
                             1001 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         January 14, 2000, Friday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 1

LENGTH: 584 words

HEADLINE: Monkey cloned by splitting embryo
 Scientists hope procedure will be breakthrough for growing new organs

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, The New York Times contributed to this report

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Atlanta

BODY:

   Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting hope to grow
genetically identical rhesus monkeys in the laboratory, a breakthrough that
would enable experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be tested
on monkeys rather than mice. Monkeys are closer to human biology.

   The technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra, but professor Gerald Schatten said four more twinned infants were
on the way.

   Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland,
said the goal was to produce identical monkeys that could be used to perfect new
therapies for human disease.

   The study appears today in the journal Science.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, said Schatten.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," said Schatten.  "The monkeys
could fill that scientific gap.

   "Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically identical animals so
cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans," he said.

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteri of different
mothers.

   In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single animal,
named Tetra. A twin to Tetra was implanted, but miscarried.

   In addition to the monkey that was born after an embryo had been divided into
four, the investigators say they have four pregnancies under way with embryos
that had been split in half.

   Two of those split embryos will be identical twins if they survive until
birth, which is expected in May.

   "It is likely that we will have genetically identical monkeys born to
different mothers," Schatten said.

   The technique is not cloning in the sense of producing a genetic duplicate of
an adult, such as was accomplished with the famed Scottish ewe named Dolly.

   Instead, said Schatten, the technique clones genetically identical infants
that arose from the same embryo. It is virtually unknown, he said, for identical
twin rhesus monkeys to be produced naturally.

   Schatten said genetically identical monkeys could be used to develop
treatments using embryonic stem cells, the ancestral cells from which all organs
and tissue grow during gestation.

   Research using human embryonic stem cells is controversial because to produce
the cells requires the death of an embryo.

   Stem cell research, however, offers the promise of growing new organs to
replace ailing hearts or livers, or to cure diabetes.

   Schatten said his research might make it possible to split a monkey embryo
and use one part to produce a live monkey, while using the other embryo parts to
produce stem cells.

   Those stem cells would be genetic matches to the live monkey.  The stem cells
could then be used to grow new organs, which could then be tested on the live
monkey.

   For instance, he said, genetically matched stem cells could be used to grow
insulin-producing organs that could be transplanted into the live monkeys to
test a promising technique for curing diabetes.

GRAPHIC: Photo color
ASSOCIATED PRESS

   Tetra, a female rhesus monkey, was cloned by researchers using
a technique called embryo splitting.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000


                             1002 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    JANUARY 14, 2000 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: OHSU RESEARCHERS CLONE MONKEY

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Summary: The scientific first holds promise for more accurate medical
research on human diseases using fewer animals

   Oregon researchers have produced the first cloned monkey using a technique
known as embryo splitting.

   "This research is an encouraging step that could accelerate the work of
thousands of scientists looking for cures to hundreds of diseases," said Gerald
Schatten, professor of obstetrics and gynecology and cell developmental biology
at OHSU's medical school.

   Identical primates are closer to humans than other laboratory animals, such
as mice, and fewer would be needed for scientific research on human diseases.
Study results would be more accurate, Schatten said, because the primates would
have no genetic variations.

   A report on the cloning of Tetra, a healthy female monkey born Sept. 7,
appears in today's issue of the journal Science. The federally funded study was
conducted by Anthony Chan, a staff scientist at the primate center, and his
colleagues in a laboratory coordinated by Schatten.

   Scientists set out to produce twin monkeys -- which rarely occurs naturally
-- but they say the birth of one monkey proves the technique's potential.

   More cloned pregnancies are under way and may produce twins in May, say
researchers at the Oregon Health Sciences University's Oregon Regional Primate
Research Center.

   In the past, investigators have used identical mice as models of human
disease. But now as research tackles complex diseases, such as Alzheimer's, AIDS
and cancer, many want a model closer to humans. They say identical monkeys could
be used to test new therapies, to understand the role of environment and disease
and to evaluate the potential of stem cells, which are being evaluated for their
ability to grow human tissue in the laboratory.

   Embryo splitting, however, is not new. It has been used in farm animals since
the early 1980s and has produced thousands of cattle, sheep, pigs and rabbits.

   "We don't want to flatter ourselves that this is some enormous step,"
Schatten said. "What we have done is just extend a technique that has been used
in many other animals and has even been tried in people."

   In 1993 a George Washington University experiment at duplicating human
embryos ultimately did not work and raised the ire of ethicists nationwide. In
1997, responding to the prospect of cloning a human, President Clinton placed a
moratorium on the use of federal funds for all such experiments.

   Thompson Faller, professor of philosophy and the ethics of medicine at the
University of Portland, said he was concerned that embryo splitting at a
teaching institution such as OHSU, "which is not a veterinary hospital," could
be a step toward human cloning.

   "I am opposed to the process in humans because it is contrary to the natural
order," Faller said. However, he said he "had no problem" with using embryo
splitting in animals because animal studies follow carefully monitored
guidelines.

   John Robertson, a professor of law at the University of Texas and chairman of
the ethics committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, said he
could see no real medical fertility need for embryo splitting in humans, "but in
monkeys, it is great for research purposes."

   And Dr. W. French Anderson, a pioneer in gene therapy and professor of
biochemistry and pediatrics at the Keck School of Medicine of the University of
Southern California, called the cloning of Tetra very important and exciting
work.

   "It still has a long ways to go," Anderson said, "but there would be a real
place for it in the area of gene therapy and other genetic areas." You can reach
Oz Hopkins Koglin at 503-221-8376 or by e-mail at ozkoglin@news.Oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Color photo by Associated Press ; Photo by FREDRICK D. JOE/The
Oregonian; Graphic -- Sidebar text -- PRODUCING CLONES; Graphic -- Diagram by
Associated Press -- IDENTICAL MONKEYS - Scientists split an early-stage embryo
of a rhesus monkey in an attempt to produce four genetically identical animals.
One monkey was produced. Here is a look at the process, 6 steps noted...

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             1003 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  JANUARY 14, 2000 Friday STREET FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: MONKEY CLONED AT OHSU

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Summary: The scientific first holds promise for more accurate medical
research on human diseases using fewer animals

   Oregon researchers have produced the first cloned monkey using a technique
known as embryo splitting.

   "This research is an encouraging step that could accelerate the work of
thousands of scientists looking for cures to hundreds of diseases," said Gerald
Schatten, professor of obstetrics and gynecology and cell developmental biology
at OHSU's medical school.

   Identical primates are closer to humans than other laboratory animals, such
as mice, and fewer would be needed for scientific research on human diseases.
Study results would be more accurate, Schatten said, because the primates would
have no genetic variations.

   A report on the cloning of Tetra, a healthy female monkey born Sept. 7,
appears in today's issue of the journal Science. The federally funded study was
conducted by Anthony Chan, a staff scientist at the primate center, and his
colleagues in a laboratory coordinated by Schatten.

   Scientists set out to produce twin monkeys -- which rarely occurs naturally
-- but they say the birth of one monkey proves the technique's potential.

   More cloned pregnancies are under way and may produce twins in May, say
researchers at the Oregon Health Sciences University's Oregon Regional Primate
Research Center.

   In the past, investigators have used identical mice as models of human
disease. But now as research tackles complex diseases, such as Alzheimer's, AIDS
and cancer, many want a model closer to humans. They say identical monkeys could
be used to test new therapies, to understand the role of environment and disease
and to evaluate the potential of stem cells, which are being evaluated for their
ability to grow human tissue in the laboratory.

   Embryo splitting, however, is not new. It has been used in farm animals since
the early 1980s and has produced thousands of cattle, sheep, pigs and rabbits.

   "We don't want to flatter ourselves that this is some enormous step,"
Schatten said. "What we have done is just extend a technique that has been used
in many other animals and has even been tried in people."

   In 1993 a George Washington University experiment at duplicating human
embryos ultimately did not work and raised the ire of ethicists nationwide. In
1997, responding to the prospect of cloning a human, President Clinton placed a
moratorium on the use of federal funds for all such experiments.

   Thompson Faller, professor of philosophy and the ethics of medicine at the
University of Portland, said he was concerned that embryo splitting at a
teaching institution such as OHSU, "which is not a veterinary hospital," could
be a step toward human cloning.

   "I am opposed to the process in humans because it is contrary to the natural
order," Faller said. However, he said he "had no problem" with using embryo
splitting in animals because animal studies follow carefully monitored
guidelines.

   John Robertson, a professor of law at the University of Texas and chairman of
the ethics committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, said he
could see no real medical fertility need for embryo splitting in humans, "but in
monkeys, it is great for research purposes."

   And Dr. W. French Anderson, a pioneer in gene therapy and professor of
biochemistry and pediatrics at the Keck School of Medicine of the University of
Southern California, called the cloning of Tetra very important and exciting
work.

   "It still has a long ways to go," Anderson said, "but there would be a real
place for it in the area of gene therapy and other genetic areas."

GRAPHIC: Color photo by Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             1004 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                  JANUARY 14, 2000 Friday CNEW JERSEY EDITION

SECTION: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: HARMONY TOPIC OF CHERRY HILL CONFERENCE CLERGY AND THEOLOGIANS FROM
ACROSS THE NATION WILL PARTICIPATE IN THE THREE-DAY SYMPOSIUM NEXT WEEK.

BYLINE: Louise Harbach, INQUIRER SUBURBAN STAFF

BODY:

   Reestablishing harmony in one's life, or reconciliation, will be the focus of
a national religious conference in Cherry Hill.

   "For many people of faith, the challenging question of the 21st century is
who shall we be," said Carol Jaworski, a codirector of the New Brunswick-based
Institute for Liturgical Formation, one of the sponsors of the event. "For some,
the answer may be found through reconciliation in an effort to reestablish
harmony that once was or should be."

   Up to 400 participants are expected at the meeting, sponsored by four offices
of the Roman Catholic diocese in Camden and the New Brunswick group, which works
with Catholic churches and other Christian denominations.

   The conference - "Who Shall We Be? A Reconciling People at Worship" - will be
held Thursday through Saturday at the Sheraton Four Points Hotel in Cherry Hill.

   "My hope is that people will see that the call for reconciliation is a way of
life," said Jaworski. "Otherwise it is the demise of a people. This is not an
easy challenge, but that's why we are part of a community."

   Assisting the institute are the Camden diocese's Office of RCIA (Rite of
Christian Initiation of Adults), Office of Worship and Music, Office of
Religious Education, and Office of Ecumenical and Inter-Religious Affairs.

   "I see this conference as a way to help people understand their role in
worship, and the best way to worship is for people to understand who they are,"
said the Rev. Michael Field, the head of the Office of RCIA.

   Among the speakers at the three-day conference will be Doris Donnelly, a
professor of theology at John Carroll University in Cleveland, Ohio; the Rev.
Richard Fragomeni, a professor of liturgy at Chicago Theological Union; the Rev.
James Keenan, professor of moral theology at Weston Jesuit School of Theology in
Boston; Msgr. Ray East, the pastor of Nativity Parish in Washington, D.C.; the
Rev. John Ball, an ordained minister in the Church of Scotland; the Rev. Robert
VerEcke, pastor of St. Ignatius Church in Chestnut Hill, Mass., and a Jesuit
artist-in-residence at Boston College; and Michael Corso, the coordinator for
continuing education at Boston College's Institute of Religious Education and
Pastoral Ministry.

   "We'll be looking at the spirituality of being a member of the body of
Christ," said Roger Pisani, an institute codirector. "People will be asked to
carry out their faith and to put together three aspects of their lives - the
church, the home and the workplace."

   For reservations, call 1-800-257-8262 or 856-428-2300.

   Arts at Grace Church The first program of musical events this year being
offered to the community by Grace Church in Haddonfield will be a harp, flute
and viola concert at 4 p.m. Sunday at the church on Kings Highway East.

   Along with Sophie Bruno with the harp, there will be Colette LeFevre with the
flute and Kathleen Carroll with the viola.

   The monthly series of musical performances was started last year by William
Fenimore, the church's organist and music director. Performances are held at 4
p.m. the third Sunday of each month through June.

   "Churches have long supported the arts, and we're maintaining that
tradition," said the Rev. Patrick Close, the rector of Grace Church. "We are
fortunate that this region has such an abundance of musical talents, which makes
for very exciting programs."

   For information about Arts at Grace Church, call 856-429-0007.

   New Sign at St. Peter's The parishioners of St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church
in Riverside can thank Kellie Beno, Kathleen Gee and Kolleen Casey for a new
sign, which was installed on Tuesday at the church.

   Beno, Gee and Casey are the daughters of John and Maryanne Sweeney, longtime
parishioners of the church, and if it hadn't been for their weddings at the
church, said John Sweeney, the church might not have its new sign.

   "Within 22 months all three of my daughters were married at the church, and
each time they complained that it was hard to give directions to the church and
just as hard for people to find the church because there was no sign," said
Sweeney, the director of Sweeney Funeral Home in Riverside and a longtime
Riverside resident. "After hearing them complain, my wife and I decided the
church needed a sign."

   When the church at the intersection of Bridgeboro and Hancock Streets opened
in 1952, a sign identifying the building as a church was only meant to be
temporary.

   Whether through happenstance or design, said Sweeney, a parishioner at the
church since 1968, the sign became a permanent fixture until the day several
years ago when it fell apart.

   The sign was never replaced until Monday when a new one was installed. The
sign features maroon and gold lettering that reads "St. Peter's Parish,
Conventual Franciscan Friars."

   "Now St. Peter's should be impossible to miss," Sweeney said.

   Jewish Genetics Talk The Jewish Medical Society, a division of Allied Jewish
Appeal, is sponsoring a free talk by Paul Wolpe, a fellow of the Center for
Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania, at 10 a.m. on Jan. 23 at the Katz
Jewish Community Center on Springdale Road in Cherry Hill.

   Wolpe's topic will be "Cloning, Genetic Therapy and Chromosome Mapping: A
Jewish Response in the Age of Genetics."

   The talk is one of a series of events sponsored by the Jewish Medical
Society, which is made up of physicians in Burlington, Camden and Gloucester
Counties.

   For information call 856-751-9500, Ext. 188.

   The Inquirer would like to hear about special events and other religious
topics of community interest. Information must include a name and phone number
for verification. Items may be mailed to Louise Harbach, The Inquirer, 53
Haddonfield Rd., Suite 300, Cherry Hill, N.J. 08002. Items also may be e-mailed
to lharbach@phillynews.com or faxed to 856-779-3221.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             1005 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JANUARY 14, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: EMBRYO SPLITTING MAY LEAD TO BETTER TESTS ANIMALS CREATED THIS WAY
COULD ENABLE SCIENTISTS TO PERFECT HUMAN TREATMENTS, ONE OF THE RESEARCHERS
SAYS.

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting hope to grow
genetically identical rhesus monkeys in the lab - a breakthrough that would
enable experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be tested on
monkeys rather than mice. Monkeys are closer to human biology.

   The technique has produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female named
Tetra, but four more twinned infants are on the way, said Gerald Schatten, a
researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland.

   Schatten said the goal was to produce identical monkeys that could be used to
perfect new therapies for human disease.

   The study appears today in the journal Science.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, Schatten said.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," he said. "The monkeys could
fill that scientific gap. Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically
identical animals so cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans."

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteri of different
mothers.

   In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single animal,
Tetra. A twin to Tetra was implanted but miscarried.

   Now, Schatten said, four mother monkeys are pregnant with cells taken from
two separate embryos. Three mothers were implanted with two unrelated embryo
splits, and the fourth mother was impregnated with a single embryo split.

   Schatten said it would not be known until May, when the animals are born,
which of the split embryos are developing into infants.

   "It is likely that we will have genetically identical monkeys born to
different mothers," he said.

   The technique is not cloning in the sense of producing a genetic duplicate of
an adult, such as was accomplished with the famed Scottish ewe named Dolly.

   Instead, Schatten said, the technique clones genetically identical infants
that arose from the same embryo. It is virtually unknown, he said, for identical
twin rhesus monkeys to be produced naturally.

   Schatten said genetically identical monkeys could be used to develop
treatments using embryonic stem cells, the ancestral cells from which all organs
and tissue grow during gestation. Research using human embryonic stem cells is
controversial, because producing the cells requires the embryo's death.

   Stem-cell research, however, offers the promise of growing new organs to
replace ailing hearts or livers, or to cure diabetes.

   His research, Schatten said, may make it possible to split a monkey embryo
and use one part to produce a live monkey, while using the other embryo's parts
to produce stem cells. Those stem cells would be genetic matches to the live
monkey. The stem cells could then be used to grow new organs, which could then
be tested on the live monkey.

   For instance, he said, genetically matched stem cells could be used to grow
insulin-producing organs that could then be transplanted into the live monkeys
to test a promising technique for curing diabetes.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Tetra is a rhesus monkey created through embryo splitting. (Oregon Primate
Research Center)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             1006 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 14, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-14, HEALTH & SCIENCE ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 687 words

BODY:


   Embryo splitting

   produces

   cloned monkey

   ATLANTA -

   Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting hope to grow
genetically identical rhesus monkeys in the laboratory - a breakthrough that
would enable experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be tested
on monkeys rather than mice.

   The technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, but
Professor Gerald Schatten of the Oregon Health Sciences University said that
four more twinned infants are on the way.

   The study appears today in the journal Science.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," said Schatten. "The monkeys
could fill that scientific gap."

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos. In effect, he said, the single
embryo became four embryos, all genetically identical.

   Kennewick man Asian?

   SEATTLE - The U.S. Interior Department said yesterday that tests show the
Kennewick man skeleton found in southern Washington state in 1996 is that of a
9,300-year-old Native American, almost certainly descended from Asian ancestors.

   The findings supported the popular theory that migrating Asians first
populated North America about 20,000 years ago, and also mean that the skeleton
could be returned to the earth without giving scientists more time to study it.

   The government has not determined whether to allow DNA testing, saying it
would offend some Native Americans and might be useless, given the bones' age.

   Instead the government will use a blend of Indian oral history, linguistic
studies and other cultural evidence to attempt to establish Kennewick man's
affiliation with any of five modern tribes that have claimed him as an ancestor.

   Kennewick man sparked debate over the origin of American peoples after
cranial studies showed that he looked different than modern Native Americans.

   But researchers note that he bears little resemblance to any modern people.
He may be related to the Ainu people of Japan, which show many cultural
similarities to Northwestern U.S. tribes.

   Blood donors needed

   The Central Blood Bank is suffering from the effects of the flu.

   The spread of the influenza virus has prompted regular donors to cancel
appointments - or just not show up - at community donor centers since Jan. 2,
blood bank officials said yesterday. Of 3,730 appointments made from Jan. 2 to
Jan. 12, only 2,050 were kept, said Judi Matok, executive director of blood
services.

   "We want people to know that there still is a need for blood donations,"

   Matok said. "We're asking for anybody who is healthy to please donate blood."

   To schedule an appointment for blood donations, call (800) 310-9551.

   Down cuts cancer risk

   LONDON - While people with Down syndrome have a high chance of developing
childhood leukemia, a new study shows they have only half the normal lifetime
risk of getting other kinds of cancer.

   The study, published in this week's issue of The Lancet, suggests those with
Down syndrome may be protected by an extra copy of a chromosome that contains
cancer-fighting genes.

   Normally, people have two copies of each chromosome but those with Down
syndrome have three copies of chromosome 21, which has at least one gene linked
to leukemia.

   Scientists suspect the 10-fold increased risk of leukemia among those with
Down syndrome could be related to having the extra copy of the gene.

   The researchers could not say why people with Down syndrome appeared to be
less vulnerable to other cancers, but scientists have identified several genes
on chromosome 21 they suspect could help curtail cancerous tumors.

   The findings provide a clue that there might be more protective genes on
chromosome 21 to identify.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2000


                             1007 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        January 14, 2000, Friday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: Researchers clone monkeys by splitting embryos

BYLINE: Paul Recer


BODY:  ATLANTA - Researchers using a technique called embryo
splitting hope to grow genetically identical rhesus moneys in the
laboratory - a breakthrough that would enable experiments such as
growing new organs from stem cells to be tested on monkeys rather
than mice. Monkeys are closer to human biology.


    The technique has produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra, but professor Gerald Schatten said that four more
twinned infants are on the way.


    Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in
Portland, said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could
be used to perfect new therapies for human disease.


    The study appears today in the journal Science.


    Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys
would be more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as
gene therapy or growing new organs from stem cells, said Schatten.


    "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," said Schatten. "The
monkeys could fill that scientific gap.


    "Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically identical
animals so cures can be perfected before they are tested on
humans," he said.


    In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey
embryos in the laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the
embryos grew to an eight-cell stage, they were each split into four
parts. These were then nurtured into new embryos.


    The new embryos were then implanted into different mothers.


    In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a
single animal, named Tetra. A twin to Tetra was implanted, but
miscarried.


    Now, said Schatten, four mother monkeys are pregnant with cells
taken from two separate embryos. Three of the mothers were
implanted with two unrelated embryo splits and the fourth was
impregnated with a single embryo split.


    Schatten said it will not be known until May, when the animals are
born, which of the split embryos are developing into infants.


    The technique is not cloning in the sense of producing a genetic
duplicate of an adult, such as was accomplished with the famed
Scottish ewe named Dolly.


    Instead, said Schatten, the technique clones genetically identical
infants from the same embryo.



LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                             1008 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        January 14, 2000 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE & HEALTH BRIEFS

BODY:

   Antisocial behavior may be hormonal

      CHICAGO -   Very aggressive boys have been found to have
lower-than-expected levels of a stress hormone in their saliva, suggesting
that their behavior might be biologically based and hard to treat with
counseling, researchers reported Thursday. The researchers reported in the
January issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry that extreme antisocial
behavior in boys ages 7 to 12 appears to be related to low cortisol levels.
Cortisol is typically released in response to fear, such as fear of punishment
for misbehaving. Its low levels in the antisocial boys might indicate that
they do not fear the possible consequences of their actions, said Keith
McBurnett, a child psychologist at the University of Chicago medical school
who led the study. "Perhaps what we're dealing with here is a biological
propensity that's resistant to treatment, which is very troubling," he said.
"The implication is that we may need to discard our traditional notions of
treatment with these kids in favor of trying to help them fit in and find a
niche in society where their aggressiveness and lack of a sense of danger is
an asset." McBurnett said a more appropriate treatment might include drugs
similar to those given to hyperactive children. The four-year project studied
such symptoms as starting fights, using weapons, stealing and forcing sexual
acts.

   Twin monkeys cloned by splitting embryo
   ATLANTA -   Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting hope to
grow genetically identical rhesus moneys in the laboratory - a breakthrough
that would enable experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be
tested on monkeys rather than mice. Monkeys are closer to human biology. The
technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female named
Tetra, but Professor Gerald Schatten said that four more twinned infants are
on the way. Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in
Portland, Ore., said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be
used to perfect new therapies for human disease. The study appears today in
the journal Science. Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but
monkeys would be more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as
gene therapy or growing new organs from stem cells, said Schatten.

   100 million black holes found
   ATLANTA -   A new telescope has revealed that the universe contains at
least 100 million "black holes," thought to be the invisible remains of a
collapsed star. The latest census of these massive objects found there are
five times as many of them as previously known, NASA astronomer Richard
Mushotzky said Thursday at the American Astronomical Society's annual meeting
in Atlanta. And there probably are more than a billion more of them yet to be
found, he said. The bumper crop of black holes was discovered by the Chandra
X-Ray Observatory, a space telescope launched into orbit last July that has
been in full operation only since November. This newly discovered population
consists of super-massive black holes, a million to several billion times
heavier than the sun.

   Tumors less likely with Down syndrome
   LONDON -   While people with Down syndrome have a high chance of
developing childhood leukemia, a new study shows they have only half the
normal lifetime risk of getting other kinds of cancer. Experts already knew
about the leukemia risk faced by people with Down syndrome, but the study by
Danish scientists is the first to estimate their chances of developing other
cancers. The study, published in this week's issue of The Lancet medical
journal, suggests those with Down syndrome may be protected because they have
an extra copy of a chromosome that contains cancer-fighting genes. Normally,
people have two copies of each chromosome - one from each parent - but
those with Down syndrome have three copies of chromosome 21, which has at
least one gene linked to leukemia.
   From wire reports

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                             1009 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               January 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

HEADLINE: Informed Dietary Choice

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   It is disappointing that the Food and Drug Administration has decided to
allow dietary supplement makers to make claims about products directed at a
variety of conditions associated with life stages in the absence of rigorous
scientific data ("Regulating Dietary Supplements," editorial, Jan. 9).

    Without a scientific rationale for making a choice, there is concern that
consumers will choose products based upon irrelevant factors, like the
attractiveness of the marketing strategy. Given figures showing that increasing
numbers of people experiment with supplements, there is a greater need than ever
to be sure that people are not endangering their health, receiving less than
optimal help for their conditions or wasting their money.

KAREN ZIER
New York, Jan. 10, 2000

The writer is a professor of medicine, immunobiology and gene therapy, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000


                             1010 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              January 12, 2000, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: ST. CHARLES COUNTY POST, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 829 words

HEADLINE: PARENTS ARE DEALING WITH RARE BLOOD DISORDER OF THEIR TWO CHILDREN
WITH;
COURAGE AND FAITH

BYLINE: Roy Malone; Of The St. Charles County Post

BODY:


   Brian and Carlisa Magee - parents of two small children with the same rare
blood disorder - are reminded daily how fragile life is.

   The Waterloo, Ill., couple must give their children infusions of a blood
product every three days to make sure their blood will clot if they start to
bleed.

   Gabriel, who is 2, almost died at birth of bleeding, and again several weeks
later when he began to bleed in his brain.

   His disorder was diagnosed as Factor 10 Deficiency - which means his blood is
missing a component that causes clotting. Only about 100 people in the world
have this deficiency, doctors told the Magees.

   Unfortunately, one of them is Gabriel's sister, Ariel, who is 7 months old.

   "Neither of us had any history of this. It was a huge shock. ... It's been
emotionally horrible," Carlisa said.

   As worried as they are about the children - getting colds or bleeding - the
Magees are also thankful. "We are so fortunate to get the medicine we need,"
Carlisa said.

   It comes from a firm in Vienna, Austria, and costs about $ 45,000 a year for
a patient. For now, the children are able to use medicine from the same vial,
but the dosages may increase as they get older.

   Another thing the Magees are thankful for is that their insurance covers most
of the medical costs. "Our premiums are really high," costing several thousand
dollars a year, Carlisa said.

   The family's medical costs are hard to afford on one salary. Brian is a
science teacher at Red Bud High School in the Metro East area and Carlisa, a
former special-education teacher, stays home with the kids. "You have to be able
to adjust to a certain lifestyle," Brian said. "The kids have to be watched
over."

   The Magees are also thankful for some fund-raising activities that have
helped them pay bills. One, on Dec. 16, was a candlelight concert at St. John's
Lutheran Church in Red Bud. It was organized by Brian's students, joined by
faculty members. Nearly $ 5,000 was raised.

   The Magees also benefited from some fund-raising at their church, St.  Paul's
Lutheran Church in Columbia, Ill.

   Gabriel had needed a blood transfusion right after birth. He suffered
seizures and brain damage because of a stroke. He needed brain surgery at five
weeks and almost died. He lost his vision, and doctors said he might not be able
to walk or talk.

   "We've had a lot of early intervention services to help with his speech,
vision and play. He's regained nearly all of his sight," Carlisa said.

   Gabriel is of normal size but has developmental delays that he will continue
to be treated for. He likes books and videos and being held by his parents.

   "He hasn't had any bleeding since he's been on this product," Carlisa said.
The medicine, called Bebulin, is used to treat hemophiliacs, but also helps
those with Factor 10 Deficiency.

   The Bebulin is sent to the Magees freeze-dried and loses it potency fast. The
children will always need it to ward off uncontrolled bleeding.

   When Ariel was born, she did not experience bleeding and was put on the
Bebulin right away. She's a normal baby except for the blood deficiency.

   The Magees hope that one day gene therapy may develop to the point that a
gene could replace the deficient gene in their children's bodies. But it's not
something they can count on.

   Still, they educate themselves about gene therapy and even attended a
convention in the fall in Dallas by the National Hemophilia Foundation. The
emphasis was on gene therapy. "It sounds very promising for our children and
others, too," Brian said.

   Both the Magees have a recessive gene that predisposed them to the blood
deficiency, which was passed on to their children. "Both of us had the disorder
in a recessive gene, but never knew of it because we never had a problem,"
Carlisa said.

   While it's hereditary, their relatives had never experienced any problem. The
chances of it being passed on to their children were about one in four, they
learned later. The Magees do not plan to a have any more children.

   Their doctor, who has been seeing the children since shortly after their
births, is Dr. Robert Bergamini, a pediatric hematologist on the staff of St.
John's Mercy Medical Center in Creve Coeur. The Magees call him Dr. Bob and are
thankful for his knowledge and treatment of the blood deficiency.

   The doctor is equally impressed with the Magees. Bergamini said Gabriel "has
made an outstanding recovery. It's a real credit to the regenerative capacity of
a child's brain, the efforts of early intervention and the work of the parents."

   Bergamini said, "They are spectacular people. They have incredible faith that
is so precious and heartwarming to see in this day and age. They give to
everyone else more than what people give to them."

   The Magees are promoters of giving blood, noting there is a shortage now.
"It's something our children depend on," Carlisa said.

   A fund for the Magee family has been set up at Commercial State Bank in
Waterloo.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (1) Photo by ODELL MITCHELL JR./ST. CHARLES COUNTY POST - LEFT:
Carlisa Magee (left) gives her daughter, Ariel, 7 months, a hug and kiss. Ariel
and her brother, Gabriel, 2, have a rare blood disease called Factor 10
Deficiency.
 (2) Photo by ODELL MITCHELL JR./ST. CHARLES COUNTY POST - RIGHT: Gabriel
reaches for the handsof his therapist, Patty Wiesner, as she tries to get him to
step up on a block and pillows without her help. Gabriel and Ariel must have a
blood infusion every three days through catheters in their chests so that their
blot can clot. Gabriel suffered brain damage as a baby because of bleeding in
the brain, and he requires therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000


                             1011 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 11, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 910 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Medibuy.com raises $77 million

   San Diego-based Medibuy.com Inc. announced it has raised $77 million in its
latest round of venture capital financing.  The company will use the money to
fund global market development, technology investments and general corporate
purposes.  Medibuy.com specializes in business-to-business electronic commerce
in the health-care industry.

   Gateway will use AMD chips

   San Diego-based Gateway is buying Advanced Micro Devices' top-of-the-line
Athlon microprocessors for its personal computers, after a shortage of Intel
Corp. chips constrained Gateway's holiday sales.  The announcement came less
than a week after Gateway, the No. 2 direct seller of PCs, warned that it won't
meet fourth-quarter earnings forecasts because it couldn't get enough chips from
Intel.  The price of Advanced Micro shares rose $2.875 to $35.375, their highest
since September 1997. Gateway climbed $2.50 to $64.125.

   @Backup forms alliance with H-P

   San Diego-based @Backup said it has reached a deal with Hewlett-Packard,
which plans to bundle @Backup's online data backup service with H-P's new line
of Pavilion notebook PCs. Financial terms were not disclosed.  The San
Diego-based firm also agreed to provide online backup, storage and remote file
access for H-P's new e-center, a suite of Web-enabled services.  The alliance
parallels similar deals @Backup has struck with other companies, including Dell,
Gateway and Microsoft.

   SAIC gets Pentagon contract

   The Pentagon's Defense Threat Reduction Agency has awarded a contract worth
almost $2.4 million to San Diego-based SAIC as part of a $12.7 million omnibus
nuclear assessment contract.  The science and engineering consulting
conglomerate said the contract is intended to provide the United States and NATO
with fast-running programs that enable military leaders to understand the
consequences of various nuclear attack scenarios in urban and rural
environments.

   NMT wins $9.2 million order

   National Manufacturing Technologies Inc. of Carlsbad, formerly Photomatrix
Inc., won a $9.2 million contract to make parts for military munitions.  Alliant
Techsystems chose NMT for the 30-month contract, in which NMT will manufacture
458 million coupling parts that allow rapid feeding of bullets into weapons.
Alliant operates the Lake City Ammunition Plant in Missouri for the U.S. Army.
At full production, NMT will make 750,000 parts a day at a factory in Oceanside.
The company expects to increase its work force from 55 to 114.

   Carlmont Capital makes acquisition

   Carlmont Capital Group, based in Chula Vista, has purchased National Benefits
& Casualty Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of HealthStar Corp. of Scottsdale,
Ariz. HealthStar received $1.5 million in cash for the deal, closed on Dec. 30.
Under an agreement, the company may received an additional $300,000 if cash flow
targets are met.

   Illumina raises $28 million

   San Diego-based Illumina Inc. announced it has completed a $28 million
private equity financing campaign.  Funds from the effort will be used to
further develop technology used in gene therapy.

   Imperial changes name, relocates

   Imperial Thrift and Loan Association has changed its name to Imperial Capital
Bank and moved to La Jolla, relocating to the same office as its parent company,
ITLA Capital Corp. Chairman George W. Haligowski said the name change will more
closely identify the bank's activities with those of similar financial
institutions.  He said Imperial Capital Bank's lending and deposit activities
are similar to most banks, including having its deposit accounts insured by the
FDIC.

   Aethlon completes Syngen deal

   La Jolla-based Aethlon Medical Inc. announced it has completed the
acquisition of of Syngen Research Inc. of San Diego.  Terms of the purchase were
not disclosed.  James A. Joyce, chairman of Aethlon, said the purchase of
Syngen, a biotechnology research and consulting firm, establishes a laboratory
presence for Aethlon on the West Coast.  Syngen will operate as a wholly owned
subsidiary of Aethlon, formerly known as Bishop Equities Inc.

   Pan Pacific acquires mall

   San Diego-based Pan Pacific Retail Properties has acquired Cable Park
Shopping Center, a neighborhood complex in northeast Sacramento for $12.2
million.  Stuart A. Tanz, president of Pan Pacific, said the price of about $76
a square foot is well below the cost of new construction.  Cable Park is a
160,800-square-foot center anchored by a newly expanded 62,000-square-foot
Albertsons, a Long's Drugstore and a U.S. Post Office.  The company also sold
two shopping centers in Santa Rosa and Rialto for a total of $8.6 million.

   Realty fund invests in REIT

   The Realty Enterprise Fund has invested $1 million in Madison Park Real
Estate Investment Trust, which owns the Landmark Tribune Tower and other
properties in Oakland and elsewhere.  The fund, which is managed by San
Diego-based Christopher Weil and Co., was founded in 1998 to invest in the
securities of small-capitalization real estate investment funds.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Mexican share prices rise

   Mexican stocks rallied, with Telefonos de Mexico and Grupo Televisa leading
the pack inspired by a sharp rebound in tech issues in the United States,
traders said.  The IPC index shot up 286.61 points to 7,333.70, an all-time
high.  The previous record of 7,278.77 was set a week ago.


LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                             1012 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 11, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 903 words

SOURCE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:


   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Medibuy.com raises $77 million

   San Diego-based Medibuy.com Inc. announced it has raised $77 million in its
latest round of venture capital financing.  The company will use the money to
fund global market development, technology investments and general corporate
purposes.  Medibuy.com specializes in business-to-business electronic commerce
in the health-care industry.

   Gateway will use AMD chips

   San Diego-based Gateway is buying Advanced Micro Devices' top-of-the-line
Athlon microprocessors for its personal computers, after a shortage of Intel
Corp. chips constrained Gateway's holiday sales.  The announcement came less
than a week after Gateway, the No. 2 direct seller of PCs, warned that it won't
meet fourth-quarter earnings forecasts because it couldn't get enough chips from
Intel.  The price of Advanced Micro shares rose $2.875 to $35.375, their highest
since September 1997. Gateway climbed $2.50 to $64.125.

   @Backup forms alliance with H-P

   San Diego-based @Backup said it has reached a deal with Hewlett-Packard,
which plans to bundle @Backup's online data backup service with H-P's new line
of Pavilion notebook PCs. Financial terms were not disclosed.  The San
Diego-based firm also agreed to provide online backup, storage and remote file
access for H-P's new e-center, a suite of Web-enabled services.  The alliance
parallels similar deals @Backup has struck with other companies, including Dell,
Gateway and Microsoft.

   SAIC gets Pentagon contract

   The Pentagon's Defense Threat Reduction Agency has awarded a contract worth
almost $2.4 million to San Diego-based SAIC as part of a $12.7 million omnibus
nuclear assessment contract.  The science and engineering consulting
conglomerate said the contract is intended to provide the United States and NATO
with fast-running programs that enable military leaders to understand the
consequences of various nuclear attack scenarios in urban and rural
environments.

   NMT wins $9.2 million order

   National Manufacturing Technologies Inc. of Carlsbad, formerly Photomatrix
Inc., won a $9.2 million contract to make parts for military munitions. Alliant
Techsystems chose NMT for the 30-month contract, in which NMT will manufacture
458 million coupling parts that allow rapid feeding of bullets into weapons.
Alliant operates the Lake City Ammunition Plant in Missouri for the U.S. Army.
At full production, NMT will make 750,000 parts a day at a factory in Oceanside.
The company expects to increase its work force from 55 to 114.

   Carlmont Capital makes acquisition

   Carlmont Capital Group, based in Chula Vista, has purchased National Benefits
& Casualty Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of HealthStar Corp. of Scottsdale,
Ariz. HealthStar received $1.5 million in cash for the deal, closed on Dec. 30.
Under an agreement, the company may received an additional $300,000 if cash flow
targets are met.

   Illumina raises $28 million

   San Diego-based Illumina Inc. announced it has completed a $28 million
private equity financing campaign.  Funds from the effort will be used to
further develop technology used in gene therapy.

   Imperial changes name, relocates

   Imperial Thrift and Loan Association has changed its name to Imperial Capital
Bank and moved to La Jolla, relocating to the same office as its parent company,
ITLA Capital Corp. Chairman George W. Haligowski said the name change will more
closely identify the bank's activities with those of similar financial
institutions.  He said Imperial Capital Bank's lending and deposit activities
are similar to most banks, including having its deposit accounts insured by the
FDIC.

   Aethlon completes Syngen deal

   La Jolla-based Aethlon Medical Inc. announced it has completed the
acquisition of of Syngen Research Inc. of San Diego.  Terms of the purchase were
not disclosed.  James A. Joyce, chairman of Aethlon, said the purchase of
Syngen, a biotechnology research and consulting firm, establishes a laboratory
presence for Aethlon on the West Coast.  Syngen will operate as a wholly owned
subsidiary of Aethlon, formerly known as Bishop Equities Inc.

   Pan Pacific acquires mall

   San Diego-based Pan Pacific Retail Properties has acquired Cable Park
Shopping Center, a neighborhood complex in northeast Sacramento for $12.2
million.  Stuart A. Tanz, president of Pan Pacific, said the price of about $76
a square foot is well below the cost of new construction.  Cable Park is a
160,800-square-foot center anchored by a newly expanded 62,000-square-foot
Albertsons, a Long's Drugstore and a U.S. Post Office.  The company also sold
two shopping centers in Santa Rosa and Rialto for a total of $8.6 million.

   Realty fund invests in REIT

   The Realty Enterprise Fund has invested $1 million in Madison Park Real
Estate Investment Trust, which owns the Landmark Tribune Tower and other
properties in Oakland and elsewhere.  The fund, which is managed by San Diego-
based Christopher Weil and Co., was founded in 1998 to invest in the securities
of small-capitalization real estate investment funds.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Mexican share prices rise

   Mexican stocks rallied, with Telefonos de Mexico and Grupo Televisa leading
the pack inspired by a sharp rebound in tech issues in the United States,
traders said.  The IPC index shot up 286.61 points to 7,333.70, an all-time
high.  The previous record of 7,278.77 was set a week ago.


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000


                             1013 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 11, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Medibuy.com raises $77 million San Diego-based
Medibuy.com Inc. announced it has raised $77 million in its latest round of
venture capital financing.

   The company will use the money to fund global market development, technology
investments and general corporate purposes.

   Medibuy.com specializes in business-to-business electronic commerce in the
health-care industry. Gateway will use AMD chips San Diego-based Gateway is
buying Advanced Micro Devices' top-of-the-line Athlon microprocessors for its
personal computers, after a shortage of Intel Corp. chips constrained Gateway's
holiday sales.

   The announcement came less than a week after Gateway, the No. 2 direct seller
of PCs, warned that it won't meet fourth-quarter earnings forecasts because it
couldn't get enough chips from Intel.

   The price of Advanced Micro shares rose $2.875 to $35.375, their highest
since September 1997. Gateway climbed $2.50 to $64.125. @Backup forms alliance
with H-P San Diego-based @Backup said it has reached a deal with
Hewlett-Packard, which plans to bundle @Backup's online data backup service with
H-P's new line of Pavilion notebook PCs. Financial terms were not disclosed.

   The San Diego-based firm also agreed to provide online backup, storage and
remote file access for H-P's new e-center, a suite of Web-enabled services.

   The alliance parallels similar deals @Backup has struck with other companies,
including Dell, Gateway and Microsoft. SAIC gets Pentagon contract The
Pentagon's Defense Threat Reduction Agency has awarded a contract worth almost
$2.4 million to San Diego-based SAIC as part of a $12.7 million omnibus nuclear
assessment contract.

   The science and engineering consulting conglomerate said the contract is
intended to provide the United States and NATO with fast-running programs that
enable military leaders to understand the consequences of various nuclear attack
scenarios in urban and rural environments. NMT wins $9.2 million order National
Manufacturing Technologies Inc. of Carlsbad, formerly Photomatrix Inc., won a
$9.2 million contract to make parts for military munitions. Alliant Techsystems
chose NMT for the 30-month contract, in which NMT will manufacture 458 million
coupling parts that allow rapid feeding of bullets into weapons.

   Alliant operates the Lake City Ammunition Plant in Missouri for the U.S.
Army. At full production, NMT will make 750,000 parts a day at a factory in
Oceanside.

   The company expects to increase its work force from 55 to 114. Carlmont
Capital makes acquisition Carlmont Capital Group, based in Chula Vista, has
purchased National Benefits & Casualty Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of
HealthStar Corp. of Scottsdale, Ariz. HealthStar received $1.5 million in cash
for the deal, closed on Dec. 30. Under an agreement, the company may received an
additional $300,000 if cash flow targets are met. Illumina raises $28 million
San Diego-based Illumina Inc. announced it has completed a $28 million private
equity financing campaign.

   Funds from the effort will be used to further develop technology used in gene
therapy. Imperial changes name, relocates Imperial Thrift and Loan Association
has changed its name to Imperial Capital Bank and moved to La Jolla, relocating
to the same office as its parent company, ITLA Capital Corp. Chairman George W.
Haligowski said the name change will more closely identify the bank's activities
with those of similar financial institutions.

   He said Imperial Capital Bank's lending and deposit activities are similar to
most banks, including having its deposit accounts insured by the FDIC. Aethlon
completes Syngen deal La Jolla-based Aethlon Medical Inc. announced it has
completed the acquisition of of Syngen Research Inc. of San Diego.

   Terms of the purchase were not disclosed.

   James A. Joyce, chairman of Aethlon, said the purchase of Syngen, a
biotechnology research and consulting firm, establishes a laboratory presence
for Aethlon on the West Coast.

   Syngen will operate as a wholly owned subsidiary of Aethlon, formerly known
as Bishop Equities Inc. Pan Pacific acquires mall San Diego-based Pan Pacific
Retail Properties has acquired Cable Park Shopping Center, a neighborhood
complex in northeast Sacramento for $12.2 million.

   Stuart A. Tanz, president of Pan Pacific, said the price of about $76 a
square foot is well below the cost of new construction.

   Cable Park is a 160,800-square-foot center anchored by a newly expanded
62,000-square-foot Albertsons, a Long's Drugstore and a U.S. Post Office. The
company also sold two shopping centers in Santa Rosa and Rialto for a total of
$8.6 million. Realty fund invests in REIT The Realty Enterprise Fund has
invested $1 million in Madison Park Real Estate Investment Trust, which owns the
Landmark Tribune Tower and other properties in Oakland and elsewhere.

   The fund, which is managed by San Diego-based Christopher Weil and Co., was
founded in 1998 to invest in the securities of small-capitalization real estate
investment funds. WORLD AND NATION Mexican share prices rise Mexican stocks
rallied, with Telefonos de Mexico and Grupo Televisa leading the pack inspired
by a sharp rebound in tech issues in the United States, traders said.

   The IPC index shot up 286.61 points to 7,333.70, an all-time high.

   The previous record of 7,278.77 was set a week ago.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1014 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 10, 2000, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 2130 words

HEADLINE: CONFOCAL APPLICATIONS

BODY:


   A new type of microscope that can show individual cells moving and
functioning inside living tissue is allowing researchers to imagine dramatically
different ways of diagnosing and treating disease.

   The obvious clinical application for the confocal endomicroscope would be as
a substitute for skin biopsies normally required for diagnosing skin cancers,
said Dr. Louis Falo, a UPMC dermatologist.

   Rather than excising a suspicious lesion and examining it under a microscope,
a dermatologist might simply swab the lesion with some fluorescent dye, press
the microscope's hand-held probe against the skin and study the resulting images
displayed on a computer monitor to see if abnormal cells are present.

   "This could replace the biopsy," Falo said.

   Moh's surgery, a technique for removing skin cancers completely while
minimizing the loss of healthy tissue, requires multiple biopsies that must be
studied under a microscope. By using the endomicroscope instead, what is now a
full-day affair might become a short-term procedure, Falo suggested.

   Because it is non-invasive and painless, the handheld microscope might also
be used by dermatologists to monitor treatments for skin disorders. In patients
with psoriasis, for instance, the confocal endomicroscope could be used to see
if steroid therapy has reduced the activity of immune system cells called
T-cells; steroid doses could be adjusted rapidly, if necessary. It also could be
used to check for Tcells in patients with malignant melanoma who are being
treated with a cancer vaccine; in those cases, doctors would hope to see T-cells
attacking melanoma cells.

   The microscope might even be able to directly target cancer cells for
destruction. Dr. John Comerci, a gynecologic oncologist at Magee-Womens
Hospital, said it might allow him to focus a laser on groups of precancerous
cells in the cervix and help spare healthy, surrounding tissue.

   This spring, Comerci is beginning a National Cancer Institute-sponsored
clinical trial evaluating the treatment of cervical and vulvar dysplasia a
precancerous condition that can be identified with Pap smears using a technique
called photodynamic therapy. This involves giving the patient a drug called
Lutrin that is sensitive to light and tends to accumulate in abnormal tissue;
when laser light is shined on these tissues, the Lutrin is activated and
destroys those cells.

   The common ways of eliminating these dysplastic cells include cauterizing,
freezing or burning them off with a laser. But those techniques also remove
large numbers of healthy cells. That is a concern because cervical dysplasia is
associated with human papilloma virus infection, which can't be treated.
Dysplasia thus tends to recur, leading to repeated treatments that eventually
remove so much healthy tissue that some women are unable to reproduce.

   Because Lutrin is concentrated in abnormal cells, photodynamic therapy should
reduce the loss of healthy tissue, Comerci said. But the confocal endomicroscope
might allow doctors to be even more selective by focusing the laser light only
on groups of abnormal cells.

   The two-year trial, which will include 54 patients, won't use the
endomicroscope to target cells, but will use it to help evaluate the response of
cervical and vulvar cells to Lutrin. Use of the microscope for aiming the laser
might be considered in future studies if photodynamic therapy is shown to be
beneficial.

   Though clinical applications are limited for now to areas such as the skin or
the cervix that are accessible to the cigar-size probe, Falo said it should also
be possible to image internal organs and surfaces using viewing devices called
endoscopes, though the images may be less sharp.

    pg00 0003 000110 R S 0001100007 00009894 IT R

   The mole on my forearm measures perhaps a sixteenth of an inch. But Simon
Watkins has pressed a flashlight-sized microscope against my arm, magnifying the
mole so that just part of its image almost fills the screen of a computer
monitor.

   No magnifying glass could match the detail of this electronically processed
image, in which individual skin cells can be seen. But the real wonder occurs
when Watkins adjusts the controls and the image changes, revealing successive
layers of living cells as the microscope peers deep beneath the surface of my
skin. It's all painless and non-invasive; only laser light penetrates my skin.

   It's as if Watkins is using X-ray Specs - the novelty glasses that make it
seem as if you can see the bones in your hand. The difference is that the device
in Watkins' laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh sees into the skin, not
through it.

   And, unlike X-ray Specs, this thing actually works.

   Called a confocal endomicroscope, the Australian invention gives researchers
and doctors the ability to observe cells that not only are alive, but function
and move within living beings.

   "I am absolutely infatuated with this thing," said Watkins, who directs
Pitt's Center for Biologic Imaging and who in November became the first U.S.
microscopist to get his hands on one. "It's like getting a hand-held CAT
scanner."

   A microscope that allows doctors to see into the skin or other exposed
surface potentially could replace surgical biopsies as a means of diagnosing
skin cancer and could become a tool for monitoring treatments. It even might
guide doctors to abnormal cells that can then be zapped with a laser.

   Research applications are numerous. Rather than study cells grown in a petri
dish, scientists can view cells as they move around or pump out substances in
animals or patients. Lab animals need only be shaved and anesthetized, not
sacrificed. When an experiment is over, Watkins said, "you pick him up, revive
him and let him run back in the cage."

   Confocal microscopes themselves are not new. Commercial versions have been
available for more than a decade, but they typically fill a desk top and can
only study small specimens that fit on the microscope stage beneath its
objective lens.

   Thanks to fiber optic technology, researchers at Optiscan Imaging Ltd., in
Melbourne, Australia, were able to free the confocal microscope from its bulky
laser light source, detectors and computers. They also reduced the size of its
optics; the probe Watkins used to image my mole was a 7-inch-long stainless
steel cylinder supported by a metal arm. A hand-held version the size of a cigar
is scheduled to arrive soon at Pitt, the first U.S. research center to obtain
the device.

   "It's a pretty good job of miniaturization," said Alan Waggoner, director of
the Center for Light Microscope Imaging and Biotechnology at Carnegie Mellon
University. With the increase in applications that accompanies that
miniaturization, he added, "I think it's going to become a much more important
technology."

   Conventional confocal microscopes cost about $ 300,000, but Optiscan expects
to sell its endomicroscope for $ 50,000 to $ 70,000. General manager Roger
Wallis said Optiscan hopes to bring the cost down further so it can be
affordable for physician offices.

   Confocal microscopes are valuable because they provide blur-free images and
can differentiate between features at different depths within a specimen. This
information can be combined by computer programs to produce three-dimensional
images.

   It was invented in 1955 by Marvin Minsky, a pioneer in artificial
intelligence and robotics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media
Lab.

   Then a post-doctoral fellow at Harvard University, Minsky was interested in
mapping the brain's circuitry. But that was impossible to do with regular
microscopes, which produce images that include not only the spot in focus, but
also blurry areas around it. That just wouldn't do for the study of interwoven,
densely packed brain cells.

   The ideal microscope, he reasoned, would gather light only from the point of
focus. By scanning a specimen, gathering light from a succession of focal
points, a blur-free image could be constructed electronically.

   He accomplished this feat by combining two microscopes that were confocal
sharing a common focus. The first microscope focuses intense light through a
pinhole. This light passes into the main microscope and illuminates only the
point of the specimen that is in focus. Light from the specimen then reflects
back, retracing its path through the microscope optics.

   At the beginning of its return flight, this light is contaminated by
incidental light from areas outside the area of focus. But when the light again
reaches the first pinhole, only the light from the focal plane passes through
and the blurry light is stripped off.

   Minsky won a patent and impressed visitors to his lab, but the confocal
microscope was ahead of its time. Computers of the 1950s strained to process its
images and the microscope required sources of intense light not widely available
then.

   The invention of the laser in 1960 solved the problem of light intensity and
increases in computer power eventually solved the image-processing dilemma.

   Also, the utility of confocal microscopes - and light microscopes in general
- was boosted by the development of a variety of fluorescent dyes that release
light when stimulated by certain wavelengths of laser light.

   These dyes are being used to label any number of proteins or chemicals, which
allows scientists not only to view parts of cells in detail but also to monitor
their function.

   Still, the combination of computers, lasers and complicated optics, including
sophisticated mirror systems to rapidly scan the point of focus across and
through a specimen, makes it "a pretty cumbersome device," Waggoner said.

   The Australian researchers were able to streamline the instrument by
substituting a long, flexible optical fiber for the pinhole. The laser,
detectors and computers could thus be separated from the microscope lenses.

   The fiber also is key to eliminating the scanning mirror system.

   "Everything goes through the end of the fiber," Watkins explained, "and the
fiber moves."

   A small piezoelectric device in the microscope handpiece drives the fiber a
thousand times a second, scanning the laser pulses across a specimen. The
microscope gathers up to a million data points each second.

   A limiting factor, however, is light penetration.

   Blue-green laser light, which is used to trigger many fluorescent dyes, tends
to be scattered by the skin. So the confocal endomicroscope can only see about
15-20 skin cells deep.

   But Watkins and the Optiscan researchers plan to soup up the new scope,
combining it with a technique called multi-photon fluorescence that uses longer
wavelength, far-red laser light that penetrates farther.

   If it works with the endomicroscope, he added, users could see into the skin
to a depth of 100 cells down to the basal cells of the skin's epidermal layer.

   Normal fluorescent dyes release a single photon of light for every photon of
light they absorb.

   The deep-penetrating, but low-energy light used in the two-photon method
normally can't excite the dye molecules that way. But when that light is
delivered with such intensity that two low-energy photons arrive at the dye
molecule at the same time, the photons are absorbed and excite the dye, causing
it to fluoresce.

   Already, the new microscope is being used to monitor the effectiveness of
gene therapy delivered via a device called a gene gun.

   Researchers are trying to prompt the immune system to launch attacks on
cancers by injecting genes into dendritic cells, a type of white blood cell.

   The idea is that the dendritic cells, thus activated, will cause T-cells to
fight cancer cells.

   In experiments directed by Dr. Louis Falo, the genes - bits of DNA - are
attached to millions of gold beads so tiny that they can enter cells without
damaging them.

   The gene gun uses pressurized helium to fire the beads into the skin.

   The researchers want to be sure the beads are hitting dendritic cells within
the skin

   Falo said Watkins has used the endomicroscope to see if the beads are hitting
dendritic cells in the skin of lab mice and if the genes are producing desired
proteins in those cells.

   "He is able to show us if we are hitting the right cells and if the DNA is
being expressed," Falo said.

   In just a few hours, the endomicroscope provides results similar to what Falo
and Watkins previously were able to achieve only after months of processing
samples of skin and lymph nodes that had been surgically removed.

   The endomicroscope enables them to not only see where the dendritic cells go,
but how they got there.

   Watkins said the instrument's potential as a research tool remains to be
tapped.

   "We haven't realized all we can do with it,"he added.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, PHOTO: Annie O' Neill/Post-Gazette: Simon
Watkins, director of the; Center for Biologic Imaging at UPMC Presbyterian, with
a mockup of the; hand-held version of confocal microscope due to arrive soon at
Pitt. The; microscopes provide blur-free images and can differentiate between
features at; different depths within a specimen.; INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: James
Hilston/Post-Gazette; UPMC Presbyterian,; University of Pennsylvania

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                             1015 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      January 10, 2000 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 1307 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL PROGNOSES FOR 21ST CENTURY

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Gazing at crystal balls is a risky hobby at best - but it is hard to think of
an area where the uncertainties are greater than in the realm of medicine.

   "We are doing things now that we wouldn't have dreamed of even 10 years ago,"
muses Dr. Robert O. Bonow, a heart specialist at Northwestern University. "A lot
of this is unimaginable."

   Still, some research directions are set and some goals are clear, and the
Associated Press asked experts in several medical specialties to make their best
guesses about what we can expect in the next 25 or 30 years. Here are their
answers:

   CANCER: Optimism for screening, therapy.

   Dr. Robert Mayer, chief of the Gastrointestinal Cancer Center, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston:

   Developing a vaccine against the hepatitis C virus will be critically
important in preventing liver cancer. The abolition of tobacco will reduce
cancer enormously, as will the use of prophylactic compounds such as tamoxifen
for breast cancer or aspirin and folic acid for colon cancer.

   Colonoscopy for colon cancer and mammography for breast cancer will likely
improve through computerized technology, and better and more specific blood
tests will make screening for prostate cancer more effective.

   I hope we will be able to refine gene therapy by either replacing an abnormal
gene or turning it off.

   Gene therapy may also focus on stimulating the body's own immune response to
selectively destroy the tumor, or take advantage of the unique genetic pattern
in malignant cells to target biological treatments to those cells.

   TRANSPLANTS: Educating the immune system.

   Dr. J. Richard Thistlewaite, chief of transplant surgery, University of
Chicago:

   First, new surgical techniques will make it far easier for living donors to
give organs or parts of organs to those in need. Herds of genetically mutated
pigs are being developed to provide organs for transplant on demand.

   Second, new medicines will let us educate the immune system to look at a
transplanted organ as "self" rather than "nonself." Finally, we will be able to
change organs themselves by transplanting genes to help prevent organ failure
and organ rejection. Cell transplants, like nerve cells, rather than organs,
will be used to treat illnesses such as diabetes and Parkinson's or Alzheimer's
disease. And ultimately, we should be able to actually grow new kidneys, new
hearts - any organ or tissue.

   MENTAL HEALTH: Brain scans will aid diagnosis.

   Dr. Steven E. Hyman, director, National Institute of Mental Health:

   Thirty years from now, we're going to have diagnoses based on brain scans, or
brain scans plus genetic tests, instead of symptoms and behavior.

   The second thing is, within the next decade, we will have discovered many
genes that create vulnerability to mood disorders, to schizophrenia, to autism
and to several other mental disorders. Science will help the public understand
broadly that these are real disorders of an organ, the brain, just as coronary
artery disease is a disease of another organ, the heart.

   GENETICS: Tools for targeting treatment.

   Dr. David R. Cox, professor of genetics and pediatrics, Stanford University:

   Genetic medicine will be much more targeted because it will be tied to how
your cells work, and therefore, it will be evidence-based, rather than medicine
based on expert opinion. We'll know that a gene makes some protein product. But
there are minor changes from one person to another.

   HEART DISEASE: Better drugs, virtual operating rooms.

   Dr. Robert O. Bonow, chief of cardiology, Northwestern University:

   We will have much better drug therapy for various forms of heart disease.
Heart failure will be more easily treated - and perhaps prevented - by rapid,
early administration of drugs to people with heart attacks. These will not just
open the arteries but also allow the heart to withstand damage better. We will
also have new and ingenious ways of preventing blood clots in arteries, so there
will be fewer heart attacks.

   Hopefully in 25 years, we will be at a point where we can treat the genetic
abnormalities in heart disease by inserting the right genes and removing the
wrong ones. This could prevent the development of atherosclerosis, keep arteries
from developing blood clots and generate heart muscle when tissue dies.

   We will have much more information about the function of the heart, have
images of the blood vessels themselves and have three-dimensional pictures so we
can look at the heart from the inside out, all without penetrating the body.

   MEDICAL ETHICS: Designed babies, brain implants.

   Arthur L. Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics, University of
Pennsylvania:

   I think there will be a debate about whether to use scientific knowledge to
design babies, not by changing their genes, but by at least screening embryos,
testing embryos for their traits. There will be some discussion about whether
eugenics is a good thing to try to improve your kid.

   I think we'll see more artificial organs, man-made parts. I think we will see
the first effort to use implants into the human brain to repair things, so
people might get implants to boost their memory or to help their dyslexia.

   STROKE: Strides in prevention, nerve restoration.

   Dr. Anthrony J. Furlan, medical director, Cerebrovascular Center, Cleveland
Clinic:

   Most excitingly, new genetic markers of atherosclerosis may allow us to
identify people at risk for stroke at an early age. New pills to prevent stroke
will be much more potent inhibitors than aspirin of cells called platelets that
trigger blood clotting.

   New catheters will allow us to access and repair small brain arteries that
are blocked by clots or that are leaking due to an aneurysm. Some novel devices
under study allow us to remove clots from blocked brain arteries within seconds,
limiting damage.

   Newer, more powerful and safer clot-dissolving drugs will be combined with
drugs that limit the damage the blocked artery causes to brain cells. Other
strategies, such as extreme body cooling, will also slow down stroke damage in
the brain.

   AGING AND LONGEVITY: Lowering risk factors for Alzheimer's, other diseases.

   Dr. Caleb E. Finch, director of biogerontology program, University of
Southern California:

   We will know a lot about genetic risk factors for diseases. Already, there
are four or five strong candidates each for Alzheimer's disease, heart disease,
cancer and diabetes. Relatively early in life, it will be possible for most
people to know if they have any major genetic risk factors. There will be
specific recommendations and guidelines for how to minimize those risks.

   A major opportunity will emerge in organ replacement, as genetic engineering
of stem cells progresses. In principle, it should be possible to take a skin
cell and grow any type of cell that is needed.

   INFECTIOUS DISEASES: Pandemic likely, but also disease eradication. Dr. James
Hughes, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National
Center for Infectious Diseases:

   We're going to see increases in this problem of antimicrobial resistance.
We're going to continue to see large regional and national and even
international food-borne-disease outbreaks, with this globalization of the food
supply that has occurred. More widespread use of food irradiation could reduce
the risk.

   We can't help but notice the number of diseases transmitted from animals to
people, including the avian influenza episode in Hong Kong, providing the
reminder that we are constantly threatened by the next flu pandemic.

   The World Health Organization targets the end of 2000 for the global
eradication of polio. The Guinea worm eradication program is proceeding. Measles
is a future candidate.

   The development of new generations of safer, more effective,
easier-to-administer vaccines will undoubtedly help us greatly.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2000


                             1016 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 10, 2000, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: ST. CLAIR-MONROE POST, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: WATERLOO FAMILY DEALS WITH A RARE BLOOD DISORDER WITH HOPE AND FAITH;
ONLY 100 PEOPLE IN THE WORLD HAVE FACTOR 10 DEFICIENCY

BYLINE: Roy Malone; Of The Post-Dispatch

DATELINE: WATERLOO

BODY:


   Brian and Carlisa Magee - parents of two small children with the same rare
blood disorder - are reminded daily how fragile life is.

   They must give their children infusions of a blood product every three days
to make sure their blood will clot if they start to bleed.

   Gabriel, who is 2, almost died at birth of bleeding, and again several weeks
later when he began to bleed in his brain.

   His disorder was diagnosed as Factor 10 Deficiency - which means his blood is
missing a component that causes clotting. Only about 100 people in the world
have this deficiency, doctors told the Magees.

   Unfortunately, one of them is Gabriel's sister, Ariel, who is seven months
old.

   "Neither of us had any history of this. It was a huge shock... It's been
emotionally horrible," Carlisa said.

Living with it

   As worried as they are about the children -getting colds or bleeding - the
Magees are also thankful. "We are so fortunate to get the medicine we need,"
said Carlisa.

   It comes from a firm in Vienna, Austria, and is expensive. It costs about $
45,000 a year for a patient. For now, the children are able to use from the same
vial, but the dosages may increase as they get older.

   Another thing the Magees are thankful for is that their insurance covers most
of the medical costs. "Our premiums are really high," costing several thousand
dollars a year," Carlisa said.

   The family's medical costs are hard to afford on one salary. Brian is a
science teacher at Red Bud High School and Carlisa, a former special ed teacher,
stays home with the kids. "You have to be able to adjust to a certain
lifestyle," Brian said. "The kids have to be watched over."

   The Magees are also thankful for some fund-raising activities that have
helped them pay bills. One, on Dec. 16, was a candlelight concert at St. John's
Lutheran Church in Red Bud. It was organized by Brian's students, joined by
faculty members. Nearly $ 5,000 was raised.

   The Magees also benefited from some fund-raising at their church, St.  Paul's
Lutheran Church in Columbia.

   Gabriel had needed a blood transfusion right after birth. He suffered
seizures and brain damage because of a stroke. He needed brain surgery at five
weeks and almost died. He lost his vision and doctors said he might not be able
to walk or talk.

   "We've had a lot of early intervention services to help with his speech,
vision and play. He's regained nearly all of his sight," Carlisa said.

   Gabriel is of normal size but has developmental delays that he will continue
to be treated for. He likes books and videos and being held by his parents.

   "He hasn't had any bleeding since he's been on this product," Carlisa said.
The medicine, called Bebulin, is used to treat hemophiliacs, but also helps
those with Factor 10 Deficiency.

   The Bebulin is sent to the Magees freeze-dried and loses it potency fast. The
children will always need it to ward off uncontrolled bleeding.

   When Ariel was born she did not experience bleeding and was put on the
Bebulin right away. She's a normal baby except for the blood deficiency.

   The Magees are hopeful that one day gene therapy may develop to the point
that a gene could be put into their children's bodies that replaces the
deficient gene. But it's not something they can count on.

   Still, they educate themselves about gene therapy and even attended a
convention in the fall in Dallas by the National Hemophilia Foundation. The
emphasis was on gene therapy. "It sounds very promising for our children and
others too," Brian said.

In the genes

   Both the Magees have a recessive gene that predisposed them to the blood
deficiency that was passed on to their children. "Both of us had the disorder in
a recessive gene, but never knew of it because we never had a problem," Carlisa
said.

   While it's hereditary, their relatives had ever experienced any problem.  The
chances of it being passed on to their children were about one in four, they
learned later. The Magees do not plan to a have any more children.

   Their doctor, who has been seeing the children since shortly after their
births, is Dr. Robert Bergamini, a pediatric hematologist on the staff of St.
John's Mercy Medical Center in Creve Coeur. The Magees call him Dr. Bob and are
thankful for his knowledge and treatment of the blood deficiency.

   The doctor is equally impressed with the Magees. Bergamini said Gabriel "has
made an outstanding recovery. It's a real credit to the regenerative capacity of
a child's brain, the efforts of early intervention and the work of the parents."

   "They are spectacular people. They have incredible faith that is so precious
and heartwarming to see in this day and age. They give to everyone else more
than what people give to them," Bergamini said.

   The Magees are promoters of giving blood, noting there is a shortage now.
"It's something our children depend on," said Carlisa.

   A fund for the Magee family has been set up at Commercial State Bank in
Waterloo.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photos by ODELL MITCHELL JR./POST-DISPATCH
 (1) Color Photo - Carlisa Magee tosses a ball to her son, Gabriel, 2, as he
sits on top of a mountain of pillows. His therapist, Patty Wiesner (behind
Gabriel), built the mountain of pillows to help Gabriel practice climbing. On
the floor in front of Carlisa is Ariel, 7 months.
 (2) Color Photo - Carlisa Magee holds her daughter, Ariel. Ariel and Gabriel
must have blood infusions every three days to help their blood clot.
 (3) Photo - Gabriel Magee, 2, gets help climbing the stairs in his home from
his therapist, Patty Wiesner of Prime Care. Gabriel and his sister, Ariel, 7
months old, have a rare blood disease that requires them to get infusions every
three days.
 (* Note: Photo 1 and 2 appeared in black & white in the Alton Area Post and the
Madison County Post.)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2000


                             1017 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            January 9, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 024

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: ON THE BRINK OF MEDICAL MIRACLES ; BIOTECH FIRMS CLOSING IN ON KILLER
DISEASES

BYLINE: SUSAN RUBINOWITZ

BODY:

   New York's medical researchers -- who've spent decades harnessing the power
of molecular science -- now find themselves in a hotbed of astounding
breakthroughs that could spell the end to AIDS, cancer and other killer
diseases.

   "It's a perfect time to talk about the fact that these things are at our
doorstep, and they are going to change the way people are treated for cancer
over the next 50 years," said Dr. Samuel Waksal, president of ImClone Systems
Inc. in Manhattan, the state's largest biotech company.

   ImClone has been cloning cells to make cancer-killing antibodies.

   One of them, called C225, is in the last phase of clinical trials at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and Yale-New Haven Medical Center, among other
sites, Waksal said.

   It's also being tried on patients with colo-rectal and head-and-neck cancers
that don't respond to other therapies.

   Then there's BEC2, another cloned substance -- made by slicing up DNA from
different organisms -- which is helping people with small-cell lung cancers form
antibodies that keep tumors from returning once they're killed by chemotherapy.

   Acorda Therapeutics, based in Hawthorne, Westchester, is banking on a
monoclonal antibody -- a substance used by the immune system to attack foreign
substances -- to improve the lives of victims of multiple sclerosis and
spinal-cord injuries.

   Those patients suffer diminished range of motion when they lose myelin -- the
fatty, protective substance that covers nerves and allows them to conduct
messages. The antibody helps regrow the cushioning material.

   A researcher at Minnesota's Mayo Clinic, Dr. Moses Rodriguez, discovered it
when he ground up the spinal cords of mice and found that injecting it into the
animals immunizes them from myelin loss.

   Taken from human cells, the same substance will be cloned millions of times
to make a drug, said Ron Cohen, founder and president of Acorda.

   Paralyzed victims won't suddenly jump out of their wheelchairs, but their
range of movement should markedly increase, said Cohen.

   The city's academic giants also are translating long years of closeted
research into concrete cures. At Cornell University's Weill Medical College, Dr.
Ronald Crystal's team has copied the gene that sparks the creation of blood
vessels.

   The treatment could one day replace heart-bypass surgery, by prompting the
body to regrow healthy arteries.

   A human trial last year showed promising results: All 21 patients who were
treated experienced a decrease in chest pain. Although 15 of those people also
underwent bypass surgery, the six who received gene therapy alone did just as
well.

   "We are very excited about these results," Crystal said in a progress report
late last year. Scientists at Enzo Biochem in Farmingdale, L.I., started out in
the 1980's by finding ways to read the sequences of DNA molecules -- the chain
that dictates each human's specific traits.

   Now they're perfecting a process that can kill off a bad gene by shooting a
genetic "missile," called a vector, into it to block it from reproducing. That
breakthrough holds promise for one day producing human T-cells that can render
people immune to AIDS, said Enzo's president, Barry Weiner. Human trials are
under way at the University of California.

   In fact, before the Food and Drug Administration will approve any new drug
for marketing, the agency demands evidence of a clear pattern of safety and
success in humans.

   "This is really the beginning," said Weiner, who predicted the new decade
could see medical science-fiction become reality.

   "The opportunities that companies such as ours are capable of executing based
on the research of the last 20 years is astounding."


GRAPHIC: CLONE WOLVES: Michelle Iacolina and Larry White are molecular-biology
researchers at Manhattan's ImClone Systems, which has cloned cells to make
cancer-killing antibodies. N.Y. Post: Michael Norcia

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2000


                             1018 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        January 9, 2000 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E5

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CORRECTS SKIN DEFECT IN ALBINO MICE

BYLINE: Chicago Tribune

BODY:

   Scientists have made albino mice grow a few black hairs by fixing a genetic
defect, a possible step toward treating some human hereditary skin diseases,
researchers say.

   It's too soon to tell whether such an approach could let gray-haired people
start growing natural-colored hair again, or treat the common kind of baldness,
experts said.

   But the technique might eventually be used against epidermolysis bullosa, a
group of rare inherited conditions that cause blistering, said Kyonggeun Yoon of
the Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia, who led the work. She also said
that the technique as used in the mice would not correct human albinism, because
the genetic fix wouldn't reach all the affected tissues of the body.

   Yoon, who said she didn't think the technique could restore color to gray
human hair, and colleagues report the mouse work in the January issue of the
journal Nature Biotechnology.

   They targeted a small genetic defect that caused albinism in the mice. They
removed some hair on the animals' backs and either injected or simply smeared on
a sort of DNA repair kit. Both techniques made the animals grow some colored
hairs.

   "It's not impressive yet. We're able to turn a few hair black. But it's a
beginning," Yoon said.

   Angela Christiano, an associate professor of dermatology and genetics at
Columbia University in New York, said it's not clear whether the technique could
work against gray hair or the common "male pattern" baldness. That's because the
biology behind those conditions is a mystery, she said.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2000


                             1019 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 6, 2000 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BODY:

   HQ moves to Richfield

   National Interstate Corp., an insurance holding company, will move its
headquarters from Pepper Pike to a 96,000-square-foot office building to be
built at Kinross Lakes in Richfield. The move, which involves 80 employees, is
planned for October. National Interstate reached an agreement with Snavely
Development Co. in Willoughby Hills to buy the building, which Snavely is
constructing on six acres at the office park. National Interstate is moving to
accommodate growth.


   REIT in talks

   Gotham Partners LP, the New York-based controlling investor in First Union
Real Estate Investments, said the realty trust is exploring business
combinations or other transactions with Wellsford Properties Inc. Wellsford is a
New York-based commercial real estate firm. First Union, based in Cleveland but
with plans to move to New York, said it will make no further announcement unless
the companies reach an agreement or end their talks.

   Lease approved

   A Cleveland-Cuyahoga County Port Authority committee unanimously approved
leasing nine acres of land known as the Old River property west of the Flats to
Akron-based Kenmore Construction Co. for one year with a one-year option.
Pending approval from the port board, the lease would start March 15 at $135,000
per year. Kenmore wants to use the property as a site for limestone handling.

   Gene therapy patented

   Beachwood-based Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. said the U.S. Patent Office
issued a patent to Case Western Reserve University covering gene therapy
technology that it exclusively licenses. Together with a half-dozen other CWRU
patents the company has licensed, the new one provides what Copernicus President
Dr. Robert C. Moen called "very broad coverage" for the company's technologies,
which make it possible to compact genetic material and send it to a target in
the body without using the viruses that have raised safety concerns.

   NATIONAL

   The bottle is back

   Coca-Cola Co. will sell its flagship Coca-Cola Classic in embossed glass
bottles. The 8-ounce contour bottles haven't been sold in about 40 years, but
with sales of its main soda lagging the growth of rivals Mountain Dew, Dr Pepper
and Coca-Cola's own Sprite, it needed a spark. The Coke Classic slogan will also
change from "Always" to "Enjoy." Coca-Cola will give away more than a million of
the embossed bottles at shopping malls, movie theaters and other venues starting
next month.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (color) by: NO CREDIT; Coke glass bottle ; CHART:; STOCKS

COLUMN: DIARY

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2000


                             1020 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 4, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. G-2, PEOPLE OF A NEW AGE

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: AT THE TOP OF THE HEAP;
GENE THERAPY MAY SOMEDAY CURE CANCER, BUT MAKING DESIGNER PEOPLE WILL BE;
ANOTHER THING

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   New gene information will influence everything from treatments for disease to
concepts of evolution.

   Early successes with gene therapy have created biological factories for
patients whose own genes cannot produce a needed protein. A normal copy of the
gene is inserted into cells, often with a harmless virus acting as the transport
vehicle.

   "So for all the genetic diseases, we will be working hard in the next 25
years to find out how to introduce that gene in the precise way in the right
cells so that you can replace that defective function with a good function,"
explained Joe Glorioso, chairman of the Department of Molecular Genetics and
Biochemistry at University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

   In some cases, a gene may be delivered that will cancel overproduction of
proteins that are causing disease.

   Glorioso said screening embryos for certain diseases and implanting the one
with the best chance of surviving without a chronic, debilitating condition
would be less difficult than trying to genetically alter a fetus' development in
the uterus. It might be possible to eliminate some diseases entirely from the
species, simply because no one inherits the genetic error that causes them.

   Inserting genes into an embryo will be far more controversial.

   "That's an active approach to enhancing the genome," Glorioso said. "To me,
it would be absurd not to manipulate the genome in a way that will eliminate
horrible diseases like gastric cancer."

   At the moment, there do appear to be limits on genetic "enhancements."
Scientists don't understand, at a biologic level, what smart, pretty or athletic
is, so they cannot simply flick a few genetic switches to make those traits a
reality.

   The Human Genome Project, which will soon provide an inventory of all the
building blocks of our species' genetic code, will help researchers make new
discoveries about normal development as well as disease susceptibility.

   But there is a vast distance, Glorioso cautions, between having a map of the
human genetic code and having an understanding of how genes interact to make and
maintain a complex living creature.

   Within a short time, scientists will have gene information for many
creatures, including worms, flies and mice. As technology improves, it is likely
that genetic maps will be made for representatives of myriad species.

   "So we will be able to understand in a very precise and powerful way what the
relationship is among organisms," Glorioso said. "We'll be able to detect
patterns of migration among species and come up with genetic ages that we'll
have a better understanding of what time in history these organisms arose."

   Being able to identify patterns in the development of life could also enhance
our ability to recognize life elsewhere, such as that of bacteria that can
survive the unrelenting heat of a volcanic vent, or even that on other planets.

   "It would be fascinating if what we find on Mars are just fossils, rather
than living organisms," Glorioso said. "We'd find evidence that species have
arisen and died off because of changes in the environment. Just recently we've
discovered new planets around other suns. It's intuitively obvious that there
are billions and billions of life forms throughout the universe."

   ABOUT THIS PACKAGE THE FUTURE SNAPSHOTS WERE COMPILED BY POST-GAZETTE STAFF
WRITERS VIRGINIA LINN, ELLEN MAZO, ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN AND CHRISTOPHER SNOWBECK.
THE ILLUSTRATIONS ON THIS PAGE ARE BY POST-GAZETTE STAFF ARTIST STACY INNERST.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2000


                             1021 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    January 4, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z06

LENGTH: 709 words

HEADLINE: SECOND OPINION; Guinea Pigs In the Genetics Revolution

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford

BODY:


   The predictions are awesome: In 10 years, there will be genetic tests to
predict your chances of getting diabetes, heart disease, asthma, mental illness
and several common cancers. In 30 years, you will be able to get your complete
genetic blueprint for $ 1,000. In 40 years, gene-based drug treatments will be
available for most diseases. Average life expectancy will reach 90 years.

   This is the vision of Francis S. Collins, who heads the National Human Genome
Research Institute at the National Institutes of Health. It is a future where
people can lead longer, better lives, thanks to the benefits of the genetics
revolution in which all the human genes are identified and treatments are
genetically designed on an individual basis to stall or prevent illness and
disability. The potential is enormous--preventing breast cancer, managing
depression, slowing down the aging process.

   Collins is an optimist when it comes to science.

   But he is a pessimist when it comes to how science may be misused and abused
in the future.

   In 30 years, he predicts, major anti-technology movements will be active in
the United States and around the world. He also foresees widening inequities in
who will benefit from genetic advances.

   In part, his pessimism is rooted in history. Some people are inherently
suspicious of science and technology--and with good reason. The splitting of the
atom was followed by the Bomb Scare Era, with people scrambling for fallout
shelters. The accident at Three Mile Island reawakened public fears of nuclear
power. More recently, the uproar in Europe over genetically manipulated foods
has raised the specter of mad scientists "messing with nature."

   News headlines about cloning pets and failed gene therapy experiments give
the impression of science running out of control. Movies such as "Gattaca"
titillate flawed fantasies of genetically designing offspring. Call it the
Frankenstein syndrome, a well established public perception that scientists are
playing God.

   Anything to do with genes is particularly susceptible to the Frankenstein
syndrome. It's threatening because of the "genes-R-us" philosophy--the feeling
that genes are the essence of our identity. There's the suspicion that changing
DNA is akin to changing identity. "It gets people where they live," says
Collins.

   But to scientists, DNA is not the whole story of identity. "DNA is just a
chemical," Collins says. "We're a lot more than our DNA sequences."

   The hope is that as the field of genetics produces some tangible benefits in
managing and preventing disease, DNA will lose some of its sacred aura--and
designing treatments based on genetic information will become less frightening
to the public. As Collins explained in an online discussion with The Washington
Post: "Knowledge is neither good nor evil--it's the uses we put it to that
determines whether the revolution in human genetics, which is getting underway
right now in a big way, will be seen by the public as a godsend or a curse."

   At the moment, the genetics revolution has stalled after the widely
publicized death of a gene therapy patient at the University of Pennsylvania and
the general failure of gene therapy to cure disease. After nearly 10 years of
experimentation, the ability to insert a new gene into a patient's body to
change the course of disease is proving much more difficult than researchers
thought.

   But the history of medicine is filled with false starts and detours. Remember
the early days of heart transplants and the fiasco of the artificial heart? And
yet researchers persisted, improving the success rates for transplants and
finding better ways to treat heart disease.

   The same will be true for genetics. Gene therapy may work only for a few rare
diseases--or it may go the way of the artificial heart. But genomics, the
science of genes, is much broader than this particular experiment. It holds the
promise of finding new ways to reduce the toll of disease, stave off aging and
improve memory.

   Over the next century we will all be guinea pigs in the genetics revolution.
In fact, NIH is likely to conduct a human study to extend the maximum human life
span in the year 2030. Maybe that's a study you'd like to sign up for.


LOAD-DATE: January 04, 2000


                             1022 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                  January 3, 2000, Monday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1103 words

HEADLINE: BRAVE NEW WORLD

BYLINE: BY EAMON LYNCH, AMANDA GARDNER & MARTY ROSEN

BODY:
SUPERBUGS The coming plagueThey are coming, faster than science can muster
vaccines or antibiotics to stop them. The end of the 20th century brought new
infectious diseases, including HIV and AIDS, and outbreaks of dormant and
seldom-seen diseases like E. coli, Lyme disease and the fatal hantavirus, a
respiratory disease carried by rodents that in 1993 suddenly struck victims in
the Southwest. Scientists also were alarmed by the rapid spread of existing
diseases that emerged as major public health threats, including hepatitis C,
malaria, and strains of drug-resistant tuberculosis, a bacterial killer that may
infect up to 50 million people worldwide.Now, they're looking with concern at
the next century, which threatens a rise in infectious disease without the
guarantee of adequate treatment. They blame the growing world threat on global
travel, the overuse of antibiotics in developed countries, the lack of vaccines
and adequate public health measures in impoverished countries and the survival
skills of mutating microbes."Microbes have an uncanny way of evolving to avoid
their own extinction. It's a never-ending struggle. I think that's the thing
most people in the U.S. don't appreciate," says Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. He cautions that our
most immediate threat may be penicillin-resistant staph infections that have not
been seen in this country since the 1940s, and a new influenza strain that could
fuel a pandemic to rival the lethal 1918 flu.But lesser epidemics also worry
public health experts. New York was hit late last summer with a fatal outbreak
of West Nile fever, an African strain of encephalitis spread by mosquitoes,
which claimed seven lives and spread concerns along the Eastern seaboard of more
outbreaks in the spring. In Texas, doctors are currently battling about 60 cases
of mosquito-borne tropical Dengue fever, a sometimes fatal disease never before
seen in this country, which causes such severe muscle and joint pain it also is
called breakbone fever. "If you look over the decades and centuries, there's a
constant emergence and reemergence of infectious disease," says Fauci.The answer
may be prevention through public health campaigns, such as the safe-sex campaign
and needle-exchange programs to stop the spread of HIV/AIDS, preventive steps
such as widespread mosquito eradication programs, clean water and safe food
programs to prevent E. coli, and the development of more effective vaccines.
Scientists warn that we can't count either on existing or newly developed
treatments to keep up with the encroaching diseases, and predict that within our
children's lifetime we'll run out of anti-microbial treatments to combat
mutating bacteria."What we'll be looking at in the next 10 years, we'll be
running out of antibiotics. We can't keep inventing them," says Dr. Donald S.
Gromisch, chief of pediatrics at Nassau County Medical Center, who has waged a
campaign against the misuse of antibiotics for the common cold and viral
infections. "When you give antibiotics, the bacteria that reside in your nose
and throat learn to become resistant. So we have to go to more and more fancy
antibiotics to treat disease. We're now seeing deaths from these superbugs." The
most feared superbug is resistant to vancomycin, the most potent antibiotic
available. It has been blamed for three deaths in the U.S. But just as alarming
are cases of drug-resistant pneumococcus - the most common bacterial cause of
pneumonia - which don't respond to penicillin and other antibiotics. Diseases
like tuberculosis and malaria, once thought to be under control, have reemerged
as major killers: Drug-resistant malaria alone killed more than 2 million people
worldwide last year, and nearly 2 billion people - up to one-third of the
world's population - are infected with TB.While most of the cases are in
underdeveloped regions, experts say it's the responsibility of developed
countries to look for answers. "We have countless examples of diseases that
started as 'Who cares?' in developing countries," says Fauci, who considers the
Texas Dengue outbreak an example. "We have a window of opportunity now that we
can prevent these infections." - Marty RosenWHAT HIGH-TECH MEDICAL FUTURE
HOLDSThe house call of the new century might go something like this: The
microchip implanted in your pancreas detects a shortage of insulin, a hormone
your body needs to control blood sugar. In the inconvenient old days, you'd have
to give yourself a shot to balance things out. But thanks to the "medisocks"
you're wearing, everything you need is right on your feet. The chip in your body
signals one in your hose, which secretes a little absorbable insulin and voila!
Sound farfetched? Not for Arthur Caplan, director of the renowned medical ethics
program at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. But while Caplan sees
rich promise in the march of technology, he is also trained to look for the
shadows those advances will cast. The 21st century will be the era of genetics,
says Caplan, but the ethical concerns that attend this trend open a "gaping
door" for conflict. How will gene therapy change the patient-provider
relationship? What will be the fallout for health insurance have-nots?Excepting
surgery, Caplan foresees the need for few, if any, hospitals, which he considers
relatively dangerous places that breed infections. "We'll have a lot more E-mail
medicine," he says, a development that will threaten the comforting notion of
doctor as hands-on healer. Caplan also predicts that as in-vitro fertilization
improves and merges with genetics, many couples will spurn the notion of in
utero pregnancy. The uterus, after all, can be a rather tenuous environment,
whereas an artificial and fully controlled womb takes the guesswork out of
gestation. Finally, don't be surprised to see the surgeon general gain an alter
ego: the nation's health czar. This new official, a moralizing mix of Dr. Laura
and Dr. Spock, will be charged will exhorting Americans to live, eat and work
healthily in the next millennium. 2084, anyone? - Adam Marcus-GRAPHIC:
Worldwide, 336 million people live with AIDS or HIV.In the U.S., between 650,000
and 900,000 have HIV, but up to 200,000 are unaware.There were 40,000 new cases
last year, half in people under 25.As of June '99, the American death toll stood
at 420,201.AIDS has infected up to 25% of some African countries.DNA STRUCTURE
BY SILVIO DASILVA DAILY NEWS GRAPHIC: Complementary chains of nucleotides
(guanine, cytosine, adenine, thymine) linked by hydrogen bonds

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000


                             1023 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                  January 3, 2000, Monday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1781 words

HEADLINE: BRAVE NEW WORLD The promise of medical breakthroughs One of the most
exciting areas arising in genetics is the development of drugs targeted at acti
ons governed by genes. Scientists are also targeting drugs to attack the genetic
weaknesses of different microorganisms.

BYLINE: BY EAMON LYNCH, AMANDA GARDNER & MARTY ROSEN

BODY:
At the start of the millennium, science is poised on the edge of medical
breakthroughs. Using a steadily increasing knowledge of genetics, researchers
are unlocking the mysteries of disease and getting closer to taming cancer,
preventing heart attacks and curing AIDS. Here, a look into the future.TAKING
HEARTCoronary artery disease is America's leading killer, "public enemy number
one," says Dr. Jonathan Halperin, director of Clinical Cardiology Services at
Mount Sinai Medical Center. According to the American Heart Association, someone
in this country dies of heart or blood vessel diseases every 34 seconds.
Researchers are following "holy grails" in trying to conquer the disease. The
most developed of them is noninvasive diagnosis of coronary blockages. Today,
such a diagnosis usually involves placing a tube into a groin artery, then
directing it to the heart arteries. An X-ray dye is injected and an angiogram
recorded - a roadmap of blood vessels and blockages a surgeon needs for a bypass
operation."We're seeing rapid advances in magnetic resonance imaging [MRI],
where we are able to image the heart's arteries by placing the patient in a
magnetic field," Halperin explains. "Not only can we see the blockages, but we
can see inside them - see the components that make up the plaque - and predict
which of these are at the greatest risk of causing heart attacks." Where the MRI
technology requires development is with imaging the smaller coronary arteries.
"Within five years we'll have noninvasive procedures as a reality," Halperin
says. "No risk. No pain. No needles. No radiation."Also being developed is a
pill similar to drugs now used to lower cholesterol. It would effectively
"dissolve" the blockage and perhaps reverse atherosclerosis. If shown to be
effective, that pill could be a preemptive strike against heart attacks, perhaps
avoiding the need for angioplasty and bypass operations entirely. The drug
should be available within a few years.Arguably the most promising development
is a process called angiogenesis, which might one day allow the heart to cure
itself. The idea is to place genes into the affected area of the heart, which
then allow the growth of new blood vessels. Not only would these new vessels
reduce the risk of heart attack, they would also reduce the damage a heart
attack might cause. "The whole idea is to find a gene that will allow new blood
vessels to grow around the obstructions. Then we might well be able to improve
the way these people feel," Halperin says. "There would be a lot less damage
when there is an auxiliary blood supply."Angiogenesis is being tested in
patients and could prove crucial in treating narrow arteries that limit the
supply of oxygenated blood, which contributes to angina pains, strokes and
impaired memory.- Eamon LynchGENETICSGene studies point the wayA month ago,
scientists at the Human Genome Project unraveled the genetic code of an entire
human chromosome - Chromosome 22, which, with 33.5 million chemical pieces, is
one of the smallest of the human body's 23 pairs of chromosomes. By the year
2003, the project expects to have mapped the entire human genome - all the DNA
in the human body.Knowing which genes are responsible for what means doctors
eventually will be able to identify people at risk for certain diseases. Armed
with that knowledge, they can then introduce lifestyle changes to reduce risks.
If, say, someone is identified as having a genetic predisposition toward colon
cancer, he might be able to modify his diet so as to lower his susceptiblity.
The same with asthmatics; if a genetic susceptiblity could be identified, those
individuals would know to stay away from certain kinds of molds, dust,
etc."Being able to give people a boutique prescription of what they should
expose themselves to - and shouldn't - in the environment will be easier," says
Jane Peterson, program director of large-scale sequencing at the National Human
Genome Research Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health. "They will
be able to take on their own health-care risks, to some extent." One of the hot
areas of gene research, pharmacogenetics is the study of how genetics makes
people respond differently to medications. Specifically, scientists are looking
into single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), individual pieces of the genetic
code, to provide the key to predicting how drugs will work. "Everyone is going
to have a different profile of SNPs and it's hoped that drugs can be screened
against these profiles," says Peterson. "Pharmaceutical companies will be able
to predict, based on a SNP [pronounced "snip"] profile, which portion of the
population will respond in a certain way to a drug. Then you can target the
drugs."One example of this "personalized medicine" principle in action is
azathioprine, an anti-leukemia drug that is metabolized differently by different
patients; some need large doses while others need only very small doses.
Scientists have discovered the genetic reason behind this difference, and now a
simple blood test can determine how patients will respond.One of the most
exciting areas arising in genetics is the development of drugs targeted at
actions governed by genes. Scientists are also targeting drugs to attack the
genetic weaknesses of different microorganisms, and using genetics for gene
therapy (transferring or modifying DNA), prenatal diagnosis, to reveal how the
human body develops and for genetic engineering, which is responsible for
producing insulin and growth hormone, among other things. But the real challenge
lies in translating knowledge into treatments. Identifying a gene or gene defect
is just a first step. From there, researchers need to know how the gene leads to
the development of disease by affecting the action of different
proteins."Genetics is the key that unlocks the door to the research," says Dr.
Robert Burk, a medical geneticist and professor at the cancer research center at
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. "We have to see how it translates in
the engine."- Amanda GardnerCANCERConquering a killerThe underlying premise of
cancer research hasn't changed: figuring out what makes cancer cells different
from normal ones, then finding ways to attack those differences. But knowledge
of various types of cancer is now so advanced that doctors can distinguish cells
on tiny, molecular levels and come up with prevention, detection and treatment
strategies that are far more focused, effective and humane than those that went
before."We are entering the most exciting time that I've ever seen in over 30
years of being involved in cancer," says Dr. Harmon Eyre, chief medical officer
of the American Cancer Society. "We've begun to win the war against cancer."
Drug treatments for the disease are becoming much more specific. "Before, we had
no molecular basis for trying one compound or another," says Dr. Robert Burk, a
medical geneticist and professor at the Cancer Research Center at the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine. "Now we know what the targets are."Just weeks ago,
preliminary trials of a drug called STI-571 produced remission of chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) in all 37 patients involved in the study. The drug
inhibits a specific enzyme that results from gene defects (the enzyme is not
present in normal cells). Targeted treatments like STI-571 are not only
effective but often don't produce the noxious side effects of standard chemo and
radiation. Cancer vaccines, both preventive and therapeutic, will also be a big
part of the future. "The use of vaccines and antibodies in cancer is one of the
dramatic new advances," says Dr. David Golde, physician-in-chief of the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. "The likelihood is that in the next five to 10
years we will literally have scores of these and this is going to change the
landscape of cancer care."There already are therapeutic vaccines (to prevent a
recurrence of the cancer) for lymphomas and one is being worked on for melanoma.
The FDA recently recognized a hepatitis B vaccine as helping to prevent
hepatitis B-related primary liver cancer. Because hepatitis B is a major risk
factor for this type of cancer, preventing hepatitis would, by extension, help
prevent cancer."The more we understand the molecular nature [of cancer], we can
see the place for molecular interventions to prevent it," says Eyre. "I believe
if you add all of these up over the next few decades, we're going to see cancer
relegated to a minor public health problem." - Amanda GardnerAIDSSnipping virus
from cells'No one will ever be cured of AIDS unless we can physically cut the
virus out of the cells," says Dr. Jeffrey Laurence, director of the Laboratory
for AIDS Research at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical College. "And there might
be a way to do that." The AIDS virus, which has killed almost 16 million people
worldwide according to the World Health Organization, buries itself in the genes
of a normal cell and researchers think the next major breakthrough might be
"molecular scissors."This is a gene-therapy process where scientists take a
harmless virus and place in it a mirror image of the gene they want to get rid
of. When the virus is placed in an infected cell, it works like a homing device,
with the virus "snipping out" the specified gene - in this case, the
AIDS-infected gene. The cell can then heal free of the disease."In the test tube
it's worked great, so why haven't we cured AIDS?" Laurence asks. "Technically
we're not good enough to get these 'molecular scissors' into every place they
need to be. We need a breakthrough in technology because we need to get it into
every cell that's infectable. One of these days we will be good enough."The most
significant recent advance in treating AIDS has been the development of protease
inhibitors, anti-viral drugs that fight the disease as it attempts to reproduce
itself in the body and destroy the immune system. "With protease inhibitors two
things happened," says Laurence. "The death rate dramatically declined and then
that declining death rate slowed." The drugs are very powerful but the virus can
find a way around them. And they're very expensive: one year's therapy with
protease inhibitors can cost $13,000.The biggest problem in the war on AIDS
remains the lack of a vaccine, though the first ever clinical trials of one are
to begin in the new year. "No virus has ever been conquered without a vaccine,"
Laurence says. "We need a vaccine and we are woefully underfunded in that
research." Laurence deems it unlikely that he will see an effective vaccine in
his lifetime. He just turned 47. - Eamon Lynch(SEE PART TWO)

GRAPHIC: HELAYNE SEIDMAN PREVENTATIVE MEASURES Dr. Jean-Claude Bystryn
administers a vaccine for melanoma to patient Joseph Aikins at NYU Skin and
Cancer Pavilion in Manhattan.   CLOSER LOOK PET (Positron Emission Tomography) -
an advanced form of MRI - detects diseases at an early stage.     SPLICE OF LIFE
Dr. Robert Burk is a medical geneticist and professor at the Cancer Research
Center at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.   JOHN ROCA
DAILY NEWS LITTLE HELPER This automatic insulin pump represents another
technological advancement in treating diabetes.     A close-up of the fearsome
Ebola virus, which caused many deaths in African countries such as Zaire (now
Congo) and Sudan.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000


                             1024 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         January 3, 2000, Monday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 10

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: Yes, the 20th really was the 'Century of Women'

BYLINE: MARTHA MUSGROVE

SOURCE: The Miami Herald

BODY:

   It's the New Year, and I'm feeling low. Wasn't the 20th the "Century of
Women"?

   It began with a campaign for suffrage and ended with two women sitting on the
Supreme Court and Carly Fiorina as chief executive of Hewlett-Packard. In
between came the flappers (whose joie de vivre was snuffed by the Great
Depression) and World War II's Rosie the Riveter.

   Also the Pill, the Civil Rights Act -- with a still intact Title IX for girls
who love sports as much as their brothers -- and the great debate over the Equal
Rights Amendment. The ERA wasn't ratified, but state legislatures across the
country were shamed into recognizing women as men's legal equals.

   Why, then, have women gotten such short shrift in the century-ending "most of
. . . " "best of . . . " stories and TV specials? When women were listed, the
choice was often mysterious: social butterflies, entertainers, cosmetic queens.

   What I wanted to see were women of the century who did or discovered
something that significantly changed the way people think or act. Was it, I
wondered, just too hard to find such women?

   No. The hard part, I discovered when finally making a list, was whittling the
number. It's painful to "leave out" women like artist Georgia O'Keeffe,
zoologist Rachel Carson, educators Maria Montessori and Mary McLeod Bethune,
labor leader Dolores Huerta. But, hey, here it is:

   Marie Curie (1867-1934): At the turn of the century, many physicists were
thinking everything had been explained. Curie, born Marya Sklowdoska in Poland,
turned the scientific world upside down, suggesting a new element was the source
of the mysterious rays given off by uranium. Her husband, Pierre Curie, gave up
his research to assist in hers.

   The Curies discovered two new elements, polonium and radium, and captured the
1903 Nobel Prize in physics. She took a second Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1911
before dying of radiation-induced leukemia.

   Jane Addams (1860-1935): The daughter of a prosperous Illinois abolitionist
and politician, Addams wrote the book on social work. She opened Hull House in
Chicago and tirelessly campaigned to end sweatshops, ban child labor, provide
legal protections for immigrants and to establish juvenile courts. In 1931, she
won the Nobel Peace Prize.

   Adm. Grace Hopper (1906-1992): Without her, Bill Gates and Microsoft would be
nothing. She figured out how to program computers with words, not just binary
ones and zeros. COBOL (common business-oriented language) revolutionized the use
of computers. She also coined the phrase "debugging" when she fixed a balky
computer by plucking a dead moth from its innards. She retired from the Navy as
a rear admiral in 1986.

   Susan Anthony (1820-1906) and Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815-1902): OK, these
two women barely made it into the 20th century, but their campaign to win the
vote for women gave birth to a women's movement that just won't die.

   Simone de Beauvoir (1908-1986): Don't discount the influence of Betty Friedan
or Gloria Steinem, but the philosopher queen is de Beauvoir and her 1949 book,
"The Second Sex." Men, she wrote, place themselves at the center of history and
society and cast women as "the Other," failing to recognize women as autonomous:
"Thus humanity is male and man defines woman not in herself but as relative to
him." Even women who accept the role welcome the explanation.

   Golda Meir (1898-1978): She was not only a mother of a nation -- Israel --
but its labor minister, foreign minister and tough, uncompromising prime
minister.

   Eleanor Roosevelt (1884-1962): The word "humanitarian" hardly does justice to
this first lady and United Nations delegate who rounded up and delivered the
votes that gave the world the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and much of
its hope for the next millennium.

   Barbara McClintock (1902-1992): For years, this geneticist's presentations
were met with stony silence. She stayed her course, conclusively demonstrating
that genes aren't glued to chromosomes but can jump around and turn other genes
on and off -- findings fundamental to the current exploration of gene therapies
to cure disease. "Being ignored was a blessing," she said, accepting the 1983
Nobel Prize for medicine. "I could pursue my work in peace and quiet without
interference."

   Margaret Sanger (1885-1966): She opened the United States' first
birth-control clinic in 1916 in Brooklyn. Police shut it down 10 days later.
Sanger persevered, insisting, "No woman can call herself free until she can
choose consciously whether she will or will not be a mother." She won the battle
in 1937 when the American Medical Association urged U.S. medical schools to
train physicians in contraception. A 1965 Supreme Court decision finally
legalized birth control.

   Mildred "Babe" Didrikson Zaharias (1914-1956): As a Texas high school
basketball star, Babe once scored 104 points. In the 1932 Los Angeles Olympics,
she took gold medals in javelin and hurdles, silver in the high jump. She took
up golf, winning 17 tournaments in 1946, founded the Ladies Professional Golf
Association and won 31 of its tournaments.

   There are other great sportswomen -- Wilma Rudolph, Martina Navratilova, the
1999 women's soccer team, Peggy Fleming, Julie Krone -- but Babe did it all
while working as a secretary.

   What more could be asked of a woman in this century?  ------------ Martha
Musgrove is an associate editor of The Miami Herald.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000


                             1025 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 3, 2000, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. E9

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: ARE THE VOLUNTEERS IN CLINICAL TRIALS GUINEA PIGS OR LUCKY DUCKS?

BYLINE: Ruth Levy Guyer

BODY:


MEDICINE

   EVERY new pill has the potential to be a miracle drug; each can also bomb.
But, like the proverbial spinach whose palatability cannot be known until it is
tried, the effects of new medicines can only be known through controlled
"clinical trials." Such trials pit a new medicine against an old one or against
no treatment at all. Some people who volunteer to participate in trials end up
feeling like drubbed laboratory guinea pigs; others surface as lucky ducks.

   That any drug works at all is in many ways awe-inspiring. A pill, for
example, must travel from the mouth into the stomach, where it encounters a
harsh chemical environment. Then it must clear various other chemical and
physical barriers-cross membranes, enter the bloodstream-before finding and
binding to its target. Only then does the pill have a chance to demonstrate its
therapeutic prowess-trigger a response, block a reaction, kill a cell, fire off
a signal, insert into a chromosome. No computer simulation, however
sophisticated, can predict absolutely that a pill will lick all hurdles in its
path and actually end up both "bioavailable" and effective.

   One rarely thinks, when popping an Advil or other household drug, that these
reliable nostrums were, at one time, not even on the horizon, that s ome
pioneering soul had to step forward and be the first to take the risks and
swallow them. But every approved drug got to the marketplace only after a
rigorous series of trials in test tubes, animals and eventually people.

   The motivations of individuals who volunteer for clinical trials - called
"subject-volunteers" if they are healthy and "patient-volunteers" if they are
sick - vary widely. Some are embarking on a last-ditch effort to beat an
illness; some are acting altruistically, figuring that part icipation could help
others in the future; some are curious about experimentation; some need the
money (some trials pay participants).

   Last month, several insurance companies announced they would begin paying for
clinical trials of certain experimental treatments for cancer. Such trials have
been slogging along for years, in part because volunteers had to foot exorbitant
bills themselves. In the void, a rogue and disturbing practice emerged:
desperate patients were offered unproven treatments as "standard-of-care." Some
30,000 women with breast cancer, for example, received bone marrow transplants
during the past decade, only to learn last May that the painful procedures are
no better than conventional therapies.

   Every volunteer accepts a gamble. Stephen Jay Gould, describing his
experience fighting a fatal disease in the mid 1980s, says he looked at the
survival curve, saw how far out the right tail of the curve - indicating
longterm survivors - stretched, and figured that his "sanguine personality" made
him a "good candidate for that part of the curve." For Gould to wind up in the
survivor tail, which he did, someone else had to butt smack up against the left
- rapid death - portion of the curve. Statistics only profile populations; they
say nothing about how a given individual will fare.

   A multi-layered safety net undergirds the clinical trial system. All trials
approved and funded by the federal government are reviewed by local
Institutional Review Boards (IRB) at the hospital or research center where the
experiment will take place. IRBs include representatives from the community, a
range of medical personnel, clergy, ethicists, lawyers and other interested
parties. They consider the design of the experiment, possible benefits and
risks, and the candor and clarity of the "informed consent" form. The consent
document outlines reasons for the experiment, risks, benefits, volunteers'
rights and obligations and so on. Volunteers are invited to join studies, not
forced to, and they can bail out at any time, although bailing is not always a
good choice medically.

   But, despite the safeguards, the trial system is imperfect. Overburdened IRBs
have given short shrift to some proposals, rubber stamping ones that should have
been revised. Volunteers, stressed by their illnesses or embarrassed at their
"ignorance," sign on the dotted line without becoming truly informed. Consent
forms are supposed to be written at the same level as newspapers, but many are
not. Researchers have, at times, taken dangerous shortcuts when pressed
professionally, politically or financially. These factors, plus the
idiosyncracies of individuals - a therapy can work fine for one person or 100
but fail for person #101 - can cause studies to go terribly wrong, as happened
last September when Jesse Gelsinger died during a gene therapy trial.

   Publicity about trials-gone-bad and about unethical experiments of the past -
at Tuskegee, by the military, at institutions for ill and disabled individuals -
make some potential volunteers understandably wary. Still, the typical medical
researcher is motivated by a desire to do good, to find new therapies, to help
patients. Individuals wanting to have access to new therapies must, in turn,
accept some responsibility for their discovery.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000


                             1026 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             January 3, 2000 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1324 words

HEADLINE: Strides in genetic research aim to halt aging and disease

BYLINE: Kevin Coughlin

BODY:

   If the weekend's millennial party was a dud, cheer up. Maybe 2100 will be
more fun.

    Breakthroughs in science and technology should help many reach that distant
New Year's Day, according to experts who believe lifespans of 150 years or more
are possible within the next half-century.

    ``It's quite conceivable within 50 years or so, we could double the human
lifespan. . . . The truth is, there is no maximum lifespan," asserts Gregory
Stock, director of the Program on Science, Technology and Society at the
University of California at Los Angeles.

    Research on several fronts is fueling optimism for a Fountain of Youth. The
Human Genome Project, a DNA road map expected by 2003, holds the promise of
dramatic gene therapies to solve diseases and, perhaps, the aging process
itself.

   Powerful new drugs soon may be tailored to our individual genetic quirks
without side effects. When organs and body parts wear out, new ones might be
bio-engineered from our own stem cells, or from animals. Synthetic skin is here
already.

    Seeking the ultimate payday, companies like California's Geron Corp. are
exploring the enzyme telomerase as a trigger to make cells rep-licate
indefinitely. Other targets of research are growth hormones and antioxidants -
to eliminate harmful "free radical" molecules that are by-products of
metabolism.

    Others chase clues in nature, where lobsters, sea turtles and sea anemones
appear impervious to Father Time.

    If fruit flies are any indicator, there might be a move to throttle sex
drives. Studies suggest that delaying reproduction to a ripe old age, over many
generations, yields hardier, hoarier flies. Only the sturdiest survivors pass
along their robust genes.

    Mice, on the other hand, live longer on near-starvation diets. Scientists
speculate that severe calorie restriction stalls rodent reproduction - somehow
suspending the aging clock. Not much fun, but food for thought. Monkeys are
dieting now.

    Researchers from the University of California at San Francisco, meanwhile,
have doubled the life of the Jeanne Calment, at left, who died in August 1997 at
the age of 122, was suspected to have been the world's oldest person. The photo
was taken in October 1995. Above, research director Francis Collins expects many
diseases by 2050 will be cured at the molecular level, before any symptoms.
humble nematode worm,  C. elegans , by tweaking two of its genes.

    All these pieces of the aging puzzle may come together swiftly, academics
say, as ever-faster computers help researchers decipher findings of the Human
Genome Project.

    That international effort is mapping the sequence of three billion chemical
"letters," which encode our genetic structure.

    Once the sequence is complete, the real work begins: Discovering functions
of specific genes, and how to switch them on or off for desired effects.
Understanding the genes that control a person's immune system, for example,
might lead to a bio-engineered pig liver that his body won't reject after
transplantation.

    Within a decade, genetic tests to predict a person's susceptibility to
diseases should become routine, writes Francis Collins in the December issue of
Scientific American.

    Collins, director of the National Human Genome Research Institute, expects
genetic therapies for some diseases between 2010 and 2020. He anticipates
genetically designed drugs for diabetes and high blood pressure, without side
effects, and cancer drugs matched to a patient's likely response.

    By 2050, Collins contends many diseases will be cured at the molecular
level, before any symptoms appear. He thinks a combination of gene and drug
therapies will boost the average lifespan - now ph76 years in the United States
- to 90 or 95 years. Like Stock of UCLA, MIT biologist Leonard Guarente foresees
lifespans doubling by 2100.

    If that happens, thank your lucky stem cells, or your telomeres.

    Telomeres cap the ends of chromosomes, like the plastic tips on shoelaces.
These tips grow shorter each time certain cells replicate, finally getting so
short that cells quit dividing. Halt this shrinkage - with telomerase - and
aging might be postponed, some scientists suspect.

    Declaring stem cell research as the "Breakthrough of the Year," Science
magazine claims these magical cells someday may repair damaged nerves and grow
new hearts and livers.

    What's astounding about stem cells is their chameleon nature. A stem cell in
a human embryo can become a blood cell, a bone cell or any other kind of cell.
Until they get their marching orders, embryonic stem cells bear the hallmarks of
immortality. Their telomeres don't shrink. The potential fascinates scientists.

    When researchers in 1998 kept embryonic and fetal stem cells alive, ready
for morphing into spare body parts, excitement was tinged by controversy. Some
groups feared such research would promote abortions, and the U.S. and other
countries banned or restricted use of human fetal tissue.

    In a huge development this year, however, studies of mice found that adult
stem cells also may be adaptable. Stem cells from mice brains and muscles can
become blood cells. Mouse marrow cells, injected into brains of newborn mice,
have turned into brain cells. These studies also hint at future treatments for
muscular dystrophy and paralysis.

    Advanced Cell Technology of Worcester, Mass., is now cloning stem cells for
research by fusing adult human cells with egg cells extracted from cows. But
don't buy a 22nd century time-share just yet, cautions Huber Warner of the
National Institute on Aging.

    For one thing, he says, it's a big leap from worms, flies and rats to  homo
sapiens . It's unclear if telomerase ultimately extends life or causes cancer.
And the whole business of identifying genes, delivering them where you want
them, and making them perform on command is enormously challenging.

    Warner adds it's "kind of irresponsible" to nurture false hopes in today's
over-85 crowd, the fastest-growing segment of the US population.

    Worried about decrepitude and financial woes, a majority of Americans don't
even want to reach 100, according to a survey last spring by the American
Association of Retired Persons.

    Warner knows this first-hand, and says it helps explain why the National
Institute on Aging, which spends $100 million a year studying the biology of
aging, focuses on making life better, not longer.

    "There's no point in extending the most miserable part of life," Warner
says. "I talk to my mother - she's 90 - and she wants to die. She's had enough.
She's ready to check out. Her life now includes her bed, the couch and the
bathroom, all in one room. It's kind of miserable. If she could feel like she
was 65, maybe she would want to live to 100. But not like this."

    "Isn't there something immoral about the elderly clinging to life?"
biologist Michael Rose of the University of California asks in Scientific
American.

    No, Robert Bradbury insists. The 43-year-old Harvard dropout wants to live
forever, and has used his computer fortune to start the research company Aeiveos
("Forever Young"). Aside from fatal accidents, he sees no reason why people
can't live 2,000 years.

    Bradbury says science and technology can solve the economics of longevity,
along with the liver spots. The cost of living will drop, he says, as
bio-engineered seniors require less health care. Products will be amortized over
longer periods. Cars and homes will be manufactured cheaply, using
nanotechnology to assemble themselves molecule by molecule, just like our bodies
are programmed to do.

    Should the gene-splicers somehow fail, there's still hope. Bradbury's
computer comrades promise virtual immortality, downloading souls onto silicon in
a sort of interactive, multimedia memorial.

    Inventor Ray Kurzweil says the line between man and machines soon will blur,
creating "The Age of Spiritual Machines."

    A longshot, no doubt. But Stock won't rule it out.

    "It's going to be very weird in the future, regardless" he says.

GRAPHIC: CHART

 LIVING LONGER--BRONZE AGE/TODAY

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             1027 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     January 3, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A09; SCIENCE

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE NOTEBOOK

BODY:


   Gene Therapy Progresses a Hair


   Scientists have been struggling for years to find a way to cure human
diseases by giving people new genes. The field recently suffered a major setback
when a young Tucson man died while participating in a gene therapy experiment at
the University of Pennsylvania.

   At the same time, researchers have also been looking for other uses for gene
therapy. And now, a team of scientists in Philadelphia has taken what could be a
step toward using gene therapy to permanently color gray hair.

   Kyonggeun Yoon of Thomas Jefferson University and colleagues showed they
could restore pigmentation to the hairs of albino mice by correcting a defect in
a gene in the hair follicle. A few weeks after the researchers applied
corrective DNA to the mice, either topically or by skin injection, the animals
grew a small number of pigmented hairs. The pigmentation lasted only about three
months, however.

   Although the work remains far from providing a way to permanently restore
color to gray hair in people, it shows that such a thing may at least be
possible, the researchers said.

   "Gene therapy has just taken a cosmetic step forward," wrote Robert M.
Hoffman of AntiCancer Inc. of San Diego in an article accompanying the research
in the January issue of the journal Nature Biotechnology. "Hair follicle
research is an area that not only holds great scientific interest, but also has
enormous commercial potential. This study now demonstrates that the hair
follicle is a visible, safe, and non-invasive target for gene therapy, which is
a field that recently has suffered unfortunate setbacks in the safety of its
medical applications."


   Sex and the Brain's Anatomy


   Brain scientists at Johns Hopkins have found new evidence for how the brains
of men and women differ.

   Godfrey Pearlson and colleagues used brain scans to study 15 men and women,
focusing on a part of the brain known as the inferior parietal lobule, which is
involved in visualizing things in three dimensions and solving mathematical
problems.

   Overall, men tended to have larger inferior parietal lobules than women, the
researchers report in the current issue of the journal Cerebral Cortex. The
right side of this part of the brain tends to be larger in women while men have
larger left sides. The right side of this brain section is associated with
working memory of spatial relationships and the ability to sense relationships
between body parts and awareness of a person's feelings. In contrast, the left
side is more involved in perception, such as judging how fast something is
moving, estimating time and the ability to mentally rotate three-dimensional
objects.


   Unintended Aid to Salmonella?


   In the 1980s, health officials in Europe and the United States realized there
had been a sharp increase in food poisoning caused by a type of salmonella
bacterium found in chickens, eggs and egg products. The upsurge caused concern
that perhaps modern farming techniques were to blame.

   Now scientists have proposed a new theory: A more virulent strain of
salmonella was given a chance to flourish in poultry after less serious forms
were killed off with antibiotics.

   Andreas J. Baumier of the Texas A&M University Health Science Center in Texas
and colleagues reviewed the scientific literature and concluded that a strain of
salmonella called S. enteritidis flourished after strains called S. pullorum and
S. gallinarum were eradicated from domesticated flocks of birds beginning in the
1930s. The birds then may have become infected with the S. enteritidis strain
from mice and rats making their way into henhouses.

   "The increased incidence of salmonellosis in humans may have been caused by
S. enteritidis filling the ecological niche vacated by eradication of the avian
pathogens," the researchers wrote in the Jan. 7 issue of Science, which was
released last week.


   A Hormone's Impact on Appetite


   Ever since researchers identified the appetite-regulating hormone leptin in
1994, they've been trying to figure out exactly how it works in the hopes of
finding new ways to control obesity. Scientists have now found evidence that
leptin works through the brain's pleasure center, perhaps making us enjoy food
less and enjoy activities that burn calories more.

   Peter Shizgal of Concordia University in Montreal and colleagues studied rats
that were hooked up to a system that allowed the animals to stimulate different
parts of their brains. When the rats received injections of leptin, they were
less likely to stimulate reward circuits that the could activate when deprived
of food. Leptin also appears to enhance the animals' sensitivity to activation
of other parts of the brain that did not respond to food deprivation.

   "Leptin could make complementary contributions to energy balance by reducing
food reward while enhancing the value of behaviors incompatible with feeding,"
the researchers wrote in the Jan. 7 issue of Science.


   Bioengineering Silkworms


   A team of researchers from France, the United States and Japan has found a
way to insert foreign genes into the genetic blueprint of silkworms.

   The team used a type of DNA known as "piggBac" to introduce a gene that
produces a fluorescent green protein into silkworm embryos. Nearly 2 percent of
the worms that resulted contained copies of the foreign gene. Moreover, the gene
was passed on to later generations.

   The work suggests that it may be possible to genetically engineer silkworms
to produce silk with certain desired traits, such as stronger silk to make
bulletproof vests or more reliable parachutes.

   "The textile industry could . . . benefit from novel fibers made by silkworms
transformed with various genes encoding fibrous proteins," the researchers wrote
in the January issue of Nature Biotechnology.




LOAD-DATE: January 03, 2000


                             1028 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       January 2, 2000 Sunday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 1530 words

HEADLINE: NEW WORLD BRINGS NEW CHALLENGES FOR GEN Y KIDS

BYLINE: JOHN M. MORAN; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   It is moments after midnight: Jan. 1, 2020.

   Voices are yelling "Happy New Year." To Kerry Fischer that really means
"Happy Birthday."

   Kerry is one of the "millennium babies" -- born in the year 2000 to greet a
new decade, a new century and a new millennium. Now she is celebrating her 20th
birthday.

   Hers is the face of the next generation, known variously as Generation Y, the
Baby Boomlet or the Echo Boomers. It is on this generation that the future
depends.

   And on this New Year's Day, two decades into the new millennium, Kerry is
coming of age in a world that is similar to -- yet also vastly different from --
the one that existed when she was born.

   Some of the starkest differences in 2020:

   Computers embedded in cars and in roadways help prevent accidents and route
drivers around congested areas.

   Robotic vacuum cleaners make housekeeping easier by quietly cleaning floors
and carpets while the family sleeps. People program their VCRs and microwave
ovens by talking to them.

   Poor eyesight, tooth decay and even baldness are in retreat as biotechnology
conquers some age-old infirmities. Many people get routine checkups over the
Internet thanks to telemedicine that allows them to transmit vital health data
electronically.

   Growing numbers of people live most of their lives at home -- working,
shopping, even socializing on-line. Most new homes have offices in place of
traditional dining rooms.

   Few of these changes are news to Kerry and the rest of her generation, of
course. They have watched all this unfold throughout their young lifetimes.

   As the children of the Baby Boomers, Gen Y kids are born roughly between 1985
and 2005. Consequently, they share a lot in common with their Boomer parents.

   The two generations are roughly the same size, with 80 million members. As a
demographic and economic force, each generation redefined markets in a way that
smaller generations, such as Generation X, never could.

   Many of the trends that were evident in the year 2000 left a lasting
impression on the Gen Y, the first true generation of the new millennium.

   Gen Y kids, for example, often come from single-parent households, either
because their parents are divorced or because their parents never married in the
first place.

   Such trends put an odd twist on family dynamics. Many members of Gen Y
consider themselves to have four parents (mom, stepdad, dad and stepmom). But
smaller family size means they have far fewer siblings than previous generations
did.

   Kerry is fortunate. The product of an intact middle-class family, her
childhood was marked more by the affluence of good schools, soccer games, music
lessons, home computers, video games and huge numbers of toys.

   Even so, Kerry recalls tight times in the school. Many communities, having
closed schools when the much smaller Generation X came through, were
ill-prepared when the larger waves of Gen Y started enrolling.

   But building new facilities proved nearly impossible. Passing school
construction bonds and raising taxes to hire more teachers was far more
difficult than it had been when the Baby Boomers arrived in the 1950s and '60s.

   As a result, Kerry and other Gen Y kids often found themselves learning in
crowded classrooms, portable classrooms, and even in converted libraries,
gymnasiums and cafeterias.

   In Connecticut, the crowding isn't as bad as in other parts of the country.
By 2020, the state's population of 3.53 million has risen just 8 percent over
the previous two decades.

   But in other places, such as San Francisco and the Pacific Northwest,
fast-growing economies are bringing in scores of new workers to the region.
Elsewhere, immigration is swelling local schools with new students.

   The consequences of all these trends are difficult to sort out. But some
experts believe the crunch has produced a certain amount of alienation and anger
among some Gen Y kids.

   Crime, which had been on the decline throughout much of the '90s, is on the
rise again as Gen Y moves through adolescence to early adulthood. The phenomenon
of school shootings continues, as does self-destructive behavior, such as
suicide and attempted suicide.

   Not all the news about Gen Y is bad, of course.

   As a rule, Gen Y embraces notions of sexual equality and racial and ethnic
diversity. Many communities are more racially diverse, even if the neighborhoods
and cities don't always reflect that trend.

   Gen Y also had access to more and better technology than anyone before them.
If the Boomers were the original TV generation, and Generation X was the cable
generation, then Generation Y is the Internet generation -- able to learn and
communicate via a global network.  Gen Y is computer-savvy from birth.

   Gen Y also finds itself postponing marriage and parenthood longer than its
predecessors in Generation X and the Baby Boom. Kerry doesn't expect to start a
family for a few years. When she does, she wants a small one.

   That is also the experience worldwide. Birth rates, which had been high for
much of the 1900s, began falling late in the century and continued that descent
into the new millennium.

   In some places, such as Japan and parts of Europe, birth rates have fallen to
the point that the population is actually shrinking. Even in underdeveloped
countries, birth rates are falling faster than experts had ever dreamed.

   It is a welcome trend, given the sharp increases in world population that had
gone before. World population stood at about 2.5 billion in 1950, rose to 3
billion by 1960, jumped to 6 billion by 2000. Today, in 2020, it stands at about
7 billion.

   Still, the momentum of earlier generations means the number of people on the
planet will rise for years to come, even as family size gets smaller.

   Dealing with that population growth is an enormous economic and environmental
challenge. Global warming is a growing threat to coastal regions. Some plant and
animal species are facing extinction because of habitat change.

   At the same time, the percentage of young people in the world is dropping.
Whereas children under 15 represented nearly 40 percent of the global population
in 1975, they are only about 25 percent of the total by 2020. Grown-ups, in
other words, outnumber children by a 3-1 ratio.

   Yet the numbers alone don't do justice to the impact of these changes on
Generation Y.

   The simple fact is that they are young at a time when much of the rest of the
world is old -- a situation that is becoming critical as the Baby Boomers
continue to retire.

   Many Boomers haven't prepared themselves very well for retirement, and they
are looking to Gen Y to pay for housing, health care, living expenses and other
kinds of elderly assistance programs.

   Kerry worries about the tax burden she will face once she starts work. She
sees retirees everywhere.  Even her own parents, having postponed parenthood
until their early 40s, are now approaching retirement.

   In 2020, health care is expensive, but it is also better than ever. Rapid
advances in drug therapies, genetic therapies, and preventive medicine mean
people are living longer and healthier than ever before. A kind of national
health insurance program now guarantees at least some coverage to all Americans.

   People are simply taking better care of themselves. Cigarette smoking, for
example, has declined substantially in the United States, although it remains a
problem in many other nations. Kerry doesn't smoke and neither do most of her
friends.

   Nevertheless, the prospect of having to finance the medical costs of the
aging population looms large over Generation Y, which is worrying about its own
financial future.

   Sure, some members of Gen Y stand to receive a mind-boggling inheritance when
their Boomer parents die. But in the meantime, they have their own careers to
build, their own houses to buy and their own families to support.

   For many others, there will be no such windfall inheritance. They are
squeezed by trying to support themselves, trying to assist their own aging
parents and trying to pay taxes for the care of the elderly at large.

   But it's an uphill battle. Following the run-up in stock prices at the end of
the 1990s, the U.S. economy has stabilized at more traditional growth rates. But
an increasingly automated economy means fewer jobs to go around.

   Demand is high for well-educated workers. Those with less schooling or
intellectual skills, however, find it hard to support themselves. At least
college costs have leveled off, thanks to distance learning, Internet-based
degree programs and other technologies.

   On the whole, though, life for children remains far better in the United
States than it does in other parts of the world. In too many nations, AIDS still
ravages families.  Elsewhere, military conflicts and famines continue to present
millions of children with a bleak future.

   So it is that Kerry -- and many other members of Generation Y -- greet the
year 2020 with mixed emotions.

   But they have this much in common with virtually everyone who came before
them throughout history: Their lives will be filled with the opportunity to make
the world a better place. Their challenge will be to figure out how.


LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000


                             1029 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                   January 2, 2000 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; YEAR 2000: LOOKING BACK AND BEYOND; SERIES; OCCASIONAL; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 1756 words

HEADLINE: Visions of life in 2100 put faith in technology

BYLINE: ABE AAMIDOR; STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The computerized butler wakes you at 7 a.m., automatically draws your bath
and starts the coffee and croissants downstairs.

   So you climb out of your temperature- and humidity-controlled sleep module,
insert a digital interface into the drilled slot in your skull, and download the
day's schedule directly into your brain.

   In an hour or so, your child's teacher will appear on the electronic
wallpaper in the home library. It's a Virtual Miss Martin, to be sure, but the
learning is interactive -- Junior raises his hand, and the holographic teacher
calls on him.

   Welcome to your world in 2100, if not sooner (much sooner, in some cases).

   And whether you live in central Indiana or along a river in Montana, it won't
much matter. The world is becoming a smaller place.

   Take grocery shopping, for example: You've been ordering online for years,
except now you can inspect and smell the fruit as it comes off the boat from
Morocco via an olfactory-equipped Webcam. You also can communicate directly with
a butcher in Argentina about the best cuts of beef, which he will then stamp
with the proper bar code so it cooks automatically once it arrives in your
kitchen.

   In fact, we might even become "cybernetic organisms" in the coming decades,
suggests writer Howard Hendrix, who has taught at California State University,
Fresno, and elsewhere.

   Think of a kinder, gentler Robocop.

   "The boundary between what is organic and inorganic is going to break down.
The difference between what is living and nonliving is going to break down
further," says Hendrix.

   Man-made genes and body parts will have a lot to do with that confusion, but
the ultimate goal is intelligent artificial life that interfaces with us.

   You think running to the Internet to search for facts is convenient? Imagine
databases you insert in your skull like small Gameboy cartridges. Stock quotes,
calorie counters, answers to your next exam at college -- anything, really.

   Ultimately, we might be able to store all our memories and feelings on a
microchip that can continue to interact with its environment after our physical
presence has left the building, so to speak. If so, will we ever die?

   Work, travel, garden -- you'll be everywhere at once, all without leaving
home. It'll be a rich, variegated world we'll experience (or think we're
experiencing).

   Yet Indianapolis won't quite disappear from our collective consciousness.

   Bill Styring , a senior fellow at the Indianapolis-based Hudson Institute,
predicts a number of changes for central Indiana in the next 20 to 40 years.
He's especially keen on personal rapid transit devices -- PRTs -- as the
solution to our commuter blues. He says the region is ripe for a revolution in
mass transit because what we have now is so poor.

   PRTs are small, cheap cars powered by induction motors that run on light
guideways built 10 feet or so above ground level. The guideways will be as
common as telephone or cable TV lines are today, and will crisscross the
landscape. You climb into a PRT (which can seat up to three), insert a card, and
it takes you to within a block of your destination. Computer software ensures
you won't crash into another PRT.

   And what will happen to local interstate highways?

   "Think of a visual image of I-465 with weeds growing in the middle of it,"
Styring suggested.

   The job market should continue to be good in central Indiana, if a bit
uneasy. We already have a healthy mix of manufacturing, farming and
information-age businesses that contribute to total economic output, says
Styring.

   But fewer and fewer people will be needed to generate that output, especially
in manufacturing, several experts predict. For example, industrial managers will
operate production lines and heavy machinery at multiple sites remotely. To have
more jobs, we'll have to create jobs.

   Indiana's demographics also will continue to change during the next several
decades, according to the U.S. Census. By the year 2025 (which is as far as the
government will project), the state's Hispanic population will increase to 3.7
percent, up from 2.1 percent in 1995. The African-American community will grow
from 8 percent to 9.2 percent in that same time.

   But the most dramatic increase will be in the number of older Hoosiers. The
percentage of Indiana's residents who are 65 or older will climb from 12.6 to
19.2. That means one senior citizen for every four Hoosiers under 65.

   The future of the central city is in limbo, though. Morton Marcus, an
economist at Indiana University's Kelley School of Business, sees urban sprawl
continuing at its current pace.

   "I think that we will have very dense population corridors in Indianapolis,"
he said. "U.S. 31 is one of those corridors. I-69 is choking itself. I-65 is in
the process of doing that."

   Downtown, here as well as in many other cities, will continue to be a nice
place to visit, but not a place where everyone will want to live. Those with
means who voluntarily settle in the city's core likely will be empty-nesters,
yuppies, dinks (double income, no kids) and gays, says Sam Staley, director of
the Urban Futures Program at the Reason Public Policy Institute in Los Angeles.
But families with children will continue to leave as soon as their kids reach
school age, he says.

   Former Indianapolis Mayor Stephen Goldsmith is a bit more upbeat than
scholars Marcus and Staley, however. He says the city's core will provide jobs
in the hospitality industry as well as in government and medicine, and will be
the focus of the arts community for decades to come.

   "There will still be a significant percentage of the population that likes
the diversity and exuberance and interchange with others, and they will continue
to cluster in urban areas as long as those places are safe, the infrastructure
works and taxes aren't too high," Goldsmith said. "But it does present a
challenge."

   Yet congregating with people as we know it today might become a thing of the
past. We could be meeting our friends, business partners, even dates
holographically.

   Take, for example, that important business meeting to finance your next oil
exploration. Several people -- say from Riyadh, London and Denver -- will be
able to sit around a table, see each other, talk to each other, even smell each
other's cigar smoke or perfume.

   Except none of them will really be "there," wherever there is.

   Holographs also bring up the prospect of virtual sex, whether it's with
Denzel Washington, Sharon Stone, your third wife or fourth husband, or any
combination of the above.

   "It's going to be one of the biggest uses for this technology," says Douglas
Raybeck, a self-described "anthropologist and futurist" who teaches at Hamilton
College in New York.

   "Kinesthetic, total involvement, olfactory experience," he proclaimed (rather
exuberantly). "It's our preoccupation. In 50 years you're going to enter a room,
don a suit, and have a realistic sexual experience."

   And the world's oldest profession finally will be out of business.

   Remember that electronic wallpaper that will greet your child as he or she
"attends" class each morning? Some people might snarl that that's all television
ever was, but we're talking wide-screen, surround-sound, total impact wall-sized
images here. In 3-D, or better, of course.

   "I believe we'll be teaching in classrooms where there will be electronic
paper everywhere," said Gary Kornblith, professor of history and director of the
Oberlin Center for Technologically Enhanced Teaching. "So, if we're going to
explore the Greco-Roman past, there will be wallpaper that will take us to the
Acropolis."

   Indianapolis Public Schools Superintendent Duncan Pat Pritchett, interviewed
earlier in 1999, said he believes technology might be the great equalizer in
student achievement between inner-city schools and the suburbs.

   "I really think that that's going to make a difference," Pritchett said.

   The Danish say Skoal, or "to your health," when lifting a drink in toast of
another. Jews say l'Chaim, or "to life."

   Futurists just say life expectancy at birth should increase dramatically this
century. After all, it zoomed from about 47 years in the United States at the
start of the 20th century to 76 by its end.

   "At the turn of the century, only one in 500 could expect to live to be 100,"
says Mike Parker, as assistant professor of social work and gerontology at the
University of Alabama. "Among baby boomers, one in 26 can anticipate reaching
100 or more years of age."

   Who would want to live to be 100, you ask?

   You may ask that now, but just wait until you're 99 1/2.

   Replaceable body parts, gene therapy and new plant foods containing
phytochemicals that heal as well as nourish will get most of the credit for
future increases in longevity.

   Are most visions of the future too rosy, though?

   While life expectancy might increase for some of us, other researchers note
that life continues to be cheap in many Third World countries, especially
sub-Sahara Africa, where life expectancy is dropping , largely because of the
AIDS epidemic, but also because of war, famine and international indifference.

   Some observers also note that we could live longer right now, if we led
healthier lifestyles. But we continue to kill ourselves with tobacco, alcohol
and fast cars that we operate without buckling up.

   What makes anyone think we will change our behavior appreciably in the
future?

   Many futurists also are troubled by the prospect of class division, or the
old story of "the haves and the have-nots."

   Hamilton College's Douglas Raybeck sees anarchy in the inner city.

   "The authorities (will) no longer control the city," he said. " 'Do not go
out at night; do not go out alone.' That all means we cannot control your
safety. People will not go outside their gated communities. There will be roving
bands."

   Basically, there is nothing in the new technology itself that will make the
future a better -- or worse -- place to be. It all depends on how we choose to
use it.

   But consider this, says writer Howard Hendrix: We may be on the cusp of a
brave new world, yet we're still an exquisitely evolved species rooted more in
our past than the future.

   "The thing that human beings can't lose sight of is the biological world out
of which we come and on which we're still dependent. The ultimate technological
optimism is that we can create anything, and that's a problem.

   "Maybe what will come out of the new millennium is a more sustainable way of
living within our biologic and ecologic constraints."

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             1030 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             January 2, 2000 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1736 words

HEADLINE: Visions of life in 2100 put faith in technology

BYLINE: By, ABE AAMIDOR; STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The computerized butler wakes you at 7 a.m., automatically draws your bath
and starts the coffee and croissants  downstairs.

   So you climb out of your temperature- and humidity-controlled sleep module,
insert a digital interface into the drilled slot in your skull, and download the
day's schedule directly into your brain.

   In an hour or so, your child's teacher will appear on the electronic
wallpaper in the home library. It's a Virtual Miss Martin, to be sure, but the
learning is interactive -- Junior raises his hand, and the holographic teacher
calls on him.

   Welcome to your world in 2100, if not sooner (much sooner, in some cases).

   And whether you live in central Indiana or along a river in Montana, it won't
much matter. The world is becoming a smaller place.

   Take grocery shopping, for example: You've been ordering online for years,
except now you can inspect and smell the fruit as it comes off the boat from
Morocco via an olfactory-equipped Webcam. You also can communicate directly with
a butcher in Argentina about the best cuts of beef, which he will then stamp
with the proper bar code so it cooks automatically once it arrives in your
kitchen.

   In fact, we might even become "cybernetic organisms" in the coming decades,
suggests writer Howard Hendrix, who has taught at California State University,
Fresno, and elsewhere.

   Think of a kinder, gentler Robocop.

   "The boundary between what is organic and inorganic is going to break down.
The difference between what is living and nonliving is going to break down
further," says Hendrix.

   Man-made genes and body parts will have a lot to do with that confusion, but
the ultimate goal is intelligent artificial life that interfaces with us.

   You think running to the Internet to search for facts is convenient? Imagine
databases you insert in your skull like small Gameboy cartridges. Stock quotes,
calorie counters, answers to your next exam at college -- anything, really.

   Ultimately, we might be able to store all our memories and feelings on a
microchip that can continue to interact with its environment after our physical
presence has left the building, so to speak. If so, will we ever die?

   Work, travel, garden -- you'll be everywhere at once, all without leaving
home. It'll be a rich, variegated world we'll experience (or think we're
experiencing).

   Yet Indianapolis won't quite disappear from our collective consciousness.

   Bill Styring , a senior fellow at the Indianapolis-based Hudson Institute,
predicts a number of changes for central Indiana in the next 20 to 40 years.
He's especially keen on personal rapid transit devices -- PRTs -- as the
solution to our commuter blues. He says the region is ripe for a revolution in
mass transit because what we have now is so poor.

   PRTs are small, cheap cars powered by induction motors that run on light
guideways built 10 feet or so above ground level. The guideways will be as
common as telephone or cable TV lines are today, and will crisscross the
landscape. You climb into a PRT (which can seat up to three), insert a card, and
it takes you to within a block of your destination. Computer software ensures
you won't crash into another PRT.

   And what will happen to local interstate highways?

   "Think of a visual image of I-465 with weeds growing in the middle of it,"
Styring suggested.

   The job market should continue to be good in central Indiana, if a bit
uneasy. We already have a healthy mix of manufacturing, farming and
information-age businesses that contribute to total economic output, says
Styring.

   But fewer and fewer people will be needed to generate that output, especially
in manufacturing, several experts predict. For example, industrial managers will
operate production lines and heavy machinery at multiple sites remotely. To have
more jobs, we'll have to create jobs.

   Indiana's demographics also will continue to change during the next several
decades, according to the U.S. Census. By the year 2025 (which is as far as the
government will project), the state's Hispanic population will increase to 3.7
percent, up from 2.1 percent in 1995. The African-American community will grow
from 8 percent to 9.2 percent in that same time.

   But the most dramatic increase will be in the number of older Hoosiers. The
percentage of Indiana's residents who are 65 or older will climb from 12.6 to
19.2. That means one senior citizen for every four Hoosiers under 65.

   The future of the central city is in limbo, though. Morton Marcus, an
economist at Indiana University's Kelley School of Business, sees urban sprawl
continuing at its current pace.

   "I think that we will have very dense population corridors in Indianapolis,"
he said. "U.S. 31 is one of those corridors. I-69 is choking itself. I-65 is in
the process of doing that."

   Downtown, here as well as in many other cities, will continue to be a nice
place to visit, but not a place where everyone will want to live. Those with
means who voluntarily settle in the city's core likely will be empty-nesters,
yuppies, dinks (double income, no kids) and gays, says Sam Staley, director of
the Urban Futures Program at the Reason Public Policy Institute in Los Angeles.
But families with children will continue to leave as soon as their kids reach
school age, he says.

   Former Indianapolis Mayor Stephen Goldsmith is a bit more upbeat than
scholars Marcus and Staley, however. He says the city's core will provide jobs
in the hospitality industry as well as in government and medicine, and will be
the focus of the arts community for decades to come.

   "There will still be a significant percentage of the population that likes
the diversity and exuberance and interchange with others, and they will continue
to cluster in urban areas as long as those places are safe, the infrastructure
works and taxes aren't too high," Goldsmith said. "But it does present a
challenge."

   Yet congregating with people as we know it today might become a thing of the
past. We could be meeting our friends, business partners, even dates
holographically.

   Take, for example, that important business meeting to finance your next oil
exploration. Several people -- say from Riyadh, London and Denver -- will be
able to sit around a table, see each other, talk to each other, even smell each
other's cigar smoke or perfume.

   Except none of them will really be "there," wherever there is.

   Holographs also bring up the prospect of virtual sex, whether it's with
Denzel Washington, Sharon Stone, your third wife or fourth husband, or any
combination of the above.

   "It's going to be one of the biggest uses for this technology," says Douglas
Raybeck, a self-described "anthropologist and futurist" who teaches at Hamilton
College in New York.

   "Kinesthetic, total involvement, olfactory experience," he proclaimed (rather
exuberantly). "It's our preoccupation. In 50 years you're going to enter a room,
don a suit, and have a realistic sexual experience."

   And the world's oldest profession finally will be out of business.

   Remember that electronic wallpaper that will greet your child as he or she
"attends" class each morning? Some people might snarl that that's all television
ever was, but we're talking wide-screen, surround-sound, total impact wall-sized
images here. In 3-D, or better, of course.

   "I believe we'll be teaching in classrooms where there will be electronic
paper everywhere," said Gary Kornblith, professor of history and director of the
Oberlin Center for Technologically Enhanced Teaching. "So, if we're going to
explore the Greco-Roman past, there will be wallpaper that will take us to the
Acropolis."

   Indianapolis Public Schools Superintendent Duncan Pat Pritchett, interviewed
earlier in 1999, said he believes technology might be the great equalizer in
student achievement between inner-city schools and the suburbs.

   "I really think that that's going to make a difference," Pritchett said.

   The Danish say Skoal, or "to your health," when lifting a drink in toast of
another. Jews say l'Chaim, or "to life."

   Futurists just say life expectancy at birth should increase dramatically this
century. After all, it zoomed from about 47 years in the United States at the
start of the 20th century to 76 by its end.

   "At the turn of the century, only one in 500 could expect to live to be 100,"
says Mike Parker, as assistant professor of social work and gerontology at the
University of Alabama. "Among baby boomers, one in 26 can anticipate reaching
100 or more years of age."

   Who would want to live to be 100, you ask?

   You may ask that now, but just wait until you're 99 1/2.

   Replaceable body parts, gene therapy and new plant foods containing
phytochemicals that heal as well as nourish will get most of the credit for
future increases in longevity.

   Are most visions of the future too rosy, though?

   While life expectancy might increase for some of us, other researchers note
that life continues to be cheap in many Third World countries, especially
sub-Sahara Africa, where life expectancy is dropping , largely because of the
AIDS epidemic, but also because of war, famine and international indifference.

   Some observers also note that we could live longer right now, if we led
healthier lifestyles. But we continue to kill ourselves with tobacco, alcohol
and fast cars that we operate without buckling up.

   What makes anyone think we will change our behavior appreciably in the
future?

   Many futurists also are troubled by the prospect of class division, or the
old story of "the haves and the have-nots."

   Hamilton College's Douglas Raybeck sees anarchy in the inner city.

   "The authorities (will) no longer control the city," he said. " 'Do not go
out at night; do not go out alone.' That all means we cannot control your
safety. People will not go outside their gated communities. There will be roving
bands."

   Basically, there is nothing in the new technology itself that will make the
future a better -- or worse -- place to be. It all depends on how we choose to
use it.

   But consider this, says writer Howard Hendrix: We may be on the cusp of a
brave new world, yet we're still an exquisitely evolved species rooted more in
our past than the future.

   "The thing that human beings can't lose sight of is the biological world out
of which we come and on which we're still dependent. The ultimate technological
optimism is that we can create anything, and that's a problem.

   "Maybe what will come out of the new millennium is a more sustainable way of
living within our biologic and ecologic constraints."

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             1031 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        January 2, 2000 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1303 words

HEADLINE: THE GOOD, THE BAD, THE UGLY OF 1999

BYLINE: William R. Macklin, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It seems unfair to remember 1999 as the year of deadly rage.

   After all, it was a time in which the President survived an impeachment
trial, a cancer survivor won the Tour de France, and a 9-year-old boy from
Memphis survived the month he lived alone with his mother's dead body.

   Still, it was deadly rage, acted out through public violence, that most
defined 1999 - a year riven by a discomforting sense that the American Century
may have had as much to do with bloodshed and alienation as it did with
invention and imagination.

   How else to explain the poisonous resentments of Dylan Klebold and Eric
Harris?

   Their pubescent jihad at Columbine High School killed 13 people and ended in
their suicides - all in the glorious name of teeny-bopper vengeance.

   And the teen killers weren't the only violence-prone sociopaths who justified
their crimes with flimsy ideology and faulty personal perspectives.

   In a year that grandly masqueraded as the end of the century and the close of
the millennium, killing for a cause - no matter how half-baked - was a cottage
industry.

   The Midwestern murder rampage of racist, anti-Semite Benjamin Smith left two
dead; the paranoid disaffection of overwrought day trader Mark Barton cost nine
lives in Atlanta; the sectarian bias of Larry Gene Ashbrook led him to slay
seven worshipers at a Baptist church in Fort Worth.

   All three attacks ended with the shooters' suicides.

   Those crimes and public shootings in schools and workplaces nationwide may
have been perplexing, but in 1999 there were other reasons to shake your head
and wonder.

   In Yugoslavia, the NATO bombing campaign ended attacks on ethnic Albanians
only to clear the way for the former victims to undertake their own campaign of
terror against their ancient Serbian rivals.

   In disaster zones from earthquake-battered Turkey to flood-scourged Mexico
and Venezuela, there were tens of thousands of lives lost and almost as many
questions unanswered about the rough-hewn social conditions that contributed to
the high death tolls.

   In Colorado, the lengthy investigation into the murder of child beauty queen
JonBenet Ramsey ended - without indictments.

   The U.S. Senate's failed attempt to convict President Clinton for lies he
told during the investigation of his relationship with Monica Lewinsky
apparently perplexed most Americans, who, if you believed the polls, felt
Clinton's affair was Clinton's business.

   In 1999, however, justice wasn't always a matter of partisan whim.

   Thomas J. Capano, powerful Wilmington lawyer turned convicted killer, got the
death penalty for the murder of former lover Anne Marie Fahey.

   The trio of white racists who chained James Byrd Jr. to the back of a truck
and dragged him down a Jasper, Texas, road until his body was torn to bits drew
capital murder convictions. Two are on death row. The third is serving a life
sentence.

   Hundreds of miles away, but in the same moral vacuum, two men drew life
sentences for the Wyoming murder of gay college student Matthew Shepard, who
died after being savagely beaten and lashed to a prairie fence.

   And for double murderer Gary Heidnik, the final exit from the house of
horrors in his mind was through the death house at a Centre County prison.

   At times last year, the machinery of jurisprudence seemed to snag or not work
at all.

   Ira Einhorn continued to evade extradition from France for a new trial in the
murder of Holly Maddux. And while 70-year-old Marie Noe's admission that she
killed eight of her babies ended a long-running mystery, her sentencing provoked
debate: five years of house arrest and 15 of probation.

   But loathing and death weren't the only fascinations in 1999.

   The year abounded with signs of how much the world has changed during this
20th century.

   Arlington Cemetery said it would not add any more remains to the Tomb of the
Unknowns, citing DNA tests that make it possible to identify even the most
mangled war dead.

   NASA took one giant leap for equal opportunity when it launched its first
space mission commanded by a woman.

   The U.S. military's departure from the Panama Canal Zone after nearly a
century was as peaceful as it was overdue.

   But Woodstock '99 shirked the love-and-peace ethic of its '60s predecessor
and eroded into looting and burning.

   In Vermont, with little hint of any protest, the state Supreme Court, in a
ruling with wide-reaching implications, concluded that same-sex couples must be
given the same rights as heterosexual couples.

   And in a respectful bow to the views of the family of one of the nation's
most revered nonviolent protest leaders, a civil jury ruled that the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. had been slain not, as long maintained, by a single
gunman, but as a result of a vast conspiracy.

   Despite changes and revelations, in 1999 some things remained the same - at
least for the foreseeable future.

   The economy kept purring like a kitten with a belly full of milk, driving the
Dow to wild heights, creating more jobs than some employers could fill, and
touching off a fresh round of mergers, including the record-wrecking $115
billion merger of MCI and Sprint.

   Microsoft, which is to the data age what Standard Oil was to the industrial
age, became the first company to top $500 billion in market value. And like
Standard Oil, it was branded a monopoly by federal authorities.

   The worlds of medicine and science had their share of wonders and trials,
from the successful sequencing of nearly an entire human chromosome to the death
of an Arizona teen during hotly criticized gene-therapy experiments by the
University of Pennsylvania.

   Jack Kevorkian, who had bucked legal restraints with his one-man euthanasia
crusade, was convicted of second-degree murder.

   Abroad, life seemed to get an affirming nod in places long troubled by death
and conflict.

   Voters in Israel elected Ehud Barak prime minister amid promises he would
invigorate the Mideast peace process. By year's end Israel and Syria had begun
talks, while in Northern Ireland, Catholics and Protestants were cautiously
cooperating under a promising power-sharing agreement.

   But in rebel Chechnya, Russian troops tightened their noose, and a vote for
independence in East Timor brought violent reprisals before international
peacekeeping forces intervened.

   Despite the shadows of those events, in 1999 there were moments that
inspired.

   Pope John Paul II's quiet plea for the life of a triple murderer in Missouri
was answered.

   Just two years after outracing cancer, Texas cyclist Lance Armstrong won the
grueling Tour de France bicycle race.

   Such moments reminded us of the majesty of the human spirit and the
surprising powers of the body that contains it.

   Others revealed our vulnerabilities.

   The crash of EgyptAir Flight 990 into the Atlantic Ocean off Massachusetts
killed all 217 people aboard.

   That followed by just months another Atlantic crash that claimed the lives of
John F. Kennedy Jr., his wife and sister-in-law as they flew in a small plane
piloted by the only son of the slain president. For many, the crash deepened the
cycle of tragedy that has long gripped the Kennedy family.

   The deep feelings expressed after Kennedy's death seemed to show that with
the century nearing its close, the nation is not a place of hard hearts and
dulled sensitivities.

   But the problem of a child from Memphis illustrated something else: We still
have much to learn about simple human consideration.

   After Travis Butler's mother died at their home, the 9-year-old - terrified
that he would be put in foster care - went on living with her corpse. For a
month.

   In a world where the population last year swelled to six billion, it took
that long for anyone to notice that a little boy was frightened and alone.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             1032 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 2, 2000, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: IMAGINE ST. LOUIS, Pg. B5

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: WE ASK COMMUNITY LEADERS ABOUT THEIR VISIONS FOR THE FUTURE . . .;
ON CREATING JOBS TO SUSTAIN OUR REGION THROUGH THE 21ST CENTURY

BODY:


   Technology will be the driver of the 21st century Knowledge Economy. St.
Louis is well-positioned to be up there with the leading cities in the 21st
century.

   In the next century, we will conduct our work and our personal lives with a
fully integrated communications system. In the office, in the home, in our palm,
the same instruments -- whether over broadband wires or wireless -- will be used
for phoning, e-mail and the Internet. Faxing will be gone, replaced by a system
with the capacity to handle digital pictures. Film and videotape will be digital
in the first place, or easily converted, and will be transmitted over the same
communications system.

   All this is great, but we have been watching it coming over the last half of
the 20th century. The real revolution of the 21st century, that will impact the
lives of every one of us, will be in medicine. Future St. Louisans will not
suffer from currently devastating diseases. Much of the groundwork for this is
happening today at Washington University Medical Center, particularly the work
on the human genome at the Genome Sequencing Center -- the largest center of its
kind in the country.

   Treatment for infectious disease will not be with general antibiotics, but
with therapeutics "custom designed" for individual traits and specifics
diseases. Vaccines and medications will not be aimed at the disease-causing
organism, but at the disease process.

   Cancer won't be eliminated, but it will be controlled in several ways.
Infants will undergo genetic analysis for evidence of a genetic predisposition
to cancer. Bad genes will be knocked out or replaced by good genes. But not all
cancers have a genetic basis, so blood will be checked regularly for proteins
indicating the presence of cancer in the body. Since cancers will be detected
early, they will be easily treated with therapeutics targeted at the disease
process.

   Diseases that are auto-immune such as multiple sclerosis, neurological such a
Alzheimer's, enzyme deficiencies such as diabetes, and genetic such as sickle
cell anemia will all be treated with targeted genetic therapies. I imagine
genetic testing and treatment for a whole range of diseases being routinely done
with infants, or even prior to birth.

   What about nondisease breakdowns in the body, such as clogged arteries, hip
and knee replacements, damaged vital organs, blindness, deafness and
neurological injury? New tissues, parts of bodies, nerve cells and even organs
will be grown inside or outside the body. New biological and physical materials
and specialized microelectronics will provide more effective, longer-term
replacement parts. Surgical methods for diagnosis and repair will be faster,
less invasive and more reliable.

   Future medical advancements will require a multidisciplinary approach to
solving the problem. The companies located in the Center for Emerging
Technologies, in the city of St. Louis, offer a great example of the outstanding
innovations that result from bringing such multidiscipline teams together.

   Most of what I have imagined is actually in research right now at Washington
University and its peers around the country, or in development by one of the
start-up companies in the Center for Emerging Technologies and others like them.
But in order for St. Louis to reap the economic benefits of these new
technologies, our community needs to invest in educating a highly skilled work
force and in developing the financing, facilities and support services needed by
start-up technology companies.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO PHOTO headshot - MARCIA MELLITZ

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2000


                             1033 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                     JANUARY 2, 2000 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 3055 words

HEADLINE: 2020 VISION

SOURCE: BILL GRAVES - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: A glimpse of the world in 20 years through a woman's troubled eyes

   The following story is a fictional account of life for a child born in 2000,
but it is based on dozens of articles, several books and more than 20 interviews
with futurists, scholars and experts of various disciplines, including
biotechnology, labor, family, sociology, economics, education, planning, aging,
medicine demographics and technology.

   Her stomach churned -- not because of what Dr. Nguyen might tell her about
her eyes, but what he might find in her DNA.

   "Glaucoma is the only disease gene you've got in the array we test for," he
told her. "The other dispositional traits we can measure show you're in some
ways the opposite of what you've been told. You thought you were resisting your
genetic destiny by embracing the arts, but you were, in fact, fulfilling it."

   Emily Suarez Chapman peered with a numbed eye into the thread of green light.
The laser fired around the rim of her walnut-colored iris, releasing dammed-up
fluid damaging her optic nerve.

   Could this operation be connected to the big event she always dreamed her
20th birthday would bring? she wondered. Something special had to happen on her
20th, only three days away, because the numbers lined up like charmed planets:
She would turn 20 at 2:20 p.m. on 2/20/2020. Maybe that will be the day I get
back my 20/20 vision, she thought with a smile as green light flickered in her
left eye.

   "It should never have reached this stage," her ophthalmologist, Dr. Robert
Nguyen, said when he examined her that morning in his downtown Portland office.
Her pediatric DNA profile should have revealed a gene for glaucoma, which
doctors easily could have controlled with drugs and, more recently, gene
therapy.

   She noticed the first trace of tunnel vision at the MAX station on the edge
of the Oregon University System's Hillsboro campus, where she had just finished
her global economics class. As she waited for a train, she flipped on her
viewfone and tuned into an Internet interview with environmentalist Hannah
Stoica, daughter of a Romanian immigrant. Hannah was a leading Oregon
anti-biotech activist who had led fights to set up gene-pure zones -- land
off-limits to genetically engineered species.

   Emily watched Hannah with envy. The young activist, who was about her age,
spoke with such authority and confidence. Hannah's exotic long face, framed by
wavy brown hair, filled the viewfone screen, her close, dark eyes narrowed in
thought as she softly described her organization's drive to limit genetic
engineering.

   "We've trashed the planet with poisons," Hannah said. "Car companies only
recently started giving us hope of cleaner air with affordable electric and
fuel-cell hybrids. Now we've got to bring these Frankensteins under control
before they knock the ecosystem out of balance with their genetically-engineered
plants. Who knows what monsters they'll make?"

   Emily noticed the right edge of the viewfone screen blurred. But when she
moved her head, the blur moved with it, distorting a blue steel column on the
station platform.

   Her peripheral vision, not the screen, was blurring.

   Dr. Nguyen suspected the laboratory had switched Emily's DNA profile with
another girl's, leaving doctors unaware Emily had a gene for glaucoma. Such
mistakes were not unheard of back in the early days of genetic profiling more
than a decade ago, when analysis was crude and complicated by patents and
bureaucracy.

   The error would not have been obvious. The profile showed genes for a lanky,
small-shouldered girl with brown eyes and hair -- all of which fit Emily, or
used to, before she filled out and developed the short waist, thick ankles and
more muscular figure of her mother.

   But the mistake had meant that Emily had taken beta blockers -- and endured
years of unnecessary fatigue -- for inherited Long QT Syndrome, an electrical
irregularity of the heart that could cause fainting, even sudden death, at any
time for almost any physical or emotional agitation.

   Dr. Nguyen worried. The girl whose genetic profile was switched with Emily's
might not even know she had the syndrome. If so, her life was in danger. He
contacted the laboratory responsible for the mix-up. The lab immediately
launched a search for the girl who lived with Emily's genetic map.

   After the 10-minute laser operation, Emily thanked Dr. Nguyen and pulled on
her blue coat. It beeped once to remind her of a missing button. She marched
directly down the South Park Blocks, under a towering web of bare elm branches,
to Nordstrom.

   She wanted to see the white dress the store had hung for her consideration on
her Web site's shopping rack. She loved the dress' simple design with long
sleeves that flared out like Easter lilies. She held it up before herself and
looked into a mirror, into her dark, surgically repaired eyes. My eyes are too
far apart, she thought as she ran one hand through her hair, cut to a uniform
length just above the base of her neck to compensate for her wide face. She
bought the dress. Only $208. She knew it would fit because Nordstrom had
tailored it to her computer-scanned body image. She would wear it to her party.

   She boarded MAX, took a seat, leaned her head against the window and looked
out into the dreary gray afternoon, over the jammed traffic crawling over the
Sunset Highway, and thought about how someone else's genetic profile had shaped
her life.

   Art doesn't add up

   She could recall moments even in her preschool days when she defied her
profile. She must have been about 4 that morning she chose art over numbers. Her
mother, Mary Suarez, was using crayons to teach her how to count. The kitchen
phone rang, and her mom disappeared to answer it. Emily went to work on a mural,
coloring Pinky the cat, tulips, a pond and Mr. Sun rising above them all across
the smooth white canvas of the living room wall.

   "That's my girl," her husky father said as he tromped down the hardwood
stairs from his work studio. Thomas Chapman appreciated his daughter's
spontaneous art. After all, the son of an Oregon logger had become a free-lance
computer graphic artist and Web page designer. His wife, daughter of a Mexican
immigrant and Bay Area flower child, was an electronics engineer with a
microchip manufacturer. She was not so impressed with Emily's work.

   "You like it so much, you paint over it," she told her husband.

   So that's what Tom did. He used his acrylic paints to help Emily finish her
work, which still brightened the living room as a memorial to her preschool
years at home. Tom and Mary both worked out of their tri-level townhouse. They
were part of the growing ranks of telecommuters who were avoiding the Portland
area's traffic gridlock, easing day-care demands and blurring boundaries between
life and work.

   Emily started her formal education at Hatfield Elementary School in
Beaverton, where grade levels largely had dissolved into a more fluid two-stage
structure that allowed students to advance at their own paces. Emily marched
with most of her peers in math but dashed ahead in reading, and she excelled in
art and music.

   She had moved deep into second-stage elementary school by that spring day in
2009 when she fell ill with a vigorous strain of Asian influenza. She coughed so
hard her parents worried she had contracted the drug-resistant strain of
tuberculosis that was claiming lives everywhere, including the Northwest.

   Emily's pediatrician swabbed her throat for a culture sample that he would
run through a gene scan to pinpoint the virus' identity. He also ordered a
genetic profile on Emily, possible with the recent advent of silicon gene chips
capable of scanning large portions of a human's chromosomes.

   Emily's DNA scan showed her with strong propensities for math, athletics,
compulsion and shyness, but no special inclination to language, art or music.

   "Looks like you are your mother's daughter after all," declared her mom, the
engineer.

   Finding comfortable genes

   Emily wasn't so sure. Her profile seemed at odds with her struggles to meet
state math benchmarks, her blunders on the soccer field, her prowess in school
plays, her messy school desk and bedroom, and her love of reading, of drawing
stallions with flared nostrils and wild eyes, of playing pop songs by ear on her
dad's keyboard. A social debate had raged for decades about whether genes were
destiny. Emily only knew her interests and gifts pushed her in directions that
defied her profile. Her mother said that was because she also had a gene for
stubbornness.

   Emily met the Hatfield exit standards at age 10, about seven months earlier
than average. She wanted to advance to Beaverton's Matt Groening Academy for
Arts, a charter school, but her parents steered her to the Linus Pauling
Technology Academy, a small middle school specializing in math, science and
computer technology.

   "Play to your strengths," her mother insisted.

   Emily proved confident and proficient in math and science because she thought
she had the genes for it, but her interest foundered, and her work was
unexceptional. She sought the school's more creative corners -- the yearbook,
digital photography, computer graphics. She met school exit standards in the
spring of 2013, which put her on track to enter high school a year earlier than
most students.

   By then -- in response to school reform and the school shootings of the '90s
-- most of the big old high school complexes in Oregon had been broken into
smaller, more personal and focused schools. Emily's parents pushed her into
Westview Science and Technology Academy, a school serving 400 students in one
wing of the old Westview High.

   By the end of her sophomore year, Emily had had her fill of math and science.

   "I'm joining you in the art school, Jessica," Emily said one night during a
video conference with two girlfriends, who attended different schools on the
Westview campus. The girls had window-sized video screens on their bedroom
walls. They relaxed on beds in silk pajamas and robes. This virtual sleepover
unfolded nearly every night after their studies.

   Emily leaned against a stack of pillows and looked up at her two friends,
Jessica Chang and Madison Ruiz, each framed in a different quarter of her
screen. She let a movie on butterflies run silently in a third quarter.

   "Your parents will never let you transfer to the arts academy," Madison said.
"But maybe they'll let you join me in health occupations."

   "I just don't think I can dissect another squid, calculate another vector or
graph another function," Emily said. "I don't care if I'm supposed to be good at
it: I don't like it."

   When her parents refused to let her transfer, Emily rebelled. She dressed in
loose, blood-red dresses, chartreuse coveralls and other frumpy clothes that set
her apart from the techies, who preferred small blouses, skin-tight pants and
short skirts. She showed up to classes late. She tinkered through projects. She
ignored the assessment center, where she was supposed to be providing work
samples and taking exams for her certificates of initial and advanced mastery,
credentials created in the '90s and now required for graduation. She slipped
behind.

   She also joined Students for a Healthy Earth [SHE], a grass-roots youth
movement led in Oregon by Hannah Stoica. Emily was mesmerized the day she
skipped school and rode MAX downtown to Tom McCall Waterfront Park to hear
Hannah address thousands of teen-agers assembled through Hannah's sophisticated
video-mail Internet campaign. Hannah listed threats to the Earth, derided
Generation Xers for indifference and baby boomers for hypocrisy, and spoke
passionately against the genetic invasion of the Oregon wilderness.

   "Genetic pollution could make our other environmental disasters, our barren
fish banks and depleted water tables, seem trivial," she said. "Help us fight
for a genetically pure earth. Join SHE."

   Emily soon was in a rain slicker and rubber boots, stooped over a clearing
under the shadows of Mount Hood helping other SHE members pull up genetically
altered commercial cottonwood seedlings. Before that day was out, she was
calling her parents from jail.

   Choosing a path

   Her arrest scared her parents. They began treating her as something more than
the sum of her genes. They let Emily transfer to the arts academy. She studied
figure drawing, photography, music and Spanish literature. She blossomed. Within
nine months, she had her certificate of initial mastery. She pressed on for her
advanced certificate and, at age 17, plunged into college, the path taken by
nearly all Oregon graduates because high school exit standards were the same as
state university admission standards.

   Like most Oregon students, Emily chose a college close to home, the Oregon
University of Art and Technology, a bustling Hillsboro campus and research
center built jointly by the local information technology industry, several
private universities, a variety of Portland art groups and the Oregon University
System.

   She could work for a double major in international business and music, live
at home, pay only the $8,500 in-state tuition and take whatever classes the
satellite campus lacked by teleconference. On the eve of her 20th birthday,
Emily was only three classes away from her degrees.

   She also was in the second year of a relationship with Jacob McArthur, an
environmental activist with a fine arts degree and thriving business selling
waterfall, pond and birdbath sculptures to retired baby boomers. And like most
people in their early 20s, neither contemplated marriage. Too young, too much to
do.

   Emily wanted to keep fighting genetic pollution, possibly even enter
politics, an increasingly promising path for women, who dominated the Oregon
Legislature and state executive posts, including governor. She hoped to start a
career that would take her to Europe and Asia and other corners of the world,
arranging to import and export culture -- symphonies, dances, operas or art --
to and from Portland. Those jobs wouldn't come easily, but options were growing,
partly because baby boomers were retiring en mass, opening old jobs and creating
thousands of new ones with their demands for entertainment and health care.

   They also were taking huge bites out of Emily's checks for their Social
Security. She already had plenty of part-time work. She sometimes helped her
father design Web sites or occasionally joined his small jazz group, which
performed for the growing ranks of boomers gathering at bookstores, retirement
village centers and coffee houses.

   Coming into focus

   Her horizons seemed bright until they took on a blurry edge at the MAX
station. She returned to the eye clinic two days after surgery for her checkup.
Her stomach churned -- not because of what Dr. Nguyen might tell her about her
eyes, but what he might find in her DNA.

   "Glaucoma is the only disease gene you've got in the array we test for," he
told her. "The other dispositional traits we can measure show you're in some
ways the opposite of what you've been told. You thought you were resisting your
genetic destiny by embracing the arts, but you were, in fact, fulfilling it."

   Emily's profile showed she had genes for adventure, spatial thinking,
language and monogamy. She also had the music gene for perfect pitch. She could
have used that information in her quest for a music scholarship. Students
increasingly were including genetic traits in their applications for college and
financial aid.

   "We also found who has been living with your profile," Dr. Nguyen said.

   "Yes?" Emily said.

   "It's a surprise," he said. "The woman knows, and she wants to meet you. She
also knows your boyfriend, and he will introduce her to you tomorrow at your
birthday party. We've got her on beta blockers for Long QT Syndrome, thank
goodness. She didn't know."

   Facing herself

   In honor of Emily's superstition about her birthday, Jacob arranged for the
mystery guest to arrive at precisely 2:20 p.m. He arranged for a party that
Thursday afternoon in the commons of her grandparents' planned retirement
village, Aquarius Acres. The commons represented the retirement version of the
boomer commune -- a shared space for movies, concerts, plays, dances, festivals
and lectures.

   Jacob arranged for a meal of genetically wild foods -- rainbow trout, a
variety of vegetables and breads. He and Emily had pledged to avoid genetically
altered foods, which eliminated just about everything you could buy at most
grocery warehouses and Internet sites. They were forced to shop at pricey
specialty stores.

   Balloons and flowers and more than 100 friends filled the party hall, and a
field of white lilies swayed in the breeze on the hall's billboard-sized video
wall screen to match Emily's lily-sleeved birthday dress. Her dad and his band
played jazz and swing. After dances, cake and presents, everyone took seats
facing the wall screen to watch v-mail from distant friends.

   "I'd love to be with you today," said Jessica Chang, who sent a v-mail of
herself on a beach in Maui. She paused and looked up and down the beach, then
out to the turquoise tropical waters, a breeze blowing her black hair from her
face. "Actually, I take that back." Everyone laughed.

   Finally, the moment came. The wall screen displayed a huge clock that read
2:19 p.m. Then the screen filled with a three-line message:

   2:20 p.m.,

   2, 20, 2020.

   Happy 20th, Emily!

   Two knocks thumped on the hall's big mahogany door. Emily turned and faced
the door, legs trembling, heart racing. The door slowly swung open and revealed
a thin woman with close-set ebony eyes and waves of brown hair hugging her
narrow face. She wore a dress exactly like Emily's.

   The room erupted in applause as Emily stood face-to-face with her heroine,
Hannah Stoica. The two looked over one another as though they were reunited
sisters. Their brown eyes locked.

   "You're the woman I always wanted to be" Emily said.

   "And you're the woman I always tried to be," Hannah said.

   Emily smiled. "That," she said, "makes me proud to know who I am."

   You can reach Bill Graves at 503-221-8549 or by e-mail at
billgraves@news.oregonian.com. Twenty years from now, you probably will be able
to reach him at the same address by v-mail, viewfone or office wall screen.

CORRECTION-DATE: JANUARY 4, 2000 Tuesday

CORRECTION:

    PUBLISHED CORRECTION RAN 1/4/2000, FOLLOWS:

   * In 2037, India is expected to overtake China as the most populous nationin
the world, with a population approaching 1.4 billion. A time line lookinginto
the new century in the Sunday Forum section had an incorrect number.



GRAPHIC: Color illustration by MOLLY SWISHER - The Oregonian ; Graphic -- Chart
and text by KATHLEEN BLYTHE and MOLLY SWISHER - The Oregonian -- GROWING UP IN
THE 21ST CENTURY - Above are developments children born in 2000 can expect to
see in their lifetimes, researchers and futurists say; Sidebar text -- SOME OF
THE VISIONARIES - List

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             1034 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                     JANUARY 2, 2000 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: GRAPHICS; FORUM; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: GROWING UP IN THE 21ST CENTURY

SOURCE: Research by KATHLEEN BLYTHE - The Oregonian Graphic by MOLLY SWISHER -
The Oregonian

BODY:

   Growing up in the 21st century

   These are developments children born in 2000 can expect to see in their
lifetimes, researchers and futurists say:

   2000

   -- 3.9 million U.S. children born, with average life spans of 80 for girls,
73 for boys.


   2003

   -- Completion of Human Genome, map of human genetic makeup.

   2005

   -- Without a low-cost cure, most of 33 million people infected with AIDS in
1999 worldwide will be dead.

   -- Oregon colleges shift to performance-based admission standards that match
high school exit standards.

   2006

   -- U.S. Army to complete disposal of bombs, mines and rockets at Umatilla
Chemical Depot.

   2008

   -- Masses of baby boomers begin retiring.

   2010

   -- U.S. achieves universal free preschool.

   2013

   -- Gene therapy becomes effective cure to significant genetic-based diseases.

   2010 to 2015

   -- Doctors gain significant control over many forms of cancer.

   -- The number of telecommuters worldwide exceeds 100 million.

   2018

   -- Patients needing transplants receive organs cloned from their own organs.

   -- Average national four-year college costs, including room and board, exceed
$200,000.

   2020

   -- Oregon population reaches 4.18 million; Portland area, 2.4 million.

   2025

   -- Retirement age rises to 70.

   -- One billion people face water scarcity.

   2030

   -- Faster, suborbital commercial passenger flight becomes available.

   -- Tobacco becomes world's No. 1 killer, claiming 10 million people a year.

   2037

   2050

   -- U.S. population hits 394 million; one-quarter African American, Asian
American or Native American, one-quarter Hispanic. World population reaches 8.9
billion.

   -- One billion private cars drive the world's roads.

   -- Arable U.S. farmland drops to 290 million acres from 470 million acres in
2000.

   --- Half of the world's 6,000 languages are dead or dying.

   -- Average world temperatures are 1 to 3 degrees Celsius warmer than in 2000.

   2050-2100

   -- World petroleum supplies begin to dry up.

   2100

   -- 70,000 Americans born in 2000 are still alive.

   Researcher Kathleen Blythe contributed to this chart.



CORRECTION-DATE: JANUARY 4, 2000 Tuesday

CORRECTION:

    PUBLISHED CORRECTION RAN 1/4/2000, FOLLOWS:

   * In 2037, India is expected to overtake China as the most populous nationin
the world, with a population approaching 1.4 billion. A time line lookinginto
the new century in the Sunday Forum section had an incorrect number.



LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             1035 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         January 2, 2000 Sunday, FIRST

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. F3

LENGTH: 2491 words

HEADLINE: SEVEN NEW ORLEANS LEADERS GAZE UNTO CRYSTAL BALL;
LEADERS COMMENT ON OUR PAST AND FUTURE

BODY:

      Seven influential local business people share their insights about
the major economic trends that shaped the New Orleans area in the 20th
century, and what they believe will be key local developments in the 21st
century.
See story, page F-3

   The Times-Picayune asked seven local business people to share their
insights about the major economic trends that shaped the New Orleans area in
the 20th century, and what they believe will be the key local developments in
the 21st century. Participants were asked to address their areas of expertise.
All seven have lived and worked for years in the New Orleans area and have
been major influences in shaping the local economy.

Joseph Canizaro

   As president and chief executive of Columbus Properties LP and chairman of
First Bank and Trust, Canizaro has been a major buyer, seller and developer of
commercial properties in the New Orleans area. His topic is the local commercial
real estate market.

   The most significant local trend in commercial real estate was the emergence
of New Orleans as a hub for oil and gas companies by midcentury and the reversal
of the trend by the close of the 20th century.

   The pleasant surprise is the growth in hospitality and convention business.

   The single biggest cause of the decline of inner-city New Orleans and other
urban areas was the emergence of the interstate highway system, kick-started
during the Eisenhower years, which spearheaded a mass exodus of population and
business that eventually sprawled outward from the interstates, creating the
suburban retail centers of today.

   Commercially, the rise of tourism and the continual surge in convention
business related to the expansion of the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center has
exploded.

   We'll see people moving back into the city as a resurgence in redeveloping
urban areas takes place, including the innovative reuse of urban space for
residential use and entertainment.

   Technology will drastically affect the same suburban retail centers created
by suburban sprawl as online shopping takes a bigger and bigger bite out of the
square footage needed by retailers.

   The next century will continue to see a trend where business relies less on
real office space and more on the virtual office, and the business person hits
the road with laptop and wireless communications, staying close to the customer
instead of home base.

   As the reliance on technology in business continues to boom, the need for
office space will decline and people will find themselves spending more time in
high-tech homes wired for the 21st century. People may end up spending more time
at home, but they'll probably be spending some of that time working, thanks to
advances in telecommunications and technology overall.

   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -

   Leah Chase

   The owner of Dooky Chase's, an internationally acclaimed restaurant, Chase
also is a patron of the arts. Her topic is the local hospitality and dining
industry.

   The most important trend or event in the 20th century in our industry, to me,
would have to be the integration of our hospitality facilities, such as hotels,
restaurants and the like, letting all of our citizens enjoy the wonderful
services rendered by the institutions. That was the best thing that could have
happened.

   The most important development affecting our industry in the 21st century
would certainly have to be the ability to offer our services on the Internet.
People will make reservations on the Internet, they find out all about you on
the Internet, and I think that's going to be our industry's big thing.

   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -

   Alden "Doc" Laborde

   Chairman of Gulf Island Fabrication Inc., Laborde is a New Orleans oil- field
luminary who developed and leased the first mobile offshore rig for Shell in the
1950s. His topic is the oil industry in the Gulf of Mexico.

   In the Gulf oil industry, the most important development of the 20th century
was the evolution of movable units for the drilling of oil and gas wells. This
began in the 1930s with "Swamp" barges for the south Louisiana marshes, followed
after World War II by submersible bottom-sitting units for near-shore operations
in the open waters of the Gulf, then by the jack-ups for intermediate water
depths and, finally, semisubmersible floating units for very deep water. These
developments gave the oil industry economically viable access to a very prolific
geological area which was not otherwise available to exploitation under
conventional drilling techniques and created the oil industry in south Louisiana
as we know it today. These same techniques then spread all around the world.

   In the 21st century, I see for the short term improvements in methods for
production of oil and gas in deep water, at least for the first half of the
century. Around midcentury, however, presently foreseeable oil and gas reserves
will be largely depleted, and there will be significant changes in our culture
in which energy from sources other than fossil fuels will have to be developed
to meet our energy needs.

   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

   Alden McDonald Jr.

   President of Liberty Bank & Trust Co., McDonald has served as a director for
numerous community groups, including the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center and
the Dock Board. Liberty Bank was formed in 1972 and represented a major new
avenue for African-Americans for financing their new businesses and homes. His
topic is local minority business development.

   Minorities spent the 20th century trying to catch up to the business role
they had played during the latter half of the 19th century.

   During Reconstruction, African-Americans owned lumber mills, steamship
companies and plantations in this area. There was a black business directory,
which listed more minority-owned businesses than there are today. Not only were
the numbers of businesses greater, but the companies were more significant and
they participated in the overall economy.

   Minorities lost ground during the early 1900s when segregation and racism
began wiping out a lot of the gains that had been made. In this century the most
important development was the Civil Rights legislation of the 1960s, which
amounted to a "freedom act."

   Years later, affirmative-action legislation opened a new economic arena, that
of contracting. Prior to that, minority businesses were subcontractors, not
general contractors. They were in funeral homes and burial insurance.

   A major development has occurred in cities where they have begun to look at
growth of minority businesses as a way to develop new jobs, a new opportunity
for the whole community to grow economically. The more people with a better
quality of life, the better the economy becomes.

   In the future, the community must continue to work to grow all of its
businesses. The community must understand it needs to work together and have an
open door for all small businesses. As the community is coming together to work
for public education today, they must translate these skills to business
development. The result will be a better-quality work force. Also, minority
businesses must become producers and manufacturers, which are job creation
engines.

    -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

   R. King Milling

   President of Whitney Holding Corp., Milling has a long history of civic
involvement. Whitney National Bank, a New Orleans institution founded 117 years
ago, survived the Great Depression and other assaults on America's banks in the
20th century. His topic is banking.

   Two recent events may materially impact banking and the financial world in
the next century. First, the explosion of e-commerce and its application to
banking will create significant enhancements to our traditional delivery system.
Secondly, the passage of financial reform legislation opened the door to myriad
business options heretofore denied to this industry. Both have the potential, in
the long run, of creating innovation in the manner in which banks and financial
institutions conduct business.

   The challenge to relationship banks like ours is to place these new powers,
whether conferred by law or technology, in perspective and to apply them in a
fashion which will not impair core banking values, but rather enhance them. To
be successful in the next century, local banks will have to focus on the
characteristics of soundness, personalized service and customer satisfaction to
implement these new business alternatives.

   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -

   Dr. John Ochsner

   A cardiovascular surgeon, Ochsner is chairman emeritus of the department of
surgery at Ochsner Clinic. He performed the first heart transplant in Louisiana
in 1970. His father was Dr. Alton Ochsner, also a surgeon and one of the
founders of what became the Ochsner Medical Institutions. His topic is the
medical industry.

   The contributions made by medicine in the last century were far greater than
the advances made from the beginning of mankind. The most important developments
have been immunization and the development of antibiotics. Immunization has rid
the world of most of the fatal contagious diseases, such as smallpox, typhoid,
tetanus, diphtheria, scarlet fever, yellow fever and poliomyelitis. Thus,
immunization has saved millions of lives and had they not been developed, it is
likely the world population would have been exterminated. Antibiotics likewise
have allowed us to control infections that cause many deaths and crippling
disabilities. They have also been helpful in preventing recurrent and indigenous
infections.

   In cardiovascular surgery, open-heart surgery has allowed us to control or
cure every heart disease known to man. In maintaining its premier status,
open-heart surgery benefited from the technical advances made in the space
programs, which allowed us to precisely measure and monitor all body functions
instantaneously. Following the developments of heart surgery, we have learned to
noninvasively attack most vascular and heart problems so that many major
vascular and heart operations can be prevented and treated in the less invasive
methods.

   The next century will no doubt continue to see tremendous improvements at an
increasing rate. There will be a strong emphasis on preventive medicine.

   The greatest advances will be made in manipulation of the genes, which will
eventually allow us to prevent and cure practically every disease known today.
The manipulation of gene therapy will allow us to distinguish those individuals
susceptible to various diseases, allow us to attack the causes of cancer and
other disease and allow us to prevent the occurrence of congenital disorders
such as diabetes, heart disease, cystic fibrosis, mental disease and many
others.

   There is no doubt that these advances will challenge the socioethical
thoughts of this world. However, with proper control and cooperation among all,
we will continue to make discoveries and advances in both the control and
treatment of disease.

   In my field of cardiovascular surgery, we will see a development of
mechanical hearts. Minimally invasive methods to treat both vascular and heart
disease will continue to improve and benefit many.

   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

   Justice Revius Ortique Jr.

   Chairman of the New Orleans Aviation Board, which oversees New Orleans
International Airport, Ortique is a former state Supreme Court justice and has
been named to the National Civil Aviation Review Commission, which makes
recommendations to Congress and the White House on aviation policy. Ortique also
has been a local leader in promoting rapid rail transport. His topic is the
local transportation industry.

   During the 20th century there was a major development that had a negative
impact on our transportation system as well as a major development that had a
positive impact. There was also a third development that was both positive and
negative.

   The negative impact has to do with the reduction in rail development. The
curtailment of rail development in our state and throughout the country has had
a very negative impact on the transportation industry and was ill-advised. We
can never build enough highways to take care of the needs of persons who wish to
travel at the surface. All we do is encourage congestion when we reduce rail
travel facilities.

   The positive development has been the rise of air transportation. New Orleans
International Airport is beginning to move again toward a proper place in the
transportation system. But like highway travel, air transportation is not the
solution to the problem.

   The growth and development of our airport in the past six or eight years
indicates clearly that we can improve air transportation from every aspect, from
the comfort of passengers to the improvement of airline schedules to the
imaginative development of physical facilities. All of this has been very
positive and is an appropriate trend in the air transportation system.

   A third major development has had both a positive and negative effect. While
we see that Congress frequently says it wants to do everything it can to improve
the transportation system and industry, we find very slow movement in the
furnishing of the resources to make the transportation system what it ought to
be. There is no reason why we should lag Germany and Japan in the development of
high-speed rail.

   Fortunately, the current secretary of transportation has made a serious
effort to improve the situation. There are plans to develop high-speed rail
throughout the country, and the New Orleans International Airport has been
invited to participate in that plan with a high-speed Gulf route that will run
from Pensacola, Fla., to Houston. We are one of eight projects selected.

   But I am mighty worried that we will continue to build highways to take care
of the transportation needs of this country. That is not the answer to the
problem. We must develop high-speed rail.

   I also am encouraged because this same secretary of transportation is
pressing forward with development of magnetic levitation. New Orleans has been
initiated as a participant in the development of magnetic levitation, which
would tie in to the New Orleans airport along with high-speed rail.

   I would hope that the new century will cause the community to recognize that
we went to sleep for about 30 years in the development of the transportation
industry for our area, and that we are awakened but we have a lot of catching up
to do. America must step forward to the center stage and compete with Germany
and Japan in the development of these new high- speed transportation techniques.
We can only do that if Congress and the administration are solidly behind these
projects.

GRAPHIC: Joseph Canizaro
"We'll see people moving back into the city as a resurgence in
redeveloping urban areas occurs."

Leah Chase
"The most important development would be the ability to offer our
services in the Internet."

Alden Laborde
"Oil and gas reserves will be largely depleted, and our culture will
see significant changes."

Alden McDonald
"Minority businesses must become producers and manufactures."

R. King Milling
"E-commerce and its application to banking will create significant
enhancements."

John Ochsner
"Gene manipulation will eventually prevent and cure poractically
every disease."

Revius Ortique Jr.
"America must compete in the development of high speed transportation
techniques."
7 PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2000


                             1036 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     January 2, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. B06; OMBUDSMAN

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: Page 1 Priorities

BYLINE: R. Shipp

BODY:



   It's a recurring question and one worth revisiting: Why do some stories never
make it onto the front page when, in the minds of some readers, many of those
that are selected are of dubious significance?

   Let's look at decisions about two stories -- the deaths of six firefighters
in Worcester, Mass., and the jury's verdict in a civil lawsuit brought by the
family of the late Martin Luther King Jr. -- that never reached Page 1 and why a
third -- the drive-by shooting of a 73-year-old black woman whose vehicle had
apparently been followed for miles by two white men in a pickup truck -- didn't
make it to the front page as quickly as some readers would have liked. All three
stories received extensive attention in other media, including local television
news, cable TV networks, talk radio and the Internet. When readers obtain the
news elsewhere, they question The Post's priorities.

   The editor in charge of the Page 1 story conference brings to the table a set
of personal preferences about news, as well as assumptions about what readers
want or need to know. But the seven stories that comprise the front page on most
days should be "a menu of the most important stories and also have some
diversity of subject and approach without being trivial or completely off the
news," said Leonard Downie Jr., the paper's executive editor. On any given day,
one can question -- and some Post staffers join readers in regularly questioning
-- whether Page 1 meets this goal.

   The slaying of Germaine Clarkston in rural Maryland was a local story that
some readers said seemed to be a throwback to 30 or more years ago, when blacks
in the rural South were terrorized and sometimes killed for sport. "It brings
the past back and should have been put on the front page," one reader said. "I
believe this is a civil rights case." The Post, however, saw the story initially
as another crime story with lots of unanswered questions. And, because the Metro
section is so filled with crime news, the unfortunate truth is that reporters
and editors are sometimes numb to the potential news possibilities of yet
another assault or death.

   Clarkston died on Monday, Dec. 6; the first story ran on B7 on Dec. 8. That
day's front-page stories included NASA's "approach to interplanetary
explorations" after the Mars lander failed; the results of a federal probe into
the death of a teenager during a gene therapy experiment; Clinton administration
plans to intervene in lawsuits brought against the gun industry; an effort to
recruit more foster parents; a trend in Internet marketing; the D.C. Council's
approval of financing for development above the Gallery Place Metro station; and
the first installment of a series on Argentina's economy.

   In general, The Post plays it cautiously when it is not sure about the
motives behind a crime. That may be especially true when an incident may or may
not be a hate crime. "We don't want to mislead about what the meaning of a
particular crime may be by putting something on Page 1," Downie said. When two
men were arrested and the FBI announced that it was launching a probe into civil
rights violations, the story went to Page 1 on Dec. 10. Among the selling
points, said Milton Coleman, the deputy managing editor in charge of the Dec. 10
front page, was more details. But by that measure, one could argue that the next
day's more substantial story, based on interviews with the suspects' relatives,
friends and neighbors, deserved to be on Page 1 rather than B1 because it had
even more details than the Dec. 10 story. Did editors too quickly lose interest
in this local story?

   I'll continue this discussion next week. In the meantime, you may contact me
at ombudsmanwashpost.com or (202) 334-7582.


LOAD-DATE: January 02, 2000


                             1037 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                 January 1, 2000 Saturday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 26A

LENGTH: 3020 words

HEADLINE: STAFF CRYSTAL BALL SEES FUTURE IN FOOD, DIVERSITY, GROWTH

BYLINE: By Judy Walker; Mary Jo Pitzl; Peter Corbett; Kathleen Ingley;
MaureenWest; Elvia Diaz; Bill Goodykoontz; Kenneth LaFave; Les Polk; Jane
Larson;Betty Reid; Jodie Snyder; and Carol Sowers

BODY:

   Food

   As the zeros roll over in the new year like Krispy Kreme rolled into
localdoughnut dominance in 1999, food will continue its schizophrenic ways.

   People will continue to watch chefs on the Food Network while
consumingdinners that were frozen in plastic trays minutes earlier. The Iron
Chef willcaptivate the Valley. And some viewers, after watching long enough,
will findtheir way to using actual pots and spatulas.

   More people will discover the joy of food. Pollsters will continue to findout
that households do sit down to meals together, despite every foodmanufacturer
who predicts that the dinner hour is dead.

   Home meal replacements, which supermarkets and Boston Market and
everytake-out shop thought were the future, will continue to ebb.

   Filling in the gaps in daily meals, though, will be many more
supermarketchoices of fresh, all-in-one-package meals that require minimal
preparation.Salad mixes will come in ever more interesting combos;
ready-to-heat-and-eatbeef roasts and stews are already alongside roasted
chickens in the meat case.Unlike boring take-out meatloaf, this stuff is
packaged to sit in the fridgefor a while until consumers have time to eat it.

   The protein diet fad, now that thousands of people have lost weight on
it,will be found to have dread results. Once again, dietitians and
physicianswill tell the public to eat a balanced, low-calorie diet.

   And once again, they will be ignored.- Judy Walker

   Transportation

   In future decades, we'll still be getting around in the car, still
cursingcongestion and still fuming at traffic lights that never seem
synchronized inthe direction we're traveling.

   And we'll be driving more - lots more.

   The number of vehicle miles traveled on a given day in the
Phoenixmetropolitan area is forecast to hit 119 million by 2025, a 100
percentincrease. In contrast, urban population is expected to grow 69 percent.

   More of that driving will happen on local streets than on freeways.
TheMaricopa Association of Governments estimates freeways will absorb 28
percentof the area's traffic by 2025, compared with 24 percent in 1995. MAG
predictsthat 42 percent of the travel during the evening peak hours will be
congestedin 2025, compared with 18 percent in 1995.

   By 2007, the Valley's 142-mile freeway network will be built. While no oneis
predicting new freeways will slice through existing urban neighborhoods,there
are strong indications that an Outer Outer Loop will develop. The Loop303
freeway is being built by Maricopa County in the Valley's extremenorthwest
corner.

   Transit will handle some of the load of inner-city travel. A light-railsystem
linking central Phoenix with Tempe will likely be in place, with debateraging on
whether to extend the system.

   Technological innovations from the 20th century may ease the
commutingtravails of 21st century travelers. "Smart cars" that let
acomputer-programmed car do the driving may be on the road. Computer-car linksto
share traffic information will be more prevalent.

   Meanwhile, gas taxes are likely to rise early in the new century to pay
fortransportation upkeep.- Mary Jo Pitzl

   Sky Harbor

   Sky Harbor International Airport's location close to downtown Phoenix,Tempe
and Scottsdale is a plus. But over the next quarter-century, look forthe airport
to become far less convenient.

   Additional flights to serve the metro area's 3 million and countingpopulation
will spawn air traffic snarls that will make getting on the parkwayin the
morning seem like a drive in the park.

   The airport averages about 1,400 takeoffs and landings daily. That'sexpected
to increase to 2,050 flights within 15 years.

   A project to double the size of Terminal 4's corkscrew parking garage
willease getting into the airport. And a third runway, opening this spring,
willhelp cope with additional commercial air traffic.

   However, to add a fourth runway, Phoenix will have to convince Honeywell
tomove its aviation operation bordering the airport or wait until its
leaseexpires in 2048. Air traffic delays could be a serious problem well
beforethen.

   New air traffic control systems, being developed by Honeywell and others,may
cut some congestion-caused flight delays.

   But rising above the roar of jet engines will be the periodic cry
forconstruction of a regional airport southeast of the Valley to
relievepressures on Sky Harbor.

   It won't happen. It's too expensive and there is too much invested
ininfrastructure at Sky Harbor. Plus, for the regional airport to work, it
wouldneed a costly high-speed train that Arizonans have been reluctant to
support.- Peter Corbett

   Growth

   The Valley will balloon in all directions if today's pace of growthcontinues.
Over the next quarter-century, the urbanized area will cover 1,200square miles -
two-thirds the size of Delaware and 40 percent larger thantoday. Houses will
replace fields on virtually all the 372 square miles of theValley that are
served by the Salt River, an area that is now 22 percentagricultural.

   Casa Grande will become a bedroom community for the metro area,
anddevelopment will stretch west along the Interstate 10 Corridor as far
asTonopah. Tourists will flock to resorts dotting the foothills of the WhiteTank
Mountains, while Valley residents enjoy boating and picnicking at astring of
lakes along the beds of the Salt and Gila Rivers.

   Sometime in the next 50 to 70 years, water supplies are likely to put
thebrakes on growth around the state. We'll be using every drop of
treatedwastewater to help increase the supply. But that will be old news in
someareas, such as Prescott and Payson, that bumped up against the limits of
watermany years earlier.

   The crystal ball shows some eye-popping changes a half-century from now:Look
for Queen Creek, with barely 4,000 folks, to boom to 122,000. TinyBuckeye is
projected to skyrocket from 8,000 people to 439,000, bigger thanMesa is today.

   Arizona's population is expected to more than double between now and
2050,topping 11 million. And Maricopa County will dominate the scene even more
thantoday, with 65 percent of the population, up from 60 percent today.-
Kathleen Ingley

   Aging

   In the first 20 years of the new century, the number of Arizonans 65 andolder
will nearly double - from 700,000 to almost 1.3 million.

   Arizonans 85 and older are projected to increase from 83,381 in 2000
to455,831 in 2050 - and that is based on the present state of medical science.

   Healthy, vital living - well into our 80s, 90s and 100s - is expected to
becommonplace for today's aging boomers. Children alive today are expected
bymany to live into their 130s.

   The changes go beyond face-lifts and vitamins: Within five years we willhave
the blueprint of the gene structure of the human body. Out of that willcome new
medicines and gene therapies, individually designed for each person.

   Serious scientists are talking about cures for cancer, controllingAlzheimer's
disease and arresting the processes of aging. New drugs couldenhance memory and
fire up dormant neurons in the brain.

   Some worry that without thoughtful discussions now, only the rich will beable
to benefit from some of these scientific advances. "Ethics will become amajor
point of discussion where science, medicine, economics and aginginterface," says
Bill Arnold, director of Arizona State University's maingerontology program.-
Maureen West

   Diversity

   Mirroring the nation's trend, ketchup in Arizona will be passed over bysalsa
this millennium.

   Equally reflecting the general preference for enchiladas, pan dulce andRicky
Martin's pop rhythms, Hispanics will keep growing rapidly, representingone out
of three people in Arizona by 2025.

   Arizona will be the 17th most populous state, with a population of
6.4million, reflecting a gain of 750,000 Anglos, 1.2 million Hispanics,
83,000African-Americans, 76,000 American Indians and 88,000 Asian-Americans.

   Overall, Anglos would comprise 57.5 percent of the state's population,
downfrom 69.6 percent in 1995.

   African-Americans would go up to 3.3 percent from 3 percent in 1995
andAsian-Americans would increase to 2.5 percent from 1.7 percent.

   Hispanics would comprise 32.2 percent of the state's residents as Latinawomen
have the highest rate of birth among all groups and more immigrantswould keeping
moving to Arizona.

   The shifting demographics will easily be noticed as airwaves will besaturated
by Spanish-language programming, a torrent of supermarkets cateringto Latinos
will burst beyond the Phoenix metropolitan area.

   An overwhelming majority of Latinos already listen to radio in espanol.That
inclination will remain steady.

   Hispanic buying power of $11 billion will nearly double in the next 25years.

   Refugees from Latin American countries experiencing ethnic and
politicalstrife will be replaced by immigrants from European nations
escapingrepression and political turmoil.- Elvia Diaz

   Television

   Jan. 1, 2000 -- Minor car accident causes temporary cable outage;
thousandspanic in Y2K hysteria, causing a run on Valley supermarkets and ATMs.

   Jan. 1, 2003 -- Sales of digital television remain sluggish.

   Jan. 1, 2005 -- Cable viewership exceeds that of conventional networks
forfirst time; quality of cable programming plummets immediately.

   Jan. 1, 2007 -- First affordable, fully interactive television
debuts,allowing grown men to use TVs instead of computers to spend hours in
chatrooms pretending to be teenage girls.

   Jan. 1, 2010 -- Sales of digital television remain sluggish.

   Jan. 1, 2015 -- First-tier sporting events seen only on
pay-per-view;Cardinals games still available for free.

   Jan. 1, 2020 -- Network executives revive late '90s prime-time
game-showcraze. Regis Philbin coaxed out of retirement, despite being dead.
Remainsunusually chipper.

   Jan. 1, 2023 -- Sales of digital television remain sluggish.

   Jan. 1, 2025 -- Networks cease to exist. Upside: All programming
availableonline through "box" on top of your set. Downside: Microsoft Channel
onlychoice available.

   Jan. 1, 2030 -- Production of digital televisions ceases.- Bill Goodykoontz

   Classical music

   The Valley's classical music and dance groups will coalesce, with thePhoenix
Symphony, Arizona Opera and Ballet Arizona banding together to formone
mega-organization. Within this group, the schedule of what once was knownas the
PSO will shrink to only the winter months, when snowbirds swell theranks of the
PSO audience. The same musicians will play opera and ballet gigswhen not giving
concerts. This will allow greater promotion for everyone andencourage audiences
now limited to one, to experience the others as well.- Kenneth LaFave

   Snowbirds

   As the new century begins, more snowbirds are choosing rural Arizona toplay
in the sun, turned off by the sprawl, traffic and brown air, according toArizona
State University researchers. That trend is expected to continue, asthe baby
boomers say they plan to retire in smaller communities. Whether theychoose towns
in rural Arizona is another question, ASU demographer andbusiness researcher Tom
Rex says. The boomers will not only want to live intowns with natural amenities,
but cultural and lifelong learning opportunitiesas well.

   Some believe the popular image of retirement as a time of leisure
andrecreation is changing. Boomer retirees are expected to want
moreopportunities for making contributions to society during their retirement.

   More older people working could also endanger snowbirds. The age forreceiving
Social Security benefits is moving upward and may continue to do soas people
live and work longer. Americans are already beginning to stay on thejob longer,
as they are either unwilling or financially unable to stopworking.- Maureen West

   Stadiums

   Ah, nothing like a good stadium or arena controversy to get things rollingin
2000. We're used to it, after all.

   A battle worthy of a pro wrestling cage match will be waged over where andhow
to build an NFL-caliber stadium for the Cardinals. The powerful Phoenixcrowd
will eventually win out, led by Jerry Colangelo. By the time a stadiumis built,
who knows, the Valley might even use those railroad tracks downtownto transport
fans to and from the three major sports facilities.

   Downtown, you see, will need another venue to host events because that
willtake some of the spotlight away from the Coyotes when they open up the
finestarena in the National Hockey League in a couple years in Scottsdale.

   There will still be plenty of suburban guerrilla warfare over the
facility,but it will be built. Then sports and entertainment fans will be
treated to afight between the Scottsdale arena and downtown's America West Arena
overconcerts, sporting events, conventions, circuses, figure skating
shows,religious revivals and Pokemon card shows.- Les Polk

   Five C's@j

   The traditional foundations of Arizona's economy - the Five C's -
willcontinue to shrink in importance as the state diversifies.

   First copper. Arizona's geology is blessed with so much red metal that thisis
still the top copper-producing state, but the past decade has brought
fewercompanies, fewer employees, more technology and more awareness of how
globalmarkets influence supply and price. When copper's cycle inevitably
turnsupward, cost-cutting will pay off big, and mines considered unprofitable
nowwill race to open or reopen.

   Cotton has been battered by global oversupply and the Valley'surbanization.
But farmers think they can survive if markets like China loosenimport
restrictions and if technology and bug-resistant plants help cut costs.

   The citrus industry, too, is counting on the opening of more foreignmarkets.
An agreement with China was touted in 1999 as having the potential tobring $1
billion more to Arizona and California over the next five years.

   The cattle industry has been trending downward since the 1970s, both
innumbers and value of cattle. Producers have had to contend with
droughts,competition from Mexico and Americans' health-conscious turn to leaner
cuts ofmeat.

   And though Arizona's climate gave birth to the tourism industry,hospitality
businesses face increased competition from Las Vegas, Orlando andthe cruise ship
industry, all of which spend millions of dollars more thanArizona to draw in
free-spending visitors.- Jane Larson

   Native Americans

   Grace W. Johns, 78, a member of the Gila River Indian Community in
Sacaton,predicts that the 21st century won't be blissful.

   "Who cares about Y2K? Only the city people seem to be hyped about it,"she
said. "I don't own a computer."

   Gambling gave an economic boost to her Native American community south
ofChandler. But she believes that the federal government's efforts, during
thepast century, to make Indians carbon copies of Anglos was successful.

   "If young mothers don't teach their kids their native language, I
predictIndian languages will be gone in the next millennium," she said.

   Colleen Biakeddy, 30, a resident of Big Mountain at the heart of
thecentury-old Navajo-Hopi land squabble, predicts she will be an "older
andwiser" person after years of learning from her pains and trials. Her
mostrecent challenge is the infamous Navajo-Hopi land feud, which during the
past25 years, forced members of Biakeddy's extended Navajo families to move
offland awarded to the Hopi Tribe by Congress.

   A Feb. 1 deadline looms for Navajo families who have not agreed to live
onHopi land for 75 years.

   "To be honest with you, they probably aren't going to resolve it, becausethey
fail to see and acknowledge the people that are living here," Biakeddysaid. "I
wouldn't be surprised if it has not been solved by the time I getinto my old age
and pass on."

   The 75-year estate is probably seen by the government as a
perfect,humanitarian solution, she says. But she believes it won't solve
manyproblems.- Betty Reid

   Health

   With medical breakthroughs coming in rapid-fire fashion, we'll still befacing
the question "How do we pay for all of this?"

   As researchers continue unraveling DNA through the Human Genome
Project,society will face ethical issues sooner than expected. Before scientists
canchange individuals' genes, they will be able to tell an unborn's chances
ofhaving a disease. Bioethicists will be relied on to sort it out.

   Even more immediately, there's going to be more advances in Alzheimer's
andParkinson's diseases, said Dr. Richard Caselli, Mayo Clinic neurologist.
Someof the most promising advances will be in developing "protein-busters"
toreverse Alzheimer's.

   The Internet will continue to change the relationship between patients
andproviders, with telemedicine providing care in rural areas.

   The Internet's greatest impact could come with public health. As much as
50percent of people's chronic health problems come from lifestyle choices suchas
diet and exercise; the Internet could educate and encourage people to makebetter
choices, said Carol Lockhart, a health care consultant.- Jodie Snyder

   Casinos

   It's a safe bet that the state's 15 gaming tribes will still be
luringgamblers to their slot machines and table games in the first decades of
the21st century.

   But the rules are likely to change and so are the casinos' surroundings.
Asrenegotiation of expiring agreements between the state and tribes get underway
this month, state regulators will push hard for tribes to increase thegambling
age from 18 to 21, and demand that casinos ban automatic tellermachines to keep
quick cash out of the hands of addicted gamblers. Many tribesalready require
players to be 21 and are taking steps to weed out problemplayers.

   Tribes will likely ask the state to raise the limit on the number ofpopular
and profitable slot machines they can install and seek operatingagreements that
go beyond the current 10 years. Fourteen of the 15 gamingtribes hammered out
10-year deals with the state in 1993. The Salt RiverPima-Maricopa Indian
Community reached a deal in 1998.

   Tribes say they want longer contracts so they can count on gambling profitsto
drive economic development. If the money continues to pour in, expect tosee
casinos as only one attraction in new reservation resorts that also offerupscale
hotels and golf courses.- Carol Sowers

GRAPHIC: Healthy living is expected to be commonplace for today 's aging
boomers. Children alive today are expected by many to live into their 130s.
Native Americans gather for a powwow on the Yavapai Apache Reservation. Gaming
and land issues continue to concern Native Americans. An experimental "smart
car" drives itself on a test track along Rio Salado Parkway. Smart cars may play
a role in future commuting. Phoenix students gather to celebrate their
diversity. Ethnic demographics are expected to continue shifting into the next
century. The Scottsdale Ranch development south of Shea Boulevard near 100th
Street is an example of continuous urban growth that predictions say will result
in wall-to-wall houses throughout the Valley in the next century. Krispy Kreme
operations managers Kurt Malsam (left) and Dean Leisman created an Arizona
craving for their doughnuts with the opening of the chain's first shop in the
state at Arizona Mills mall in June.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2005


                             1038 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     January 1, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 542 words

HEADLINE: MILLENNIUM; A CENTURY OF LIFESTYLE; Some 20th century events that
changed the way we live; chronology; timeline

BYLINE: By Christopher Cox

BODY:

   1900: Sigmund Freud's "The Interpretation of Dreams" is published

   Eastman Kodak Co. sells $ 1 Brownie camera

   1902: Philadelphia's "Automat" self-service eatery opens

   1903: Crayola crayons debut

   1906: U.S. Pure Food and Drugs Act passed in response to Upton Sinclair's
slaughterhouse expose, "The Jungle"

   1908: Henry Ford introduces the Model "T"

   1909: Bakelite manufactured; Plastic Age begins

   1914: Ford Motor Co. doubles minimum wage, to $ 5 a day

   1915: Alexander Graham Bell makes first transcontinental phone call

   1916: Margaret Sanger opens first family-planning clinic

   1920: 19th Amendment ratified, giving women right to vote

   Prohibition begins

   1922: Emily Post's "Etiquette" published

   Vanity Fair describes "the flapper"

   1927: Pan Am's Key West-Havana flight ushers in scheduled international
airline travel

   1928: Alexander Fleming discovers penicillin

   1929: Ross-Loos Clinic in Los Angeles invents managed health care

   First crease-resisting cotton fabric developed

   1931: Neoprene, a syntheic rubber, produced

   1932: Vitamin D discovered

   1933: President Roosevelt unveils The New Deal

   1935: Rumba becomes dance rage

   Alcoholics Anonymous organized

   Social Security Act passed

   1936: "Life" magazine debuts

   Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind" is published

   1937: Nylon patented

   1941: Dacron invented

   1943: Zoot suit, jitterbug crazes

   1945: Slinky toy craze

   1947: William Levitt begins building pre-fab Long Island community of 17,450
homes

   1952: Contraceptive pill produced

   1953: Alfred C. Kinsey's "Sexual Behavior in the Human Female" published

   Lung cancer attributed to cigarette smoking

   1954: Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka strikes down previous decisions
permitting racial segregation of public schools

   1955: Dr. Jonas E. Salk's polio vaccine pronounced safe

   Ray Kroc opens first McDonald's

   1956: Interstate Highway System created

   1957: Dr. Seuss' "The Cat in the Hat" published

   First Toyota car, the Toyopet Crown sedan, sold in U.S.

   1958: Hula Hoop craze

   1959: Mattel introduces the Barbie doll

   Inkless xerographic printing perfected

   1960: Laser developed

   the Twist dance craze

   1961: First commerical integrated circuit

   1962: Rachel Carson's "Silent Spring" prompts modern environmental movement

   1963: Dr. Michael De Bakey first uses artifical heart during surgery

   1964: Watusi, Frug, Monkey, Funky Chicken dance crazes

   1967: South African Dr. Christiaan N. Barnard performs first heart transplant

   1968: Jacuzzi launches first whirlpool tub

   1971: Cigarette ads banned from TV

   1973: Roe v. Wade court decision strikes down state laws against abortion in
the first 3 months of pregnancy

   1974: "Streaking" craze

   1975: Microsoft founded

   1978: First "test-tube" baby born in England

   1980: World Health Organization announces global eradication of smallpox

   1983: The artificial sweetener Aspartame approved

   1984: Apple Macintosh launched

   AIDS virus discovered by French and U.S. teams

   1988: First transatlantic fiber-optic cable

   Crack cocaine burns through U.S. cities

   Airlines ban smoking on all flights less than 2 hours

   1990: First human receives gene therapy

   Political correctness

   1995: IBM relaxes dress code

   1998: Furby craze

   1999: Pokemon. Pokemon. Pokemon.

LOAD-DATE: January 01, 2000


                             1039 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 01, 2000, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy is at scientific, ethical, financial crossroads

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: RICK WEISS, DEBORAH NELSON

BODY:

   Sometimes it takes a disaster to remind scientists and the public just how
far out on a limb they have ventured together, as happened with the Challenger
explosion and the accident at Chernobyl.

   Now gene therapy, the bold effort to revolutionize medicine by reshaping
people's genes, finds itself in the midst of a similarly wrenching and
contemplative reassessment in the aftermath of the death of Jesse Gelsinger -
the first person killed by having his genetic code rewritten.

   Ever since researchers at the National Institutes of Health dripped new genes
into a 4-year-old Ohio girl's vein in 1990 in an effort to cure her inherited
immune system disorder, gene therapy has stood out as one of medicine's
brightest hopes. But the conceptually simple approach, which promised a new era
in which diseases would be cured at their molecular roots, has suffered repeated
failures.

   Getting new genes into people, and especially to the organs where they are
most needed, has proved difficult. And getting those genes to work for more than
a few weeks or months has been almost impossible.

   "It's fair to say that in 300 clinical trials and 6,000 patients or so, if I
had to show you a ringing endorsement that it works, there are none. That is the
truth," said Inder Verma, a gene researcher at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
Calif., and one of the field's founders. "We all know now it was overblown and
overhyped."

   If anything gave scientists solace during their years of frustration, it was
that gene therapy at least seemed safe. But that presumption was shattered in
September with Gelsinger's death at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Now gene therapy stands at a scientific, ethical and financial crossroads.

   It is a crossroads still filled with promise, represented most poignantly
earlier this month by a little-noted report that two French newborns with deadly
inherited diseases appear to have had their fates reversed by infusions of new
genes. Those preliminary results could turn out to be the field's long-awaited
first cures.

   But it is also a crossroads laden with risk. Medical risk, as became clear
with Gelsinger's death. And equally important, the risk that gene therapy -
which still faces major technical hurdles but is under pressure from corporate
sponsors to produce a return on their investment - will speed ahead too quickly,
gloss over its problems, and lose the support of a public that is already
uncertain about the wisdom of tinkering with people's genes.

   "Scientists call gene therapy 'elegant,' " said Thomas Murray, president of
the Hastings Center, a bioethics institute in Garrison, N.Y. "But, obviously, it
is not elegant at this point. It is damn messy, and in fact we now see it can be
dangerous. Patients and research subjects need to be told about the risks, and
protocols need to be approved or denied in full knowledge of those risks."

   As with so many areas of genetic research, including cloning and human embryo
research, the concept of gene therapy has long rattled society with a mix of
excitement and fear.

   In part because of those social concerns, and also because of the many
scientific uncertainties raised by human genetic engineering, federal officials
created a higher and more public standard of review for gene therapy experiments
than exists for conventional new therapies. And in September 1990, a team of NIH
researchers finally got to oversee the first approved infusion of new genes into
a patient.

   Today that patient, Ashanthi DeSilva, is a mostly healthy 13-year-old girl
who "gets an occasional cold," said her father, Raj. But scientists still don't
know how much of her health is because of her new genes, and how much of it is
because of the immune system-boosting drug that she has continued to take since
before she was given that new DNA. And since then, despite a plethora of efforts
against cystic fibrosis, inherited high cholesterol, muscular dystrophy, heart
disease, cancer, AIDS and other ailments, not a single patient has been cured by
gene therapy.

   As the field foundered, however, it also began to undergo a transformation
that is at the heart of gene therapy's predicament.

   More than ever, it was becoming dominated by profit-seeking companies rather
than by academic and federally funded researchers. Scientists who once shared
their results openly at scientific meetings grew more secretive. Increasingly,
talk was of patents rather than patients. By the time Gelsinger died in
September, some corporate researchers were already battling the NIH in bids to
keep serious injuries or deaths in their studies from becoming public.

   The University of Pennsylvania, where Gelsinger died, is in many ways
representative of the new world of gene therapy. It has allied itself with
several financially interlinked biotechnology companies. These firms stood to
gain financially if the Gelsinger study had proved successful, including one
founded by the leading geneticist in that study.

   The Penn team has said that financial considerations had no impact on patient
care decisions in the study and had nothing to do with the multiple violations
of patient protection rules that federal investigators have uncovered.










GRAPHIC: Mug: Before Jesse Gelsinger became the first to die by having his
genetic code rewritten, scientists presumed gene therapy was safe.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000


                             1040 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 1, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section E; Page 7; Column 1; The Millennium

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: VISIONS: BIOLOGY: A GENETIC FUTURE BOTH TANTALIZING AND DISTURBING;
A Small Leap To Designer Babies

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg

BODY:

   UNLIKE the sheep named Dolly, the mouse named Lucy has barely made a ripple
in the news. Lucy, born on Oct. 26, 1998, is the creation of scientists at
Chromos Molecular Systems, a biotechnology company in Vancouver, British
Columbia. She has black-brown fur and is not unlike mice bred in laboratories
around the world, the company says, with one exception: Lucy has an artificial
chromosome that she has passed to her offspring.

   And so the little mouse's implications may be vast. Her descendants, experts
say, represent another critical step in biotechnology's inexorable march toward
the day when parents will be able to design their own babies: eliminating genes
for undesirable traits, adding genes for desirable ones -- and in the process
altering the DNA of generations to come.

    This will not be the work of some mad scientist squirreled away in a dungeon
lab. It will flow from legitimate research intended to treat disease and cure
infertility. Scientists are already pushing the frontiers of cloning; of the
manipulation of embryonic stem cells, which grow indefinitely and can develop
into any tissue in the body; of gene therapy, which uses genetic material to
treat disease; and of in vitro fertilization.

   In the next century, experts say, these technologies will merge, enabling
doctors to tinker with the genes of eggs and sperm. Thus will "germline genetic
engineering," now only a theory, become reality.

   "There will be enhancements to life span, alterations to personality, like
intelligence," says Dr. Gregory Stock, the director of the Program on Medicine,
Technology and Society at the University of California at Los Angeles. "In the
not-too-distant future, it will be looked at as kind of foolhardy to have a
child by normal conception."

   Genetic research has always posed vexing social and ethical issues. But there
may be no more complicated question than how the fruits of the genetic
revolution should be used and, most important, who should have access to them.
In the last century, eugenics was about the exercise of power and ideology. In
the next, it may be about money.

   Already, wealthy childless couples routinely spend tens of thousands of
dollars trying to conceive babies through science. Already, couples who carry
genes for Tay-Sachs disease or sickle cell anemia can have their embryos
screened to prevent passing on those genes. Dr. Lee M. Silver, a molecular
geneticist at Princeton University, says that someday, a doctor will tell
parents: "I've got your embryos under a microscope. How about if I add a couple
of genes to provide cancer resistance?" Or genes for stronger muscles? Or
musical talent?

   Dr. Ruth Hubbard, a retired professor of biology at Harvard University, is
offended by the thought. She predicts that safety concerns will prevent germline
engineering from coming to pass; the risk of creating deformed babies is too
great, she says. And, she points out, biology is not destiny: "What if you have
been engineered to be a dancer and you're a total clod? How horrible for those
children."

   Dr. Silver agrees that genes confer an advantage -- nothing more. But if some
children are lucky enough to be born with genes that protect them against cancer
or make them musical geniuses, he reasons, what is wrong with using science to
give other children the genes those youngsters come by naturally? Is it any
different from paying for private school? "The answer to what's wrong with
this," Dr. Silver says, "is that it is people with money who will be able to not
only give their child a better environment, but also better genes."

   That is a concern others share. "Have you seen 'Gattaca?' " asks Dr. W.
French Anderson, the geneticist who in 1990 conducted the first gene therapy
experiment. In that 1997 science-fiction film, society was divided into
"valids," whose genetic profile was corrected before birth, and "invalids," who
were conceived naturally. "That's exactly what will happen in our society if
there are no safeguards," Dr. Anderson warns.

   Yet Dr. Anderson is among those pushing the technology forward. He has
proposed performing gene therapy on a fetus to try to cure a rare immune
deficiency, although the National Institutes of Health has rejected the plan. As
to engineering eggs and sperm, he says, enhancement should be forbidden. What
would he permit? "Anything which brings a child from below-normal function back
up to normal function."

   But the question of what is normal is tricky. Adrianne Asch, a bioethicist at
Wellesley College, is blind, a condition she says does not prevent her from
functioning normally. Even if germline gene therapy could safely prevent
blindness in children, Dr. Asch says, she would be apprehensive. She views Dr.
Anderson's standard as problematic.

   "If you say you are only going to use it for disabilities, but you are not
going to use it for character traits, then is schizophrenia a disability but
depression a character trait?" she asks. "When is dwarfism a disability and when
is being short a social problem?"

   The American Association for the Advancement of Science has spent the last
two years wrestling with such thorny questions; it has convened two working
groups that are examining ethical and scientific issues surrounding germline
gene therapy. A report, intended as a guide for policy makers, should be
released early this year.

   That effort wins praise from Dr. Paul Billings, a geneticist and member of
the board of the Council for Responsible Genetics, a nonprofit group that
opposes germline engineering. Dr. Billings says he has safety concerns about the
technology and warns that altering genes may prove an exercise in hubris. He
wants limits placed on germline engineering before it becomes feasible, but
doubts that will happen.

   "We are market driven," he says. "We emphasize the individual freedoms of
scientists and others. The cow is out of the barn."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawings

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2000


                             1041 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 1, 2000 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 1391 words

HEADLINE: 'A GREAT COMMOTION' RANG OUT THE CENTURY IN 1900

BYLINE: By BRIAN ALBRECHT; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   2000. That's a big Two chased by three little zeros.

   It's been awhile since we've seen more zeros than other numbers in a year, so
we're a little rusty handling such weighty matters as the changing of a century
and a millennium.

   Not that we aren't trying our frantic, frenzied darnedest. Efforts range from
a thousand pipers piping in Scotland, to Britain's $1.2 billion Millennium Dome
attraction, to Chicagoans dancing "The Milly," to grabbing bottled water and
Spam and heading for the hills with fellow doomsday survivalists.

   The celebratory awkwardness is perhaps understandable. Our forefathers didn't
leave any do-it-yourself instruction manuals on "How to Mark the Millennium" or
"Everything You Wanted To Know About the Turn of the Century - But Were Afraid
to Ask."

   However, a few glimpses of how such milestones were handled in the past can
be gleaned from stories in tattered newsprint about New Year's, 1900, and such
ancient time capsules as Ohio's Serpent Mound, built around 1000 AD.

   Its population at the turn of the century was four times larger than it was
in 1870; flooded by waves of southern and eastern European immigrants who
provided a work force for Cleveland's rapidly growing iron, steel, automotive,
shipbuilding, garment, chemical and meatpacking industries.

   Milk was 6 cents a quart, dipped at your doorstep from a farmer's 10-gallon
can. Coffee and doughnuts were a nickel. Baseball was just becoming popular as a
national pastime, with the Cleveland Spiders playing at the new League Park.
Preparations for the biggest New Year's in 100 years - regardless of the
apparently timeless dispute (judging from current debate) over whether the new
century actually started in 1900 or 1901 - included police shutting down public
performances by "Bosco, the snake eater," who specialized in devouring chunks of
live rattlesnakes.

   On New Year's Eve, special midnight watches and Masses were held in Cleveland
churches. A capacity crowd overflowed onto the sidewalks surrounding St. John's
Cathedral, where a special musical program was offered.

   Elsewhere, according to one newspaper account, "The old year went out with a
great commotion ... Whistles on the boats in the river, factories, locomotives
and other places tooted it out. Fire bells, church bells and all other kinds of
bells rang it out. Cannons, revolvers and other firearms banged it out, while in
not a few cases sleepers, undisturbed, snored it out."

   On New Year's Day, a parade of all 25 gas-, steam- and electric-powered
automobiles in Cleveland was held on Public Square. Three cars in the 6 mph
parade - a gasoline "racing machine," mail wagon and phaeton - were provided by
Cleveland's first auto manufacturer, Alex Winton.

   Several hundred onlookers braved freezing temperatures to watch most of the
cars circle the square. One vehicle broke down and another caught fire, blazing
until its occupants could extinguish the flames with snow. City firefighters
presumably were handling a burning river at the time.

   Nonetheless, an air of confidence floated in that smoke and exhaust over
Public Square. In one newspaper column, "Streets clean as glass and the housefly
unknown," a writer predicted that horse transport would soon disappear from
Cleveland streets, replaced by automobiles, as would the plague of flies
attracted to local stables.

   A Plain Dealer editorial - looking back on a century of innovations ranging
from automobiles to X-rays - commented, "The age of surprises is but beginning,
but men have almost lost the capacity of being surprised ... The incredible of
yesterday is the demonstrated fact of today."

   "There was a lot more optimism and belief in progress at that time," said
Stuart Hobbs, Ohio Historical Society historian. "There was great hope that
technology meant good things, would make people's lives better."

   Hobbs said this spirit of 19th-century idealism would soon be crushed by the
harsh lessons of a Depression, two world wars, threat of global extinction via
the atomic bomb, and other scary milestones of the 20th century.

   Today, "There isn't that same kind of unblemished faith in the possibilities
of technology," Hobbs said. "People can see the promise of such things as gene
therapy, but they also see the dark side.

   "I really think if they hadn't found the Y2K bug, some other technological
apocalypse would be found," he added. "People are just in the mood for some kind
of technological threat to be discovered. There's a reality to it, but there's
also a cultural thing going on."

   Y1K

   Back in Y1K, long before bites became bytes, the only bugs Ohioans worried
about were the kind that sucked blood or ate crops.

   By 1000 A.D., American Indians had already inhabited the area that would
become Ohio, for about 10 millenniums.

   Living along the southern rim of Lake Erie from 900-1650 A.D. were members of
what has become known as the Whittlesey culture (named for Cleveland
archaeologist Charles Whittlesey).

   Current residents of the Marine Park condominiums in Eastlake will mark the
millennium on a site once occupied by Whittlesey Indians, according to Gwen G.
King, director of the Indian Museum of Lake County, where ancient artifacts dug
from the site in 1973 are displayed.

   King said these early Ohio natives hunted, fished and farmed in villages
along the southern shore of Lake Erie. They also developed the first bows and
arrows used in this area, but such weapons apparently did not save the tribes
from ultimate extinction.

   "They were either wiped out completely by some enemy who needed their
territory for hunting, or destroyed in some way," King said.

   Some surviving artifacts - pipes, beads, shell pendants and earrings - may
have been used for special occasions or ceremonies, according to King.

   But the odds that these and other early Ohio residents celebrated the passage
of the last millennium are slim, according to Bradley Lepper, Ohio Historical
Society archaeologist.

   "Although we know the aboriginal Ohioans living at that time possessed some
sort of calendar, it would be the wildest coincidence if that particular year
marked a millennial anniversary for the native Americans," Lepper said.

   "The whole millennium concept is one of ours, that we're kind of imposing on
the rest of the prehistoric world."

   Not that the ancients didn't party, conceivably including a New Year's bash,
of sorts, celebrating the ripening of the first crop of spring corn, Lepper
said.

   According to Lepper, the Fort Ancient culture (1000-1550 A.D.) of southern
Ohio used huge wooden posts to track movements of the sun, much as ancient
Europeans used Stonehenge, conceivably to schedule crop planting and harvesting,
and timing corresponding ceremonies and festivals.

   Another possible calendar - too big to hang on any wall, but sturdy enough to
last 1,000 years - is the giant Serpent Mound of Adams County.

   Lepper noted that parts of the 1,348-foot-long mound, shaped like a partially
coiled snake seemingly about to swallow a 30-foot-wide egg, align with the sun
at sunrise of the winter and summer solstice and the equinox and at sunset of
the summer solstice.

   Others speculate that the mound was erected as a depiction of Halley's comet,
or a solar eclipse.

   Whatever the reason - calendar, effigy or topsoil doodling - the mound became
a tombstone for a culture that would not survive to the next millennium.

   Lepper said that as Fort Ancient villages grew and inhabitants became less
inclined to move, more people meant scarcer food resources and violent
competition between neighboring villages. Larger numbers of people living a
sedentary lifestyle also heightened their vulnerability to infectious disease.

   By the 1500s, the Fort Ancient people shared the fate of their northern
counterparts, defeated by other American Indian tribes and possibly absorbed
into their ranks.

   "In this case, civilization was their own worst enemy," Lepper said. "People
tend to think of progress as an uphill road, always leading to something better,
but actually it's a pretty bumpy road, with a lot of potholes along the way."

   Nevertheless, he added, "As apocalyptic fears dog our entry into the year
2000, it is reassuring to look back upon peoples such as the Fort Ancient and
realize that, in spite of much adversity, humans have an indomitable habit of
surviving."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: PLAIN DEALER FILE; At the last turn of a century, Cleveland's
Public Square was a place of wide-open spaces where traffic consisted of
pedestrians and horse-drawn vehicles.  There were only 25 automobiles in the
entire city.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2000


                             1042 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 1, 2000 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: THE MILLENNIUM - THOSE WHO WILL HELP SHAPE OUR LIVES FACES OF
CLEVELAND'S FUTURE; Pg. 2S

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: TRYING TO REPAIR CORONARY ARTERIES WITHOUT OPEN-HEART SURGERY

BYLINE: Fran Henry

BODY:

   Heart bypass surgery has been on the increase since it was pioneered in 1967
by Dr. Rene Favaloro, Cleveland Clinic heart surgeon, with nearly 600,000
procedures performed last year in the United States, according to the American
Heart Association.

   Through the research of Dr. Vincent Pompili, director of interventional
cardiology at University Hospitals of Cleveland, bypass candidates in the future
may be able to avoid open-heart surgery.

   Pompili is investigating two promising procedures that may fix blocked or
damaged coronary arteries without resorting to open-heart surgery. In one
method, a needle is used to open a direct channel between the muscle of the
heart's left ventricle and the coronary artery, and a shunt, a tiny tubelike
device, is inserted to divert blood flow from the heart around an artery
blockage.

   Also he has examined gene therapy as a tool for preventing atherosclerosis, a
form of arteriosclerosis. In the gene-therapy study, a vein was soaked in a
solution that contains a gene-encoding virus that leads to the production of
nitric oxide, which has been shown to prevent bypass failures. Clinical trials
are on the horizon, said Dr. Huntington Willard, head of the Research Institute
at University Hospitals of Cleveland.

   Pompili, 37, a native of Youngstown, lives in Chagrin Falls.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO : NO CREDIT; Pompili

COLUMN: MEDICINE

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000


                             1043 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 1, 2000 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: THE MILLENNIUM - THOSE WHO WILL HELP SHAPE OUR LIVES FACES OF
CLEVELAND'S FUTURE; Pg. 2S

LENGTH: 188 words

HEADLINE: MOLECULAR BIOLOGY IS KEY TO GENE THERAPY, NEW DRUGS

BYLINE: Fran Henry

BODY:

   Dr. Huntington Willard's research team achieved worldwide recognition in 1999
for the development of the first artificial chromosome, which may be used to fix
errors in genetic coding that produce such maladies as sickle cell anemia and
cystic fibrosis. However, Willard, chairman of University Hospitals of
Cleveland's Center for Human Genetics and head of the Research Institute,
believes his real legacy is the research institute itself.

   "We're not working with test tubes and tissue samples," he said. "We're
working with human beings to test whether these in fact will be useful
approaches or mechanisms in treating disease."

   In general terms, University Hospitals' researchers are using new discoveries
in molecular biology and genetic engineering to understand diseases and to craft
new therapeutic approaches, including gene therapy and new drugs, to manage or
treat them. "Research is moving so quickly," said Willard, 46, "that the real
fruits will come from those who are committed to getting it to the patients as
fast as possible. I see what we're doing now as being part of medical practice
in 10 years."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO : NO CREDIT; Willard

COLUMN: MEDICINE

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000


                             1044 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 1, 2000 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: THE MILLENNIUM - THOSE WHO WILL HELP SHAPE OUR LIVES FACES OF
CLEVELAND'S FUTURE; Pg. 2S

LENGTH: 206 words

HEADLINE: CANCER DRUG AIMS TO SHIELD NORMAL CELLS

BYLINE: Fran Henry

BODY:

   Chemotherapy drugs don't think. They adversely affect normal cells right
along with the malignant ones they're supposed to kill, according to Dr. Stan
Gerson whose research is aimed at changing this.

   Gerson, chief of the hematological oncology division of Ireland Cancer Center
at University Hospitals of Cleveland, is the lead investigator of a gene therapy
designed to help normal cells recover from the damage of chemotherapy. The
approach involves strengthening bone marrow cells while weakening cancer cells
and making them less resistant to chemotherapy. Preliminary clinical trials have
shown that a drug called benzylguanine, when given to patients in combination
with traditional chemotherapy drugs, appears to inhibit the production of an
enzyme that helps cancer cells repair themselves.

   To protect the health of stem cells in the bone marrow during chemotherapy,
Gerson, 47, who lives in Pepper Pike, and his colleagues are working with a gene
called MGMT to encode the enzyme that helps cells repair themselves. In
laboratory trials, mice whose stem cells were enriched with the gene MGMT
tolerated higher levels of chemotherapy and lived longer. Clinical trials will
be launched soon, pending approval of the FDA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO : NO CREDIT; Gerson

COLUMN: MEDICINE

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000


                             1045 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       January 1, 2000 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 18A

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: FRENCH BOYS' GENE THERAPY OFFERS GLIMMER OF HOPE;
THEY WERE BORN WITHOUT GENES THAT ARE CRITICAL TO THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss and Deborah Nelson The Washington Post

BODY:

   What may be the first cures in the field of gene therapy were heralded this
week in a report at the annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology.

   The experiment involved two unrelated infants born with an ailment similar to
Ashanthi DeSilva, who in 1990 received an infusion of new genes and has been
healthy since. Their disease leaves the immune system lacking two kinds of cells
that are central to the body's ability to fight infections.

      Most infants born with the disease do not live to their second birthday.
But the two French boys, whose identities are being kept confidential at their
parents' request, were infused with healthy versions of their faulty genes
nine months ago, when they were about nine months old, and both now have the
missing immune cells circulating in their blood. And in contrast to the
constant infections they suffered after birth, neither boy has been sick since
getting the new
   genes, said lead researcher Alain Fischer of the Necker Hospital in Paris.
   It may be many years before scientists know if the two boys are truly
cured. The new genes may have taken up residence in short-lived cells that
will disappear within a few years, or the genes may simply stop working after
a while.
   But the French boys are not the only glimmers of hope on the horizon.
Researchers from Philadelphia reported earlier this month that two patients
with hemophilia, the bleeding disorder, are getting by with half the usual
number of coagulation shots since they were given the blood clotting genes
they had lacked since birth.
   At the same time, the field is inching closer to some more controversial
endeavors, including "germline" gene therapy, in which genetic changes would
be made in a patient's sperm or eggs to be passed down to future generations.
Until recently, that has been considered taboo because, tempting as it may be
to free a family of an age-old inherited affliction, the therapy could end up
causing genetic problems of its own, which would then become part of that
family's line forever.
   Despite those concerns, NIH officials have talked openly this year about
allowing some germline efforts. And already, the NIH and the FDA have begun to
review a preliminary proposal to conduct gene therapy on a fetus. That would
be the world's first effort to change someone's genetic inheritance before
birth.
   The death of Jesse Gelsinger, the first person to be killed by having his
genetic code rewritten, and all the questions about science and ethics it has
raised, may postpone some of these ventures. But probably not for long,
several experts agreed.
   "As with the (space shuttle) Challenger, we had perhaps grown a tad bit
complacent in some areas, and after the (University of Pennsylvania) accident,
we had to retrench," said C. Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova of Texas Children's
Hospital. Aguilar-Cordova is a member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, the NIH panel that oversees gene therapy. "But that doesn't mean we
had to stop all space exploration. On the contrary, the fact that there has
been such a punctuated sacrifice by the death of an individual can really
strengthen our resolve and makes a heavier burden on us to do better and put
100 percent effort into this."
   If the two French boys continue to thrive, that would produce a lot of
inspiration for researchers trying to do better, Aguilar-Cordova said. He
called the boys "the first sentence of gene therapy's Chapter Two."
   "Chapter One was characterized by a tremendous naivete," he said. Chapter
Two, he said, will be about cures.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2000


                             1046 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

HEADLINE: In America;
Miracles At Warp Speed

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

BODY:

   Just 50 years ago, no time at all in the long excursion of history, Americans
were driving cars with divided windshields, listening to ballgames on radios
that crackled with static, and reading comic strips that suggested someday there
might be a portable electronic device (a wrist radio, perhaps) that would allow
individuals to have the equivalent of a telephone with them at all times.

   Forget for a moment your personal computers and fax machines. Americans on
the cusp of 1950 hadn't even heard of rock 'n' roll. Milkmen were ubiquitous.
Credit cards were not. Even television was an oddity.

    Just 50 years ago.

   Tonight the country will raise a toast to the peaceful and prosperous
transition from one epoch to another, a toast that in effect is a salute to the
remarkable advances of the past half-century. Those advances have been driven by
science and technology and a commitment to the ideals of freedom, and they have
lifted the quality of life for most of us to heights that would have astonished
midcentury America.

   Now buckle up. This ride is just getting started. The last few decades have
been amazing. But the next few will be profound.

   Listen to Dr. Dari Shalon, director of the Harvard Center for Genomics
Research:

   "Some recent results have indicated that things that looked very complex,
such as aging and intelligence, can actually be altered with a single gene. And
once you can alter something with a single gene, it's not far-fetched to imagine
gene therapy permanently altering what's called the germ line, which means it
gets transmitted from generation to generation. I think people will be very
hesitant to do that on humans, but it's very easy to make a small molecule drug
that you can just take as a pill that alters the activity of a single gene. The
pharmaceutical industry is well geared to do that.

   "So once certain genes are discovered that actually change, if you will, a
cognitive trait -- intelligence -- or even things such as life span, it's not
too far-fetched to imagine a small pill that actually influences these two
activities. I don't think it's as far off as people think.

   "Less drastic will be things such as tissue regeneration. So, for example,
people who are suffering now from nerve disorders -- say, Parkinson's disease or
liver disease -- we're getting pretty close in animals and pretty soon in humans
to be able to simply regenerate those tissues from what's called stem cells. And
that's a new form of therapy that I believe is going to be on the horizon within
25 years."

   Or listen to Dr. Michael Crow, executive vice provost for research at
Columbia University:

   "Science right now is the most powerful single force in our culture. We've
got guys who are not just working on the double helix, approaching the structure
that carries all of our DNA-based genetic code -- they're saying: 'Well, let's
build something beyond that. Let's build our own structures.'

   "How do you get into that very, very heady business of building molecular
communication molecules -- which puts us into the role of life designer -- and
not deal with the complicated ethical and moral questions?"

   We are speeding semi-blindly into frontiers that will change not just our
standard of living, but even, in very fundamental ways, what it means to be
human. The science and technology that have made something wondrous of our lives
to date are now pulling us ahead at warp speed. The crucial task is to find out
how to do more than just hang on.

   Dr. Crow is helping to develop a project that will bring experts together
from a wide variety of disciplines to study the implications -- and, where
feasible, help shape the outcomes -- of scientific and technological research.

   Offering an illustration of the astonishing speed of some scientific
advances, Dr. Crow said, "Biological science's knowledge is doubling every 180
days."

   When the toasts are done and our heads have cleared and we are squinting in
wonder at the rising sun of the new century, we'll see the need for a more
knowledgeable and mature approach by all of us to the accelerating miracles of
science and technology.

   If we're up to the task, and our luck holds, we'll hand the coming
generations a world that even in our most optimistic moments we could never have
imagined.


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1999


                             1047 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               December 31, 1999, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A14

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: IN THE NEW MILLENNIUM, SCIENCE MUST BECOME MORE THAN A TOOL FOR GROWTH

BYLINE: George Johnson

BODY:


   This is the last day of the old millennium. As we approach tomorrow, it is
impossible for me to avoid a certain apprehension. Are we walking into light, or
over a cliff? Lacking a crystal ball, I look to the past as our only view of the
future. Perhaps where we have been may yield clues about where we are going.

   I don't for one minute think it is possible to predict the future. I look to
the past for a different reason, as a Rorschach ink-blot test of my own
scarce-recognized intuitions.

   The history of science is so rich and complex that no two scientists will see
it the same. Looking back over yesterday's discoveries, each of us will take
away different lessons, not easily articulated even to ourselves.

   The accompanying table presents in capsule form my look back. I find it much
more useful to think in 50-year periods than in centuries.

   For the past three half-centuries, I have noted what seem to me to be the
major innovations in four categories: materials, medicines, inventions and
scientific theories. Anyone else would select different items, and no one of you
will read my lists without doubting the wisdom of a choice, or wondering how I
could have been so stupid as to have omitted a particular item.

   Whatever its limits, however, this table reflects my "take" on the course of
scientific progress as we approach the new millennium.

   What then does the table reveal about my perception of past scientific
progress? For one thing, I obviously see each half-century as emphasizing
particular themes. Consider "inventions." I see the 1850-1899 period as
featuring transportation (iron ships, cars) and subduing the West (dynamite,
barbed wire). The 1900-1949 period shifts to communication, with the advent of
radio and TV. The 1950-1999 period has been the information age, shaped by
transistor-driven computers.

   Of course, not all advances fit this simplistic scheme. The airplane appears
just after the age of transportation, in 1903, the transistor just before the
age of information, in 1948. But the synergy of scientific progress seems to me
a clear pattern of coordinated advance over a lifetime of discovery.

   Is any more general pattern evident in my overview of science past, any clue
about the likely direction of scientific progress in the next millennium?

   I have thought about this table for a month while preparing this column, and
only gradually have I come to understand its true message. If you stand back
from its detail and ask, "What is its essence?" a clear pattern snaps out at
you, one that says a great deal about the probable future of science in the next
century. Overwhelmingly, this table presents a picture of science at work
promoting growth. For a century and a half, science has been the engine of
society's conquering of the planet.

   This leads to a clear prediction about science's future, which is that
science is going to have to change its focus drastically. Consider for a moment
the past half-century. What the table does not tell you is that at the beginning
of this period, in 1950, the world's population stood at 2.5 billion people,
while at period's end, in 1999, the world contains 6 billion people.

   It is difficult to overemphasize the impact this change in population will
have on the planet's future. The cost of getting the food to feed the 3 1/2
billion added people has begun eating into the world's nonrenewable resources.
In a banker's terms, we are spending our capital, lowering Earth's ability to
support us. Over the past 50 years, we have lost 25 percent of the world's
topsoil, one third of its forests, and fully one-quarter of its agricultural
land. We have added 15 percent to the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
unleashing global warming. We have released chemicals that have destroyed 6
percent to 8 percent of the atmosphere's ozone, leading to a 20 percent global
increase in malignant skin cancers.

   According to the most conservative estimates, we will add 2.9 billion more
people in the next 50 years. How are we to care for them, and at what cost? We
are using 55 percent of the world's available fresh water and 45 percent of the
world's net terrestrial photosynthetic productivity (that is, all the food
photosynthesis could possibly make) now, to feed 6 billion people, with half of
the world's population malnourished and one-quarter living in extreme poverty
(at less than $ 1 per day).

   No amount of science can overcome the finite nature of the world we inhabit.
If we are to have a future in the next millennium, science will have to focus
not on growth, but on sustainability. My take-home lesson from thinking about
science and the new millennium is that we scientists desperately need to
redirect our focus toward solving the problems that are rushing towards us,
rather than continuing to fuel our rush towards them.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Graphic / Chart - How science has changed us
 ===
 1850-1899
 Materials
 Construction Materials
 1864 - Steel
 1884 - Portland Cement
 1888 - Commercial aluminum

 Medicines
 Pain relief
 1853 - Aspirin
 1870 - Morphine

 Inventions
 Transport - Subduing the West
 1862 - Iron ships
 1864 - Rim-fired cartridges
 1867 - Dynamite
 1873 - Electric motor
 1873 - Levi's & denim
 1874 - Barbed wire
 1876 - Telephone
 1879 - Electric light bulb
 1881 - Lead pencil
 1893 - Zipper
 1896 - Automobile

 Discoveries
 Biology
 1854 - Darwinian evolution
 1866 - Mendelian genetics

 ===
 1900-1949
 Materials
 Synthetics
 1913 - Commercial gasoline
 1930s - PVC plastics 1935 - Nylon
 1938 - Teflon
 1942 - Synthetic rubber

 Medicines
 Fighting infection
 1928 - Penicillin
 1945 - Fluoridation
 1949 - Birth control pills

 Inventions
 Communication
 1903 - Airplane
 1904 - Vacuum tube
 1909 - Radio broadcasting
 1927 - Talking movies
 1938 - Xerox copier
 1939 - Jet airplane
 1941 - Television broadcasting
 1942 - Nuclear power
 1948 - Transistor

 Discoveries
 Physics
 1902 - Chromosomal theory
 1905 - E=mc2
 1906 - Relativity
 1920s - Quantum mechanics
 1929 - Expanding universe

 ===
 1950-1999
 Materials
 Novel properties
 1954 - Silicon semiconductors
 1960 - Heat-resistant ceramics
 1990s - Nanomaterials

 Medicines
 Eliminating disease
 1952 - Anti-TB isoniazid drugs
 1953 - Polio vaccine
 1977 - Smallpox eliminated
 1990s - Cancer understood

 Inventions
 Information
 1953 - Commercial computer
 1950s - Interstate highway system
 1961 - Integrated circuit chips
 1972 - Microprocessors
 1977 - Personal computers
 1989 - Internet
 1998 - Gene microchips
 1999 - Human genome project

 Discoveries
 Molecular biology
 1953 - Structure of DNA
 1972 - Trans-gene transfer
 1990 - Gene therapy works
 1997 - Cloning Dolly
 1999 - Embryonic stem cells isolated

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2000


                             1048 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    December 31, 1999, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 2053 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy's Troubling Crossroads; A Death Raises Questions Of
Ethics, Profit, Science

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Sometimes it takes a disaster to remind scientists and the public just how
far out on a limb they have ventured together, as happened with the Challenger
explosion and the accident at Chernobyl.

   Now gene therapy, the bold effort to revolutionize medicine by reshaping
people's genes, finds itself in the midst of a similarly wrenching and
contemplative reassessment in the aftermath of the death of Jesse Gelsinger --
the first person to be killed by having his genetic code rewritten.

   Ever since researchers at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) dripped new
genes into a 4-year-old Ohio girl's vein in 1990 in an effort to cure her
inherited immune system disorder, gene therapy has stood out as one of
medicine's brightest hopes. But the conceptually simple approach, which promised
a new era in which diseases would be cured at their molecular roots, has
suffered repeated failures.

   Getting new genes into people, and especially to the organs where they are
most needed, has proven unexpectedly difficult. And getting those genes to work
for more than a few weeks or months has been almost impossible.

   "It's fair to say that in 300 clinical trials and 6,000 patients or so, if I
had to show you a ringing endorsement that it works, there are none. That is the
truth," said Inder Verma, a gene researcher at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
Calif., and one of the field's founders. "We all know now it was overblown and
overhyped."

   If anything gave scientists solace during their years of frustration, it was
that gene therapy at least seemed safe. But that presumption was shattered in
September with Gelsinger's death at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Now gene therapy stands at a scientific, ethical and financial crossroads.

   It is a crossroads still filled with promise, represented most poignantly
earlier this month by a little-noted report that two French newborns with deadly
inherited diseases appear to have had their fates reversed by infusions of new
genes. Those preliminary results could turn out to be the field's long-awaited
first cures.

   But it is also a crossroads laden with risk. Medical risk, as became clear
with Gelsinger's death. And equally important, the risk that gene therapy --
which still faces major technical hurdles but is under pressure from corporate
sponsors to produce a return on their investment -- will speed ahead too
quickly, gloss over its problems, and lose the support of a public that is
already uncertain about the wisdom of tinkering with people's genes.

   "Scientists call gene therapy 'elegant,' " said Thomas Murray, president of
the Hastings Center, a bioethics institute in Garrison, N.Y. "But obviously it
is not elegant at this point. It is damn messy, and in fact we now see it can be
dangerous. Patients and research subjects need to be told about the risks, and
protocols need to be approved or denied in full knowledge of those risks."


   Conflicts of Interest

   As with so many areas of genetic research, including cloning and human embryo
research, the concept of gene therapy has long rattled society with a mix of
excitement and fear.

   Protesters attended many of the NIH meetings at which the first gene therapy
proposal was reviewed. Some considered the experiment the ultimate act of
hubris, a profound meddling in God's handiwork. Others predicted ominously that
the well-intentioned goal of curing genetic diseases would grow into a high-tech
quest for genetic perfection and open a new era of racist eugenics.

   In part because of those social concerns, and also because of the many
scientific uncertainties raised by human genetic engineering, federal officials
created a higher and more public standard of review for gene therapy experiments
than exists for conventional new therapies. And in September 1990, a team of NIH
researchers finally got the satisfaction of overseeing the first approved
infusion of new genes into a patient.

   Today that patient, Ashanthi DeSilva, is a mostly healthy 13-year-old girl
who "gets an occasional cold," said her father, Raj. But scientists still don't
know how much of her health is due to her new genes, and how much of it is due
to the immune system-boosting drug that she has continued to take since before
she was given that new DNA. And since then, despite a plethora of efforts
against cystic fibrosis, inherited high cholesterol, muscular dystrophy, heart
disease, cancer, AIDS and other ailments, not a single patient has been cured by
gene therapy.

   As the field foundered, however, it also began to undergo a subtle
transformation that is at the heart of gene therapy's predicament today. One of
the first clues that something was changing was that researchers started to
focus on cancer more than the rare genetic diseases that the field had first
aimed to treat. The economics of developing a cure for cancer were much more
attractive than those for a disease with just a few hundred victims. And more
than ever, gene therapy was becoming dominated by profit-seeking companies
rather than by academic and federally funded researchers.

   In a related development, scientists who once shared their results openly at
scientific meetings grew more secretive under the competitive pressures to
develop the first blockbuster therapy. Increasingly, talk was of patents rather
than patients. By the time Gelsinger died in September, some corporate
researchers were already battling the NIH in bids to keep serious injuries or
deaths in their studies from becoming public.

   The University of Pennsylvania, where Gelsinger died, is in many ways
representative of the new world of gene therapy. It has allied itself with
several financially interlinked biotechnology companies. These firms stood to
gain financially if the Gelsinger study had proved successful, including one
founded by the leading geneticist in that study.

   The Penn team has said that financial considerations had no impact on patient
care decisions in the study and had nothing to do with the multiple violations
of patient protection rules that federal investigators have uncovered --
including the team's failure to properly inform the Food and Drug Administration
about the side effects in volunteers that, if reported, would have forced a halt
of the experiment. But some experts believe that the Penn violations are
evidence that the field of gene therapy has strayed from its initial promise of
public accountability.

   "What happened in the Penn study should not be brushed off lightly," said
LeRoy Walters, a Georgetown University ethicist and former chairman of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), the NIH committee that oversees gene
therapy. "It's one of the top research groups in the country, certainly one of
the largest. They were in a position to know the rules better than most people.
I think they betrayed the trusts of the patients participating in that trial and
betrayed the trust of FDA . . . and the RAC in what they did."

   The FDA and the NIH are jointly investigating whether the Penn team's lapses
were exceptional or representative of the gene therapy field. But even as they
try to answer that question, those agencies are under pressure from the
biotechnology industry to scale back their special reporting requirements so
fewer gene therapy results would end up in the public domain.

   In essence, the emerging debate about gene therapy oversight comes down to a
single question: Has the field of gene therapy reached a stage of scientific
rigor, and has a sensitive public grown comfortable enough with the concept of
human genetic manipulation, for gene researchers to be regulated as conventional
drug developers? A special NIH advisory panel is focusing on that question, and
a congressional hearing on the topic is planned for January.

   But behind that question is a much more difficult one: How can patients and
volunteers be protected, and conflicts of interest among researchers minimized,
as academic medical researchers and corporate sponsors become increasingly
interdependent? It's a question not unique to gene therapy, but one that has
come into special focus with gene therapy because of the field's tradition of
public review.

   "We're dealing with a clash of cultures and values," said Murray of the
Hastings Center. "The culture and values of science and the culture and values
of industry, one embracing openness and the other embracing secrecy."


   Glimmers of Hope

   Ironically, the intense attention given to the Penn debacle throughout
December overshadowed what might otherwise have been gene therapy's best news in
years: A report at the annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology on
what may be the field's first cures.

   The experiment involved two unrelated infants born with an ailment similar to
Ashanthi's. The disease leaves the immune system lacking two kinds of cells that
are central to the body's ability to fight infections.

   Most infants born with the disease do not live to their second birthday. But
the two French boys, whose identities are being kept confidential at their
parents' request, were infused with healthy versions of their faulty genes nine
months ago, when they were about nine months old, and both now have the missing
immune cells circulating in their blood. And in contrast to the constant
infections they suffered after birth, neither boy has been sick since getting
the new genes, said lead researcher Alain Fischer of the Necker Hospital in
Paris.

   It may be many years before scientists know if the two boys are truly cured.
The new genes may have taken up residence in short-lived cells that will
disappear within a few years, or the genes may simply stop working after a
while.

   But the French boys are not the only glimmers of hope on the horizon.
Researchers from Philadelphia reported earlier this month that two patients with
hemophilia, the bleeding disorder, are getting by with half the usual number of
coagulation shots since they were given the blood clotting genes they had lacked
since birth.

   At the same time, the field is inching closer to some more controversial
endeavors, including "germline" gene therapy, in which genetic changes would be
made in a patient's sperm or eggs to be passed down to future generations. Until
recently, that has been considered taboo because, tempting as it may be to free
a family of an age-old inherited affliction, the therapy could end up causing
genetic problems of its own, which would then become part of that family's line
forever.

   Despite those concerns, NIH officials have talked openly this year about
allowing some germline efforts. And already, the NIH and the FDA have begun to
review a preliminary proposal to conduct gene therapy on a fetus. That would be
the world's first effort to change someone's genetic inheritance before birth.

   Gelsinger's death, and all the questions about science and ethics it has
raised, may postpone some of these ventures. But probably not for long, several
experts agreed.

   "As with the [space shuttle] Challenger, we had perhaps grown a tad bit
complacent in some areas, and after the accident, we had to retrench," said RAC
member C. Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova of Texas Children's Hospital. "But that
doesn't mean we had to stop all space exploration. On the contrary, the fact
that there has been such a punctuated sacrifice by the death of an individual
can really strengthen our resolve and makes a heavier burden on us to do better
and put 100 percent effort into this."

   If the two French boys continue to thrive, that would produce a lot of
inspiration for researchers trying to do better, Aguilar-Cordova said. He called
the boys "the first sentence of gene therapy's Chapter Two."

   "Chapter One was characterized by a tremendous naivete," he said. Chapter
Two, he said, will be about cures.


   One Treatment Method

   Genetically engineered viruses inject potentially curative genes into a
patient's liver cells.

   A metabolic pathway is blocked in patients with a genetic disorder called OTC
deficiency. Dangerous ammonia levels build up.

   Genetically engineered adenovirus (with some toxic genes removed) infects
liver, injecting normal OTC genes into liver cell DNA.

   Altered liver cells engage in normal OTC metabolism, breaking down ammonia.




GRAPHIC: Illustration, PATTERSON CLARK

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1999


                             1049 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Sperm Stem Cells Transferred in Mice

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28

BODY:

   Researchers working with mice have successfully transplanted cells that
eventually develop into sperm, giving new hope of fatherhood to boys who must
undergo cancer treatments that damage their reproductive potential.

   A team of researchers led by Ralph L. Brinster of the University of
Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine was able to transplant the stem cells
from one type of mouse into another. The cells then developed into sperm cells,
carrying the traits of the donor male. The findings are reported in today's
issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

    In an accompanying article, Howard J. Cooke of Western General Hospital in
Edinburgh and a colleague, Philippa K. T. Saunders, said Dr. Brinster's work
indicated that if immature stem cells could develop successfully after
transplantation, they could be frozen and reintroduced into the donor after
completion of cancer treatment.

   Frozen preservation "of testicular stem cells and post-treatment
reintroduction could protect germ cells from potentially (mutation causing)
cancer treatments and safeguard against infertility," the Scottish researchers
concluded.

   However, they cautioned, care needs to be taken to avoid reintroduction of
cancer cells into the patient in this process.

   They also noted that the ability to separate, preserve and reintroduce stem
cells raised the possibility of using gene therapy to correct genetic problems.

   "Ethical problems with this approach abound," they said.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1999


                             1050 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             December 28, 1999, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Cell finding could help infertile men

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers have transplanted mouse cells that develop into sperm, giving new
hope of fatherhood to infertile men.

   A team of researchers led by Ralph L. Brinster of the University of
Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine was able to transplant the stem cells
from one type of mouse into another. The cells then developed into sperm cells,
carrying the traits of the donor male.

   The findings are reported in today's issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   While the work was done only in mice, it could have major implications for
some young human cancer victims, Howard J. Cooke of Western General Hospital in
Edinburgh, Scotland, reports in an accompanying article.

   Because some cancer treatments can cause mutations in developing and mature
sperm cells, men undergoing these treatments often have sperm removed and frozen
for later use.

   This cannot be done for boys who have not yet gone through puberty since they
have no mature sperm cells.

   Cooke and colleague Philippa K. T. Saunders say that Brinster's work
indicates that if immature stem cells can develop successfully after
transplantation, they can be frozen and reintroduced into the donor after
completion of cancer treatment.

   Frozen preservation "of testicular stem cells and post-treatment
reintroduction could protect germ cells from potentially (mutation causing)
cancer treatments and safeguard against infertility," Cooke and Saunders
concluded.

   However, they caution, care needs to be taken to avoid reintroduction of
cancer cells into the patient in this process.

   They also noted that the ability to separate, preserve and reintroduce stem
cells raises the possibility of using gene therapy to correct genetic problems.

   "Ethical problems with this approach abound," they said.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1999


                             1051 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

               December 28, 1999, Tuesday, Ventura County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 197 words

HEADLINE: VENTURA COUNTY BUSINESS;
 VENTURA COUNTY DIGEST / BARBARA MURPHY;
 JUDGE TO REVIEW AMGEN'S CLAIM OF PATENTS VIOLATION

BYLINE: BARBARA MURPHY

BODY:


   A U.S. District Court judge said he will review a request by Thousand
Oaks-based Amgen, the world's largest biotech company, for a quick decision on
claims that tiny rival Transkaryotic Therapies violated Amgen patents by
developing a product similar to its best-selling drug Epogen.

   Judge William Young told the two companies that he will schedule hearings as
soon as possible to review Amgen's claims, company spokesman David Kaye said.
Besides ruling on Amgen's claims of patent infringement, the court will review
separately a claim by Transkaryotic of Cambridge, Mass., that Amgen's patents
are not valid. That issue will be considered in a trial that begins in April.

   The two sides are battling over rights to the global market for a protein
drug whose chemical name is erythropoietin. It treats anemia by stimulating and
regulating production of red blood cells.

   Erythropoietin, which analysts estimate has annual global sales in excess of
$ 3 billion, is marketed in the United States by Amgen under the name Epogen.
Amgen holds the rights to sell the drug to dialysis patients, and Johnson &
Johnson sells it for all other uses under the brand name Procrit.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1999


                             1052 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              December 28, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     December 28, 1999 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: SPERM TRANSPLANT;
IN MICE MAY HAVE;
FUTURE HUMAN USE

BYLINE: By RANDOLPH E. SCHMID; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers have successfully transplanted cells that eventually develop into
sperm, giving new hope of fatherhood to young males who undergo cancer
treatments that damage their reproductive potential.

   A team of researchers led by Ralph L. Brinster of the University of
Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, was able to transplant the stem
cells from one type of mouse into another. The cells then developed into sperm
cells, carrying the traits of the donor male.

   The findings, developed in a study of whether fertility can be restored in
infertile males, are reported in today's issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   While the work was done only in mice, it could have major implications for
some young human cancer victims, Howard J. Cooke of Western General Hospital in
Edinburgh, Scotland, reports in an accompanying news article.

   Because some cancer treatments can cause mutations in developing and mature
sperm cells, men undergoing these treatments often have sperm removed and frozen
for later use.

   This cannot be done for boys who have not yet gone through puberty since they
have no mature sperm cells.

   Cooke and colleague Philippa K. T. Saunders say that Brinster's work
indicates that if immature stem cells can develop successfully after
transplantation, they can be frozen and reintroduced into the donor after
completion of cancer treatment.

   Frozen preservation "of testicular stem cells and post-treatment
reintroduction, could protect germ cells from potentially [mutation causing]
cancer treatments and safeguard against infertility," Cooke and Saunders
concluded.

   However, they caution, care needs to be taken to avoid reintroduction of
cancer cells into the patient in this process.

   They also noted that the ability to separate, preserve and reintroduce stem
cells raises the possibility of using gene therapy to correct genetic problems.

   "Ethical problems with this approach abound," they said.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1999


                             1053 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         December 27, 1999, Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2517 words

HEADLINE: Shapes of things to come

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER, KAWANZA GRIFFIN AND MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Imagine a world with no heart disease, in which cancer is more annoyance than
scourge.

   Picture this: shopping malls with more senior citizens hanging out than
teenagers.

   How about corresponding with friends or relatives who live on Mars?

   Or expressing your feelings, not with a Hallmark card, but with an MRI image
of your brain taken as you think lovingly about a special person.

   There also may be so-called designer babies, in vitro fertilization that
works as well as the real thing, restful sleep every night, food altered to suit
your genetic makeup and psychotropic drugs that make Prozac seem as antiquated
as lobotomies.

   Our brave new world is just around the corner.

   But what the 21st century ultimately will look like is anybody's guess.

   We asked researchers and scientists in a variety of fields to speculate on
medical and science developments that could occur over the next 100 years. Here
is what they had to say:

   CANCER

   In the next century, "cancer will be a disease that no longer will be
considered a major public health problem," because it will be easier to detect,
prevent and treat, predicted Harmon Eyre, a physician and longtime medical
director of the American Cancer Society.

   Cancer incidence and death rates are declining, and "we're on the verge of
seeing an explosion of change in how we think about cancer and how it will be
managed," based on understanding of the biologic and genetic mechanisms of how
it develops, he said.

   Eyre believes that "cancer profiling" will become common at birth or in early
childhood, aided by the genetic map being produced by the Human Genome Project.

   "We will be able to characterize each individual in the future by genetic
risk" and give advice on lifestyle choices to minimize the chances of developing
cancer -- taking tamoxifen or another chemoprevention drug, for instance, he
said.

   There will be more drugs for chemoprevention, Eyre said. Tamoxifen soon may
be joined by finasteride for prostate cancer and other drugs to prevent colon
polyps. About 30 chemoprevention experiments are under way now, he said.

   On the treatment front, drugs will become more targeted and highly engineered
-- like Herceptin for breast cancer and a promising new drug in advanced testing
for chronic myelogenous leukemia -- and will be more effective with fewer side
effects than current ones are, he said.

   SPACE EXPLORATION

   Confident probably understates Robert Zubrin's expectations for humankind's
future forays to the Red Planet.

   Zubrin, a well-known author and astronautical engineer, offers this
prediction: "I believe that humans will be on Mars before the end of the second
decade of the 21st century."

   But it won't just be a one-time landing and return voyage, he says.

   "By the end of the 21st century, there will be a new branch of human
civilization on Mars that will have developed its own dialect, its own culture,"
he said. "It will have made numerous contributions to technology, the arts and
literature. It will have experimented with new forms of social organization. It
will have its own history of epic deeds that will inspire pioneers to push
further out."

   By 3000, Zubrin said, humans will be living on asteroids, the moons of the
outer planets and "thousands" of human-settled planets in this region of the
galaxy.

   "These people will have technologies that would seem as magical to us today
as ours would have to the people of 1000," he said. "When they look back at this
time, when people first set sail for other worlds, they will wonder at us."

   Zubrin is the founder of Pioneer Astronautics and president of the Mars
Society, a worldwide organization that promotes Mars exploration. He also is the
author of "The Case for Mars," and "Entering Space, Creating a Spacefaring
Civilization."

   To find out more about Mars exploration check the Mars Society Web site at
www.marssociety.org.

   NEUROSCIENCE

   Exploration of inner space -- the grayish region between our ears -- also
will blast off in the next century.

   Using imaging techniques that were not available during most of the 20th
century, neuroscientists not only will map the human brain, they will understand
the molecular rules that govern it, said Ron Kalil, director of the Center for
Neuroscience at the University of Wisconsin -- Madison.

   Within 10 years, researchers should know how cells migrate out of the neural
tube in developing fetuses and eventually move to specialized areas such as the
regions that control visual and auditory functions.

   "We are starting to learn at a rate that is so astonishing that within 10 to
20 years, there will be a basic molecular map of how the brain develops," Kalil
said.

   Once that is accomplished, the processes of memory and learning will be
understood.

   Educators will know how to optimize learning and mental development in
children, he said. The memory loss that begins in mid life might be dramatically
slowed.

   We will understand the processes that make us feel love or that allow complex
thought, he said.

   "In the next 100 years, we will have explanations of how the brain goes about
categorizing daily activities and putting them into programs that can almost run
themselves, Kalil said.

   HEART DISEASE

   More than 30 years ago, Kenneth Cooper launched the aerobics movement. He
predicts the fruition of that movement in the very near future.

   "We are on the verge of eliminating heart disease," said Cooper, a physician
and researcher. "I think it will go the way of smallpox. We will get control of
it in the next few years. We are learning so much. The whole field of preventive
medicine is just going to explode."

   Cooper, founder of the Cooper Institute for Aerobics Research in Dallas, said
that with medical advances as well as better prevention, including a combination
of diet, exercise and taking supplements that supply anti-oxidants, people
should live an extra six to nine years.

   "Realistically, the life span of the average American should be 83 years," he
said.

   And those additional years should be relatively healthy and disability-free.

   "I'm talking about quality," he said.

   SLEEP

   One of the ills of modern society is that many people do not get adequate
sleep. That leads to thousands of deaths a year, including traffic fatalities
caused by sleep-deprived drivers and an untold number of heart attacks and
strokes caused by sleep-related high blood pressure, according to sleep
researchers.

   Sleep research pioneer William Dement said he believes the future will bring
a gigantic increase in national support for sleep research and education,
leading to diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders entering the mainstream
health and wellness agenda.

   Dement, a Stanford University professor and author of "The Promise of Sleep,"
said there will be rapid progress in defining the precise brain mechanisms
responsible for regulating sleep and wakefulness.

   AGING

   Michael Malone has seen the future and it is gray. By 2030, the over-65
population group will have grown at more than twice the rate of the general
population. Americans over 65 outnumber teenagers, and the over-85 group is the
fastest growing segment of the population. One in 26 baby boomers (those born
between 1946 and 1964) will live to be 100.

   The population shift "will stress our Medicare systems and our Medicaid
systems and community resources to define programs to take care of the frail
elderly," especially older women, who outlive males by an average of seven
years, said Malone, medical director of the Geriatrics Institute at Sinai
Samaritan Medical Center.

   There will be a need for better treatment and approaches to chronic illnesses
such as heart disease, emphysema, high blood pressure and arthritis.

   "We'll also struggle as we try to decide how to use technologies on these
very old people," such as whether a 90-year-old woman with chest pain would
benefit from angioplasty, he said.

   Other big issues will be caregiver stress, and paying for drugs and
technology, he predicted.

   "As more older people develop problems or are treated for chronic illnesses,
we may end up with wonderful treatments and medications which may not be
available to the people who need them the most" because they may not be able to
afford them, he said.

   On the plus side, "I foresee new treatments for persons with dementia, such
as Alzheimer's dementia," Malone said.

   AIDS

   "I don't think that any history of the millennial change can be written
without a very solemn chapter on the AIDS epidemic," said Doug Nelson, executive
director of the AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin.

   The World Health Organization recently reported that 33.6 million people,
including 1.2 million children, are infected with HIV, the virus that causes
AIDS. In 1999 alone, 5.6 million new cases were expected to occur, and 2.6
million deaths. The world "is at a turning point" in dealing with the epidemic,
Peter Piot, executive director of UNAIDS, said when the report was released.

   AIDS remains a disease with 100% mortality. Not a single case of HIV
infection has been cured. And protease inhibitors, drugs that revolutionized
care and extended the lives of many with HIV, either are not working or are
becoming increasingly problematic for many with the disease.

   "We are facing the stark reality that the drug treatments that we've invested
in so much are getting old, and we are beginning to learn that they may cause
severe health problems, like heart disease and cirrhosis of the liver, that will
contribute to mortality," Nelson said. "We may have to live with the fact there
will not be a cure for AIDS for as far ahead as we can see."

   Prevention efforts must continue with each new generation, he said.

   In the United States, "we know that half of the new infections are among
people under age 24. This becomes, in the new millennium, every generation's
threat," Nelson said. "We are holding our breath with regard to the future of
AIDS."

   ORGAN/TISSUE/CELL TRANSPLANTS

   More people will need organ transplants, and the supply will continue to lag
behind demand, said James Wolf, medical director of the United Network for Organ
Sharing or UNOS, the agency that runs the transplant system.

   In 1998, there were 20,961 transplants in the U.S. and 66,000 people on
waiting lists. As more people live longer, their livers, kidneys and other
organs wear out, leaving them few options but transplant. Demand for livers in
particular is rising as more people develop problems from hepatitis C infections
they unknowingly acquired years before the blood supply was tested for the
virus.

   On the other hand, "because of the increase in medical therapy for heart
failure, there actually are less people every year deemed to be in need of heart
transplants," Wolf said.

   The organ shortage will lead to increased use of living donors for
transplants involving kidneys or part of a liver, Wolf said. Livers from
cadavers also may be split more often so that two transplants can be done with
one organ.

   Research continues into human embryonic stem cells, which someday may be used
to grow organs or tissues for transplant.

   But animal organs will not come into use, Wolf thinks, unless there is a
major breakthrough in overcoming rejection issues.

   BIOTECHNOLOGY

   The ability to genetically engineer foods, not only for nutrient content, but
also disease prevention, is as close as the next decade, according to Michael
Pariza, professor and chairman of the department of food microbiology and
toxicology, and the director of the Food Research Institute at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison.

   "The idea of producing drugs in plants, not just for eating per se, but to
make large amounts of drugs that would lower their cost, is coming fast," said
Pariza.

   Vaccines in potatoes, added vitamins in apples -- even individualized
altering based on your own genetic makeup are what we can look forward to in the
future.

   "We could even have the ability to eradicate poverty and hunger," he said.
"Just about anything that you would want to do will be possible."

   MENTAL HEALTH

   Although cures for mental illnesses are not expected soon, control of their
symptoms is anticipated by the close of the next century.

   "The growth of our knowledge of how the brain works will give us a clear and
specific understanding of the mechanisms of how it functions and why it
dysfunctions," said Harold Pincus, former medical director of the Office of
Research at the American Psychiatric Association. "As a result, we will be able
to target very specific medications for specific areas of the brain."

   But these treatments will not work like an "on/off switch" just because
doctors will be able to access the risk for developments of diseases. Instead,
doctors will be able to customize treatments for their patients as needed, he
said.

   More importantly, the stigma associated with the disease will be diminished
because there will be no visible symptoms of mental impairment.

   "People will come to understand that illnesses such as schizophrenia are no
different than diabetes," said Pincus.

   REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

   Some people are looking forward to the opportunity to "design" their babies,
but Frank Miller, president of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, believes women should expect to see advancements in the treatment
of infertility and cancer.

   "We will continue to see advances in the treatment of infertile couples," he
said. "So much that the pregnancy rates from in vitro fertilization will be
either as good, if not better than pregnancy rates in the general population."

   He believes that there will be less surgery to open blocked tubes, that
implanting will be offered sooner and that couples will be able to predetermine
the number of babies.

   In addition, developments in gene therapy will be helpful not only for
determining such things as eye color, but for screening for disease, he said.

   SURGERY

   The future of surgery already is upon us, according to Daniel P. O'Hair, a
cardiothoracic surgeon at St. Luke's Medical Center.

   Within the next five to ten years, he anticipates cardiovascular surgeries to
be done using robotic systems, which, under the surgeon's guidance, will make
major surgeries relatively non-invasive.

   According to O'Hair, surgeons will be able to control the robot's "hands"
from another room by manipulating handles that resemble conventional surgical
instruments.

   "It really works well," he said. "Especially because the images are
tremendously magnified and you can see better than you would with the naked
eye,"

   The system also will eliminate the surgeon's slightest of hand tremors and
scale down the surgeon's movements, so the end results are rock-solid robotic
micro-movements.

   "This will have implications in many surgeries, including those involving the
lung and chest wall," said O'Hair.

   And because the technique requires only three small incisions, recoveries
will be much faster, he said.

GRAPHIC: Photo color
Photo illustration and page design by LOUIS K. SALDIVAR
Journal Sentinel

   (MAN)

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1999


                             1054 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           December 27, 1999, Monday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 023

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CURES FATAL' DISEASE

BYLINE: BILL HOFFMANN

BODY:

   Doctors have made medical history -- successfully achieving the world's first
gene-therapy cures.

   Kids born with a fatally defective gene for a vital blood component have been
effectively treated after the correct DNA was artificially inserted into their
cells, the Sunday Times of London says.

   The procedure -- which scientists said was as important as the first heart
transplant -- has enabled the children to celebrate holidays their parents were
convinced they would never see.

   The patients, 1-year-old Shah Rayhman of London, as well as newborns in
France, are said to be making good progress.

   "This is the first clear demonstration that gene therapy has corrected a
condition," said British doctor Graham Davies, who is treating Shah.

   Doctors say the advancement is important because, in the future, rather than
treating symptoms, they could rewrite the DNA blueprint for life.

   Shah was born with a form of Severe Combined Immuno-Deficiency, in which a
single defective gene stops the manufacture of T-lymphocyte cells.

   Those white "killer" cells circulate in the blood and lymph nodes to fight
off invading microbes.

   The condition leaves kids vulnerable to infection and many sufferers must
spend their lives in isolation.

   Some can be treated with bone marrow transplants if suitable donors can be
found, but babies untreated usually die before they reach 12 months.

   Tackling the cause of such conditions by rewriting or replacing the defective
genes has long been a dream of doctors.

   Gene therapy also offers the possibility of curing diseases such as cancer
and heart disease.

   About 3,000 people around the world are taking part in gene-therapy trials,
the newspaper said.

   "Shah had a long history of infections and they could not find suitable bone
marrow for a transplant. Then the doctors told us about this new treatment,"
said the boy's dad, also named Shah. "It seems to have worked and all we can do
now is wait."

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2000


                             1055 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    December 26, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Reader; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 1435 words

HEADLINE: Science Watch: A MEDICAL ENCORE;
 As a new century unfolds, old ideas of preventing illness and fostering healing
take center stage once again.;
 The century's top 10 advances in medicine

BYLINE: Kevin Lamb, Staff

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
In 1900, scientists were learning exciting new ways to prevent diseases through
municipal sanitation and vaccinations. A hundred years later, we are learning
exciting new ways to prevent diseases through diet, exercise and gene therapy.

   At the end of a century that saw the taming of many horrific illnesses and
injuries, medicine is turning its attention in many ways to some of the very
things it focused on 100 years ago. Old notions of preventing disease, enhancing
the body's own healing process, treating the mind and body as intricately
connected, and taking part in one's own health care are coming back into vogue.

   Medicine certainly isn't abandoning the remarkable technological advances
that helped boost the average American lifespan from 47 to 76 years over this
century. It is merely shifting its aim of such lifesaving weapons as
antibiotics, antiseptic
surgery and harnessed radiation. It also is broadening its definition of health
beyond the absence of disease or injury to include the presence of vitality.

   "I think our progress has taken us to a place where we're rediscovering the
value of ideas we may have discarded," says psychiatrist Dr. David Bienenfeld of
Good Samaritan Hospital and Wright State University's School of Medicine in
Dayton, Ohio.

   This was the century when organized medicine went from knowing very little
about the disease process to thinking it knew almost everything to finally
realizing it still had much to learn. At the turn of the new century, medical
scientists now realize not all problems can be explained by germs or treated
with pharmacological bombardment.

   As a result, medical researchers and doctors are returning to a focus on
prevention and harnessing the body's own healing systems --- just as interest in
naturopathy, chiropractic and osteopathy sprung up in the late 1800s.

   "That is the only way you're going to really cure anything," says Joseph
Mantil, director of nuclear medicine at Kettering Medical Center in Kettering.
"Because drugs can't cure. Even antibiotics really don't kill an infection. They
stop it from doing anything until your immune system can kill it. They're buying
time."

From germs to genes

   German scientist Robert Koch first articulated the "germ theory" in an 1882
paper that showed specific diseases are caused by microorganisms. The germ
theory gave healers an identifiable enemy and spawned an era of attack medicine,
says James Edmonson, a professor of medical history at Case Western Reserve
University's medical school in Cleveland.

   But over time, says Dr. Richard Reiling, a Kettering surgeon, modern medicine
has shifted its focus to target cancer by utilizing the body's own immune system
--- and, increasingly, through genetic manipulation.

   People generally think of gene therapy in terms of repairing defective human
genes that cause cystic fibrosis or trigger breast cancer. But the application
that excites doctors most is manipulating genes in ways that help the immune
system fight off disease. And a flourishing school of thought insists that
bolstering the immune system through healthy lifestyles --- exercise, diet,
laughter, spiritual development --- is the way to go.

   American doctors ridiculed the immune system approach for much of this
century because they believed drugs were a better option. Well into the 1980s,
new drugs, antibiotics and vaccines kept arriving. "We thought we would be able
to wipe out all diseases and nirvana would occur," says Reiling.

   "And then along came the AIDS virus," Edmonson says, "and suddenly the
confidence that doctors had acquired was shaken to its roots."

   Even vaccines were losing their luster in light of evidence that flushing
toilets and sanitary sewers were really the biggest factors in health advances
in this century, says Janet Golden, a medical history expert at Rutgers
University's Camden, N.J., campus.

   In addition to the daunting challenges posed by AIDS, medical science is
still baffled by many cancers and other diseases that can't entirely be combated
with drugs --- or by radiation or surgery.

   As a result, American interest in nonconventional medicine is rising, with
two of every five Americans saying they have tried some form of alternative
medicine.

   "The legitimization of non-Western medical tradition in the last 15 years is
striking," says University of Rochester, N.Y., medical history Professor
Theodore Brown. "This is an interesting broadening of treatment possibilities
after a period in which the boundaries had become very rigid."

Alternative therapies

   As the limits of drugs and surgery become apparent, today's disenchantment
with conventional medicine reminds historian Edmonson of 19th century challenges
to the medical establishment. Medicine of the 1830s and '40s was painful and
dangerous, based on bloodletting and purging in the belief that disease was
caused by excesses of bodily fluids.

   So people tried other approaches. Dr. Samuel Hahnemann had already developed
homeopathy in Germany, after some of his children died from ineffective medical
treatment. He believed in stimulating the immune system with diluted substances
that caused the same symptoms as an illness. Osteopathy was founded on the
belief that studying the musculo-skeletal system more closely would shed light
on the healing process. Chiropractors believe skeletal misalignments obstructed
the healing process. Naturopaths embrace a variety of healing strategies and
believe plant-based medicines would be more effective than conventional
medicines.

   All these disciplines jostled with drug-based medicine for supremacy in 1900.
But within two decades, medical doctors' arsenal of drugs had shot down their
competitors. Doctors also flourished because surgery kept people alive, new
insurance plans made hospitalization affordable, and their unprecedented
abilities to diagnose diseases allowed physicians to answer the question, "
What's wrong with me?"

   Today's proliferation of medical alternatives is bringing with it the dangers
of unregulated practitioners, the mixed blessing of self-care and the benefits
of linking the mind with the body --- much as it did 100 years ago. Herbal
remedies and dietary supplements have returned to an era of "buyer beware"
because of a 1994 federal law that removed them from the Food and Drug
Administration's oversight.

Self-care a trend

   Another major trend in medicine today that echoes the past is the movement
toward self-care, with patients taking more responsibility for their own
treatment. The Internet, media and the explosion of health-related publications
have given health care consumers an abundance of information about disease that
Americans simply couldn't have imagined 100 years ago.

   Along with drugs and surgery, Dr. Herbert Benson calls self-care "the third
leg of health care's three-legged stool." Benson is the Harvard cardiologist who
became the father of mind-body medicine 30 years ago. He demonstrated the
connection between stress and high blood pressure and proved the physical
benefits of meditation, biofeedback and stress-reducing relaxation techniques.

   Rochester's Brown adds, "One of the most exciting recent developments is that
research has caught up with what astute clinicians have been saying --- that
there are connections between emotions and the disease process, between mind and
body."

   Modern medicine has also caught up with that age-old philosophy that
prevention is always better than a cure. Consequently, managing and preventing
diseases are becoming the primary focus of care --- another throwback to the
early part of this century, if for different reasons. "When prevention became
prominent in the second half of the 19th century," Brown says, "it really was a
desperation move." Doctors realized they didn't have good medical options after
a person became sick. As prevention surfaces again now, Brown says, it is for
entirely different reasons.

   One is to enhance the quality of life, he says. The other is to save costs.
If American society cannot prevent more of the illnesses that cost six figures
to treat, we won't be able to afford the extraordinary improvements medicine
offers. So we have become desperate not to avoid the hopelessness of disease,
but to take advantage of all the hope that medical science is finally offering.

   "The more things change, the more they remain the same," wrote 19th century
Frenchman Alphonse Karr. Even before then, French philosopher Voltaire had
noted, "The art of medicine consists of amusing the patient while nature cures
the disease."

GRAPHIC: Graphic
A collage of the human body and medicine. / TED PITTS / Dayton Daily News
Graphic
The century's top 10 advances in medicine
1. Control of infectious diseases with drugs, antibiotics and better sanitary
conditions.
 2. Mass immunization campaigns to fight illnesses that once killed millions.
 3. Advent of vitamins.
4. Reduction of heart disease risk factors.
5. Development of designer drugs that target specific receptors in the body.
6. Molecular genetics advances.
7. Mobilization of "health care consumers" taking control of their own care.
8. Cancer diagnosis and treatment improvements.
9. Organ transplantation.
10. Advances in diagnostic technologies that have led to earlier treatment.

Source: Editors of the Merck Manual

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1999


                             1056 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      December 26, 1999 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: LFS; Pg. E-01

LENGTH: 2211 words

HEADLINE: 1,000 YEARS OF STORIES THAT TIME FORGOT, OR SHOULD HAVE Minor events
had big results

BYLINE: By Jack Cox, Denver Post Staff Writer,

BODY:

   Not many schoolboy brawlers grow up to be Jesse Venturas. But  in politics,
as in wrestling, lots of people who start out small  and unnoticed loom large
and powerful as time goes on.

   And so it is with society at large: Lots of discoveries or  developments that
seem insignificant at first trigger changes that  lead eventually to major
transformations in the way we live.

   Here are a few of the most underreported such stories of the  past decade,
century and millennium, starting with the earliest  and most far-reaching and
ending with the most recent and  localized.

   The French and Indian War

   Eclipsed in most history texts by the American Revolution,  which started
about 20 years later, the Seven Years' War, as it  was known in Britain and
France, was a regional conflict that had  enormous repercussions on both sides
of the Atlantic.

   First of all, 'By eliminating the French as an imperial  presence on this
continent, it ensured that English would be the  predominant language and
culture in North America,' says  University of Colorado history professor Fred
Anderson, whose book  on the subject, 'The Crucible of War: The Seven Years' War
and the  Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754-1766,' will be  published
in February by Alfred Knopf.

   Secondly, he says, by alienating the American colonists - who  wanted to be
seen more as comrades of the British than as subjects  - it started the drive
toward independence.

   Third, by humiliating the French, it gave the colonists an  ally without whom
they couldn't have won the revolution.

   Finally, by bankrupting the French, it set in motion the  chain of events
that culminated in their own revolution and led to  the reign of Napoleon, who
changed the course of European history  in the early 19th century.

   And that's not to mention what the Brits' decisive victory  did to a) further
their concept of an empire on which the sun  would never set, and b) deprive the
Indians of French firepower,  without which they were unable to resist the
Americans' expansion  westward.

   The Newburgh Address

   While this country has witnessed assassinations and scandals  galore, it has
never experienced a military coup, thanks in part  to George Washington.

   In an incident rarely mentioned in civics classes, the  general talked a
group of disaffected colonial officers out of  taking over the government in the
spring of 1783, when the country  was still operating under the Articles of
Confederation.

   The officers - camped at Newburgh, on the Hudson River north  of New York
City - had gone months without being paid, and,  suspecting that Congress might
not settle their claims before  demobilization, they had drawn up an eloquent,
unsigned address  urging direct action.

   As Metropolitan State College history professor Tom Altherr  tells the story,
Washington got wind of this 'irregular  invitation' and rode overnight through a
sleet storm to confront  his subordinates, not knowing whether they would murder
him or  hear him out. Allowed to address the officers, Washington - 51  years
old at the time - urged them to be patient, then picked up  his spectacles and
told them, 'I've gone gray as a result of this  war, and now I'm going blind.'

   It was a lie, of course, but it drew the officers' sympathy,  defused the
situation and deterred a mutiny that would have  gravely imperiled the new
republic.

   Westward migration

   The great westward migration of the 19th century was begun not  by
downtrodden Easterners seeking a better life, as generally  believed, but by
Protestant missionaries seeking to save the  natives of the Oregon country.
Delegations of Methodists,  Presbyterians and Congregationalists, among others,
began settling  in the Willamette Valley south of Portland in 1834 - well before

  the Catholics arrived, and almost a decade before the Oregon Trail  became
clogged with wagon trains.

   But while 500,000 people attempted to move west in the years  1841-69 (an
estimated 40 to 50 percent died on the trip or within  a year later), Altherr
points out that a far larger shift in  population occurred in the 20th century.

   In a similar period from the '50s through the '70s, the  population of the
Western states grew by about 28 million - more  than 50 times the increase in
the 1800s. Sure, many of the  newcomers were children of the baby boom, but
their parents got  there somehow, right?

   Gene research

   Experimenting with sweet peas in the garden of his monastery,  an obscure
Austrian priest named Gregor Mendel theorized in the  1850s that certain
properties now known to be carried by genes -  like height - were either
dominant or recessive. His work lay  dormant for half a century, however, until
scientists unearthed it  in the search for answers to questions raised by the
discovery of  chromosomes.

   Since then, genetics research has blossomed into a field with  tremendous
impacts on medicine, agriculture and forensic  investigation, as anyone who's
heard of gene therapy,  bioengineering and DNA testing is aware.

   What hasn't captured the public imagination, says Cheri  Jones, curator of
mammals at the Denver Museum of Natural History,  is the potential for gene
research to revolutionize fields as  diverse as wildlife management and
paleontology.

   'Say you're looking at introducing a population of some  threatened species
into a new area,' she explains. 'You might want  to look at its DNA and match it
with a species that's closely  related, as opposed to one that's across the
continent, to improve  the chances for successful breeding. It sounds like real
esoteric  stuff, but it's the kind of practical decision land managers have  to
make.'

   Similar matchups can also be made in the study of evolution,  she notes, to
determine how the DNA of an ancient organism may  relate to a modern creature
that may or may not have a similar  outward appearance.

   Freeways

   It could be argued that the foundations of the modern freeway  system were
laid by the introduction of asphalt in the 1870s or  Portland cement in the
1890s. But in truth, the notion of  interstate highways was conceived by Dwight
D. Eisenhower near the  end of World War I, when he suffered through an
excruciatingly  long trip across the country as a young Army officer
accompanying  a troop convoy.

   It wasn't until after World War II and his subsequent  election as president
in 1952, however, that Eisenhower was able  to translate his idea into
legislation. The Interstate Highway Act  of 1956 authorized $ 32 billion over 13
years for 41,000 miles of  roads that would eventually cost three times as much
and take  three times as long to complete as originally anticipated.

   The network of limited-access highways would spawn economic  and social
effects of far more consequence than the swift movement  of men and materiel in
a military crisis.

   The freeways enabled trucking companies to displace railroads  as the
nation's primary freight haulers, thus giving the United  States 'the most
efficient transportation system in the entire  world, and allowing most of the
country to share in the economic  boom,' according to Greg Fulton, president of
the Colorado Motor  Carriers Association.

   The system also changed Americans' vacation habits,  jump-started the tourist
industry, standardized food and lodging  services and - more troubling - split
neighborhoods, encouraged  white flight and accelerated suburban sprawl.

   A. Philip Randolph

   and civil rights

   Most Americans might ascribe the origin of the civil rights  movement to the
Montgomery bus boycott of the early 1950s, but  arguably it was born decades
earlier, when A. Philip Randolph  founded the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters in 1925.

   Randolph's greatest triumph, perhaps, was a federal  anti-discrimination
order he elicited from President Franklin D.  Roosevelt in 1941 by threatening
to stage a mass march on  Washington to protest racist practices in
defense-related  industries. More than 20 years later, at the age of 74, the
pioneering black leader finally did direct such a march on  Washington - the
1963 demonstration that gave rise to Martin  Luther King's famous 'I Have a
Dream' speech.

   Changes in families

   The single-parent family is enshrined in American life today,  thanks to TV
sitcoms. But for much of the latter half of the 20th  century, it was
overshadowed by images of the traditional nuclear  family headed by a working
father and stay-at-home mother.

   Ironically, the same sort of lag in awareness may be  occurring with regard
to ongoing changes that may be even more  far-reaching.

   'The 'typical' family at the millennium is likely to take one  of four
alternative forms: the two-wage-earner family, the  single-parent family, the
blended family of remarriage, or the  empty nest couple whose children have
grown up and moved out,'  says University of Colorado sociology professor Patty
Adler.

   'In addition to these forms, many people spend significant  parts of their
lives living apart from their families, as single  young adults, divorced
singles or older people who have lost a  spouse.'

   As Americans struggle to cope with changes in gender roles,  the world of
work and age-related expections, she suggests, new  family forms will emerge to
give people 'a more creative, flexible  and inclusive future than that contained
in our monolithic family  past.'

   Nukes

   The most dangerous kind of fallout from the nuclear arms race  of the Cold
War years may not have been the small amount of  radiation spewed into the
atmosphere by early testing, but the  widespread cynicism engendered by the
secrecy that surrounded the  U.S. nuclear weapons industry.

   The assertion that this was a matter of national security  'removed a whole
sector of government operations from public  scrutiny,' notes University of
Colorado journalism professor Len  Ackland, former editor of the Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists  and author of a new book called 'Making a Real Killing: Rocky

  Flats and the Nuclear West' (University of New Mexico Press, $ 34.95).

   'Huge arsenals were built in the '60s and '70s, yet there  wasn't even a
public debate about it until the early '80s with the  Nuclear Freeze Campaign,'
he says. 'Eisenhower warned us about the  military-industrial complex, but we
don't seem to have listened to  him.'

   The upshot, Ackland argues, is a chilling lack of concern  over the thousands
of weapons still deployed (or ready to be) by  U.S. and Russian forces, as well
as those in the hands of China,  India and other countries. As he puts it, 'Just
because the Cold  War has ended doesn't mean the age of nuclear weapons has
ended.'

   Lasers

   The design for the laser beam was patented in 1957, the same  year the
Russians launched the first Sputnik satellite. But the  first effective, working
model didn't emerge until 1960, when  Denver native Theodore Maiman - son of the
chief radio engineer  for Mountain Bell - built one while working for Hughes
Aviation.

   Herb Hackenburg, a telephone historian and author of the book  'From
Muttering Machines to Laser Beams,' notes that lasers are  familiar to the
public because of their high-profile applications  in eye surgery, computer
printers and military targeting. But it  is their crucial role in
telecommunications, he adds, that may be  most significant. Simply put, he
explains, 'The fiber-optic  network provides the road for the information
highway, and the  laser is what travels on that road, carrying all the digitized
data.'

   Denver's revival

   At a local level, the 'absolutely breathtaking revitalization  of Downtown
Denver' has occurred so gradually it's gone almost  unnoticed, says Jim
Griesmer, dean of the Daniels College of  Business at the University of Denver.

   As an example of what can be accomplished through enlightened  public and
private planning, Griesmer maintains, Denver's Downtown  is unmatched even by
similar facelifts in such cities as Chicago,  Seattle and San Antonio. It's so
impressive, he says, that scores  of professional city managers who attended an
international  meeting here two years ago remarked 'how taken they were' with
the  city's core.

   The transformation began in the mid-1960s when Dana Crawford  began
renovating the run-down buildings that would become Larimer  Square. It gained
momentum in the '70s with the construction of  the 16th Street Mall, Auraria
campus, Denver Art Museum, the  Denver Center for the Performing Arts and
McNichols Sports Arena,  and cruised through the '80s and '90s with a flurry of
new  skyscrapers, the convention center, the baseball stadium and a  whole new
restaurant district in LoDo.

   'The original goal,' says Griesmer, 'was to bring shoppers  back, but that
was the Downtown of yesterday. What has emerged is  the Downtown of tomorrow,
full of entertainment, living, cultural  and financial opportunities.'


GRAPHIC:  Denver Post photo illustration by Peter Pauley

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1999


                             1057 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14CN; Page 8; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1874 words

HEADLINE: A New Generation of Cancer Vaccines

BYLINE: By MARY ANNE CHUTE LYNCH

BODY:

   A SAMPLE of Karin Laakso's white blood cells were siphoned off and made into
a personal cancer vaccine, which she was given once a week for four weeks,
followed by one dose per month for three months.

   "It's marvelous. It's made from your own body, and has no negative side
effects," said Ms. Laakso, a registered nurse whose chronic lymphocytic
leukemia, a slow-growing cancer, was diagnosed 14 years ago.  After the fifth
vaccine injection in April, tests indicated her immune systems T-cells were
attacking the malignant cells.

    The idea of creating a cancer vaccine has been around for a hundred years,
since it was first observed that melanomas, in rare incidents, went away
subsequent to a patient fighting an infection. The current generation of
vaccines, several of which are evolving at the University of Connecticut Cancer
Research Center in Farmington, the Yale Cancer Center in New Haven and the
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in Wallingford, date back only 10 years, said John
Sogn, chief of cancer immunology at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda,
Md.

   "Immunology is a very young science and it's changing rapidly," said Dr.
Sogn.

   Made from the patients' cells or synthetically, cancer vaccines are often
intended to treat the existing disease rather than prevent it. Vaccines are
given after established treatments in an attempt to eliminate residual cancer
cells that cannot be detected or removed.

   Most patients enrolled in vaccine trials have undergone every form of
treatment available and found they cannot tolerate existing therapies or their
cancer is still progressing.

   "What we're trying to do is attack cancer on as many fronts as we can," said
Dr. Lee Schacter, oncologist and associate director of clinical trials at Yale.
The goal is to eradicate cancer and have the body produce an immunity so it
won't recur, but "even a delay in recurrence would be beneficial," he added.

   Cancer arises from within, and its cells and DNA are very similar to normal
cells, said Dr. Jonathan Sporn, Ms. Laakso's oncologist at UConn. Finding that
unique characteristic of the cancer cell, common to all cancers but
distinguishable from healthy body cells, is "the Holy Grail" of cancer research,
Dr. Schacter said.

   Researchers are using distinctive antigens, typically protein molecules found
on the surface of cancer cells, to produce vaccines, but each vaccine is limited
to one patient or one specific cancer. The antigen molecules are extracted from
the patient's tumor and attached in the lab to immune system stimulants, which
alert the T-cells to attack any cells that match the attached antigen.

   Think of the immune stimulant as a taxi and the antigen as the passengers
telling the taxi where to go, said Garo Armen, chemist and former Wall Street
analyst, who in 1994 started a biopharmaceutical company, Antigenics, to
manufacture custom-made vaccines from an antigen called heat shock protein.

   Ms. Laakso's vaccine was made from her cancer cells' heat shock protein, a
molecule instrumental in the cells' recovery from heat stress.  The beauty of
heat shock protein is that it serves as both an immune stimulant and antigen
target, said Pramod Srivastava, director of UConn's Immunology and Cancer
Research Center and co-founder of Antigenics. Dr. Srivastava, who started his
career as a paleontologist, inadvertently discovered the potential of heat shock
protein when "teasing out all the parts of the tumor" in graduate school. To
make a vaccine, the heat shock protein is ground down with the patient's tumor
tissue, separated from other tumor components, and purified.

   Four of five patients who were given heat shock protein vaccines for
pancreatic cancer in 1997 appear to be disease-free 16 to 26 months after
treatment, said Dr. John Lewis, who ran Antigentics's initial trial at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. A "big immune response" was observed
in two patients, said Dr. Lewis, who cautioned: "It's too soon to tell," but "a
good lead to follow."

   Vaccines could not be developed for 10 patients in the study, yet Dr. Lewis
considers that "fixable" and theorizes that surgeries preceding their vaccines
released excess enzymes which broke down the proteins.

   At M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, observations from a heat shock
protein trial in 36 patients with melanoma, a rapidly advancing skin cancer,
indicate 53 percent of patients are disease-free or their condition has stopped
progressing, Dr. Armen said.

   Almost 50 percent of patients at M.D. Anderson who had kidney tumors removed
surgically and further renal cell metastases, showed partial regression or
stabilization of tumor growth when given a moderate dose of heat shock protein
vaccine, said Dr. Robert Amato, who conducted the study.

   Similar results were found in all patients who tested low, medium or high
dosage levels of the vaccine.
 A new study sponsored by Antigenics using a moderate dosage and different
schedule, already has 70 patients enrolled, said Dr. Amato.

   With the final dose of vaccine, Ms. Laakso's blood count went back to its
baseline level; researchers went back to the lab to determine if dosage,
schedule or other factors need modification. "Its unlikely you'll hit a home run
the first time out," Dr. Sporn said.

   Nevertheless, heat shock protein treatment, "is considered a promising
approach," Dr. Sogn, of the National Cancer Institute, said. "Dozens of factors
determine how responsive" the immune system will be, he said.

   At the Yale Cancer Center, Dr. Frank Hsu is exploring those other factors,
using a different antigen target and immune stimulant with non-Hodgkins
lymphoma-B patients. Dr. Hsu takes an idiotype protein from a biopsy of the
patient's lymphoma cells and generates it in the lab over several weeks into
large quantities.  The protein is subsequently pulsed into dendritic cells, a
powerful immune stimulant harvested from the patient's blood. The cells "mature"
in the lab before being given as a vaccine, Dr. Hsu said.

   What's critical is presenting the malignant protein target the correct way to
get optimal effect, Dr. Hsu said. The tailor-made vaccine is given to the
patient intravenously once a month for three months, followed by conventional
protein vaccine shots, similar to flu vaccines, given once per month for five
months. The trial examines different ways of giving vaccines and the response
each generates. Of the Yale vaccines, Dr. Hsu's is "the most likely to be
successful," Dr. Schacter said.

   Dendritic cells also serve as an immune stimulant in Dr. Bijay Mukherji's
UConn lab, but he attaches a synthetic protein segment instead of extracting an
antigen from each patient. The synthetic protein, or peptide, is "an exact
replica" of the peptide commonly found on a melanoma patient's cells, Dr.
Mukherji said, but the dendritic cells are harvested from each patient to
produce a personal vaccine.

   A few off-the-shelf vaccines, for patients manifesting the same cancer cell
targets, are farther along the path to market application. Harriet Chirigos had
surgery to remove colon cancer, six months of chemotherapy and two follow-up
liver surgeries during which "a tumor the size of a lemon" was removed. When
tumors were found on her lungs, she was then invited to participate in such a
trial sponsored by Titan Pharmaceuticals of South San Francisco.

   "What could I do? I was very, very tired and my ribs hurt so much," before
starting the vaccine in March, said Ms. Chirigos. In July, tests indicated her
cancer was stabilizing, and X-rays in November showed a tumor on one lung
reduced "to half its original size, and little spots on the other side went
away," she said. Ms. Chirigos received the first four doses of vaccine every
other week from Yale oncologist, Dr. Barbara Burtness, and now gets the vaccine,
injected under the skin like a tuberculosis test, once monthly while continuing
chemotherapy every four weeks.

   Ms. Chirigos's vaccine, based on a mouse antibody, is being tested nationwide
and in the United Kingdom on 400 patients, whose tumors harbor a protein found
on the majority of colorectal cancers, said Susan Burton, a Titan spokeswoman.

   "There has been an explosion of interest in trying to capitalize on
approaches to cancer," said Dr. Susan Kelly, who is directing a melanoma trial
of 880 patients for Bristol-Myers Squibb in collaboration with Progenics
Pharmaceuticals, Incorporated of Tarrytown, N.Y., which initiated the study. The
vaccine uses a synthetic version of a ganglioside protein commonly found on
melanoma cells. The synthetic ganglioside is combined with an immune stimulant
used in children's vaccines and derived from limpets, a domed-looking snail
which can be found in Long Island Sound, Dr. Kelly said.

   In February, Bristol-Myers Squibb plans to launch a study combining multiple
synthetic gangliosides expressed on lung cancer tumors, and the company is
"pursuing a careful review for expanding our presence" in the development of
other types of cancer vaccines, Dr. Kelly said from their Wallingford research
facility with more than 1,000 employees.

   "Its a very difficult area when you start out," Dr. Sogn said. Custom-made
vaccines are not feasible, critics say. It is "a cumbersome and difficult
approach," said Dr. Kelly, but Dr. Armen said Antigenics lab in Woburn, Mass.,
processes tumors from around the world, and his facility demonstrates that
autologous vaccines can be manufactured safely and efficiently. Each vaccine
originally took 40 hours to produce but is now done in 10 and will soon be made
in 6 hours, said Dr. Armen, who estimates it costs $3,000 for each batch of
vaccine.

   "It is a hard subject to tackle,' said Dr. Philip Noguchi, the F.D.A.'s
Director of Cellular and Gene Therapies. Its not simply a matter of how much
vaccine to give, but a question of "the ability of that biological product,"
whether vaccine or gene therapy, to get the effect you want, and what "parallel
biologic effects" occur.

   Funding poses another question.  Support for research comes from the
universities, the National Cancer Institute, private foundations, and
pharmaceutical company trials. As of Jan. 1, 2000, health care coverage in
Connecticut cannot exclude Phase 3 drug or medical treatment, such as Ms.
Chirigos's large-scale trial, and the insurer's position on coverage of
preliminary Phase 1 and 2 trials, similar to Ms. Laakso's, "must be spelled out
in the subscriber agreement," said the state insurance commissioner, George M.
Reider Jr. Aetna-U.S. Healthcare "would cover clinical trials down to and
including Phase 1," in the event of any life-threatening disease in which
"standard treatment has failed or there is no standard treatment," said Jill
Griffiths, corporate spokesperson in Bluebell, Pa. Many companies are reviewing
similar policies in response to New Jersey's new mandate for coverage of early
and advanced phase trials.

   "Nobody said curing cancer was going to be easy. If we don't try, we'll never
get there," Dr. Noguchi said.

   "I think they will get it right. This is the wave of the future. Fifteen
years down the road, cancer will be either curable of manageable as a chronic
illness," Ms. Laakso said.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: From left, Dr. Lee Schacter, Dr. Frank Hsu and Dr. Barbara
Burtness discuss a patient's file at the Yale Cancer Center in New Haven.
(Richard Mei for The New York Times); Pramod Srivastava, director of UConn's
Immunology and Cancer Research Center and co-founder of Antigenics, at the
research center. (George Ruhe for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1999


                             1058 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: To a Long Life! (But How Long?)

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   When Jerome Groopman (Op-Ed, Dec. 20) says science will turn the genetically
mediocre into robust centenarians, he's not peering far enough over the time
horizon. My grandmother managed to survive 90 years despite heavy smoking,
frequent drinking and obesity. Surely gene therapy would have been good for more
than one additional decade. No one knows how far "artificial longevity" will
extend human life. With all the roadblocks removed, a Methuselahan existence
might be within reach. Just in case, let's make sure researchers also work on a
longevity antidote that will quickly trigger some fast-acting bad genes. At age
300, we all might need a rest.

MARK ROMAN
New York, Dec. 20, 1999



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1999


                             1059 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       December 24, 1999, Friday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Jellyfish research furthers human study

BYLINE: William McCall


BODY:  PORTLAND, Ore. - Moving medicine a big step closer to the day
when healthier humans can be engineered in the laboratory,
scientists have successfully transferred glowing green jellyfish
DNA to monkey embryos.


    Researchers previously did something similar with green jellyfish
DNA and mice. In this latest experiment, scientists at the Oregon
Regional Primate Research Center used rhesus monkey embryos
instead, and produced a healthy, normal-looking monkey.


    "When you get to a nonhuman primate, like a monkey, you're getting
much closer to people," said Gerald Schatten, a cell biologist and
professor of obstetrics at Oregon Health Sciences University who
led the research. The university is a partner in the primate
research center.


    The scientists employed a technique adapted from fertility clinics,
in which a tiny needle is used to insert sperm into an egg. In this
case, the scientists first combined jellyfish DNA with monkey
sperm, and injected the sperm into a monkey egg.


    Researchers said the experiment represents a big step toward the
day when genes can be inserted into human embryos to correct or
prevent diseases. As a result, the experiment has raised ethical
concerns.


    Schatten doubts the technique he used could be employed in such a
way, and he added that wasn't the purpose of his research anyway.
He said the goal was to make fertility treatments safer by finding
a more effective way to "clean" human sperm so that it does not
carry a virus or bacteria into the egg. That has yet to be achieved
by the monkey research.


    "Normally when sperm enters the egg, it sheds its outer membrane
the same way you might take off a raincoat," Schatten said. "When
you inject sperm, you send in the raincoat and anything riding on
the raincoat. We want to make it kind of like a car wash."


    His research team chose the jellyfish gene for transfer because it
is harmless and because its green glow makes it easy to track.


    Seven embryos carrying the jellyfish DNA were transferred to rhesus
monkeys, and one gave birth to a normal male. Scientists have not
yet detected the genetic material in the monkey, but the birth
itself was considered a success.


    The work was reported this week in the journal Molecular Human
Reproduction.


    In May, scientists at the University of Hawaii reported that they
had produced mice that actually glow green. The monkey research in
Oregon moves genetic engineering closer to humans.


    "It's a lot closer to us than a mouse," said Dr. Barry Zirkin, who
heads the division of reproductive biology at the Johns Hopkins
University School of Public Health in Baltimore. "Sensible people
should be having serious discussions about this right now."


    Dr. Ryuzo Yanagimachi, who pioneered the jellyfish DNA transfer to
mice in Hawaii, believes it is only a matter of time until the
technique is adapted to humans. "This can apply to humans
eventually," Yanagimachi said. "The monkey is kind of a bridge
between animal and human."


    Critics were quick to warn against applying the technology to
humans before more is learned about genetic structure.


    "The thing that concerns me is that the field is really wide open.
There is absolutely no regulation governing this field whatsoever,"
said Alix Fano, spokeswoman for the Medical Research Modernization
Committee, a nonprofit health advocacy organization in New York.


    She said the death earlier this month of gene therapy patient Jesse
Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., shows the need to proceed slowly.



LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1999


                             1060 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    December 23, 1999 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 036

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme ends Cell Genesys bid

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. gave up a $ 350 million takeover bid for Cell Genesys Inc.
yesterday rather than fight for the California firm after its directors panned
the deal.

   Directors of Cell Genesys soured on the deal because it didn't reflect a
recent sharp rise in the value of one of its investments, a 19 percent stake in
a Abgenix Inc. That pharmaceutical company's shares have almost tripled since
the October deal with Genzyme.

   "We couldn't agree on how to account for this volatility," said Genzyme
spokesman Bo Peila. "And once their board withdrew its support, we evaluated all
our options and decided to close this chapter."

   The increased value of Abgenix made Cell Genesys worth closer to $ 600
million, he said.

   As a result of the termination, Cell Genesys will pay Genzyme, based in
Cambridge, a $ 15 million break up fee.

   Genzyme had looked to the deal to give it  a beachhead in California and gain
access to Cell Genesys' gene-therapy technology, which includes methods to
deliver specific genes into disease tissue.

   The end of the deal may prove beneficial for Genzyme, at least in the near
term, analysts said.

   "It doesn't hurt them because it eliminates the possibility of the potential
dilution that would have come from the deal," said Elise T. Wang, a PaineWebber
analyst in New York. Also, the companies have a strong relationship that could
lead to future collaborations, she said.

   Genzyme shares gained about 4 percent, or $ 1.63, to close at $ 43.63
yesterday.

   The termination of the Cell Genesys deal ended a related plan to transfer
cancer programs and $ 60 million in cash from Genzyme General to Genzyme
Molecular Oncology.


LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1999


                             1061 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     DECEMBER 23, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: GROUP SEEKS A HALT IN STUDY RECRUITING A FOUNDATION ASKED THAT NO MORE
PATIENTS BE RECRUITED FOR GENE-THERAPY STUDIES USING A METHOD BLAMED IN A DEATH.

BYLINE: Marie McCullough, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has asked researchers to suspend recruitment
of patients for foundation-funded gene-therapy studies that use a delivery
system blamed in the September death of an Arizona teenager.

   Foundation president Robert T. Beall said that two institutions - the
University of Pennsylvania and the University of Iowa - were involved in such
studies and that only Penn had begun enrolling patients.

   "This is a cautionary move," Beall said. "We certainly haven't seen any
adverse effects. But with all the controversy . . . we felt we wanted to get the
FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration) to provide recommendations on the use of
adenovirus."

   The adenovirus, the same virus that causes colds, has served as a delivery
vehicle, or vector, for sending therapeutic genes into patients. The virus is
modified, however, so it does not cause a cold.

   But even modified adenoviruses may trigger harmful immune-system reactions.
Penn researchers blamed such an unusual reaction for the death of Jesse
Gelsinger of Tucson. They were treating the 18-year-old with an adenovirus gene
therapy, delivered into his liver to correct a genetic disorder that produces a
deadly buildup of ammonia in the blood.

   His death, the first caused directly by gene therapy, prompted the FDA to
suspend recruitment of patients for trials delivering the adenovirus directly to
the liver and to request detailed reports about all "adverse events" from
adenovirus gene therapy trials around the country.

   In addition, a federal advisory panel, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
(RAC), held hearings recently. The panel is expected to issue recommendations in
March.

   "We assume the RAC recommendations will address this [adenovirus use]," Beall
said. "We've asked them to."

   Beall said foundation-sponsored research using another vector, the
adeno-associated virus, would continue.

   Penn spokeswoman Rebecca Harmon said the cystic fibrosis trial, launched six
months ago, had enrolled and treated only two patients. Neither had bad
reactions to the gene therapy, an aerosol introduced directly into their lungs,
she said.

   "We, of course, are going to honor the foundation's request," she said.

   More than 30,000 people in the United States have cystic fibrosis, the most
prevalent, lethal genetic disease. While medical advances have helped prolong
their lives, most die by age 30.

   Patients with cystic fibrosis are born with a defect in a single gene that
directs production of a protein needed to dilute the mucus in the lungs.

   The idea of using gene therapy on cystic fibrosis goes back to 1988.
Researchers thought that the adenovirus would be a good vector because it has an
affinity for the lungs. But a red flag went up early when a patient developed
complications, including lung inflammation. The FDA and researchers became more
cautious about giving high doses, especially into the lungs, and the adenovirus
was further modified to try to prevent an immune response.

   Trials using the adenovirus make up about a quarter of the nation's 350
ongoing gene therapy experiments.

   The other trials use a variety of other vectors, including the
adeno-associated virus (AAV). Although the AAV does not appear to have the same
inflammatory response problems of the adenovirus, it is a much smaller vector
and cannot be outfitted with large therapeutic genes.

   Inder Verma, a molecular biologist at the Salk Institute and an expert on
adenoviruses, speculated that adenoviruses will continue to be the vector of
choice for gene therapies targeting cancerous tumors, because such therapies are
short-term and administered directly to the tumor.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1062 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   December 22, 1999, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Local News; Pg. 2G

LENGTH: 1298 words

HEADLINE: Where You Live

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Cobb seeks bids to run bus system ... DeKalb fined for sewer spills ... Roswell
buys more land for Riverwalk project ... Rockdale schools update Web site

METROSCOPE: Job start suggested
The state Department of Transportation board's transition committee is
recommending that incoming Department of Transportation Commissioner Tom Coleman
officially assume his duties June 1, 2000, at an annual salary of $ 150,000. The
committee also recommends that Coleman appoint current DOT Commissioner Wayne
Shackelford as special adviser to serve until his retirement in September. Both
recommendations must be approved by the full DOT board.

ATLANTA: Legal benefits expanded
The Atlanta Legal Aid Society has expanded its year-old program to help people
with HIV and AIDS to include people with cancer and Lou Gehrig's disease. Legal
Aid offers free legal services to poor people and can help individuals with
these diseases in disputes over Social Security and insurance benefits,
disability, wills, power of attorney and more.

CHEROKEE: Trigger locks donated
Safekids of Cherokee County has given away more than 150 pistol trigger locks to
the parents of children. Sheriff Roger Garrison and Lowe's Home Improvement
Warehouse on Ga. 92 started the program in September. Lowe's donated 180 trigger
locks, which cover the trigger of a pistol so it can't be fired without
unlocking it with a key. The locks are given away at safety events sponsored by
Safekids of Cherokee County.

CLAYTON: Commissioner against trail
Commissioner Charley Griswell twice voted Tuesday against Jester's Creek
bike/jogging/walking trail. He cast the lone dissenting vote. Griswell opposed
awarding a $ 760,000 construction contract to DPS Industries Inc. of Mableton
and then against moving money from one account to another so it could be spent
on the project. Griswell said he was not going to vote for any nonessential
county projects until he found out how much it is going to cost each year to run
the new courthouse/jail complex.

COBB: Bus proposals sought
Cobb County wants to hear from companies interested in running the county's bus
system. Ryder ATE Inc. had a five-year, $ 6.5 million contract to oversee the
bus system. That contract will expire June 30, 2000. Proposals for the job are
due in late January.

Land rules changed
Picture an office or store on the north side of Clay Road, at Ewing Road, on the
lawn owned by the Ewing Road Baptist Church. County commissioners last week
changed the county's land use blueprint to allow commercial development there
and on land occupied by the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah Witness Church across the
street.

Anti-smoking law support
At least one other Cobb County commissioner, Woody Thompson, will back a
proposal to require restaurants and bars to reserve at least 50 percent of their
seats for nonsmokers and provide ventilation. County Commission Chairman Bill
Byrne opposes the idea, proposed by Commissioner Sam Olens. Commissioner Joe Lee
Thompson said he's open to the suggestion. Commissioner Louie Hunter was more
wary. "Anytime we address taking away the private right of citizens, we have to
tread very carefully," he said.

COWETA: See-through bags needed
When Coweta County middle and high school students return to class on Jan. 10,
they'll only be allowed to use clear or mesh book bags. The Coweta Board of
Education made the decision last spring in hopes of increasing school safety.
School officials say it will be much tougher for students to hide weapons in the
see-through bags.

DEKALB: EPD fines county
The state Environmental Protection Division has fined the county $ 20,000 for
sewer spills between December 1998 and October 1999. In all, there were 36
"minor" sewer overflows and 10 "major" overflows investigated by the EPD. Any
spill less than 10,000 gallons is classified as minor.


   Institute chief named
Dr. Jonathan W. Simons has been named director of the Winship Cancer Institute
of Emory University. Simons is currently director of the Molecular Pharmacology
Program and Cancer Gene Therapy Laboratory at the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine. Simons begins his work at Emory on Feb. 1, 2000. He replaces
interim director William C. Wood, a breast cancer surgeon and chairman of
Emory's Department of Surgery.

FAYETTE: Offices closed Thursday
City of Fayetteville and Fayette County offices will be closed Thursday, as well
as Friday, for the Christmas holiday. City and county government will reopen on
Monday.

FULTON: More land purchased
The city of Roswell has purchased 29 acres of land along the Chattahoochee River
west of Ga. 400 for $ 3.25 million, as an addition to its proposed Riverwalk
project. The land currently is owned by the Ace Sand Mining Co., which will
phase out its sand-mining operation during the next five years. Riverwalk, a
seven-mile system of trails, river access points and parks, is a joint effort of
the city, the National Park Service, the state of Georgia, Fulton County, the
Trust for Public Land and the citizen's group R.A.P.I.D.S.

Custodial kids' wish lists
Twelve Fulton County government departments donated dolls, toy trucks and other
items to fill the Christmas wish lists of children in legal custody of the
Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services. Volunteer Fulton, a
division of the Fulton County Human Services Department, helped coordinate the
drive.

GWINNETT: Tax proposal opposed
The president of the Gwinnett County Chamber of Commerce says he is opposed to
proposed legislation that would freeze property tax assessments for homeowners
but not businesses. State Sens. Don Balfour (R-Lilburn) and Billy Ray
(R-Lawrenceville) have said their bill, which they plan to introduce in January,
would freeze the taxable values of homes as long as the owners don't sell. The
chamber executive, Richard Tucker, called the bill unfair and said he will
recommend that the chamber board oppose it. "The bill allows for a property tax
freeze for homeowners at the expense of everyone else," he said.

HALL: Trail to be built
Construction will begin in January on an eight-mile mountain biking trail on 200
acres of the Chicopee Woods Agricultural Center. The Gainesville Southern
Off-Road Bicycle Association signed an agreement with Chicopee Woods last week
outlining the responsibilities of both groups in building and maintaining the
trails. The association will provide volunteer building and design crews.

HENRY: Consulting firm chosen
County commissioners picked a Norcross firm, United Consulting, to help correct
a contaminated groundwater problem on old gas station property the county wants
to use as it expands its courthouse. The courthouse expansion plan includes the
old gas station site at 2 Atlanta St. in downtown McDonough.

ROCKDALE: School Web site updated
The Rockdale County school system has updated its Web site and added more e-
mail access to principals and schools, a summary of board meetings, a picture of
the site for the planned new elementary school and construction updates. Interim
Superintendent Ruel Parker said there is more to come and encourages residents
to stay tuned. The Web site is www.rockdale.k12.ga.us.

GEORGIA: Runoff for Senate seat
Former Savannah Alderman Dana Braun and former state Rep. Regina Thomas
qualified Tuesday for a runoff in a special election to claim the state Senate
District 2 seat vacated by Diana Harvey Johnson of Savannah. Johnson resigned
last month after being convicted of mail fraud. Six candidates were on the
ballot. Braun captured 3,724 votes to 3,472 for Thomas. The runoff will be Jan.
11. The winner immediately joins the Legislature, which opens Jan. 10.

GRAPHIC: Photo
Sean Hogue of LaFayette has a companion as he waits at the Greyhound station in
Atlanta for his girlfriend to arrive from Rock Hill, S.C.  Hogue, who is legally
blind, says he always travels with one of his more than 340 teddy bears for good
luck. The only time he didn't, he says, he lost his luggage. / CHARLOTTE B.
TEAGLE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1999


                             1063 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  December 22, 1999, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: CELL GENESYS LOOKS TO END GENZYME ACQUISITION DEAL

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A surging stock market has jeopardized Genzyme Corp.'s proposed $350 million
acquisition of Cell Genesys Co., whose management yesterday asked its
shareholders to vote against the offer.

   Cell Genesys' opposition comes nine weeks after Cambridge-based Genzyme
announced plans to buy the Foster City, Calif., biotechnology company and its
gene therapy technology and extensive patent portfolio in gene activation
technology. Included in the deal was Cell Genesys' 22 percent interest in
Abgenix Inc., a publicly traded biopharmaceutical company based in Fremont,
Calif.   Abgenix was trading at $39 a share nine weeks ago and accounted for
$129 million of the $350 million deal.

   Since, Abgenix shares have soared after the company announced several new
research agreements. The stock reached a record high of $119.50 on Friday and
closed yesterday at $112. That makes Cell Genesys' stake worth $371.5 million.

   As a result, Cell Genesys's board withdrew its support for the deal, saying
it isn't in the best interest of its shareholders. In a statement, Cell Genesys
said it has attempted to negotiate a "mutual termination of the merger agreement
with Genzyme but was unable to do so."

   Abgenix was spun out of Cell Genesys in 1996 and its chairman, Dr. Stephen A.
Sherwin, is also chairman and chief executive of Cell Genesys.

   Under the terms of the Oct. 18 merger agreement, Cell Genesys must pay a $15
million termination fee to cancel the deal or hold a meeting of stockholders to
vote on Genzyme's proposed acquisition. Yesterday, the company said it would
hold a shareholders meeting by early February.

   "The two companies could not agree on how to interpret the market
volatility," said Caren Arnstein, Genzyme's vice president of corporate
communications, adding that the Cambridge company was not prepared to make a
higher offer.

   Lehman Brothers analyst Anthony Butler said he believes the Genzyme-Cell
Genesys deal is still salvageable.

   "The frothy stock market is the cause for now, but there are a lot of
benefits to this deal for both Genzyme and Cell Genesys," he said.

   Cell Genesys's extensive patents and know-how are designed to enhance
Genzyme's own gene therapy plans and protect it against rivals using another
technology called gene activation, which uses human instead of animal cells to
make drugs.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge and Genzyme are in a tight race to
develop a drug to treat Fabry's disease, a rare genetic disorder. The only major
difference between each company's drug is in the manufacturing process - Genzyme
using a more traditional biotech method while Transkaryotic uses gene
activation.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1999


                             1064 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: Of Mice and Genes: A Merger Is Killed by Soaring Valuation

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 21

BODY:

   Abgenix Inc. has a valuable mouse, and today its roar was heard.

   Cell Genesys, a gene therapy company, announced that its directors had
rescinded their recommendation that the company be sold to the Genzyme General
Corporation for $350 million in stock.

    The reason is that Cell Genesys's 19 percent of Abgenix, worth about $130
million when the merger with Genzyme General was announced in October, has
nearly tripled in value, to about $370 million. That is more than Genzyme would
pay for all of Cell Genesys.

   Shares of Abgenix, which is based in Fremont, Calif., have soared because of
investor enthusiasm for its XenoMouse technology, which modifies the genes in a
line of mice so they can produce human antibodies rather than mouse antibodies.

   Monoclonal antibodies are versions of the proteins used by the body to fight
disease-causing agents and are highly promising as drugs. But mouse antibodies
do not work well as drugs because the patient's immune system attacks them as
foreign invaders. Abgenix, whose technology is not used in any monoclonal
antibodies now on the market, says its antibodies are fully human. It says 15
companies, including the drug giant Pfizer, have agreed to use its technology to
make 20 different drugs, the first of which will enter clinical trials next
year. Two antibodies from Abgenix itself are already in clinical trials -- one
for cancer and one for psoriasis, the skin disease.

   On Monday, Abgenix said it had agreed to pay $47 million to gain exclusive
rights to XenoMouse from a joint venture partner, Japan Tobacco Inc. Abgenix
shares closed today at $112, up $5.25. The stock was at $40 when the Genzyme
acquisition of Cell Genesys was announced.

   Abgenix, which does not expect to be profitable for two more years, was spun
off from Cell Genesys in 1996. Genzyme General, part of the Genzyme Corporation
of Cambridge, Mass., was interested in Cell Genesys for its gene therapy
technology, not its stake in Abgenix. "They didn't even mention us on the
conference call" announcing the acquisition,Kurt W. Leutzinger, chief financial
officer of Abgenix, said today.

   But as Abgenix shares have risen, the deal became "untenable," said Jim
McCamant, editor of Medical Technology Stock Letter. Though Genzyme does not
want to give up the acquisition, he said it would probably drop its bid or
perhaps agree to pay a higher price.

   Investors, sensing that Genzyme would have to renegotiate, had already bid
Cell Genesys stock higher than the $10 a share that Genzyme was supposed to pay.
Today, however, Cell Genesys shares fell 43.75 cents, to $10.875, a sign that
some investors think the deal will collapse. Genzyme General shares rose
$3.8125, or 10 percent, to $42.

   Cell Genesys said in a news release today that it could not negotiate a
mutual termination of the merger agreement and thus had no choice but to
schedule a shareholder vote on the deal in February and to hope shareholders
reject it.

   Bo Piela, a spokesman for Genzyme, said the companies could not agree on how
to handle the volatility of Abgenix shares.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1999


                             1065 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Bell Atlantic Seen Entering The Long-Distance Market
Bell Atlantic today will become the first of the regional Bell companies allowed
into the $80 billion long-distance market, signaling a new era of competition in
the communications industry, people close to the decision said.

   The announcement, which is expected from the Federal Communications
Commission, would allow Bell Atlantic to sell long-distance services to the 6.6
million households it serves in New York State. Approval would mark the first
time since the breakup of AT&T 15 years ago that millions of consumers would be
able to get both local and long-distance phone services from an AT&T offspring.
Page A1.


   Ex-Investment Bank Chief Charged
Last spring, the respected investment bank Keefe, Bruyette & Woods mysteriously
scrubbed plans for a stock offering -- and refused to say why. The reason became
clear yesterday when federal prosecutors in Manhattan charged the firm's former
chairman, James J. McDermott Jr., with insider trading in a case in which he was
accused of leaking information about potential bank deals to a pornographic
movie star.  A1.

Stocks Surge on Decision by Fed
Two broad stock market gauges leaped to records, with the Nasdaq gaining 127.28
points, its biggest one-day gain ever, to 3,911.15, and the Standard & Poor's
500-stock index climbing 15.34 points, to 1,433.43. The Dow Jones industrial
average also was higher, closing at 11,200.54, up 56.27 points. The bulk of the
gains came after the Federal Reserve decided to leave interest rates alone.
C14.

Government bond yields were down moderately but stayed near their two-year
highs. The yield on the 30-year issue rose to 6.46 percent from 6.44 percent on
Monday.  C14.

Goldman Sachs Posts Record Profit
Goldman Sachs Group said it posted record profit of $723 million, or $1.48 a
diluted share, in its most recent quarter, beating Wall Street's forecasts after
suffering a slight loss a year earlier when a financial crisis rippled around
the globe.  C2.

F.T.C. Lets Nuclear Ads Continue
The Federal Trade Commission has agreed that advertisements by the nuclear
industry made unsubstantiated claims about the benefits of nuclear power, but
the commission said the ads were a form of political speech that would be
allowed to continue.  C6.

Fraud Charged in Azerbaijan Deal
An investment promoter who made a fortune from questionable stock dealings in
his native Czech Republic has been accused of fraud in an Azerbaijan venture
that has attracted $450 million from foreign investors.  C4.

Cell Genesys Backs Off Merger
Cell Genesys, a gene therapy company, announced that its directors had rescinded
a recommendation that the company be sold to Genzyme General for $350 million in
stock. The reason is that Cell Genesys's 19 percent of Abgenix, worth about $130
million when a merger with Genezyme General was agreed to in October, has nearly
tripled in value, to about $370 million, more than Genzyme would pay for all of
Cell Genesys. Shares of Abgenix have soared because of investor enthusiasm for
its Xenomouse technology, a line of mice that have had their genes modified so
they can produce human antibodies.  C12.

New York Called Year 2000 Ready
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that New York, after spending more than $350
million, had finished checking its hundreds of computers, 11,000 traffic lights
and other equipment for any glitches and said he was confident that power,
phones, elevators, and the rest of the city's electronic and electrical
underpinnings would work when clocks switch to 2000.  B1.

SportsLine.com Sells Retailing Unit
MVP.com, a new online venture led by Michael Jordan, John Elway and Wayne
Gretzky, agreed to take over the online retailing business of SportsLine.com,
which produces the CBS SportsLine Web site.  C6.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials -- 11,200.54 up 56.27
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 6.46% up 0.02
The euro -- $1.0093 up 0.0006
The dollar -- 102.18 yen down 0.90

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1999


                             1066 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     December 21, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 003

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: Mass. General reports discovery of cancer-starving protein

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital have reported using a protein
that occurs naturally in human skin to choke off the growth of tumors in
animals.

   Thrombospondin-2 or TSP-2 is found naturally in human skin cells, but is not
found in certain tumor cells, including melanomas and human squamous cell
carcinomas, both skin cancers.

   Dr. Michael Detmer said the protein may be designed to help fight off
cancers.

   "We believe that TSP-2 is part of a natural protein system designed to
prevent the development of tumors," he said.

   In animal studies, the protein inhibited tumor growth by 90 percent, he said.

   Used with another similar protein, thrombospondin-1 or TSP-1, it stalled
tumor growth by 100 percent, he said.

   "We see the tumor cells dying," he said. "They are starving."

   Both TSP-2 and TSP-1 are found in high levels in developing blood vessels,
which suggests they are important for helping regulate the development of new
vessels.

   Detmer said it is way too early to say if and when the proteins may be able
to be tried in humans.

   "We still have a long way to go to human studies," he said.

   However, the work is helping them to understand cancers better. A key step
will be to find out why tumor cells lose the ability to make the protein and
then to try and find a way to help the cells begin making it again.

   Detmer said the protein can be given in two ways, either as a drug designed
to choke off the blood supply that feeds the tumor, or in gene therapy, where
the cells fix themselves.

   The mice trials have involved incubating the tumor cells with the gene that
expresses the protein, since producing the protein itself has been tricky, he
said.

   Detmer said future animal studies will try it against other types of tumors
besides skin cancers.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1999


                             1067 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 21, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z08

LENGTH: 1310 words

HEADLINE: A Century of Medical Milestones; Editors of the Merck Manual Assess
the Most Important Advances of the Last 100 Years

BODY:


   This year marks the 100th birthday of the widely used medical reference book
"The Merck Manual," published by the pharmaceutical giant Merck & Co.

   The manual's pocket-size first edition, printed in 1899, listed cod liver oil
as a treatment for nervousness and cocaine as a remedy for hysteria. The new
centennial edition runs 2,833 pages; its index alone is 177 pages long.

   Medicine has come a long way in 100 years.

   The editors of The Merck Manual's centennial edition have compiled a list of
the 20th century's most significant advances in medicine. Here is their Top 10.


   1. Infectious Disease Control.

   A century ago, infectious disease was the most common cause of death in the
United States. Better control of infectious disease is the biggest reason for
the added life expectancy of an American baby born today. Many scourges of the
early 20th century, such as tuberculosis, polio, gangrene and influenza, have
been held at least partly in check. The main factors include development of
antibiotics, which fight bacterial infections; improved sanitation; and a better
understanding of the human immune system.

   Not that infectious disease is no longer a threat. AIDS remains a rampant
epidemic. Tuberculosis, including types resistant to bacteria, is experiencing a
resurgence. And new threats such as Ebola virus keep showing up.


   2. Immunization.

   Mass vaccination campaigns during this century have helped control and even
wipe out common killer diseases. The smallpox virus was eradicated during the
1980s. Polio has nearly been eliminated from the United States, and incidence
has fallen by 90 percent worldwide in the past decade.

   Childhood immunization in the United States has dramatically reduced the
incidence of such diseases as diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, mumps and
measles. Currently recommended childhood vaccines include those against
hepatitis B; diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis; childhood meningitis; polio;
measles, mumps and rubella; and chickenpox.


   3. Vitamins.

   Early this century, scientists began to identify substances in food that
contain ingredients essential to life and critical to preventing diseases such
as scurvy, beriberi, fatal pernicious anemia and rickets. The list of essential
vitamins gradually grew to 13, plus vital minerals such as iron and potassium.
The 1934 edition of The Merck Manual was the first to include a table of
vitamins.

   Scientists continue to discover new benefits for "old" vitamins.

   For example, folic acid (or folate, a B vitamin) is now known to help prevent
neural tube defects such as spina bifida in infants when it is taken by women
early in pregnancy.


   4. The Framingham Heart Study.

   Since 1948, more than 5,000 adults living in or near Framingham, Mass., have
participated in one of the most important epidemiological studies in
medicine--the Framingham Heart Study. Information obtained over the years from
several generations of Framingham residents has led to a greater understanding
of cardiovascular disease and its risk factors--such as cigarette smoking and
high blood pressure.

   While heart disease remains the leading killer of Americans, death rates from
cardiovascular illness have fallen steadily during the past 50 years.

   The section on cardiovascular disease in the centennial Merck Manual includes
nearly 300 pages, more than than entire first edition of the manual.


   5. Drugs By Design

   Until this century, medical drugs were discovered largely through
serendipity. Many well-known early drugs--such as aspirin, digitalis and
morphine--were made from flowers, herbs, seeds or tree bark.

   With better knowledge of chemistry and the human body, pharmaceutical
research became less random. By the 1970s, scientists began to design medicines
by deliberately manipulating molecules to act upon a specific part of the body's
cells to elicit a specific response. The first drugs designed in this manner
were propranolol, a beta blocker for the treatment of chest pain and high blood
pressure, and cimetidine, an anti-ulcer medicine.


   6. Molecular Genetics.

   No field of scientific research has more potential for improving human health
than molecular genetics. The first test for genetic defects in fetuses was
developed in 1966. Genetic engineering arose in the 1970s as a new way to
develop and produce insulin for diabetics, along with a widening variety of
other drugs. A technique known as polymerase chain reaction, invented in the
1980s, made it possible to create millions of copies of specific genes. That
helped improve detection of viruses and cancers and the matching of donors and
recipients of organ transplants. It also led to the Human Genome Project, the
ongoing effort to identify and map every one of the estimated 80,000 genes that
provide chemical instructions for building and maintaining a human body.

   Molecular genetics forms the basis for the still-unrealized promise of gene
therapy: the treatment of diseases by manipulating or replacing genes.


   7. Health Care Consumerism.

   The doctor-patient relationship used to be mainly a one-way street, where
doctors dispensed medical information and patients followed those directions
without question.

   Today, by gathering information from libraries, the news media, patient
advocacy and support groups and the Internet, patients have become increasingly
knowledgeable about their own health and the treatments available to them. They
are more likely than ever to involve themselves directly in medical decisions.


   8. Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment.

   Even a generation ago, doctors could offer few treatments and little hope for
a patient with cancer. Since then, an explosion of knowledge has improved
medicine's ability to understand, detect, diagnose and treat cancers.

   While cancer remains the nation's second-leading cause of death (after heart
disease), the death rate from all cancers has edged down in the past decade,
reversing a longtime trend. The probability that a person with cancer will be
alive at least five years after diagnosis has also increased markedly.

   "Most cancers are potentially curable if detected at an early stage,"
according to the latest Merck Manual.


   9. Organ Transplantation.

   The first successful kidney transplant was done more than 40 years ago,
between identical twins. Advances in surgery, medication and tissue typing have
reduced the risk of organ rejection and opened up the possibilities of
transplantation to a growing number of patients. By 1995, one-year survival
rates in kidney transplant patients reached 98 percent.

   The first successful heart and liver transplants were performed in 1967, and
surgeons have also learned how to transplant lungs, pancreases and corneas,
among other organs. Only the shortage of donor organs has held in check the
growth of transplantation in recent years.


   10. Diagnostic Technology.

   At the beginning of this century, a physical exam involved taking a medical
history and a pulse, but not much else. Today's physical involves a variety of
diagnostic tools--including blood tests, the blood pressure cuff and
electrocardiograms to record the pace and rhythm of the heartbeat. Other
diagnostic tools include Pap smears to detect cervical cancer and an array of
techniques by which doctors peer inside the body without surgery: ultrasound, CT
scans, MRI scans and mammography. These tests not only help diagnose disease but
also help identify risk factors for conditions that have not developed yet.

    Children attending a school in Los Angeles in 1955 were among the first to
be inoculated with the Salk vaccine for polio. South Africa's Christiaan
Barnard, left, studies a model of the heart with surgeons Michael DeBakey and
Adrian Kantrowitz shortly after Barnard completed the first successful heart
transplant in 1967.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1999


                             1068 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 20, 1999, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1576 words

HEADLINE: CRICTICS CLAIM PATENTS STIFLE GENE TESTING

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   At eight months, Sherri Epstein's daughter Rachel was falling behind the
normal milestones of development. She couldn't hold her large head up or roll
over; she didn't even babble normally.

   The diagnosis was months in coming: it turned out that Rachel has a rare and
devastating genetic disorder called Canavan disease that ravages the brain and
nervous system and usually leads to death in the first few years of life.    The
disease affects about 1 in 6,500 births to couples of Ashkenazi Jewish
background, like the Epsteins. If both parents carry the Canavan gene, there is
a 25 percent chance a child they produce will have the disease.

   A recently developed gene test could have identified Epstein and her husband
Ken as healthy carriers of the gene: it also could have been used for prenatal
diagnoses. But only in 1998, after Epstein was pregnant, did a professional
organization advise doctors they should offer the Canavan test to high-risk
couples.

   "I never want another parent to feel the way we feel," says Epstein, who,
along with other Canavan families, are spreading the word about the disease and
the existence of the test.

   But the Canavan test and several others, as well as those yet to be
developed, are at the center of an intense and growing dispute over who should
control and profit from them.

   The basic issue is whether a 1980 Supreme Court decision allowing patents on
living organisms is unfairly enabling private companies to monopolize specific
gene tests, barring other labs from performing them or charging what critics say
are excessive royalty payments.

   Rachel, now 14 months old, has the typical signs of Canavan disease: poor
muscle tone makes her "floppy;" she can't sit up on her own, stand, or walk, and
so far she has no speech.  "She's like a Raggedy Ann doll, right down to the
curly red hair," says Epstein, who lives in Worcester. Due to a gene mutation,
toxic substances build up in the brain in Canavan infants, causing disability
and retardation, blindness, seizures and, for many, an early death.

   There is no treatment; however, scientists are testing gene therapy in some
Canavan children, and Epstein hopes that Rachel can be included when the
privately funded experiment resumes next spring.

   The gene test "is an absolute must" to prevent the devastating disease, says
Dr. Debby Duitsch, a Newton physician and parent of a Canavan child.

   However, the rights to perform the Canavan test are in the hands of Miami
Children's Hospital, which received a patent on the test, developed there in
1997. Canavan families and a number of medical geneticists are unhappy with the
hospital's plans for commercializing the test through limited licensing and
charging a $12.50 royalty fee on every test.

   The patent gives the hospital the right to license the test to other
institutions at a charge; the patent doesn't expire for 17 years, which means
that other hospitals or labs either negotiate a license with Miami Children's or
they can't offer the test.

   The dispute over gene patents comes at a time when the federally run Human
Genome Project and competitors in the private sector are rushing to finish
decoding the entire set of human genes - the roughly 100,000 pieces of DNA that
dramatically influence health and disease.

   A number of labs funded by the government are putting the DNA code into a
public database as quickly as it's deciphered.  But the chief competitor in the
private sector, Celera Genomics Inc. of Rockville, Md., is withholding its gene
discoveries until it can file patent applications on information it believes
will be commercially valuable in developing a wide array of new gene-based tests
and treatments. In October, Celera announced that it had filed patent
applications on 6,500 genes or partial genes.

   The Cambridge-based Committee for Responsible Genetics is leading a campaign
to get Congress to reverse the policy on patenting life forms, which, they say,
are "part of the natural world into which we are all born." And organizations
like the American College of Medical Genetics, whose members do much of the
testing and treating of patients with genetic diseases, are going on record
opposing the gene patents.

   "This is a unique situation where physicians [genetic laboratory directors]
are being stopped from practicing medicine" by the restrictive licensing of
patents, contends Jon Mertz, a bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The view from the biotech industry, however, is that what is being patented
"is not the DNA inside someone that's walking around," but a process or product
based on that DNA, says Ivor Elfiri of the law firm Mintz, Levin. Antibiotics,
he points out, come from natural organisms, too, but are not patented.

   From the viewpoint of the medical genetics field, however, the stampede to
patent genes neglects the fact that the public paid for much of the original
gene research.

   "I would like to see society benefit from its investment in the human genome
project," said Dr. Arthur Beaudet, a medical geneticist at Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston.

   "And if royalties are preventing people from benefiting [by reducing access
to the fruits of gene research], then I think Congress ought to take a look" at
possibly changing the law.

   In recent months, Miami Children's has begun enforcing its patent. It has
restricted the use of the test to about a dozen labs with which it is
negotiating licenses, and placing a cap on the number of tests a lab can do. In
addition, the hospital is charging the $12.50 royalty on every test carried out.
The licensed lab has to pay the fee out of its own pocket or pass on the cost to
patients.  The test costs consumers or their insurers anywhere from $60 to $300.

   "If every gene test carries an additional royalty cost of $10 or $15 we're
going to be in terrible trouble," said Judith Tsipis, who heads the genetic
counseling program at Brandeis University and who had a son die from Canavan.
Gene tests are proliferating quickly and in the future, she said, large numbers
of people may be tested for hundreds of mutations, which means an additional $10
per test could add up to thousands of dollars.

   "We are extremely concerned that patents will be restrictive and costly and
will limit access to testing," said Dr. Rodney Howell, president of the American
College of Medical Genetics, speaking at a meeting earlier this month of the New
England Regional Genetics Group in Durham, N.H.

   It's not only worries about access that disturb the opponents of gene
patents: it's the fundamental concept.  "I think the idea of patenting a gene is
absolutely outrageous - how can someone claim it as belonging to them?" said
Duitsch, the Newton physician and parent of a Canavan child. "It seems to me
you're talking about people's lives here."

   The disease, which was first identified in the 1930s, is also known as
"spongy degeneration of the brain." But not until the 1990s was the mutant gene
discovered at Miami Children's, and only in 1998 did the American College of
Obstetrics and Gynecology advise its members that it should be offered routinely
when both members of a couple were of Ashkenazi ethnicity. Unfortunately, the
advisory came too late for the Epsteins.

   Now, the patent issue is clouding the test and a number of other gene tests
for neurological and other diseases.

   "Canavan is just falling in line with a lot of other tests that we've been
stopped from doing," said Dr. Debra Leonard, director of the molecular pathology
laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania. In some cases, the royalty fees
are excessive, she says, robbing laboratories of their incentive to offer the
test, and in other cases the patent holder has exclusively licensed a single lab
to do the test.

   Other tests that patent-holders have monopolized, she says, include ones for
a mutant gene that confers an elevated risk for Alzheimer's disease; at least
two genes for neurodegenerative diseases, and BRCA1 and BRCA2, inherited breast
cancer genes.

   Leonard and others in the field say that excluding all but a one or a few
laboratories from doing a test is anticompetitive, often leads to poorer service
- more errors, slower turnaround time - and prevents other lab specialists from
improving the tests and making them cheaper.

   To be sure, hospital officials say they want to recoup part of the $5 million
they says they spent in developing the test.  That is, after all, one of the
reasons inventors are awarded patents.

   The other goal, by licensing only a few test providers, is to funnel the
relatively small number of Canavan tests done each year to a few selected
hospitals, including one dominant commercial lab that would become a "market
leader." Such a lab, says the hospital, which has not yet selected a candidate,
would be required to maintain high standards and to underwrite an effort to
spread the word about Canavan disease and the test.

   "We don't want to limit testing, we want to expand it," says Marc Golden,
president of Golden Group Intellectual Capital LLC of New York, who is the
hospital's attorney.

   Thus far the hospital has declined to drop or lower the royalty fee or change
its licensing practices, but has agreed to discuss these issues with Canavan
advocates on Jan. 20.

   For further information on Canavan disease and gene therapy trials, contact
the Canavan Research Fund, 16 School Street, Rye, NY 10580.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1999


                             1069 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1999, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 3184 words

HEADLINE: Using Gene Tests to Customize Medical Treatment

SERIES: TAILOR-MADE MEDICINE: First of two articles

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

DATELINE: CINCINNATI

BODY:

   Warren Wegele is on the front line of a medical revolution.

   After doing a simple blood test recently, doctors at the University of
Cincinnati Medical Center told Mr. Wegele, a 65-year-old former salesman for air
compressor companies, that he had inherited a tiny alteration in one of his
genes. A certain chemical unit out of the string of three billion that make up
the mass of DNA in his cells is different from the norm.

    The alteration -- found in 5 percent of the population -- would normally be
of no more medical significance to Mr. Wegele (pronounced WEG-lee) than his
black hair or burly physique. But it translated into a potential medical
catastrophe for Mr. Wegele when he became ill with congestive heart failure, a
disease in which the heart muscle no longer contracts vigorously. On average,
patients with the condition live 5 years after they become ill; some live 10
years or more.

   But people with anomalies like Mr. Wegele's altered gene, doctors told him,
usually live only one to two years. For these people, the drugs used to treat
the disease may be of little help.

   "I don't accept it," Mr. Wegele said of the bad news doctors gave him about
his gene, which directs heart cells to make a crucial protein. After all, he
argued, as he lay in his hospital bed, "I've never really gotten ill, and I've
always recovered from everything instantly."

   But Mr. Wegele's former vigor was beside the point. Clearly ill, he had spent
weeks in the hospital, growing sicker by the day, waiting for a heart to become
available for a transplant -- the only way, his doctors said, to save his life.

   The revolutionary new genetics that predicted Mr. Wegele's dire circumstances
is not about genes that confer generally good health or health that is generally
poor. Instead, it is about a collection of common single-molecule variations in
genetic material that are normally no more important than having curly or
straight hair or brown or blue eyes, but might be revealing when people become
ill.

   Scientists believe humans have hundreds of thousands of these genetic
variations, and drug companies are avidly searching for them, convinced that
they can use collections of them to identify patients who will benefit from
drugs, patients who will not, and patients who will suffer troubling side
effects.

   Eventually, they say, this research will lead them into an era of tailor-made
medicine.

   So far, testing for such genetic variants is being done only at a few medical
centers as part of experimental trials. Experts predict a gradual increase in
such testing as the roster of variations is compiled and research accelerates.
They predict that the first personalized drug prescriptions will appear in a few
years and many more will roll out over the next two decades.

   At first, the advanced genetic testing will probably be used for refining
drugs for the more common diseases like asthma, arthritis, heart disease, high
blood pressure and migraines. Eventually, experts say, it could be applied to
virtually any drug for any disease.

   Drug prices could increase, some drug company executives say, but they add
that drugs will be so much more effective that they will be worth more to
patients.

   Of course, optimistic predictions of scientists and drug companies can go
awry, and until the revolution in pharmacology takes place, it is hard to know
if the glowing predictions are accurate. So far, only a relatively few genetic
variants have been found and only a small number of these have been shown to
have medical consequences.

   In Mr. Wegele's case, there was no good drug to slow his disease. But that
did not mean he had not been helped. Based on their data from a continuing study
that now includes about 500 patients with congestive heart failure, doctors at
the University of Cincinnati hospital said that the only long-term hope for
people with Mr. Wegele's genetic variant was a heart transplant.

   "We test everyone who has congestive heart failure," said Dr. Stephen
Liggett, a lung specialist and molecular geneticist at the University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, who discovered the genetic variant and its
effects on congestive heart failure. Dr. Liggett said it was his opinion that
those who had the genetic variation, like Mr. Wegele, "should be put on the
transplant list early and they should have more aggressive drug therapy."

   On Dec. 9, Mr. Wegele received a new heart. A week later, Dr. Liggett said,
Mr. Wegele was well enough to be sent home.

The Scientists
From Impossible Task To Reasonable Goal

   Five years ago, when he was giving a technical talk to scientists, Dr. Eric
Lander had a eureka moment. Dr. Lander, who is director of the Center for Genome
Research at the Whitehead Institute in Boston, had assumed that it would be
hopeless to even dream of finding the common variants in human genes. Gene
alterations -- single chemical changes -- occur by accident, at random. Those
with an immediate effect on health or fertility would be retained or eliminated
by evolution.

   The other alterations would be neutral -- they would ordinarily make no
difference to the person -- and so they would slowly become common as they were
passed from generation to generation.

   With about 100,000 human genes and six billion people on earth, the number of
common variations could be enormous. But, Dr. Lander realized, the human race
numbered just 10,000 to 100,000 people as recently as 7,000 generations ago and
a population that small would have only a modest number of common genetic
variants, perhaps a few hundred thousand.

   "There hasn't been enough time for the common variants to build up," Dr.
Lander said. For each gene, there might be two, or three, common variations at
one or two positions in the gene sequence, not hundreds.

   "It becomes a finite problem," Dr. Lander said. "It is within reach."

   That insight converted him into one of the pioneers in the search for genetic
variants that can predict individual differences in responses to illness and
responses to drugs, a field known as pharmacogenetics.

   Around the same time Dr. Lander was realizing that each gene might have just
a few variants, Dr. Liggett, then a researcher at Duke University, was starting
to see what such variants might mean for patients.

   Dr. Liggett was intrigued by one particular gene, the beta-2 adrenergic
receptor gene. It directs cells to make a protein that helps relax muscles in
the airways of the lungs and contract muscles in the heart. Drugs for asthma
attach themselves to the protein, setting off a cascade of biochemical events
inside the cells that makes the airways dilate. Drugs for congestive heart
failure also attach themselves to the protein, this time making heart muscles
contract.

   In studies with cells grown in the laboratory, Dr. Liggett discovered that
the gene that codes for production of the beta-2 adrenergic receptor protein
seemed exquisitely tuned by its structure. A change in just a single chemical
along the gene's length could make the protein work slightly better, or slightly
worse.

   The next step was to find out if this could occur in humans.

   Dr. Liggett and his colleagues recruited 100 healthy people and began
deciphering the chemical sequence of each person's beta adrenergic receptor
gene. After 18 months, he got his answer. There were three different variants of
the gene. All three worked fine.

   Nonetheless, Dr. Liggett's mind raced. Maybe this was why some people respond
better than others to asthma drugs. Maybe it was why some people taking asthma
drugs quickly become resistant to them and others did not. Maybe it was also
tied to the way patients with congestive heart failure responded to drugs.

   "A lot of people told me that what we had found was unimportant," Dr. Liggett
said. "They were wrong."

   Last year, in a paper in The Journal of Clinical Investigations, Dr. Liggett
and his colleagues showed how the genetic variants affected disease prognosis in
congestive heart failure. Reporting on tests of 259 patients who had come to the
University of Cincinnati to be evaluated for possible heart transplants, the
researchers found that those with one particular beta-2 adrenergic receptor gene
variant did far worse than those with another. A third group was in the middle.

   Within 100 days after they arrived at the hospital, about 60 percent of the
patients with an isoleucine amino acid at position 164 in the protein chain were
dead or required a heart transplant. That is the variant that Mr. Wegele has.

   Patients with a different amino acid, threonine, at position 164, had a much
better outcome. About 95 percent of them were alive after 100 days without
having had a heart transplant, and half were still alive 900 days after they
first arrived at the hospital.

   Other changes in the gene appear to be important in asthma.

   In a recent small study conducted at the University of Tennessee at Memphis,
Dr. Julie A. Johnson, Dr. John J. Lima and their colleagues found that asthma
patients who inherited from both parents the amino acid arginine in position 16
of the beta-2 adrenergic receptor protein responded best to the popular asthma
drug albuterol. The drug increased the amount of air they could expel from their
lungs by 18 percent. Those who inherited from either parent the chemical glycine
in that position had just a 4.9 percent increase in the air they expelled.

   "We've always known that some people respond better to albuterol," Dr.
Liggett said. "But we've never known why."

   Now the challenge is to tailor drug treatments to help those who have genetic
variants that spell a poor prognosis.

   "That," said Dr. Liggett, "is the key to pharmacogenetics."

The Drug Companies
First-Time Step In Joint Research

   Hidden in the rolling countryside near Hopewell, N.J., in a cluster of brick
buildings once owned by Mobil Oil is Bristol-Myers Squibb's budding center of
pharmacogenomics research. There, in echoing offices still under construction,
Dr. Elliott Sigal makes bold plans to expand his staff and investments in what
he believes will be the future of the drug industry.

   When executives like Dr. Sigal look at the pharmaceutical industry, they
groan. One out of 7,500 compounds that looks promising in the laboratory
actually gets to the market. Only 3 out of 10 that are marketed make any money
for the company.

   "Our attrition rate is a plague for the industry," Dr. Sigal said, referring
to the many drugs that fail.

   Typically, said Dr. Sigal, who is Bristol-Myer's senior vice president for
early discovery and applied technology, major drug companies introduce one
innovative drug into the market each year -- if they are lucky. For many drugs,
he added, only half of the patients who take them respond.

   Some drugs are worse than that. People with conditions like high blood
pressure, for example, often find themselves trying one drug after another
before they find a medication that works for them.

   Other drugs are rarely used because they cause side effects in a small
proportion of patients.

   For example, a drug like Glaxo Wellcome's Lamictal, which is used to treat
epilepsy, can cause itching and rashes. It can only be used by patients whose
doctors are willing to start with a small dose and gradually increase it over a
period of months, watching to see if a rash develops.

   "When most general practitioners see that a drug needs dose escalation, they
use something else," said Dr. Allen Roses, a neurologist who is vice president
worldwide and director of genetics at Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C. "But it's a great
drug."

   Dr. Roses and others emphasize that if genetic variants could be used to
identify who would respond to a drug and who would have side effects, the
benefits for companies and patients would be obvious. Companies could sell more
drugs, more efficiently, by marketing them to those who would be helped. And
patients would get drugs that worked for them.

   For companies like Glaxo Wellcome and Bristol-Myers Squibb, as well as
Pfizer, the path is clear. Last April, they and seven other large drug companies
joined forces with the Wellcome Trust, a medical research charity, and several
leading academic centers, to compare human DNA segments and find the places
where variations occur. The companies will use these variations, called single
nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs, and pronounced "snips," to try to develop the
precisely targeted drugs of the future. Their goal is to identify 300,000 such
landmarks along the human DNA within two years and make the results public.

   On Nov. 21, the group, called the SNP Consortium, published on the Internet
its first group of SNP's, identifying 2,279 of them and describing their precise
sites on human chromosomes.

   But more is involved than just finding SNP's. Companies are also worried
about the bottom line: How much will it cost to find these alterations in genes?

   Today, it costs $150 or more to identify each of a person's S.N.P.'s, said
Dr. B. Michael Silber, who directs pharmacogenetics research at Pfizer. The
goal, he said, is to get the price down to pennies, which he called feasible.

   Even a man who describes himself as "leading the way in caution" is convinced
that SNP analyses will become cheap enough to be useful. Dr. Paul Spence, the
executive director of biotechnology for Searle, the pharmaceutical division of
Monsanto, said that before he committed himself to SNP analyses, he actually sat
down with pen and paper and worked out the economics. Like Dr. Spence, he
concluded that cost would not be an obstacle for long.

   As for Dr. Roses of Glaxo Wellcome, as early as September of 1997, he
persuaded his company to begin storing DNA samples from every patient in most of
its drug studies. The idea is that when the SNP's are found, the company can go
back and ask: What patterns of these molecular markers correlate with what sort
of drug responses? If one pattern is associated with a drug's efficacy and
another with bad side effects, the company would consider marketing the drug
only to those with the pattern that predicts a good response.

   To protect patients' privacy, Dr. Roses said, their names and identifying
features are not stored with their DNA.

   Glaxo Wellcome plans to enter the pharmacogenetics market with a drug that is
already on the market, offering patients a SNP test before they take the drug to
see if they are likely to respond. Then the company plans to move on and use the
SNP profiles as part of drug development. In a few years, drug company
executives predict, SNP tests will be available for several drugs and several
diseases. Eventually, most drugs will be sold with a SNP test, companies say.

   Companies expect to use a "SNP chip" for testing. It is a device that can be
used to scan a sample of DNA for specific genetic sequences or anomalies.

   In the future, drug company executives predict, SNP research will reward them
with hundreds of new drugs, including many that will be unlike any on the market
today. With that in mind, Dr. Sigal said, his company has a new business goal.
Rather than settling for the current pattern of one entirely new drug on the
market each year, the company aims to have three.

   "Many companies see this as the way of the future." Dr. Sigal said.

The Ethics
Discriminatory Risks In Genetic Testing

   Mention genes and diseases to many ethicists and they will see a dark side to
a bright future. Will people be getting information about their medical
conditions that they would rather not know? Can their privacy be protected?

   Few are more acutely aware of these problems than Dr. Francis Collins, the
director of the National Human Genome Research Institute, the federal effort to
map the human genes. From its inception, the genome project has had ethicists as
consultants, and it has had to answer piercing questions about the consequences
of unveiling what could be intimate genetic information.

   While Dr. Collins is excited by the prospect of pharmacogenetics, he sees
situations in which it could raise privacy problems. Knowing if someone will
respond to a drug, or have a side effect, can tell something about that person's
susceptibility to disease.

   For example, scientists recently reported that a SNP pattern in a
cholesterol-metabolizing gene determined who would respond to the cholesterol
lowering drug pravastatin. But the people who respond to pravastatin are also
the ones who will have the worst prognosis if they do not get their cholesterol
levels down. Insurers might use that genetic information to deny or limit
coverage.

   "You won't be able to separate the reason you did the test from the response
to it," Dr. Collins said.

   The solution, he added, is to pass effective laws to prevent genetic
discrimination. And, he said, "We are pretty close to seeing that come to pass."

   Although genetics always gives rise to ethical concerns, the debate over
pharmacogenetics has so far been muted, with even some longtime critics of
genetic testing saying that they think it will be a blessing to doctors and
patients.

   "I'm all for the research," said Dr. Michael Kaback, a geneticist at the
University of California in San Diego, who has often criticized genetic testing.
"I think it's great."

   His main concern, he said, is that companies will promise too much too soon,
turning the public bitter and cynical. "Then a whiplash occurs and you end up
curtailing progress," Dr. Kaback said.

   Dr. Roses noted that the pharmacogenetics approach might not provide people
with information about disease susceptibility or their medical futures. While a
genetic variant may make a difference in whether a person with asthma, for
example, responds to albuterol, it does not have any bearing on whether that
person will get asthma in the first place.

   The genetic variant is predicting individual physiological responses to drug
molecules, not the biochemical processes that caused the disease being treated.
And when SNP patterns are analyzed together, as a sort of DNA bar code, they
will predict drug responses without revealing anything about the actual genes on
which the SNP's occur.

   Bartha Maria Knoppers, a law professor at the University of Montreal, who is
chairwoman of the international ethics committee of the Human Genome
Organization, an international organization of scientists who are working on
finding the sequence of the human genome, said she thinks that the benefits of
the new approach are overwhelming.

   "People will probably look with some suspicion on claims that this will
ultimately be beneficial because it is in our cultural milieu to say 'Oh,
another marketing ploy,"' Ms. Knoppers said.

   But "I think that, provided we proceed with caution, that it can be very
beneficial," she added. "There are drugs that don't work for many people, there
are drugs that are dangerous. I would think that making drugs more therapeutic
and safer surely is an ethical goal."

Next in Business Day: Makers of chips used in DNA analysis are rushing to
capitalize on the move toward tailor-made drugs.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: For Warren Wegele, an alteration in one of his genes caused the
treatment that he received for congestive heart failure to be ineffective. "I've
never really gotten ill, and I've always recovered from everything instantly,"
said Mr. Wegele, who eventually had a heart transplant. (Photographs by Mark
Lyons for The New York Times); Dr. Stephen Liggett's discovery of the genetic
variant helped explain why patients responded differently to treatment. (pg.
A34)

Chart: "Tiny Changes, Big Effect"
Chart shows ways Gene therapy can customize medical treatment. (pg. A34)

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1999


                             1070 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 20, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 2228 words

HEADLINE: A GENETIC PRIMER STORIES ABOUT GENES AND SCIENTISTS' WORK WITH THEM
CAN BE BEWILDERING. A BASIC Q & A MAY HELP.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Genes are big news.

   A $3 billion government project to "map" genes is producing landmark
achievements.

   A University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trial gone wrong has killed a
teenager from Arizona.

   Protesters around the world are warning about the dangers of genetically
engineered food.

   If you've been feeling the need to sign up for Biology 101 - again - to make
sense of it all, we'll try to bring you up to speed:

   Where, exactly, are my genes?

   They are neatly coiled up inside your cells, housed in a little chamber
called the cell nucleus. The genes are segments of invisibly thin, stringy stuff
known as DNA.

   That DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, if you must know) is packed into little
bundles called chromosomes - so tightly wound that if you took the DNA from a
single, microscopic cell and stretched it out, it would reach about six feet.

   In detail, DNA is like a string with four different kinds of beads - four
different chemical structures nicknamed A, T, G, and C - strung along in
seemingly endless succession.

   The sequences of these A's, T's, G's, and C's spell out a vast library of
information written in a language that scientists are working to understand.
(Actually, the DNA is a double-stranded chain, with every A stuck to a T and
every G stuck to a C. That's why it is often called a double helix.)

   The code letters spell out recipes for making a host of biological molecules
called proteins - pretty much everything needed to make and run your body. Each
protein recipe is called a gene. And those six feet of DNA in each cell hold
about 80,000 genes.

   That vast store of information is what makes it possible for a single cell -
a fertilized egg - to turn into a full-fledged human being.

   Though scientists sometimes refer to genes as the cause of disease, what they
really mean is that misprints in genes cause things in the body to go awry. Some
make it impossible for the body to produce some key ingredient for normal
existence - blood-clotting proteins, for example, or enzymes needed to digest
substances in food, or disease-fighting molecules in the immune system.

   Other misprints can make it more likely a person will get cancer later in
life.

   How does the body follow these recipes?

   You carry around a staggering amount of DNA. Every cell in your body gets its
own six feet of the stuff.

   Though the entire library is in every cell, different types of cells use
different genes - certain genes in the pancreas are activated to make insulin,
for example, and genes in brain cells trigger the process to make dopamine.

   Since your body has around 5 trillion cells, that means you are carrying
around a grand total of 3 billion miles of DNA. (That's enough to stretch from
the Earth to the sun - 30 times.)

   What is gene therapy?

   It's not that hard to tinker with the genes of a plant or animal when it's
still at a very early stage of development - a fertilized egg. At that point,
any change you make will be copied billions of times as the cell divides and the
organism grows.

   But once you're born, the task gets trickier. If there's something wrong with
a gene on your DNA, it's wrong in every cell.

   Scientists have discovered a way to get a few good copies of specific genes
into specific cells. They use viruses - the same basic organisms that can make
you sick. Viruses, to the chagrin of human beings, have the ability to invade
millions of cells and interject their own DNA.

   In gene therapy, doctors use what they believe are harmless viruses -
generally cold viruses with much of their own DNA replaced with DNA that
contains the desired gene. By injecting a serum full of these viruses,
scientists attempt to "infect" the patient with desired genes. The new genes, in
theory, take over the functions of the defective genes.

   Over the last decade, researchers have tested gene therapy on more than 4,000
people with little success - but also little harm.

   In September, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died when scientists at the
University of Pennsylvania tested a form of gene therapy on him as part of a
trial. Gelsinger suffered from a genetic disorder that caused toxic ammonia to
build up in his system if he consumed foods with protein.

   The trial was designed simply to test the safety of the procedure - the doses
that he and other patients were given were too small to cure anyone.

   Other patients with the disease came through the trial without problems.
Scientists are still trying to figure out why he died. Some suspect that the
gene-carrying virus kicked his immune system into overdrive, destroying his
lungs.

   Why is the recent gene-therapy death at Penn such a big story? Don't patients
die all the time in drug trials?

   They do. But this death has caused a great deal of controversy for these
reasons:

   Unlike most patients in gene therapy trials, Gelsinger was not terminally
ill, and he was on medication to control his condition. It was clearly the
experiment, not the disease, that killed him.

   This was the first reported death from the procedure after hundreds of trials
over nine years.

   The Food and Drug Administration, which approves all gene therapy trials, has
raised several questions about how the trial was conducted and whether Gelsinger
should have been accepted as a patient.

   What is the Human Genome Project?

   In the 1980s, scientists started to think about trying to decode all the
information in human DNA. One part of the project, called mapping, determines
where the genes are located along all this DNA. The DNA in your cells doesn't
come in one long strand - it's divided into 46 paired chunks called chromosomes.
Scientists are mapping where these various genes lie on their respective
chromosomes.

   The other part of the project, called sequencing, involves reading out all
the individual letters - A's, T's, G's and C's - a total of 3 billion in all.

   Earlier this month, researchers in the United States, England and Japan
announced a major milestone: the complete mapping and sequencing of the first of
the 23 human chromosome pairs - Chromosome 22. The mapping part of the project,
finished several years ago, was led by researchers at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia. Then, in the process of sequencing Chromosome 22, scientists
decoded genes that are thought to be involved with schizophrenia, several types
of cancers, and a host of inherited disorders. But locating and decoding these
genes won't tell us how flaws in them lead to diseases, nor will it tell us how
to treat them.

   Is it worth $3 billion?

   That remains to be seen.

   While the human genome often is billed as the complete blueprint of a human
being, knowing these sequences won't tell us anything right away. It's like
having all the words of a book but no dictionary to interpret what they mean.
"All we're going to do is stare at it for a while," said Art Caplan, a
bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania.

   No instant cures will come from the project. Some scientists predict that the
undertaking will have its biggest impact on ordinary medicine. Eventually,
doctors could use an understanding of the genome to pinpoint people's specific
medical needs, said Brandeis University microbiologist Gregory Petsko.

   "Today, treatment of most diseases is trial and error," said Petsko. "That's
both dangerous and time-consuming." Eventually, we might have all our genetic
information encoded on a computer chip, and doctors could tailor treatments to
each individual.

   Subtle genetic differences determine why some people don't respond to
ibuprofen, for example, and why others suffer nasty side-effects with certain
antibiotics. Genetic information in theory could predict exactly who is
predisposed to heart disease, cancers and other common killers - and allow
specific treatment.

   Whose genome is being studied?

   There isn't one human genome - there are 6 billion. Otherwise, we'd all look
like identical twins. Luckily, your genes are 99.99 percent identical to those
of your neighbor, even if you look nothing alike.

   Still, it's the differences that will prove important in medicine. Cancer
researcher Richard Fishel of Thomas Jefferson University Hospital said that when
research funds were short, he suggested, somewhat facetiously, finding a big
donor and using his or her genes as the "human genome." As it turned out, the
government allotted more money for science, and a variety of people's genes are
being used for the mapping and sequencing project.

   What are genetic engineering and genetically engineered foods?

   It's a little like film splicing - snipping a bit of DNA here, adding a piece
there. It's been done to alter the traits of plants and animals for several
decades, often by transferring genes from one species to another.

   The combinations can appear almost grotesque. To make a point, the Complete
Idiot's Guide to Decoding Your Genes put together a sample menu of dishes from
American farms. It included Juice of Tomatoes with Flounder Gene, Pork Chops
with Human Gene, and Milk with Genetically Engineered Bovine Growth Hormone.

   Food growers and distributors have their logic. The flounder gene, for
example, is a recipe for a kind of antifreeze that helps this Arctic fish keep
its blood in liquid form. That same substance can help the tomato avoid frost
damage. Other foreign genes help plants resist pests, or make animals grow
bigger.

   Human genes inserted into animals prompt their bodies to grow proteins to be
used as human medicines, such as insulin and clotting factors.

   In recent years, genetically engineered food has become quite common in the
United States, and generally is not labeled - a controversy in itself.

   Many people, especially in Europe, have protested the encroachment of
genetically engineered food. They fear unknown health effects, particularly from
foods that have been engineered to produce their own pest-killing toxins.
Proponents argue that genetic alteration in food can be a health plus, making
possible grains that are higher in protein, meats that are lower in fat, and
fruits and vegetables that are cheaper to grow and distribute.

   What is genetic screening?

   While gene therapy remains solidly in the experimental stage, people right
now are screened for genetic problems that they could potentially pass on to
their children, such as cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs disease, and sickle cell
anemia. Many people are "carriers" of such genetic diseases. They don't get
sick, but if two carriers come together, their children can inherit a serious or
deadly problem.

   Screenings for some diseases can be conducted in utero, and some parents use
that information to terminate a pregnancy. As more and more genes are discovered
and linked to particular disorders, researchers are developing more and more
screenings. In fact, would-be parents can request plenty of tests already, if
they want to pay for them.

   But as scientists develop tests for less-than-fatal genetic abnormalities -
inherited deafness, dwarfism, and albinism, to name three - ethicists such as
Caplan say society will have to figure out where to draw the line.

   Will our knowledge of all these genes allow parents to create children who
have desired eye colors, intelligence or talents?

   That's a big fear - but it's not coming anytime soon. "If you can't even get
a gene into a person to treat a disease," said ethicist Caplan, reflecting on
the gene therapy death at Penn, "then the idea that we're ready to make genetic
super-babies is hilarious."

   As for cosmetic changes, there's no big push for making blue-eyed babies
using genetics. (Colored contact lenses look remarkably natural these days.)

   Qualities such as talent and intelligence can't even be clearly defined, let
alone connected to a specific chemical. Some recent work in mice showed that a
genetic change did increase the animals' ability to memorize shapes and mazes -
but is that intelligence? Einstein allegedly used to forget where he was going
on his evening walks.

   Could all this knowledge of genetics eventually lead to the creation of
artificial life?

   Darwin's theory of evolution left one big question. Humans may have evolved
from other life forms, but what did the first organisms evolve from? Mud? Rocks?

   Scientists have tried to create a soup of chemicals and zap it in a way that
prompted something alive to crawl out. No luck.

   Earlier this month, genetics pioneer Craig Venter was part of a team that
used two common microorganisms to determine that it takes a minimum of 300 genes
to be alive - the essential living-thing survival kit.

   Knowing this may make it possible for scientists to construct a living thing
from smaller pieces. They would string together individual chemical code letters
from DNA to create a minimal genetic package and perhaps find some way to build
a creature around it. Or it may not be that easy.

   A panel of ethicists has already pondered this Frankensteinian scenario. The
panel, led by Mildred K. Cho of the Stanford University Center for Biomedical
Ethics, suggested that by learning to create life, we would trivialize its
value.

   The panel raised concerns that creation of "new life forms will be perceived
by the public as proving that life is reducible to, or nothing more than, DNA."

   That would be like saying Shakespeare's King Lear is nothing more than
letters.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1071 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    December 19, 1999, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2566 words

HEADLINE: USF, like its peers, follows the money in research;

BYLINE: of The Tampa Tribune;

BODY:


   TAMPA - As USF and other public research centers look to the future, they see
an uncharted path  lined largely with private dollars.

   Name an ailment, whether life-threatening or mere nuisance, and chances are
that medical  researchers near or far are busy searching for a cure.

   But trying to discover the magic pill that might stop a cancer, or the
treatment that might  remedy hemophilia, is essentially the search for a product
to market.

   As such, it's leading medical and other research into new and often uncharted
territory - and  raising as many concerns for patient safety, research quality
and potential conflicts of interest  as it is for hopes of a breakthrough.

   Some see a natural progression in the melding of private business interests
with research even  at public universities.

   "Ten or 20 years ago, we were just asking rudimentary questions: "How does
this gene function?' "  said Terry Flotte, interim director of the newly opened
University of Florida Genetics Institute.  "Now we're at the stage where we
should be transitioning to industry.

   "To make a product, you have to do safety tests and, in the final stage,
marketing," Flotte said  in a recent interview. "(It) involves processes that
should not be paid for by the federal  government because they're essentially an
investment that's going to make a company money."

   There's money to be made all along the progression, actually.

   Moving a promising new drug or device from laboratory to consumer is a
multibillion-dollar  business. Researchers can earn windfalls through royalties
on discoveries licensed to private  companies. They can double or triple
academic salaries through consulting and other side jobs.  Universities can gain
equipment, students and alumni donations linked to increased prestige.

   In the 1990s, this all has become a boom industry, as researchers at
universities and elsewhere  have worked with companies to discover new ways of
treating whatever ails an aging population.

   Pharmaceutical companies alone pump an estimated $ 1 billion into product
research and  development annually, underwriting both scientists and the
expensive equipment needed for their  work. The funding stands in stark contrast
to managed care policies that are cramping doctors'  incomes and medical school
budgets.

   That in turn means increasing numbers of people around Tampa Bay, and across
the country, are  involved in medical experiments funded by drug makers or other
businesses rather than by government  agencies such as the National Institutes
of Health.

   Research centers such as the University of South Florida, understandably, are
following the  money.

   "To a priori turn your nose up at research funding is basically stupid," said
Michael Kovac, USF's  former engineering college dean who now leads the school's
high-technology research efforts.

   Kovac noted arrangements with Lucent Technologies and Cirent Semiconductor,
both in the Orlando  area, bring millions of dollars worth of equipment into USF
labs each year.

   The school's growth in the area is notable.

   Just a decade ago, USF scientists received twice as much research money from
the federal  government as from private entities. By 1997-98, 232 corporations
or affiliates helped underwrite  research at USF. In 1998-99, $ 59.8 million of
a record $ 161.3 million in overall research awards  came from private
partnerships of pharmaceutical and other companies, compared to $ 50.3 million
from Uncle Sam.

   It's a shift witnessed nationwide, both thrilling and chilling those
entrusted with safeguarding  the conduct of medical research.

   "As the competition (for) federal research dollars heated up, companies
stepped in and began to  seriously fund research at academic institutions. It's
a situation that needs to be managed, not  stopped," said Moira Keane, research
protection director at the University of Minnesota.

   "It's very worrisome," said Leonard Zwelling, associate vice president for
research at the  University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. Profit motive
has intruded on university work, he  said, and "money sullies everything."

   CORPORATE RESEARCH is not intrinsically more risky or less viable than
government work.

   Regulatory agencies such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration still
review experiments  before approving any drug or device for sale. Companies know
they can pay a heavy price for things  that slip by only to bring expensive
litigation later, such as silicone breast implants. Scientists  either want or
are required to publish results, subjecting their work to rigorous peer review.

   And, as researchers from USF to Duke University and from Chicago to Los
Angeles can attest, the  regulators of conduct in human research have toughened
their scrutiny of how the players follow the  rules.

   The U.S. Office for Protection from Research Risks has forced five
institutions (four in just  the last 15 months) to halt human experiments
because of lapses in oversight procedures.

   USF has had scrapes with the OPRR throughout the 1990s - and while the agency
has found nothing  troubling enough to warrant drastic action, the school has
been compelled to improve its oversight  system. The improvements have included
computerization of records, more training for employees, and  an end to a type
of "fast-track" research review.

   But the scrutiny doesn't reach as far when it comes to potential conflicts of
interest.

   Scientists and doctors are required to report corporate boards they sit on,
side companies they  set up, or businesses for which they work as consultants or
lead product-training seminars.  Institutions such as USF collect this
information through annually updated "outside activity reports"  to manage
potential conflicts.

   Lapses in such "required" reporting may go undiscovered, however.

   In USF's most notable case, eye surgeon James Rowsey initially failed to
report he had  established a private company at his home and had tried to profit
by its sale of a patient form the  university claimed as its own.

   Investigators also found Rowsey failed to tell patients, or a USF board
responsible for research  ethics, that he might profit from cornea transplants
he performed using a surgical knife he helped  to invent. Rowsey had agreed to
develop the knife through research beginning on cats - then  persuaded the USF
board that his work wasn't research after the board became aware he had begun
operating on humans without approval in 1995.

   It was only this year that Rowsey's case drew public questions. Federal and
internal USF  inquiries were launched, and the former ophthalmology department
chairman ran afoul of the American  Academy of Ophthalmology, a professional
society that counts as its members almost every practicing  eye doctor in the
nation.

   Rowsey intended to market the knife, known as the Tampa Trephine, and once
predicted sales of  $ 112.5 million in five years. USF policy grants inventors
45 percent of royalties, a share standard  among universities in Florida, said
Richard Streeter, director of USF's Office of Economic  Development.

   Streeter helped to promote Rowsey's trephine and its development, using
nearly $ 764,000 in  federal grant money. Today the trephine appears abandoned,
and Rowsey left USF this fall after  months of fighting criticism of his
professional conduct.

   ROWSEY'S CASE is aberrant, USF officials assure people looking to the future.

   "That's correct: (Rowsey) did not report until we beat him up," said Martin
Silbiger, USF medical  college dean. "I set out the rules. If I'm dealing with
ethical folks, they obey."

   Silbiger's trust in professional ethics is supported by his peers nationwide.
They say most  professionals recognize the importance of credibility and
reputation, and they say tightening  oversight too much could put harmful
shackles on research.

   No system is fail-safe, they note.

   "If you own stock in a company, where do I capture its value - yesterday, or
when the discovery's  marketed? Do I consider just your stock, or look at the
holdings of your wife and adult children?"  asked Tony Mazzaschi, an assistant
vice president for research with the Association of American  Medical Colleges.

   "There is no bright-line test here," Mazzaschi said. "It's sort of like the
old definition of  pornography: You know it when you see it."

   USF, like most universities, forbids doctors who join privately sponsored
research to pocket  cash bonuses frequently offered to those who recruit
patients quickly for experiments.

   The bonuses are common because the profit potential from a winning drug is
estimated as high as  $ 1 million a day, a considerable amount for those held
accountable to shareholders and the bottom  line.

   At USF, such added income goes into a department's research account to pay
costs of attending  professional conferences or subscribing to scholarly
journals, officials said.

   Still, the university doesn't consider such money an afterthought. Like its
peers, USF actively  courts private dollars. It even set up an office in
September 1996 dedicated solely to promoting  trials needed to market new drugs
and devices.

   Called USF CARES, the office promised patient recruitment, access to "an
extensive volunteer  population located in three counties," and "rapid study
initiation," according to a 1997-98 Office of  Research annual report.

   The office was run by the same man responsible for caution in research
oversight, however. It  was closed quietly in July because it was "not fiscally
viable," according to George Newkome, USF  vice president for research.

   Newkome declined more recent requests from The Tampa Tribune to speak about
USF's research  future, saying through an office assistant that he was too busy.

   Friday was the deadline for Newkome to report to the OPRR whether Rowsey
improperly experimented  on people without their consent in the transplants that
used his special knife. Newkome's answer  included a USF scientific misconduct
panel's conclusion that Rowsey did not do research by federal  definition - but
that USF should have forced him to treat the work as research.

   Without exception, scientists questioned at USF and elsewhere agree that
patient safety and  notification is paramount. That includes notification, many
said, whenever a doctor stands to  profit from an experiment in ways that go
beyond pay for his or her effort. USF allows its research  oversight board to
decide if the profit margin warrants public disclosure.

   But as medicine delves into new areas, new questions come to the fore.

   IN SEPTEMBER, University of Pennsylvania scientists seeking a cure for a
hereditary liver  disease infused genetically treated viruses into the
bloodstream of an otherwise healthy teenager.  Jesse Gelsinger died of lung
failure four days later.

   His was the first recorded death tied directly to gene therapy treatments.
The pioneering field  hopes to cure serious illnesses such as cancer by altering
a person's genes. It has brought some  4,000 people into more than 350 trials
since 1990.

   In the intense review that followed the teenager's death, troubling details
surfaced. Chief  among them was that sometimes crucial information - including
"adverse events," a term that includes  death during an experiment - can be kept
from scientists and regulatory agencies in the name of  protecting a company's
trade secrets.

   Federal regulations require that all research sponsors, private or public,
disclose adverse  events. On privately funded studies, however, some report only
to the U.S. Food and Drug  Administration, which does not share that information
without the company's permission.

   Companies occasionally allow disclosure, but large numbers do not because of
fear of losing a  potentially promising, money-making treatment.

   After Gelsinger's death, regulators revealed that five other people had died
and three had  become seriously ill while participating in gene therapy
experiments since mid-1998. The deaths  were thought unrelated, the result of
prior ill health, but researchers thought two illnesses were  "probably" related
to treatments, according to published reports. Yet corporate research sponsors
downgraded that professional assessment.

   This fall, The Tampa Tribune requested under state public records law USF
documents that might  shed light on various medical research projects. Among the
records would be reports of patients  having medical problems while enrolled in
psychiatric studies of new drugs.

   Some USF research review board records contain mentions of patients suffering
severe psychotic  episodes and other serious health problems while enrolled in
studies, but those records do not  elaborate.

   USF officials balked at providing the records and, in response to the
newspaper request, crafted  a new policy allowing the drug companies to review
and redact information in those records before  they are released.

   Through a spokesman, Newkome has said such a policy is needed to protect
confidentiality  agreements the university signed with the drug companies. The
Tribune is challenging that policy.

   Last month, the National Institutes of Health proposed guidelines that would
require more rapid -  and public - disclosure of adverse events.

   UF's Flotte, lead scientist for a 4-year-old gene therapy trial involving
cystic fibrosis, is  among those advocating openness.

   "I've always favored sharing information," Flotte said. "The fact is, in many
cases you can  disclose critical information about safety concerns without
really compromising a company's  potential for a product."

   No one expects the adverse event issue to be the last conflict or concern
raised about research.  By its very definition, research is a plunge into
uncharted territory.

   Still, there are guideposts.

   Where patients are involved, "we have to be above the law (and) I don't know
how to legislate  that," said USF's Silbiger. "The only safeguard ... as best as
I can see, is education, education,  education. And that's what we'll be doing."

 (BOX) A side effect of strong research growth can be weak oversight. This
series, begun three  months ago, has attempted to wrap up a broader look at
issues that have put a recent spotlight on  the University of South Florida.
(CHART)Rising research.<A1>  The University of South Florida has seen a larger
increase in research funding from private  business than from government
sources. Because the charted numbers within categories are rounded  off, they
may not add up precisely to the annual totals.    (CHART) Money mill  USF
research awards by college (in millions):   Public Arts & Business  Year
Medicine Health Sciences Engineering administration  1998-99 $ 59.5 $ 20.1 $
19.3 $ 10.1 $ 1.2  1997-98 $ 55.9 $ 9.9 $ 15.8 $ 9.4<A1> $ 1.6  1996-97 $ 43.2 $
6.0 $ 15.0 $ 9.2 $ 1.3  1995-96 $ 38.8 $ 4.0 $ 13.7 $ 10.4 $ 1.3  1994-95 $ 41.4
$ 4.1 $ 19.5 $ 11.7 $ 1.4  1993-94 $ 35.0 $ 4.0 $ 9.5 $ 9.3 $ 0.9  1992-93 $
20.6 $ 4.1 $ 10.6 $ 9.7 $ 0.8  1991-92 $ 14.8 $ 2.0 $ 8.1 $ 5.9 $ 0.8  1990-91 $
18.0 $ 3.0 $ 8.0 $ 6.1 $ 0.8  Source: USF Office of Research annual reports
Grace Frank can be reached at gfrank@tampatrib.comor (813) 259-8285.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 3 (2C) CHART 2,
 Arlynn Lorenzo monitors computers as Ruth Kent receives a CT scan at USF's H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center. Kent is a participant in a study seeking to find new
ways for the early detection of lung cancer. Moffitt is one of three hospitals
doing such research.  BRUCE HOSKING, Tribune photo

NOTES: EYE ON EXPERIMENTS: WHY IT MATTERS

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1999


                             1072 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             December 18, 1999, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: CITY & STATE; AROUND THE STATE; Pg. 5B

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 128 words

HEADLINE: Couple donates $ 2-million to UF gene therapy center

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports

DATELINE: GAINESVILLE

BODY:


   A Miami couple has donated $ 2-million to the University of Florida College
of Medicine Gene Therapy Center.

   Earl and Christy Powell's donation will be combined with a state matching
grant to advance medical researchers' efforts to find the best way to treat and
prevent diseases at the genetic level. The university will name the center the
Powell Gene Therapy Center.

   Earl Powell attended UF from 1957 to 1959 before graduating from the
University of Miami with an accounting degree. In 1981, he co-founded Trivest, a
private equity investment firm in Miami. He is a UF Foundation board member.

   Christy Powell received a degree in zoology from UF in 1971. She is
chairwoman for the National Foundation for Advancement in the Arts.

   - Wire reports


LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1999


                             1073 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             December 18, 1999, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: CITY & STATE; AROUND THE STATE; Pg. 5B

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 128 words

HEADLINE: Couple donates $ 2-million to UF gene therapy center

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports

DATELINE: GAINESVILLE

BODY:


   A Miami couple has donated $ 2-million to the University of Florida College
of Medicine Gene Therapy Center.

   Earl and Christy Powell's donation will be combined with a state matching
grant to advance medical researchers' efforts to find the best way to treat and
prevent diseases at the genetic level. The university will name the center the
Powell Gene Therapy Center.

   Earl Powell attended UF from 1957 to 1959 before graduating from the
University of Miami with an accounting degree. In 1981, he co-founded Trivest, a
private equity investment firm in Miami. He is a UF Foundation board member.

   Christy Powell received a degree in zoology from UF in 1971. She is
chairwoman for the National Foundation for Advancement in the Arts.

   - Wire reports


LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1999


                             1074 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 18, 1999, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: Secrecy and Gene Therapy

BODY:


   THE TRAGIC death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger has focused intense attention
and concern on the field of gene therapy. But a three-day conference last week
at the National Institutes of Health, which aired abundant and sobering
information about apparent shortcomings in the University of Pennsylvania
experiment in which Mr. Gelsinger died, showed how far short that concern falls
of a consensus on the best ways to monitor this volatile area of research.

   The conference showcased a long-running conflict. On one side are those
seeking more oversight and public disclosure--including disclosure of the kind
of "serious adverse events" that might, if revealed early enough, have led to
the halting of the Penn experiment before Mr. Gelsinger died. On the other side
are those in the biotech industry who think the current level of disclosure is
already too high and a burden on a burgeoning field.

   Biotech industry advocates argued at the conference that mandatory detailed
reporting of all "adverse events"--deaths or injuries during an experiment,
whether obviously related to it or not--runs the risk of revealing proprietary
information or compromising patient privacy. Companies also worry that public
disclosure of problems during an experiment will scare off sponsors or drive
down stock prices, choking off investment in new therapies.

   The Food and Drug Administration, which oversees all drugs, including gene
therapies, requires comprehensive reporting on drug trials but keeps the
information confidential to protect manufacturers' interests. The case for
disclosing more information about gene therapy experiments goes back to the
field's early days, when the NIH created an advisory committee to provide a
second, more public level of scrutiny and to help information about possible
problems travel faster among researchers. (Such public disclosure is the norm in
NIH-funded medical research, most of which takes place in academia.) In the wake
of the Gelsinger death, and of reports that companies had failed to report as
many as four deaths during other gene experiments, the NIH has sought to make
these public reporting requirements more explicit. The biotech companies have
redoubled their efforts to shield some information.

   The conference's examination of the Penn experiment suggested that mistakes
went beyond failures to make public disclosure--that investigators' reports to
the FDA were incomplete as well. Genetic research may not be intrinsically more
dangerous than other drug trials. But any regulatory scheme must take account of
precisely the kinds of worst-case scenarios the Gelsinger case represents.

   Though it's important to stay alert to the needs of the private sponsors who
mostly fuel the biotech field, those needs are outweighed by the pressing public
need to know as much as possible about gene therapy experiments as they unfold.
In the long run, more disclosure will bolster confidence in the field, if in
fact such confidence is warranted.



LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1999


                             1075 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1999 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            December 17, 1999 Friday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A38

LENGTH: 420 words

HEADLINE: Fixing our genes

BODY:

   For years, Americans have been dazzled by the promises of genetic therapy.
Diseases such as cancer and AIDS are to be cured and inherited disabilities such
as hemophilia and cystic fibrosis eliminated. Defective genes are to be replaced
with normal ones. All it will take is manipulation of the human genome which, as
the public is forever being reminded, is within reach.

   Yet as scientists have been forced to admit, hundreds of human experiments
have come to naught. Not a single genetic cure has been achieved.

   The latest evidence of that harsh truth was an 18-year-old Tucson, Ariz., man
who succumbed in September to a rare liver disorder. Why he died was the subject
of a three-day soul-searching held recently at the National Institutes of Health
and attended by scientists, medical researchers and the families of other
patients suffering from a similar liver condition.

   The young man was part of a controversial experiment in which he received
healthy genes by way of a modified cold virus. Four days later he died of an
apparent immune system reaction.

   Did doctors involved in the experiment cut corners or break rules? Was the
young man's liver functioning well enough to be considered for therapy? Was he
infected by another unknown virus? There were plenty of questions but no hard
and fast answers.

   W. French Anderson, known as the father of gene therapy, told the meeting
that cutting-edge medical research is always risky. "If mistakes were made, they
were honest mistakes . . . We are developing a complex technology. You have to
try different things. That is the way of research," he said.

   Jeremy Rifkin, president of the Foundation on Economic Trends, agrees that
men are natural risk-takers. But he urges a conservative approach in choosing
one's risks. "First, do no harm" is a well-established, revered principle, he
notes.

   In his book The Biotech Century, Rifkin acknowledges that the biotech
revolution will affect every aspect of our lives from the way we eat to how we
have babies to the way we perceive the world around us. It will force us to
ponder the ultimate question of the meaning of existence, he insists. The
challenge is whether we can control the coming revolution before it controls us.

   There is a mental and moral discipline in the Rifkin approach, one that is
different -- and far preferable -- to the unquestioning faith in research and
experimentation expressed by Anderson.

   Which mind-set prevails in the next few decades is likely to determine the
nature and shape of our brave new world.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             1076 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 17, 1999 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: INSURERS IN N.J. EASE POLICY ON CANCER IN A REVERSAL, THE STATE'S
LARGEST HEALTH PLANS WILL / COVER ROUTINE COSTS OF MANY EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENTS.

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, INQUIRER TRENTON BUREAU

DATELINE: TRENTON

BODY:

   New Jersey's largest health insurers announced yesterday that they will
voluntarily cover all routine costs associated with many experimental cancer
treatments, a reversal in policy that experts called unprecedented for HMOs and
important for cancer research nationwide.

   The coverage, which applies only to federally approved trials of cancer
treatments, could immediately liberate up to 4,200 people in New Jersey from
out-of-pocket costs such as hospital stays and laboratory bills, which most
insurers formally exempt from coverage.

   Equally important, the move could boost participation in experimental trials
in New Jersey by removing patients' fears about the routine costs, officials
said. Cancer is diagnosed in about 40,000 New Jerseyans every year, but only
about 1,350 - 3 percent - enroll in trials, which are considered essential for
studying treatments and possible cures.

   Officials said they hoped the groundbreaking voluntary pact, reached by 10
managed health-care plans and a panel of cancer experts appointed by Gov.
Whitman, could raise participation in trials to as much as 15 percent, or 6,000
a year, in New Jersey.

   "It is quite significant," said William L. Roper, dean of the School of
Public Health at the University of North Carolina and member of a panel trying
to iron out a similar pact nationally.

   "It permits health-plan members to get access to potentially lifesaving
treatment, and at the same time gives health plans a sense that the money they
spend on these treatments is not going to be wasted," Roper said.

   Paul R. Langevin Jr., president of the New Jersey Association of Health
Plans, said insurers also gained a bit of protection from the mounting tide of
state and federal legislation over HMO coverage.

   "The clear signal [is] that health-care progress can be achieved without
legal and regulatory mandates," Langevin said, speaking for the 10 companies,
which insure 4.8 million people in the state.

   Across the country, the standard insurance practice of refusing reimbursement
for experimental trials has been cited as a reason for falling participation in
some cancer trials.

   Many insurance companies say they have been paying for some treatment on a
case-by-case basis anyway. Several have announced steps to cover costs
associated with trials and to address criticism that they are too stringent.

   At least one state, Maryland, has enacted a law requiring insurers to cover
all four phases of a typical cancer trial: determination of dosage, evaluation
of effectiveness, comparison with existing treatments, and examination of other
uses.

   Georgia and Rhode Island require coverage for phases two and three; Virginia
requires coverage for phases two, three and four. Many other states, including
Pennsylvania, have legislation pending to require coverage.

   New Jersey now will cover all four phases of a cancer trial.

   Carmella Boccino, vice president for medical affairs at the American
Association of Health Plans, a trade group, said health plans across the country
would watch New Jersey and other states closely to see which method worked best,
or at all.

   "They have been [reimbursing patients] on an individual basis, and these are
the models to do it more broadly," Boccino said.

   The New Jersey pact was reached after two legislators told the insurers about
a year ago that they were ready to push bills to require coverage unless
something was done. The lawmakers and insurers agreed to take part in the panel
to study ways to increase participation in trials, Langevin said.

   Ann Marie Hill, a prime force behind the talks from the New Jersey Commission
on Cancer, said she had been an outspoken proponent of tough legislation and
even litigation to force HMO reimbursements.

   "But when I look at what we've done here, I wonder if that [legislation] was
the right direction to take. We are now . . . going to be educating physicians
and patients as partners with insurers. That is a very positive step," Hill
said.

   Under the pact, insurers will cover all routine patient costs that would have
been incurred for nonexperimental treatments. For example, even if a clinical
trial requires five blood tests a week, the insurer will pay for only one
required under standard care.

   If there is no standard treatment for comparison, reimbursements will be set
under a special agreement negotiated with researchers on each trial. Most costs
of the trial itself are borne by the sponsor of the trial, typically
pharmaceutical companies or federal agencies.

   Langevin said that because most costs would have been incurred anyway,
usually by cancer patients in relapse looking for the most aggressive treatment
possible, the bottom-line cost to insurers may not change.

   Cancer patients are eligible as long as their insurer in New Jersey has
signed onto the agreement, whether the patient lives in New Jersey or
surrounding states, officials said.

   Eligible trials can take place anywhere in the country, but they must be
approved by the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, the Defense Department, or the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs. Eligible trials currently number about 6,000 nationwide and 70 in New
Jersey, officials said.

   The types of trials range broadly. Mary Todd, deputy director of the Cancer
Institute of New Jersey, a member of the panel, said most trials focus on
testing gene therapies - either those to stop the cancer-causing gene itself or
the agents it lives on.

   "With today's agreement, we move one step closer to the cures for cancer,"
Todd said at a news conference.

   Louis J. Vennucci, a lung-cancer survivor from Morristown who was at the news
conference, said the pact would eliminate an enormous source of stress for
patients.

   The trial "has proved to be my second chance at life," he told reporters. "I
watched people in mental and physical pain every day because their costs were
not covered. . . . It will eliminate a huge fear for every patient. It will make
it a little less stressful and frightening."

   Overall, between 150,000 and 175,000 cancer survivors registered in New
Jersey are eligible for coverage if they choose to participate in a trial, Hill
said. Eventually, officials hope to sign up all insurers in the state.

   Participating Insurers

   These 10 insurers in New Jersey have agreed to cover routine costs during
many trials of cancer treatments:

   Aetna U.S. Healthcare

   Americaid Community Care

   AmeriHealth HMO

   Cigna HealthCare of New Jersey

   Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey

   Managed Healthcare Systems of New Jersey

   Oxford Health Plans

   Physicians Health Services

   Prudential HealthCare

   UnitedHealthcare of New Jersey

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1077 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    December 17, 1999, Friday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell work named breakthrough of '99;
Scientists say the explosion in the understanding of the body's master cells has
enormous potential.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

   A burst of discoveries about the workings of the body's master cells _ and
their potential for repairing and replacing diseased livers and other body parts
_ was named as the scientific breakthrough of 1999 in today's issue of the
journal Science.

        "We salute this work, which raises hopes of dazzling medical
applications and also forces scientists to reconsider fundamental ideas about
how cells grow up," the magazine's editors said.

        Medical researchers at the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic
roundly endorsed the honor bestowed upon advances in the understanding of these
cells _ called "stem cells." To illustrate the potential, Dr. Jeffrey
McCullough, who directs the university's Center for Molecular and Cellular
Therapy, recalled a recent meeting on spinal injuries. The speaker was actor
Christopher Reeve, who was paralyzed by a spinal-cord injury.

        "This research really does create the possibility that in the laboratory
one could generate large numbers of nerve cells that could be used to replace
damaged spinal cords, and it may very well be that Christopher Reeve will walk
again some day," McCullough said.

        Stem cells enable an embryo to make bone, muscle, a heart, a brain and
all of the parts that make up a full person. And even in adults, specialized
stem cells continue to work their magic, enabling a body to regenerate blood or
skin, for example.

        For decades, the cells have been a tantalizing mystery for medical
researchers. But in late 1998, scientists in Wisconsin and Maryland reported
that they had isolated embryonic stem cells and kept them alive and reproducing
in incubators. Since then, scientists elsewhere have begun learning how to
manipulate more specialized stem cells in adults.

        "This explosion in our understanding of what stem cells are _ even that
they exist and that we can isolate them from human adults _ is very exciting and
provides a whole new spectrum of possibilities for application in medical
procedures," said Stanimir Vuk-Pavlovic, who directs stem-cell laboratories at
Mayo's cancer center.

        Most of the recent major discoveries have come from private labs because
the government has restricted federal funding for the research amid an ethical
debate over deriving the cells from human embryos. But a presidential advisory
panel this year recommended funding the research, and this month the National
Institutes of Health proposed guidelines that would allow funding for research
on certain cells that had been extracted from embryos in private labs.

        Science magazine said new research on adult stem cells may cool some of
the ethical debate.

        "In defiance of decades of accepted wisdom, researchers in 1999 found
that stem cells from adults retain the youthful ability to become several
different kinds of tissues: Brain cells can become blood cells, and cells from
bone marrow can become liver," it said. "Scientists are now speeding ahead with
work on adult stem cells, hoping to discover whether their promise will rival
that of embryonic stem cells."

        Such "primitive" adult cells are the main focus of a new Stem Cell
Research Institute at the University of Minnesota Medical School, said Dr.
Catherine Verfaillie, who directs the institute. In particular, it is gearing up
to work on blood cells and on those that could help regenerate brain tissue,
heart muscle, arteries, livers and pancreatic cells that make insulin.

        "Once we understand how stem cells create all of the things that are
part of the liver or of the brain, we should be able to change the behavior of
these cells in an organ that's diseased," Verfaillie said.

        At Mayo, stem-cell research is leading to new treatments for certain
types of cancer and for problems with hips and other joints. Mayo also is
exploring the potential for using stem cells in gene therapy, Vuk-Pavlovic said.

        Patients aren't likely to benefit from much of the research for at least
a decade. But some applications could come sooner. One of the first clinical
uses is expected in therapy for Parkinson's disease as the cells make it
possible to grow neurons for replacing damaged brain cells.

        The research will move faster once federal funding is allowed under the
new NIH guidelines, McCullough said. "While there are boundaries, they certainly
are wide enough so it's going to open up a lot of very active work."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1999


                             1078 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    December 16, 1999 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 066

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   Sun Life votes demutualization

   Policyholders of Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada voted in favor of the
insurer's demutualization plan by 94.9 percent yesterday.

   Sun Life, the parent of Boston-based mutual fund group MFS Investment
Management, has headquarters in Toronto and Wellesley Hills and plans to go
public in March. It is expected to be valued at $ 3.8 billion to $ 5.7 billion.

   Shares are likely to be priced from $ 9.52 to $ 14.28. Eligible policyholders
will get a minimum of 75 shares, the company said, while the average will be 378
shares. - HERALD STAFF

   Swansea doctors on own

   Doctors from Swansea Health Center of Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Inc.'s
Rhode Island subsidiary, which is being closed, are forming an independent
practice. The Swansea Family Practice Group, which includes eight doctors and a
nurse practitioner, will serve more than 18,000 patients. - HERALD STAFF

   3 charged in Net fraud

   Federal regulators charged three people yesterday with illegally netting $
364,000 by using the UCLA library's computers to manipulate stock prices through
Internet chat sites. The case is the first Internet fraud case brought against
people for profiting by manipulating stock in companies they were not affiliated
with, an SEC spokesman said. The three, including two recent graduates of the
University of California at Los Angeles, all live in California. They were
charged with manipulating the stock of NEI Webworld Inc. - BLOOMERG NEWS

   Puzzle maker buys firm

   Watertown jigsaw puzzle maker Ceaco Inc. hopes buying a neighbor, Gamewright
Inc., will lead it to new markets. Ceaco, which says it's the nation's third
largest jigsaw puzzle company, said Tuesday it bought Gamewright, maker of games
that "build the brain," including Slamwich and Rat-a-Tat Cat. Terms of the deal
were not disclosed. Ceaco, which sells its puzzles through mass market retailers
like Wal-Mart and Toys 'R' Us is targeting the specialty toy and game store
market, where Gamewright sells its products. The combined company will employ 20
people. - HERALD STAFF

   Judge on Amgen request

   A federal court judge agreed to review a request by Amgen Inc. for a quick
decision on claims that tiny rival biotech firm Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of
Cambridge violated Amgen's patents in developing a product similar to its
best-seller, Epogen. Judge William Young said he would set a hearing as soon as
possible on Amgen's request for a summary judgment in the dispute. Transkaryotic
has made a counter claim, challenging Amgen's patents on the substance. A trial
in that case is set for April. - BLOOMBERG NEWS


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1999


                             1079 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 15, 1999, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: CHILDREN'S RESEARCHER IDS MUSCLE STEM CELLS

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Local scientists have for the first time purified a cell population that
could be precursor cells, called stem cells, for muscle, which could eventually
provide new ways of treating diseases such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Earlier research suggested that some of these stem cells, which have the
ability to produce a variety of specialized cells, could be found in muscle, but
no one had picked out the exact ones, said Johnny Huard, director of the Growth
and Development Lab for Children's Hospital. Those early experiments involved a
collection of cells found in muscle, some of which were presumed to be stem
cells.

   Huard's findings were presented yesterday at the American Society of Cell
Biology's conference in Washington, D.C. Public interest in stem cell advances
and muscular dystrophy led the society to highlight Huard's work from a field of
3,000 presentations.

   Scientists once thought that muscle stem cells made only muscle cells, blood
stem cells made only blood cells and so on.

   Recent work has been refuting that theory. Researchers in Boston found that
precursor cells taken from muscle or bone marrow had the capacity to make both
muscle cells and blood cells.

   But the Boston group could not be absolutely sure which of the cells they
took from muscle were capable of making blood cells. A few blood stem cells
trapped in the muscle tissue could have performed the task, Huard said.

   In one of Huard's experiments, blood was completely drained out of muscle
tissue before the cells were extracted, limiting the chance of contamination
with blood-derived stem cells.

   His group showed that the muscle cells that they suspected were muscle stem
cells carried protein markers on their surfaces characteristic of other types of
stem cells that had previously been isolated.

   Huard said muscle stem cells might stimulate new treatment possibilities for
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a genetic disease of boys in which muscle cells
cannot make the protein dystrophin, leading to degeneration of muscle and death
from respiratory failure.

   For example, in a gene therapy strategy, stem cells could be engineered to
contain a working copy of the dystrophin gene. In turn, the cells might produce
a large number of functional muscle cells and hopefully alleviate the disease.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1999


                             1080 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           December 14, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 009

LENGTH: 1227 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TURMOIL: ARE HUNDREDS OF TEST SUBJECTS' LIVES AT RISK
BECAUSE OF ONE FATAL MISTAKE?

BYLINE: HALLIE LEVINE

BODY:

   SUSAN Bottari is worried.The Westchester mother of two fears the furor over
the death of Jesse Gelsinger -- who became the first casualty of experimental
gene therapy three months ago -- could cost her 7-year-old son, Paul, his life.

   "Gene therapy may be Paul's last chance," says Bottari, whose son suffers
from muscular dystrophy, a fatal disorder characterized by progressive muscle
weakness.

   "He's having more and more difficulty walking and climbing stairs. We've
tried to put him in clinical trials before but they were canceled last minute
due to safety and ethical concerns."

   Bottari is worried that Jessie's death at 18 will escalate such ethical and
safety concerns, and that proposed tighter regulations will "put a kibosh on
some very promising clinical trials and take us back several years -- my son may
not have another decade to wait."

   The problem, health officials argue, is that experimental gene therapies
could also cost people their lives.

   Gene therapy is a revolutionary new field of medicine, which for nine years
has sought to cure cancer and genetic diseases by giving people new genes. The
idea behind it is relatively simple: replace a defective gene with a good one.

   But while there are more than 230 current clinical trials, the field has yet
to achieve its first cure. What's more, there are roughly 1,000 adverse-event
reports to the Food and Drug Administration each year on patients who have
suffered side effects from gene therapy.

   As federal officials and scientific researchers wrangle over who is to blame
for Jesse's death while biotechnology companies push for less burdensome
regulations, parents of sick children are pleading for the continuation of gene
therapy -- even if it means their children could die.

   Jesse Gelsinger, a Tucson, Ariz., supermarket clerk was born with ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a rare genetic metabolic disorder that partly
disabled his liver.

   But he was responding well to a course of drugs and a low-protein diet. The
trial promised nothing in the way of a cure -- it was to test the safety of this
treatment in babies.

   Jesse presumably thought it wasn't much of a risk, taking an unpaid leave
from work to help others in the name of science.

   "It made him feel good as a person," his father Paul Gelsinger, told Time
magazine in October. "He said, 'Hey, this may be good for me, and I'll be
helping newborn infants.' You know teenagers. They think they're going to live
forever."

   But Jesse died after the gene therapy initiated a deadly immune system
response that led to multiple organ failure and eventually death on Sept. 17.
Jesse's temperature rose to 104.5 degrees the night after he received gene
therapy, followed by kidney failure, lung failure and ultimately brain death
over the next three days.

   Researchers said the chances of his surviving multiple organ-system failure
were slim, and even if he did, he'd suffer extreme brain injury. The team
recommended to Paul Gelsinger that they withdraw life support equipment, and he
agreed.

   In the Jesse Gelsinger case, University of Pennsylvania researchers used a
common gene therapy strategy: 18 subjects were injected with the adenovirus
(common cold virus) which had been encoded with a copy of the gene that was
defective in Jesse.

   The FDA says Jesse should never have been given the adenovirus because his
liver wasn't functioning well enough -- even though one leading researcher says
it was functioning within the study's guidelines.

   The FDA also says researchers failed to immediately report information about
two patients who, long before Jesse's death, suffered serious side effects.

   Leading metabolic disease experts also say he should never have been in the
trial because Jesse was not so sick that gene therapy was his last resort.

   "It alarms me that Jesse was put in a trial where he was at great health risk
and wasn't going to receive any health benefits," says Dr. Holmes Morton,
Director for the Clinic for Special Children in Strasburg, Pa.

   "The adenovirus can trigger a very high fever, which is dangerous for someone
with OTC because it makes their ammonia levels rise."

   Researchers were also reportedly giving patients steroids to suppress
inflammation due to the virus, which would have been particularly dangerous to
Gelsinger as it also raises blood ammonia levels.

   "It really worries me that the researchers did not anticipate the severity of
his reaction to virus exposure and didn't plan post-treatment care accordingly,"
Dr. Morton says.

   Now, even though Gelsinger's father maintains the University of Pennsylvania
researchers who conducted the trial did nothing wrong, the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, the panel at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that
oversees gene therapy, is having second thoughts about using healthy patients as
test subjects.

   The Bottaris are well aware of the ethical issues and are willing to take
such risks.

   "If I enroll Paul into a clinical trial I'm essentially agreeing to use my
kid as a guinea pig," Bottari says. "On the one hand, it's my last hope, but do
I put him through tremendous aggravation or even risk his life for something
where there's no guarantee it'll work?"

   "All these people who participated in this trial did a wonderful thing," the
elder Gelsinger, a handyman from Tucson told a conference of researchers and
federal officials last week, his voice trembling. "They came in with the same
pure intent my son had."

   Concerns about the Jesse Gelsinger trial were aired as early as December
1995. University of Arizona researcher Robert Erickson criticized conducting the
proposed experiment on healthy individuals, arguing that delivering the genes
directly into the liver via millions of living viruses could trigger organ
damage. He suggested more work on lab animals.

   Researchers James Wilson and Mark Batshaw defended their study and ultimately
prevailed -- resulting in Gelsinger's death.

   Even so, genetic disease researchers maintain that the benefits of gene
therapy far outweigh the risks.

   "Gene therapy appears to be a potentially major device to save lives and
reduce suffering," says Dr. Leon Charash, chairman of the medical advisory board
of the Muscular Dystrophy Association and associate professor of neurology at
Cornell Medical School.

   "You can't abandon the only logical and successful avenue because of one
unfortunate mistake."

   Doctors on both sides of the debate hope the Jesse Gelsinger case leads to
better safety guidelines for these controversial clinical trials. Like the
Bottaris, they are pressing for a continuation of gene therapy.

   "Unfortunately, Jesse's story makes it painfully clear that if we are going
to ethically conduct gene therapy, we have to screen candidates more carefully
and also keep them as healthy as possible during the trial," Dr. Morton says.

   Dr. Charash agrees.

   "The evidence shows there were some pretty compelling errors made in this
trial that could have been avoided," he says. "But in medicine, when you make a
mistake, you analyze it, learn from it, and proceed."


GRAPHIC: CURSE OR CURE: Jesse Gelsinger (left), died as a result of experimental
gene therapy. Paul Bottari, 7, his mother Susan and sister Laura (right) want to
continue the trials on Paul, for whom the experiment is a last resort.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1999


                             1081 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 14, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 315 words

BODY:


   A brief on yesterday's Science page stated incorrectly that farmers already
inject pigs with a naturally occurring hormone to make the animals grow bigger
and faster. Researchers are investigating ways to artificially boost the growth
rate and size of farm pigs.

   In an article Sunday about the campaigns of Vice President Gore and Bill
Bradley, scholars Cornel West, whose name was misspelled, and Henry Louis Gates
Jr. were identified with the wrong university. Both are at Harvard.

   A news brief on Saturday's Religion page incorrectly quoted the Dalai Lama,
who gave the closing address Wednesday at the Parliament of World Religions in
Cape Town, South Africa. The quote should have read: "Changes only take place
through action--not through prayer, not through meditation."

   In the Health section's Second Opinion column last Tuesday, Dan Collison's
name was misspelled. Collison was a producer, director and photographer for the
film "Scenes From a Transplant: A Cancer Diary."

   A photo caption Dec. 1 incorrectly described an accident on Frederick Road in
Rockville. According to a police report, a 1991 Buick Park Avenue attempting a
left turn from Redland Road failed to yield the right of way to a 1998 Mack
truck. The truck collided with the Buick and ended up on its side. The force of
the collision sent the Buick into a 1999 GMC Safari, which was attempting to
make a left turn. The truck did not turn over on top of the two vehicles.

   CLARIFICATION

   A quote from the Biotechnology Industry Organization that ran in large type
in an article Saturday about the release of information about gene therapy
experiments incorrectly combined words from two sentences in the organization's
statement. It should have said that the organization stated that data about
"adverse events . . . are, by definition, trade secrets and confidential
commercial information."

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1999


                             1082 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 13, 1999, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1277 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH SENSE / JUDY FOREMAN;
DETECTING, TREATING BLADDER CANCER EARLY

BYLINE: BY JUDY FOREMAN, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Four years ago, Ellen Pinzur, a Cambridge woman who had been a lifetime
smoker, got a most unwelcome surprise.

   When she went to her gynecologist for a routine exam, he suspected she had a
fibroid, a benign growth in the uterus. He sent her for an ultrasound. Sure
enough, she did have a fibroid.     But that was the good news. The test also
showed that Pinzur, now 52, had bladder polyps. She had them removed, then
several months later, had a checkup by cystoscopy, in which a urologist inserts
a lighted tube through the urethra to see inside the bladder while the patient
is under local anesthesia.

   The polyps were gone, but they had "seeded" her bladder with cancerous
tumors. Unlike many people who get bladder cancer, Pinzur did not have the
telltale sign of blood in her urine.

   In hopes of boosting the odds of beating her cancer, Pinzur joined a study in
which tuberculosis bacteria, of all things, are squirted into the bladder to
trigger an influx of white blood cells that attack both the TB and cancer cells.
(The risk of TB spreading to other parts of the body is low.)

   Perhaps because of this unusual therapy, Pinzur has been cancer-free now for
two years.

   The therapy she had is but one of a number of new techniques that scientists
are working on to improve both treatment and diagnosis of bladder cancer, which
will strike 54,200 Americans this year and kill 12,100. Men are four times more
likely to get bladder cancer than women because smoking is a major trigger for
the cancer, and historically, men have smoked more than women.

   If caught early, while the cancer is a shallow spot in the lining of the
bladder, the 5-year survival rate is 95 percent; for cancers that have invaded
muscle tissue and spread throughout the body, 5-year survival is 50 to 60
percent.

   But the most striking thing about bladder cancer is that it recurs in 70
percent of cases, no matter what doctors do. For the 500,000 Americans who have
it, this means a lifetime of monitoring - including cystoscopy every three to 12
months.

   This is not only unpleasant, it's expensive - much more so than caring for
someone with breast or prostate cancer, notes Dr. Ihor Sawczuk, vice chairman of
urology at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons.

   But nearly a dozen new tests now on the market or under development could
lighten this burden.

   The goal of all these tests is "to make cystoscopy unnecessary," says Dr.
Kevin R. Loughlin, a urologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital. So far, he
cautions, none of the tests has replaced cytology - a noninvasive exam in which
a pathologist looks through a microscope at cells shed from the bladder into the
urine. If he or she sees any suspicious cells, the patient must then undergo
cystoscopy, the more invasive test.

   But cytology, the current "gold standard," is not a perfect test. In fact, it
picks up only about 40 percent of cancers, and is worst at spotting the most
common, early stage bladder cancers.

   The hope is the new tests can do much better.

   Today , for instance, Matritech, Inc. of Newton will present its case to the
US Food and Drug Administration, arguing for expanded approval of its
already-marketed test, NMP22, which measures a protein made in the nucleus of
cells in urine. High levels of NMP22 indicate high turnover of cells, a sign of
cancer. The company wants doctors to use the test not just to monitor people who
have cancer, as is now the case, but to test those who merely show symptoms,
like having blood in the urine. In Japan, the NMP22 test is already approved for
wider screening.

   Overall, the test is 70 percent sensitive, which means it finds 70 percent of
tumors at all stages of cancer combined.

   That also means it misses 30 percent. And while that's better than cytology,
it's still underwhelming to some urologists.

   "It's not the greatest test in the world," says Dr. Michael O'Donnell,
director of the bladder cancer center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
"I did a 6-month pilot trial at our institution and abandoned it." The test
often said patients had cancer when they didn't and missed it in those who did
have it.

   Even if it were 80 percent sensitive, "that just isn't good enough in my
mind," adds Loughlin of the Brigham.

   Still, in one Italian study published last year, NMP22 was a better cancer
detector than a marker called BTA. Another 1998 study found NMP22 was just as
sensitive as a marker called telomerase, and that both were more sensitive than
BTA. A Cleveland Clinic study published in January, showed the test was 100
percent sensitive. And a Spanish study, published this month suggested that
NMP22 combined with another marker, CYFRA 21-1, can help reveal whether
cystoscopy is needed.

   For instance, if a patient scores low on the NMP22 test, it may be safe to
postpone the invasive exam for a few months or do it under local anesthesia in
the doctor's office. If a patient scores high, it suggests the procedure should
be done in a hospital under anesthesia, so that if the urologist does see
cancer, he or she can remove it right then and there.

   The NMP22 test may also tip the balance when other tests are ambiguous, notes
Dr. Eric J. Sacknoff, a urologist at Cambridge Urological Associates. If the
NMP22 score is high and a bladder X-ray is negative, for instance, that may
indicate there is indeed a cancer, but higher up in the urinary system.

   Ultimately, it's not just better detection but better treatment that's needed
to turn the tide in bladder cancer.

   At the Beth Israel, for instance, urologist O'Donnell is expanding the trial
that Pinzur participated in to 70 centers nationwide. It's already been shown
that treating bladder cancer patients with TB seems to prevent recurrence in
about 60 percent of cases. O'Donnell hopes that adding alpha interferon may
improve those odds. So far, though, his study hasn't followed patients long
enough to tell.

   Ultimately, says Loughlin of the Brigham, the best treatment for bladder
cancer will probably be gene therapy to correct messages from errant genes on
chromosomes 9 and 17. And the best way to prevent it is not to smoke. Scientists
believe that bladder cancer begins when genes on one or both of these
chromosomes are damaged by tobacco and other carcinogens.

   So far, he says, that research is still in its infancy. But "this is where
the real, major advance is going to be."< SIDEBAR

   SMOKERS AT HIGHER RISK YOU MAY BE AT RISK FOR BLADDER CANCER IF YOU ARE OVER
50, MALE OR SMOKE. IN FACT, MEN ARE FOUR TIMES MORE LIKELY THAN WOMEN TO GET
BLADDER CANCER, PROBABLY BECAUSE, HISTORICALLY, THEY'VE BEEN MORE LIKELY TO
SMOKE. MEN ALSO TEND TO URINATE LESS FREQUENTLY THAN WOMEN, WHICH MEANS THAT
WHATEVER TOXINS OR CARCINOGENS ARE IN THE URINE STAY IN THE BLADDER LONGER.
Smoking causes nearly half of bladder cancer deaths in men and more than a third
in women. Others at risk include those who are exposed to chemicals called
aromatic amines. Painters, as well as people who work in the leather, rubber,
dye, and aluminum industries often use these compounds.

   In recent years, the incidence of bladder cancer has been rising slowly, for
unclear reasons.

   One sign of possible bladder cancer is blood in the urine, either enough to
see with the naked eye, or traces detected through urine testing. But this
doesn't always indicate cancer. It can also be - in fact, it usually is - a sign
of infection or inflammation anywhere in the urinary tract, prostate problems,
or a kidney stone. Or sometimes, simply having eaten beets can give the urine a
reddish hue.

   Still, if you have blood in your urine, you should call your doctor.

   J

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, Dr. Kevin Loughlin is hopeful about new urologic tests.
/ GLOBE PHOTO/MARK OSTOW

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                             1083 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    December 13, 1999, Monday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: WTO IS IGNORING A PUBLIC HEALTH THREAT

BODY:


   Americans showed in Boston that they did not accept the legitimacy of British
tax policies set without representation.

   Americans showed in Seattle that they do not accept the legitimacy of trade
policies set by the World Trade Organization without participation by the
public. Indeed, the Battle of Seattle may, like the Boston Tea Party, go down in
history as a high point in democratic activism.

   The real issue in Boston was not the cost of the new tax on tea, it was the
threat to American liberty. The real issue in Seattle was not free trade, it was
the threat to the health and safety of millions of people.

   In the name of free trade, the WTO had imposed billion-dollar trade penalties
intended to force the European Union to open its markets to Monsanto's
genetically modified foods. The demonstrators voiced the fears of millions of
people worldwide who bitterly resented this attempt to force them to eat such
foods.

   While the WTO accepted without question the mantra of the biotech companies
that "a few alien genes can't hurt you," incontrovertible scientific evidence
disputes this.

   A report in The News last week revealed that a young man in Pennsylvania had
been killed by the "harmless" alien genes used in his gene therapy. Earlier, the
Washington Post reported deliberate attempts to cover up a number of other
deaths and illnesses caused by gene therapy by doctors and the biotech drug
companies that sponsor them. They tried to use claims of "confidentiality" as an
excuse for defying a National Institutes of Health mandate to report all such
adverse side effects of gene therapy.

   When the WTO intervened on the wrong side of a public health issue for the
benefit of a U.S. biotech company, it deservedly lost any claim to legitimacy.

   In promoting the sale of dangerous genetically modified foods and drugs in
the name of free trade, the WTO endangers the health and safety of millions of
people around the world. IRWIN D. BROSS Amherst

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1999


                             1084 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    December 13, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 5; View Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words

HEADLINE: CAPSULES;
 SADDLED WITH SETBACKS, GENE THERAPY FINALLY LOOKING UP

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II

BODY:


   The field of gene therapy experimentation has suffered a few notable setbacks
recently, including the highly publicized death of one man in a Pennsylvania
clinical trial. Although scientists have not yet conclusively determined that
the man's death was the result of the gene research, there have been other
problems.

   The goal of gene therapy is to replace a defective gene with a healthy one
that will produce a missing protein. But researchers have struggled to get large
enough quantities of the gene into a patient's cells and then to induce the
genes to produce enough protein to improve the patient's health. The most common
way to introduce new genes is to insert them into a virus--one that has been
defanged so it doesn't produce disease--that will introduce them into cells. But
these viruses can produce an immune reaction such as the one that killed
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger.

   Last week, however, researchers from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and
the Stanford University Medical Center presented some good news for a change. In
preliminary results from a safety trial of a new system for treating hemophilia
B, they found not only that the virus they used does no harm, but that it was
providing substantial benefits to the patients.

   Hemophilia B is caused by a deficiency of a protein called factor IX. Without
factor IX, blood does not clot properly, and a victim can bleed to death from a
small cut. Recombinant factor IX produced by genetic engineering techniques can
stimulate clotting, but it is expensive and must be injected. Gene therapy could
provide a more permanent solution.

   The researchers used an adeno-associated virus (AAV) developed by Avigen Inc.
of Alameda, Calif., as the "vector" to introduce the factor IX gene. AAV is a
common virus that has been shown to be present in most humans and that, most
important, does not produce an immune reaction.

   Dr. Katherine High of Children's Hospital reported at a New Orleans meeting
of the American Society of Hematology that the team had injected a low dose of
AAV into the muscle of three hemophilia B patients. None showed a reaction to
the virus, and all three began producing factor IX, thereby reducing their need
for recombinant factor IX. The production persisted for the six months that the
patients were monitored. They now give higher doses to the next group of
patients.

   If Morning Sickness Is Extreme, It May Be a Girl

   Women who suffer from extreme nausea and vomiting during the first three
months of pregnancy are more likely to be carrying a girl than a boy, according
to Swedish researchers. The condition is called hyperemesis gravidarum and may
be related to increased production of a pregnancy-related hormone called human
chorionic gonadotropin.

   Dr. Johan Askling and his colleagues at the Karolinska Institutet in
Stockholm studied all Swedish births from 1987 to 1995, a total of more than 1
million. They reported in Saturday's Lancet that the overall male-to-female
ratio was 51.4 to 48.6. Among women hospitalized for hyperemesis gravidarum,
however, the ratio was 44.3 to 55.7.

   St. John's Wort Beneficial in Depression Treatment

   St. John's wort, a popular over-the-counter herbal remedy, is as effective in
treating depression as the common anxiety drug imipramine, German scientists
report.

   The team reported in Saturday's British Medical Journal that imipramine and
hypericum extract--the active ingredient in St. John's wort--were equally
effective and both were more effective than a placebo. The findings are the most
recent in a series of studies showing that St. John's wort has beneficial
properties.

   Although imipramine has been displaced by some of the newer, Prozac-like
drugs called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, it is still considered the
gold standard against which new treatments for depression are evaluated.

   Dr. Karl-O. Hiller of the Steiner Arzneimittel in Berlin and his colleagues
studied 263 patients with moderate depression. One-third were given 350
milligrams of hypericum extract three times daily, one-third were given 100
milligrams of imipramine once daily and the rest received a placebo.

   Side effects were similar in all groups. Because many depression patients
receive inadequate treatment or none at all, the authors concluded that
hypericum extract may be considered as an alternative first choice in treatment
of mild to moderate depression.

   Zinc Reduces Childhood Pneumonia, Diarrhea

   Widespread use of zinc supplements could prevent millions of cases of
pneumonia and diarrhea among children in developing nations, according to a new
study in the December Journal of Paediatrics. Researchers from the World Health
Organization and the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health combined
the findings from 10 small studies of the efficacy of zinc supplements to reach
their conclusion.

   They calculated that the supplements could reduce the incidence of diarrhea
by as much as 25% and that of pneumonia by about 41%. The effect on diarrhea
prevention compares favorably with interventions like clean water and
breast-feeding, while zinc has a greater preventive effect on pneumonia than any
current intervention. Pneumonia and diarrhea are among the leading causes of
childhood death in developing nations.

   Doctors Asked to Stop Oral Polio Vaccine Use

   The American Academy of Pediatrics is recommending that physicians abandon
the oral polio vaccine for routine childhood vaccinations and use only injected
killed-virus vaccine. Most physicians now use a combination of the two types in
a series of vaccinations, and the current recommendation is that the
killed-virus vaccine be used first.

   The problem with the oral vaccine, which uses a weakened form of the polio
virus, is that a small number of children who receive it each year develop
polio. Its advantage is that it produces immunity faster.

   The new guidelines, published in the December Pediatrics, would allow
physicians to use up their remaining supplies of the oral vaccine before
switching to the killed-virus product exclusively.

   Mortality at Record Low, Life Span Highest in 1998

   The U.S. death rate reached its lowest point ever last year and life
expectancy hit an all-time high, according to another report in the December
Pediatrics. Researchers from the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public
Health said the death rate in 1998 was 470.8 per 100,000 population. Average
life expectancy reached 76.7 years, an increase of 0.2% from the previous year.
AIDS deaths were down 21%; from homicide, down 14% and from suicide, down 6%.
Live births rose 2%, the first increase since 1990. Infant mortality was 7.2
deaths for every 1,000 live births, equaling the previous year's record low.


   *

   Medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II can be reached by e-mail at
thomas.maugh@latimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                             1085 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 13, 1999 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: UCSD scientist prepared to test Alzheimer gene therapy treatment

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   With the last federal reviews now completed, a UCSD neuroscientist said he is
prepared to proceed with the first experimental tests of a gene therapy
treatment for people suffering the mental deterioration of Alzheimer's disease.
A National Institutes of Health panel reviewed the research and plans of Dr.
Mark Tuszynski and raised no objections to his proceeding with tests in eight
people. Tuszynski plans to deliver into the patients' brains a gene that
produces a growth factor to improve the functioning of cells typically ravaged
by the disease.

   Earlier experiments in rhesus monkeys suggest that the approach can work. The
review in Bethesda, Md., by the National Institutes of Health's Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee is not required of Tuszynski, but he said he sought it to
gather additional opinions about the work and add credibility to his plan. It
was not immediately clear when the trial will begin.

   It could be within a matter of months, once patients are identified and
materials prepared. The committee Tuszynski appeared before hears many
discussions about gene therapy and recently reviewed the case of an Arizona
teen-ager who died during a gene therapy procedure designed by University of
Pennsylvania doctors to ameliorate a liver ailment. Tuszynski's gene therapy
trial is designed primarily to assess the safety of his procedure, but he hopes
for some therapeutic benefit, too. Approval of the trial by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, which is required before experiments can proceed, came in
October. The trial will include people who are in the early stages of
Alzheimer's. Tuszynski said such people should be aware enough to give informed
consent for the experimental procedure. The test may draw the attention of many
researchers, in part because there are no ways to prevent Alzheimer's disease
and there are few reliable treatments for the disorientation, lack of attention
and forgetfulness that accompany the disease. Alzheimer's affects an estimated 4
million Americans, and that number is expected to double in the next 25 years
with the aging of the population.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1086 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                     December 12, 1999 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: Treatment: Doctors try new ways to beat cancer: Making cells more
sensitive to drugs will help recovery

BODY:

   DETROIT -- There are two ways to skin a rabbit, the old adage goes. So while
some researchers are focusing on external ways to locate the prostate before a
radiation session, others are creeping up on the problem in other ways.

   Used together, doctors could soon have intimidating power over tumors.

   These methods focus on using drugs or other kinds of radiation to make cancer
cells more sensitive to radiation, much like some drugs make people more
sensitive to sun.

   In the prostate, for example, a patient needs about 80 Gray of radiation to
kill a tumor, while nearby healthy tissue will tolerate only about 70 Gray. If
doctors can find a way to make the cancer cells in the prostate more sensitive
to radiation, then a 70 Gray dose of radiation could have the extra power of,
say, 80 Gray on just the cancer cells.

   Two methods of accomplishing this goal are being explored in southeast
Michigan.

   At Karmanos Cancer Institute in Detroit, Dr. Jeffrey Forman, associate
chairman of radiation oncology, is using neutron radiation followed by
traditional photon radiotherapy. Neutron radiation, which is delivered by a
superconducting cyclotron, has more power against tumors with low oxygen
content, such as those in the prostate.

   A six-year study of this method, which involved 558 patients, concluded the
method was safe and effective. Side effects for men in the trial were reduced by
25 percent, and the rate of recurrence of the prostate cancer three years after
diagnosis was 50 percent lower than with the standard treatment alone, Forman
said.

   "This has become our standard treatment for prostate cancer," he said.

   At Henry Ford Health System, Svend Freytag, a molecular biologist, and Dr.
Jaeho Kim, chairman of the department of radiation oncology, have developed a
genetic therapy in which a virus works with drugs to make cancer cells in the
prostate more sensitive to radiation. Six patients are signed up to begin a
Phase I trial of the method's safety.

   "With this genetic approach, we try to minimize normal tissue complication,"
Kim said.

   While Forman's neutron radiation could be expanded to only those cancers with
a low oxygen content, such as some cancers in the head and neck, Henry Ford's
method could be applied to virtually all types of cancer where there is a solid
tumor. That would exclude blood cancers such as leukemia, Freytag said.

   The genetic therapy works through a pair of genes that are fused and injected
into the prostate. These "suicide genes," as Freytag calls them, would spread
through the prostate cancer like a cold virus. The patient would then be given
two FDA-approved drugs: five-fluorocytosine, an antifungal medication, and
ganciclovir, a herpes treatment.

   "Alone, they are harmless, but together with the suicide genes they are
powerful," Freytag said. "It's tumor-targeted."

   These genes, which themselves have some power to shrink tumors, use the drugs
to make cancer cells vulnerable to radiation. How vulnerable has yet to be seen,
but Henry Ford Hospital hopes to extend the genetic therapy's effectiveness in
some brain cancers next year.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1087 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    December 12, 1999, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: STATE; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 888 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy proves effective as a treatment for hemophilia;
It helps patients produce a blood-clotting protein on their own

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Doctors have used gene therapy to treat a form of hemophilia, injecting
patients with a gene that produced a blood-clotting protein without adverse side
effects.

   And in a more preliminary but likewise promising study, researchers at
Massachusetts General Hospital are reporting this week that they have used gene
therapy to revive failing heart cells.

   The blood-clotting research involves hemophilia B, which afflicts about 5,000
Americans, or 20 percent of all hemophiliacs in the United States. The patients,
who lack a protein called Factor IX, are subject to spontaneous bleeding,
arthritis and, in some cases, severe disability or death from bleeding into the
central nervous system.

   Typically, they must undergo intravenous infusions of Factor IX protein
concentrates, which provide temporary relief but last only a few days in the
bloodstream.

   Researchers from Avigen Inc., a biotechnology company based in Alameda,
Calif., and from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Stanford University
Medical Center injected three patients with a genetically engineered virus used
as a carrier, or vector, for the gene that prompts cells to produce the Factor
IX protein.

   Although this was primarily a safety trial, using low doses, the three
patients began producing Factor IX within eight weeks and have continued to do
so for six months, researchers said this week at the annual meeting of the
American Society of Hematology in New Orleans.

   The researchers said this was a combination of the first two of the three
phases required by the Food and Drug Administration for approval of a new drug.
The first phase, in a small number of patients, is to establish safety; the
second is to show efficacy; and the third, in a larger group, to confirm
efficacy.

   Because hemophilia treatments yield unambiguous results - the patient's blood
either clots or does not - they can be approved on the basis of small trials.
Avigen says it plans to test an increased dose in three additional patients, and
conclude with a further increased dose in three more patients.

   "What we have observed is that the gene has been successfully delivered and
is producing biologically active Factor IX," said John Monahan, Avigen's
president and chief executive. "Over the last several months, we were pleased to
observe that the increase in Factor IX protein activity correlated with a
significant reduction of Factor IX concentrate usage by these patients. This is
a result we would not have anticipated at this dose level."

   The trial has been closely watched by hemophilia patients and by scientists
pursuing gene therapy, who have had a barrage of negative publicity in recent
months prompted by the death of a patient in a trial at the University of
Pennsylvania and by disappointing outcomes in other studies.

   Gene therapy commonly uses viruses as vectors to carry DNA into cells, and a
vector called adenovirus was implicated in the Pennsylvania death. The vector
used by Avigen in its hemophilia research was adeno-associated virus, which
despite its name is not related to adenovirus. Adeno-associated virus, though
ubiquitous in humans, has no health consequences.

   "This particular virus is not capable of replicating by itself, so when it
enters a cell, it doesn't do a thing," said Dr. Savio Woo, president of the
American Society for Gene Therapy. Regarding the positive results, he added,
"This is the kind of trial that the community has been waiting for anxiously, so
that we can portray to the public that not all gene therapy trials are risky or
kill people or do no good."

   But the adeno-associated virus is small, so it apparently cannot carry large
genes, like the one for Factor VIII, whose absence causes the much more common
hemophilia A.

   Nevertheless, Avigen is doing research on delivering the Factor VIII gene
with the adeno-associated virus, and expects to seek permission from the FDA to
begin a clinical trial in hemophilia A next year. The Chiron Corp., a California
biotechnology company, has treated eight hemophilia A patients with a gene
therapy using a retrovirus as a vector, and plans to release its first data by
the middle of next year.

   Dr. Jeanne Lusher, chairwoman of the National Hemophilia Foundation's Medical
and Scientific Advisory Committee, called the announcement "very exciting and
encouraging, even though it's a Phase 1 study," and added that gene therapy was
"a very promising approach and may lead to a cure for people with hemophilia B."

   Although the study on heart cells is at a far earlier stage, researchers said
it was exciting because it showed the potential for gene therapy to treat heart
failure. In the study, which appeared in Tuesday's issue of the journal
Circulation, the researchers reported delivering additional copies of a gene
called SERCA2a to muscle cells from failing human hearts. Cells that
incorporated the gene began to function in a normal fashion, contracting more
quickly and more powerfully.

   "This ability to modify the contraction of failing human cardiac cells
represents an important step toward gene therapy for heart failure," said Dr.
Roger Hajjar of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cardiovascular Research
Center, who led the study, along with collaborators from Boston University
Medical Center and Imperial College in London.


LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                             1088 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    December 12, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Opinion; Part M; Page 4; Letters Desk

LENGTH: 38 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY

BODY:


   * Re using biotech to plump up hogs (Dec. 8): To heck with farm animals! They
need to find a way of reversing that technique. What we really need is gene
therapy to slim down fat humans.

   ALICE L. RAMIREZ

   Los Angeles

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1999


                             1089 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 740 words

HEADLINE: FIVE QUESTIONS: for DR. W. FRENCH ANDERSON;
The Long Horizon Of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

BODY:

   IT has been nine years since Dr. W. French Anderson performed the first gene
therapy experiment, on a 4-year-old girl with an immune system disorder. In
those days, the idea that diseases could be treated, or even cured, by infusing
patients with healthy DNA was the bright light of medicine, offering hope to
patients and the promise of profits to investors. But the light has dimmed
considerably.

   In September, an 18-year-old Arizona man, Jesse Gelsinger, died in an
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania after receiving a dose of
corrective genes encased in adenovirus, a weakened cold virus; his was the first
death directly attributed to gene therapy. Then came word that other scientists
had failed to report safety data to a National Institutes of Health oversight
committee.

    The committee met last week to review Mr. Gelsinger's death and the safety
of adenovirus, and to debate a proposal opposed by the biotechnology industry
that would force researchers to disclose all patient deaths, whether or not
related to gene therapy.

   But not all the headlines have been gloomy. Avigen, a biotechnology company
in Alameda, Calif., has reported good results using gene therapy to treat a form
of hemophilia.

   Last week, Dr. Anderson, director of the gene therapy program at the
University of Southern California and the founder of a pioneering gene therapy
company now owned by Novartis, discussed these developments and the prospects
for commercial gene therapy. Here are excerpts from the conversation.   SHERYL
GAY STOLBERG

Q. What impact has the death at Penn had on interest in gene therapy?
A. I don't think it has affected it much. The whole field of biotech has had a
bit of hard times, but gene therapy particularly, because the fact is there
haven't been any products. We are probably still a minimum of three years away
from anybody having a product out there. This definitely throws some cold water
on investment.
Q. Why are marketable products taking so long to emerge?
A. The human body has much better defenses against manipulating its DNA than we
thought it had. We can do miracles in a tissue culture dish. You can cure cancer
in mice with gene therapy. But then you go to the human body, and we face three
major problems.

   The first is, how do you get a gene into enough cells to make a difference?
The second is the body's defense mechanisms, which basically shut down the genes
once they get there. And then the third is figuring out how to get genes into
cells at the right place, at the right time, making the right amount of product
to treat a given disease.
Q. In 1995, you sold Genetic Therapy, the company you founded, to Sandoz, now
part of Novartis. Now there are reports that Novartis is scaling back, and has
abandoned its largest study, for treatment of glioblastoma, a brain cancer. What
happened?
A. We still don't have a product.

   The glioblastoma data hasn't been made public yet, but it's so widespread on
the grapevine that it isn't confidential anymore. The survival curve between
those who received the gene therapy and those who did not was basically no
different. Even though individual patients were helped, and there are patients
alive now who would have been dead, it was not a product that a major
pharmaceutical company would want to go forward with.
Q. In retrospect, did Novartis pay too much for your company?
A. I think the jury is still out. The total investment was around $315 million.

   At the time they bought it, I got annoyed by some people at Sandoz. They told
us that the things we thought were so exciting would probably not work right
away. So, Sandoz, they had their heads on right -- they bought it as a long-term
investment.

   Now, if it takes another 10 years before gene therapy comes up with a major
product, then they will have paid too much.
Q. Look into your crystal ball. Is the business outlook for gene therapy still
exciting?
A. All around the world, there is progress being made. The first indications
that we might be tipping over the hump are in cardiovascular disease, cancer,
AIDS and hemophilia. We are seeing signs that there are potential products, real
products.

   Over the next two or three years, if we don't hit another brick wall, and
several of these products get into Phase 3 trials and things look encouraging,
the business outlook for gene therapy will brighten again and money will flow
back into the field.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. W. French Anderson

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1999


                             1090 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 54 words

HEADLINE: December 5-11;
Hope for Hemophiliacs

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Doctors have successfully used gene therapy to treat a form of hemophilia.
The results, which produced a blood-clotting protein without adverse side
effects, were reported in research connected with hemophilia B, which affects
about 5,000 Americans, or 20 percent of all hemophiliacs in America.   LAWRENCE
M. FISHER


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1999


                             1091 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             December 11, 1999, SATURDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: Gene research rules may change

BODY:


   Two months after the first death from experimental gene therapy, an advisory
panel is proposing tough new rules for researchers.

   Many of those gene researchers have failed to follow rules that require
reports of certain medical problems to the National Institutes of Health,
officials said Friday as the advisory committee concluded a three-day hearing.

   "There has been significant noncompliance," said Lana Skirboll of the Office
of Science Policy. "There will be action. There will be changes to clarify and
to respond to public concerns."

   During the three days of testimony, members of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee heard reports from researchers who admitted they had not promptly
reported problems as government guidelines require.

   The researchers included a team from the University of Pennsylvania, where a
patient's death was the first blamed directly on gene therapy experiments. Some
Pennsylvania doctors apologized Thursday for lapses in filing reports to the
National Institutes of Health.

   At issue is a federal requirement for reporting "serious adverse events" --
including death and medical conditions that require hospitalization -- among
patients in experimental programs.

   FDA guidelines require scientists to report serious adverse events only if
they were unexpected or if the conditions were related to the experimental
treatment.

   The proposed rules would require such events among patients in a study even
if the events are not related to the experimental treatment and even if the
medical conditions were expected.

   Under the current rules, the FDA is not required to make the adverse events
public and thus can protect trade secrets and commercial information. Some
researchers have claimed that reports about adverse events contain proprietary
information and, thus, they were reluctant to reveal problems.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                             1092 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             December 11, 1999, SATURDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: Gene research rules may change

BODY:


   Two months after the first death from experimental gene therapy, an advisory
panel is proposing tough new rules for researchers.

   Many of those gene researchers have failed to follow rules that require
reports of certain medical problems to the National Institutes of Health,
officials said Friday as the advisory committee concluded a three-day hearing.

   "There has been significant noncompliance," said Lana Skirboll of the Office
of Science Policy. "There will be action. There will be changes to clarify and
to respond to public concerns."

   During the three days of testimony, members of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee heard reports from researchers who admitted they had not promptly
reported problems as government guidelines require.

   The researchers included a team from the University of Pennsylvania, where a
patient's death was the first blamed directly on gene therapy experiments. Some
Pennsylvania doctors apologized Thursday for lapses in filing reports to the
National Institutes of Health.

   At issue is a federal requirement for reporting "serious adverse events" --
including death and medical conditions that require hospitalization -- among
patients in experimental programs.

   FDA guidelines require scientists to report serious adverse events only if
they were unexpected or if the conditions were related to the experimental
treatment.

   The proposed rules would require such events among patients in a study even
if the events are not related to the experimental treatment and even if the
medical conditions were expected.

   Under the current rules, the FDA is not required to make the adverse events
public and thus can protect trade secrets and commercial information. Some
researchers have claimed that reports about adverse events contain proprietary
information and, thus, they were reluctant to reveal problems.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1999


                             1093 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 2; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1552 words

HEADLINE: Is Complexity Interlinked With Disaster? Ask on Jan. 1;
A Theory of Risk and Technology Is Facing a Millennial Test

BYLINE: By LAURENCE ZUCKERMAN

BODY:

   Charles Perrow plans to rise early on Dec. 31 to see what happens as the
calendar turns over to the year 2000, first in New Zealand and then, hour by
hour, across the globe. It will be an unusual activity for the Yale sociologist,
who says he rarely watches television.

   But Mr. Perrow sees the planet on New Year's Day as a giant laboratory for
the influential theory he formulated in the early 1980's about the nature of
catastrophic accidents. "This is going to be very exciting, to see just how
interdependent we are," he said of the date change, which could disable
computers around the world that have been programmed to read the year as two
digits rather than four.

    The varied and unpredictable ways in which systems interact with one another
is at the heart of the theory that Mr. Perrow described in his seminal 1984 book
"Normal Accidents: Living With High-Risk Technologies."

   Mr. Perrow found that the organizations designed to run and safeguard modern
technology were so complex and so tightly integrated that accidents are
inevitable, or "normal," even when all the proper safety procedures are
followed.

   Thus, disasters like the near-meltdown of the nuclear reactor at Three Mile
Island in Pennsylvania and the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger cannot
be traced to discrete errors or blamed solely on "operator error," as has been
the typical approach in the past. They are the natural result of the systems
themselves. They are accidents that are inconceivable -- until they happen.

   "Normal Accidents," which was reissued by Princeton University Press this
year, first appeared at a time when organizational theory was beginning to catch
on with many social scientists. The book helped inspire a small cadre of what
Lee Clarke, a Rutgers University professor who studied with Mr. Perrow, calls
"social ambulance chasers" who examine the nature of high-profile accidents.

   Since then, normal-accident theory and its intellectual cousins have begun to
spread from engineering into other fields like medicine and finance where
researchers are using it to try to better understand the nature of such
potential disasters as a stock market crash.

   "It was an idea whose time had come," Mr. Perrow said of his theory. "The
field was ready for it, which is not surprising because we have just revved up
the technology so far and run into these catastrophes one after the other."

   Indeed, it is hard to open a newspaper these days without seeing an article
related to normal-accident theory. Last week alone there were four prominent
examples.

   The small cadre of accident theorists in the medical profession received a
huge boost when President Clinton endorsed a new report by the National Academy
of Sciences calling for a systemic approach to decreasing lethal medical
accidents that kill more people each year than AIDS.

   At the same time, the National Institutes of Health held a meeting to debate
whether greater regulation was needed after the death in September of
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, the first fatality directly connected to gene
therapy.

   Last week a Florida jury acquitted two employees of an airplane maintenance
company charged with deliberately causing the 1996 crash of ValuJet Flight 562,
which killed 110 people. The verdict appeared to endorse the view of some
analysts and journalists that the crash was a normal accident rather then the
result of criminal negligence.

   Finally, the disappearance of the Mars Polar Lander last week after entering
the Martian atmosphere resulted in a searching examination of what might have
gone wrong with the lander and NASA's management of the entire program.

   "As a world we keep developing more and more complicated technologies that
require more and more complicated organizations," said Karlene Roberts, an
organizational safety expert at the Haas School of Business of the University of
California at Berkeley, "and nobody understands how those organizations work."

   In the early 1980's, Ms. Roberts and several colleagues at Berkeley were
asking many of the same questions Mr. Perrow was. They decided to look at three
organizations that manage high-risk technologies with low rates of accidents --
aircraft carriers in the United States Navy, the nation's air traffic control
system, Calif., and the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant in California -- to
see what made them successful.

   Some of Mr. Perrow's followers have drawn sharp distinctions between this
so-called high-reliability theory and normal-accident theory. But Ms. Roberts
and Todd La Porte, Berkeley political scientists, argue that the two schools are
complementary. Some social scientists say they combine both schools in their
work.

   Given the range of views on both sides, the differences are sometimes hard to
divine. But the normal-accident theorists appear to be much more pessimistic
about society's ability to manage hazardous technologies and much more skeptical
about the nature of political power.

   Mr. Perrow, who developed his ideas after serving on a panel that examined
what went wrong at Three Mile Island, argues that some technologies, like
nuclear power, should simply be abandoned because they are not worth the risk.

   The high-reliability theorists do not for the most part ask such searching
questions, preferring instead to accept the existence of hazardous technologies
and to focus on ways to manage them more safely.

   Whereas the high-reliability theorists believe that many backup systems can
enhance safety, normal-accident theorists argue that the increased complexity
resulting from redundancy actually increases the likelihood of an accident.
"They have more trust in management and safety procedures and so on than I
have," said Mr. Perrow, who added that he had always been fearful of large
organizations.

   Ms. Roberts calls "Normal Accidents" a "beacon" and warmly refers to Mr.
Perrow as a curmudgeon. But she says that his extreme views have prevented him
from spending time inside organizations actually learning how they work.

   "If you are going to be too rough on management," she said, "then you get
into the sabotage question, and they won't tell you anything."

   Like the high-reliability theorists, Mr. Perrow does think about what make
certain organizations safer than others. For example, he argues that commercial
aviation is a highly reliable system, even though flying would itself appear to
be extremely risky.

   One reason is that the riskiest activities involved in flying -- taking off
and landing -- occur frequently, keeping the skills of pilots and air traffic
controllers sharp. Moreover, the nation's air transport system is surrounded by
organizations -- the National Transportation Safety Board and the Federal
Aviation Administration, for example -- that are committed to preventing
failures. Some, like the airlines and airplane manufacturers, will suffer
directly if confidence in the system declines.

   Finally, and this is where Mr. Perrow's political perspective is at its most
potent, he argues that because jet travel is frequented by society's elite, they
have a vested interest in keeping it safe. On the other hand, chemical plants
are often in poor districts, far away from the elite, and therefore, he says,
have a lower safety threshold.

   To those already fearful of modern technology, the saving grace of both
normal accident theory and high-reliability theory is that while both assume
that organizational breakdowns are inevitable, they agree that such incidents
only rarely translate into major disasters.

   "It is hard to have a catastrophe; everything has to come together just right
(or wrong)," Mr. Perrow writes in a new afterword to "Normal Accidents." (No one
died as a result of the Three Mile Island accident, he points out.)

   He calls this phenomenon the "Union Carbide factor," after the company that
operated the chemical plant in Bhopal, India, where a deadly gas leak in 1984
killed 4,000 and injured 200,000. In that case, so many mistakes were made by
the company and so many things went wrong at once that what might have been a
minor accident was transformed into a major disaster.

   The Union Carbide factor is one reason Mr. Perrow and other accident
theorists are not seriously concerned about the arrival of the year 2000. Mr.
Perrow believes that there will be some disruptions but that they will result in
only minor inconveniences.

   But then again, he is not entirely certain.

   While billions of dollars have been spent to fix computers at individual
companies and organizations, there has been less focus on what will happen when
these computers interact across networks. A computer that is considered
"year-2000 compliant" at one company may cripple a compliant computer at another
because software writers in the two organizations took different approaches to
fixing the problem.

   That is why Mr. Perrow and the other accident and reliability theorists are
eagerly waiting to see just how tightly knit the world is.

   "People have mental maps about how their systems work," said Mr. Clarke, the
Rutgers professor whose most recent book examines the "fantasy plans" that
organizations create to justify high-risk technologies. "To the extent things
break, it will give us insight into how those mental maps work."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles Perrow at a dormant power plant in New Haven. (Don
Hamerman)(pg. B13); One catastrophe after another: Above left, the space shuttle
Challenger explodes after liftoff (Steve Helber/Associated Press); center top,
engine parts of a ValuJet airliner that crashed in Florida (Agence
France-Presse); center bottom, an artist's rendering of the Mars spacecraft that
vanished just before landing last week (NASA); right, the Three Mile Island
nuclear plant before a near-meltdown. (Bill Bowden/York Daily Record, via
Associated Press)(pg. B11)

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1999


                             1094 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: Committee Considers Change in Reporting On Gene Therapies

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Dec. 10

BODY:

   Addressing heightened concern about the safety of gene therapy experiments
and the openness of the scientists who conduct them, a government advisory
committee considered today whether to require researchers to make information
about all patient deaths public, whether related to the therapy or not.

   No agreement was reached on the plan, drafted by the staff of the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee, the National Institutes of Health panel that oversees
gene therapy research. It was aired on the final day of a three-day meeting
devoted to examining the death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old Tucson man who
in September became the first person killed by gene therapy.

    The proposed rule change drew criticism from the biotech industry, the
American Society for Gene Therapy and even some members of the advisory panel
itself. Dr. Robert Spiegel, chief medical officer for the Schering-Plough
Corporation, described the proposal as "poorly thought through."

   At issue is how the committee can restore public trust in the safety of gene
therapy without duplicating the efforts of the Food and Drug Administration,
which regulates the experiments. The F.D.A. already collects so-called
adverse-event reports on patients who have suffered side effects from gene
therapy -- roughly 1,000 reports a year, said Dr. Philip Noguchi, the agency's
top expert in the field -- but keeps the data confidential except in unusual
circumstances.

   The mission of the advisory committee is to foster openness. The panel
already has rules requiring reporting, but it has learned in recent months that
some researchers are not complying with them. The proposal considered today
would require scientists to report more information, more quickly, to the
advisory committee than to the F.D.A.

   It would also preclude researchers from classifying the reports as trade
secrets, as at least one company, Schering-Plough, has tried to do in the past.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1999


                             1095 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 11, 1999 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 973 words

HEADLINE: FULLER DISCLOSURE IS PROPOSED IN GENE-THERAPY EXPERIMENTS

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Scientists would be required to publicly disclose any deaths or other
"serious adverse events" that occur to patients enrolled in gene-therapy
experiments under far-reaching government guidelines aired here yesterday.

   The proposals were discussed at a meeting of the government's Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee (RAC). They aim to ensure public accountability for patient
safety as more and more private companies jump into the hot new field of gene
therapy.

   Although the private sector must disclose adverse events to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, the regulatory agency cannot make the information public
without the permission of the firms. And while some companies agree, an
increasing number do not for fear of disclosing trade secrets.

   "People are allowed to keep things secret now - and they have," said Lana R.
Skirboll, associate director for science policy at the National Institutes of
Health.

   Under draft guidelines proposed by the NIH last month, the scientists in
charge of human gene-therapy experiments would have to report any serious
adverse events within 15 days to the NIH Office of Recombinant DNA Activities.

   That office, in turn, would notify the RAC, a 15-member advisory group made
up of scientists, ethicists and public representatives, and charged with
protecting the safety of human gene-therapy subjects. By design, the RAC
conducts its business in public.

   Gene therapy "is a new and unproven area," said Eric T. Juengst, an RAC
member and bioethics professor at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
"There is a reason for getting more information."

   Industry representatives, however, told the RAC that the proposed guidelines
would violate patient confidentiality, add another layer of bureaucracy to the
federal reporting process, and slow the progress of cutting-edge medicine that
holds great promise for treating - and possibly curing - a wide range of
diseases from cancer to hemophilia by giving patients the genes they lack.

   The proposed plan is "contrary to the public interest" and "poorly thought
through," said Dr. Robert Spiegel, a senior vice president at Schering-Plough
Corp. of Madison, N.J.

   A board member of the National Hemophilia Foundation also argued against the
proposed guidelines. Patients in gene-therapy trials understand that they are at
risk, and "they want to be pioneers," said Michael Coyne, an emergency-room
doctor whose son has hemophilia.

   LeRoy Walters, an ethics professor at George Washington University and former
chairman of the RAC, testified that public disclosure was good for almost
everyone.

   "It's good ethics," he said, because it protects the patient. "It's good
medicine," he added, because it helps insure that doctors will do no harm. "It's
good science," he continued, because researchers in the emerging gene-therapy
field need to be kept informed of the latest data, including problems.

   "Is it also good for business?" Walter asked. "I'm not sure." While the
proposed requirements might undermine a firm's competitive advantage, he said
that had to be weighed against the many benefits of public disclosure.

   Walters urged the RAC to go even further, and set up an online database of
adverse events during gene-therapy trials, with summary reports to be issued by
the RAC on a quarterly basis.

   The proposed guidelines would amend existing NIH rules governing the
reporting of serious adverse events in gene-therapy experiments. Some of the
changes are clarifications, but there are also a number of new provisions.

   The guidelines would make clear that all serious adverse events, including
those that doctors do not think stemmed from the gene therapy itself, must be
reported. They are defined as any expected or unexpected death, life-threatening
event, hospitalization, disability or birth defect that occurs during a human
gene-therapy trial. Even problems that may have stemmed from the patient's
underlying medical condition - not the gene-therapy treatment - are to be
reported.

   The draft guidelines state that researchers should not put proprietary
information or trade secrets in their adverse-events reports.

   The rules would apply to all scientists funded by the NIH as well as to
non-NIH-funded trials conducted in an institution that receives NIH support.
Because most privately funded gene-therapy trials are conducted in NIH-supported
teaching hospitals, the proposed guidelines, for all practical purposes, would
cover virtually all gene-therapy trials.

   The FDA, which is also pushing for greater public disclosure, said the
government would likely need more money and resources if the proposed guidelines
were adopted.

   Ruth Macklin, an RAC member and bioethics professor at Albert Einstein
College of Medicine in New York, applauded the University of Pennsylvania's
decision to promptly disclose to the RAC the death of an 18-year-old Arizona
youth in a gene-therapy trial in September.

   The death - the nation's first to be directly connected to an experimental
gene therapy - was the subject of two days of intense scrutiny by the RAC
earlier this week.

   But Macklin said it was clear from news accounts after the Penn death that
other scientific teams have not been as forthcoming. She said they had put up "a
number of defenses," including the need to protect patients' privacy rights,
trade secrets, and ignorance about reporting requirements. "The new proposals
make very clear what has to be reported," she said.

   Under the proposed regulations, the accounts of adverse events would not
actually name patients, but they would describe what happened to them during a
trial.

   The guidelines are being considered by the RAC and another advisory group. A
final decision on implementing the guidelines will be made by the NIH director
after both groups have weighed in.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1096 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 11, 1999, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-20

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: PANEL PROPOSES TOUGHER GENE THERAPY RULES

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON -

BODY:


   Two months after the first death from experimental gene therapy, an advisory
panel is proposing tough new rules for researchers.

   Many of those gene researchers have failed to follow rules that require
reports of certain medical problems to the National Institutes of Health,
officials said yesterday as the NIH advisory committee concluded a three-day
hearing.

   "There has been significant noncompliance," said Lana Skirboll of the Office
of Science Policy. "There will be action. There will be changes to clarify and
to respond to public concerns."

   During the three days of testimony, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
heard reports from researchers who admitted they had not promptly reported
problems as NIH guidelines require.

   The researchers included a team from the University of Pennsylvania, where a
patient's death was the first blamed directly on gene therapy experiments. Some
Pennsylvania doctors publicly apologized Thursday for lapses in filing reports.

   At issue is a federal requirement for reporting "serious adverse events"
including death and conditions that require hospitalization - among patients
enrolled in experimental treatment programs.

   FDA guidelines require scientists to report serious adverse events only if
they were unexpected or if the conditions were related to the experimental
treatment.

   The proposed NIH rules would require reporting such events among patients in
a study even if the events are not related to the experimental treatment and if
the medical conditions were expected.

   Under the current rules, the FDA is not required to make the adverse events
public and thus can protect trade secrets and commercial information. But
reports to the DNA advisory panel and the NIH are discussed in an open, public
forum.

   Some researchers have claimed that reports about adverse events contain
proprietary information and, thus, were reluctant to tell the panel or NIH about
the problems.

   "There has been confusion about compliance" among researchers, said the
committee's chairwoman, Claudia Mickelson of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

   She said the 15 committee members are not yet in agreement on new guidelines,
but she said that there will be a recommendation for tough new rules.

   The guidelines became a hot issue after Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson,
Ariz., died in September while undergoing a procedure at the University of
Pennsylvania.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000


                             1097 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      December 11, 1999, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Panel suggests tighter rules for gene therapy research

BYLINE: Paul Recer


BODY: WASHINGTON - Two months after the first death from experimental
gene therapy, an advisory panel is proposing tough new rules for
researchers.


    Many of those gene researchers have failed to follow rules that
require reports of certain medical problems to the National
Institutes of Health, officials said Friday as the NIH advisory
committee concluded a three-day hearing.


    "There has been significant noncompliance," said Lana Skirboll of
the Office of Science Policy. "There will be action. There will be
changes to clarify and to respond to public concerns."


    During the three days of testimony, members of the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee heard reports from researchers who admitted they
had not promptly reported problems as NIH guidelines require.


    The researchers included a team from the University of
Pennsylvania, where a patient's death was the first blamed directly
on gene therapy experiments. Some Pennsylvania doctors publicly
apologized Thursday for lapses in filing reports to the NIH.


    At issue is a federal requirement for reporting "serious adverse
events" - including death and medical conditions that require
hospitalization - among patients enrolled in experimental treatment
programs.


    FDA guidelines require scientists to report serious adverse events
only if they were unexpected or if the conditions were related to
the experimental treatment.


    The proposed NIH rules would require such events among patients in
a study even if the events are not related to the experimental
treatment and even if the medical conditions were expected.


    Under the current rules, the FDA is not required to make the
adverse events public and thus can protect trade secrets and
commercial information. But reports to the DNA advisory panel and
the NIH are discussed in a public forum.


    Some researchers have claimed reports about adverse events contain
proprietary information and, thus, were reluctant to tell the panel
or NIH about the problems.


    "There has been confusion about compliance" among researchers, said
the committee's chairperson, Claudia Mickelson of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.


    She said the 15 committee members are not yet in agreement about
new guidelines but said there will be a recommendation for tough
new rules.


    Skirboll said NIH director Dr. Harold Varmus is awaiting a
recommendation from the advisory committee.



LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1999


                             1098 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      December 11, 1999 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: LIMP 'LADY' IS MILDER WILDER

BYLINE: By David Cuthbert Staff writer

BODY:

   I love a mystery and I love old movies. And, on occasion, I have also - dare
I say it? - loved Gene Wilder, usually when he's working with Mel Brooks.
Therefore, I should be the ideal audience for Wilder's seriocomic mystery movies
on A&E set in the 1930s.

   Alas, the first one, which established his character of Larry "Cash" Carter,
a mystery-solving theater director, engaged me not. And his new one, "The Lady
in Question," also generates no emotion stronger than the old ennui.

   I don't believe that there are any hard and fast rules in these matters, but
I would submit that it's a mistake to kill off your most interesting character,
played by your most interesting actor. Claire Bloom is the lady in question and
even severely de-glamorized, she is so strikingly beautiful, her performance so
confident, she makes you believe the silly lines she's saying are worth your
attention. But all too soon she's gone and so, I'm afraid, was my interest in
"The Lady in Question."

   Set in 1938, the story's all about what the government (our own) used to call
"a premature anti-Fascist." Bloom plays one, a rich American woman dedicated to
rescuing Jews from Nazi Germany. In fragile health, she announces one night
after her latest return trip from the fatherland that she's altering her will,
leaving the bulk of her estate to The Cause and nominal sums to her heirs.
There's all sorts of skullduggery afoot amongst staff and family, none of it
particularly compelling.

   One intriguing plot thread has Michael Cumpsty as a Nazi passing himself off
as a wine merchant and clearly up to no good. But then he's killed, too, and one
is obliged to pay attention to what Wilder's up to, which is not much, I'm
afraid.

   This is Wilder as he prefers to present himself these days -- as a kind of
light romantic actor who doesn't stoop to shtick, which is a pity. Because the
aging Wilder just can't pull off this kind of mock-Cary Grant role, especially
with material this thin.

   And as co-writer of the script, Wilder has not given actor Wilder any
opportunity to be funny. What kind of sense does that make? Even in his worst
movies ("Haunted Honeymoon," also a period piece, comes to mind), one could
count on a few comic interludes to punctuate the tedium. But this is very lean
Gene; milder Wilder.

   He does have a substantial leading lady in Broadway's Cherry Jones ("The
Heiress"), but using Jones as a sort of middle-age Nancy Drew strikes me as a
great waste of talent, although her radiant smile and presence help to warm
things up from time to time.

   Now, about that title: Didn't the drag artiste Charles Busch write and star
in a hit off-Broadway movie spoof called "The Lady in Question"? If memory
serves, it also had Nazi underpinnings, with Busch playing a noble Norma
Shearer-Greer Garson concert pianist heroine. Maybe A&E would have been better
off filming that one instead.

   Big, beefy Mike Starr adds some visual contrast to Wilder and B-movie flavor
as cop Tony Rossini, who does Wilder's leg work, allowing him more time for limp
romantic moments and rehearsal scenes that add nothing apart from setting up a
musical tag at the end.

   Among the supporting cast, Barbara Sukowa has her moments as the mysterious
companion Rachel Singer (who plays piano; another Busch borrowing?), Kerry
McPherson is cute as devious diva-in-training Dorie Bernheim, and John Benjamin
Hickey plays a mousy secretary carrying on multiple romances. I must also
mention an actress named Dixie Seatle, who plays Gertie, the Teutonic maid,
because she has fun with the part and anyone named Dixie Seatle should be
encouraged in her endeavors, whatever they might be.

   All the period details are in place, but tend to stand out a bit much, and
the involved denouement comes out of nowhere.

   Ah, well. There's always "Dalziel & Pascoe."

GRAPHIC: 'THE LADY IN QUESTION' Mystery movie set in the 1930s, starring and
co-written by Gene Wilder. Sunday, 7 p.m. (A&E) GRAPHIC Gene therapy: Wilder and
his leading lady, Cherry Jones, who is not 'The Lady in Question.' [COLOR] PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1999


                             1099 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 11, 1999, Saturday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 856 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Firms Resist Publicity; U.S. Regulators, Researchers Are
Divided on Releasing Information About Adverse Effects

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:




   Federal officials overseeing the field of gene therapy searched in vain
yesterday for common ground between drug companies that want to keep details of
their experiments secret and advocates who favor a more open airing of the
field's recently revealed problems.

   On the final day of an emotionally exhausting gene therapy conference at the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, federal officials wrangled over the
difference between "serious" and "severe" side effects, biotechnology company
officials pushed for less burdensome regulations, and parents of sick children
pleaded for more help from both the regulators and those who hope to profit from
gene therapy.

   The three-day meeting was prompted by the awkward confluence of two events:
the September death of a teenager in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
experiment, and recent efforts by some gene therapy companies to scale back the
amount of information about side-effects they must submit to the NIH.

   Researchers and companies testing genetic therapies on people are required by
the NIH to release to the public more details of their work than are researchers
who test conventional drugs. Those rules were devised to ensure that subtle
side-effect trends are noticed more quickly, and to foster public confidence in
the novel field that seeks to cure diseases by giving people new genes.

   Gene therapy has yet to cure anyone. But as the field has grown from one
dominated by academic researchers to one driven by companies with millions of
dollars at stake, pressure has built to trim the NIH public disclosure rules and
have research results reviewed mostly by the Food and Drug Administration, which
keeps such information confidential.

   "Virtually every detail about the design, size or status of a clinical trial
is of potential competitive value," according to a statement by the
Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) for the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee (RAC) yesterday. That includes details of "adverse events," the
industry group said, which "are, by definition, trade secrets and confidential
commercial information."

   BIO board member H. Stewart Parker told officials that biotechnology
companies were willing to submit to the NIH some details of the most serious and
unexpected adverse events as they occurred but only if the companies and the
agency could first agree on how much of that information would be made public.
NIH now makes all such information available to the public.

   Less serious adverse events should not have to be reported to the NIH at all
except in annual summary reports, Parker and other industry representatives
said, because those details are too easily misconstrued negatively by the
public.

   "Immediate disclosure of adverse events is bad science," said an official
from Schering-Plough Corp. of Kenilworth, N.J., a company whose recent effort to
declare its NIH adverse-events reports "confidential" helped prompt yesterday's
reassessment of reporting rules.

   Others at the meeting objected to that view, saying so much is still unknown
about gene therapy that open sharing of results may help prevent tragedies like
the one that befell Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona teenager who died in September.
Even if gene therapy is not more dangerous than other experimental approaches,
some said, it is scary enough to the public to warrant extra openness.

   "My feeling is it's still a unique field," said W. French Anderson, the
University of Southern California researcher who conducted the nation's first
gene therapy test in 1990. "Standard medical research doesn't strike the same
nerve as changing genes and changing the core of what we are as human beings.
It's not a safety issue. It's a public confidence issue. And that will remain
until people are really starting to see some cures," perhaps in three to five
years, Anderson predicted.

   Some RAC members questioned whether the NIH had the right to demand so much
data if it didn't have the resources to make sense of it. The agency is years
behind in its effort to create an online database of gene therapy trials and
adverse events.

   Others expressed concern that public reporting could run afoul of new patient
privacy regulations under construction. Even a few details in an adverse-event
report could inadvertently and illegally give away the identity of a clinical
test volunteer with a rare disease. If that's the case, some said, it may be
that gene therapy volunteers should be asked to sign a special consent form,
which states that they accept the possibility that their identities may become
public.

   Asked if that extra level of public exposure was appropriate to ask of
volunteers, Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, acknowledged that some might not be
as willing as he and his son were to step into the limelight. "That's a tough
one. It's a personal choice," he said. "But I'd advise people to be willing to
be public, because it's so important that all the information get out."

   RAC officials said they would continue the discussion at future meetings, and
would welcome public comments on the issue.


CORRECTION-DATE: December 14, 1999

CORRECTION:
CLARIFICATION

   A quote from the Biotechnology Industry Organization that ran in large type
in an article Saturday about the release of information about gene therapy
experiments incorrectly combined words from two sentences in the organization's
statement. It should have said that the organization stated that data about
"adverse events . . . are, by definition, trade secrets and confidential
commercial information."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1999


                             1100 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              December 10, 1999, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 226 words

HEADLINE: Lapses cited in gene study death

BYLINE: BY RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON

BODY:


   Researchers in charge of a fatal University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
experiment apologized for their lapses Thursday while parents of sick children
pleaded with federal regulators not to slow the pace of inherited disease
research.

   At a meeting of regulators and scientists in a crowded auditorium at the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., federal investigators revealed
additional evidence that Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona teenager who died from the
treatment, should not have had the experimental treatment in September.

   They also made public for the first time that the Penn researchers changed
the rules for inclusion in the study without the required approval of the Food
and Drug Administration. And they provided details of deaths of monkeys getting
a treatment similar to the one Gelsinger got -- deaths that according to FDA
regulations should have been reported within 15 days, but which did not get
reported until after Gelsinger died, more than a year later.

   Those problems stand in addition to previous findings of improprieties,
including that Gelsinger was too sick to meet the criteria for participating in
the study and that scientists failed to halt the experiment and notify federal
officials as required in two instances when volunteers suffered serious toxic
reactions before Gelsinger was enrolled.

GRAPHIC: WASHINGTON POST

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                             1101 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                    December 10, 1999, FRIDAY, FINAL MARKETS

SECTION: NEWS; NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 600 words

BODY:


   3 U.S. soldiers die in Kuwait plane crash

   A U.S. Air Force plane carrying 96 people made an emergency landing without
landing gear at Kuwait International Airport today, killing three American
soldiers and injuring 16. The C-130 was carrying troops to locations throughout
Kuwait, Air Force officials in Washington said. The crew declared an in-flight
emergency and diverted the plane to Kuwait's airport. Under a 10-year defense
agreement that Kuwait signed with the United States at the end of the 1991
Persian Gulf War, several thousand American troops are stationed in Kuwait.

   Search goes on for missing Marines

   Rescue crews off San Diego searched today for seven Marines still missing
after their helicopter crashed Thursday afternoon and sank into the Pacific
Ocean during a training flight far from shore. Eleven others were saved. Marine
Lt. Scott Bowman said only a few pieces of debris were found overnight. The
CH-46 Sea Knight had been flying from one ship to another when it crashed about
15 miles southwest of San Diego. The helicopter's wreckage was submerged in
3,600 feet of water. Only a few pieces of the helicopter were recovered, the
Marine Corps said. An approaching storm threatened to halt the search.

   No failures on EgyptAir plane, U.S. says

   Analysis of the cockpit voice tape from EgyptAir Flight 990 strengthens the
belief that neither problems with the aircraft nor an explosion caused the plane
to crash Oct. 31, federal aviation investigators said today. "No sounds have
been detected that would be consistent with mechanical failures or an
explosion," said James Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety
Board. "Routine air traffic control communications are heard throughout the
recording, and at no time did a member of the flight crew use radio
communications to advise air traffic control of either an emergency or a
mechanical failure or concern."

   New rules planned for gene research

   Gene therapy researchers would be required to report all serious medical
problems affecting patients in their clinical trials under new rules being
proposed by an advisory committee probing the first death believed to be caused
by a gene therapy treatment. The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee was
concluding three days of meetings today, hearing reports that current rules are
not being followed. Members urged that all serious problems be reported, whether
or not they are linked to the treatment being tested. Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of
Tucson, Ariz., died in September, four days after receiving an injection of a
transfer gene.

   EU expands list of potential members

   The European Union today added six countries to those now eligible to
negotiate entry into the organization, and made Turkey a candidate but said it
must first improve its record on human rights and good neighborly relations.
Bulgaria, Romania, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia and Malta are now formal
candidates for membership.  Their entry talks are expected to open early next
year.  All, except Malta, were put on hold in 1997, when the EU agreed to open
negotiations with Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus and
Slovenia.

   Disney to change video game character

   The Walt Disney Co. has agreed to change a sombrero-wearing character in the
"Toy Story 2" video game because it offended some Hispanics. One level of the
game features a villain with a mustache, bullet bandolier and a sombrero, which
Hispanic activists said was a Mexican stereotype. In 1993, Disney altered some
lyrics to a song in "Aladdin" after Arab-American activists labeled them racist.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                             1102 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        December 10, 1999, Friday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 36

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: High-tech hogs: Gene therapy used to help pigs grow 40% larger,
quicker

BYLINE: PHILIP BRASHER

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Here come the super pigs. Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured
out a way to make young hogs grow 40% larger and faster.

   Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of the pigs' growth
hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers -- and eventually could even be
used to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle deterioration
in AIDS and cancer patients.

   "We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining technology
that will change the face of how agriculture is done," said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston.

   The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions in a
growing worldwide controversy over genetically engineered food. The United
States already is locked in a trade war with the European Union over the EU's
ban on beef from cattle injected with hormones.

   "I don't think most consumers are very interested in eating hormone-treated
meats," said Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist for the Environmental Defense
Fund.

   Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in genetics, nutrition and
housing and the use of hormones in cattle.

   But the results reported by Schwartz's team, which are published in the
December issue of Nature Biotechnology, are especially dramatic. All the
improvements made in hog production over the past two decades have pigs maturing
only 10% faster than they used to.

   The key to the new technology is a synthetic chemical that's inserted into a
biodegradable piece of DNA, then injected into the leg of a 2-week-old pig. The
chemical in turn causes the pig's pituitary gland to secrete higher than normal
levels of growth hormone.

   Two months after the injection, treated pigs weighed 92 pounds, compared with
65 pounds for an untreated hog. The treated pigs eat 25% less feed, which would
amount to huge savings for the farmer, and they are ready for slaughter two
weeks earlier, Schwartz said. The price of feed alone accounts for half the cost
of raising a hog.

   Because they eat less, they also are expected to produce less manure, he
said. Hog waste is a growing environmental concern in many states.

   Additional research will have to be done to show that the meat is safe for
human consumption, and that the treatment has no negative long-term impact on
animals. The treatment would have to be approved by the Food and Drug
Administration before it could be used commercially.

   "This is extremely interesting work, but it has some problems with how the
consumer will receive it," said Max Rothschild of Iowa State University, one of
the nation's leading authorities on pig genetics.

   "Will consumers eat animals that are treated in such a fashion. The jury is
still out. . . . In Europe, the answer is absolutely not."

   It would be far less controversial to continue improving pigs by identifying
genes that control growth and other traits, he said.


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1999


                             1103 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: Tribute and Apologies In Gene Therapy Death

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Dec. 9

BODY:

   Paul Gelsinger, his voice quivering but his composure intact, stepped to the
microphone today in a crowded auditorium here at the National Institutes of
Health.

   About three months ago, Mr. Gelsinger's 18-year-old son, Jesse, became the
first person killed by gene therapy. Today, Mr. Gelsinger would address the
scientists who had gathered this week to examine the experiment that cost Jesse
his life.

    Mr. Gelsinger, a handyman from Tucson, asked the members of the do
subsaudience to reach into their pockets and take out a quarter. Throughout the
hall, the rustling of purses and the jingling of coins could be heard. He noted
the language on the coin and said: " 'In God we trust.' You don't see that too
much in government anymore."

   He then told how Jesse, a clerk in a supermarket, had taken unpaid leave to
participate in the experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, even though it
was not intended to benefit him but rather babies with a fatal form of the rare
metabolic disorder from which he suffered.

   "All these people who participated in this trial did a wonderful thing," Mr.
Gelsinger said. "They came in with the same intent my son had. It doesn't get
any purer."

   Mr. Gelsinger's speech, which was greeted with lengthy applause, provided a
moment of humanity on the second day of a three-day meeting of the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee, the panel at the National Institutes of Health that
oversees gene therapy research.

   In addition to examining the experiment in which Jesse died, the committee
was considering the safety of adenovirus, the weakened cold virus that was used
to deliver healthy DNA to the patients in the Pennsylvania study. It was also
debating rules that would force scientists to make public more of their safety
data.

   The gathering has been marked by ill feeling between scientists at the
University of Pennsylvania and officials of the Food and Drug Administration,
who on Wednesday accused the scientists of several lapses, including improperly
admitting Jesse into the study, altering the informed consent form given to
patients and failing to immediately report safety data that could have ended the
clinical trial.

   Today, however, the talk had been toned down, as the Pennsylvania
investigators, led by Dr. James Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene
Therapy at the university, and F.D.A. officials each gave lengthy presentations.

   Dr. Wilson and his colleagues pointedly apologized for specific failings, and
Dr. Wilson repeated what he had said on Wednesday in response to the agency's
charges: "At no time during or prior to this trial did we in any way expect to
see what we saw in Jesse Gelsinger."

   F.D.A. officials delivered only muted criticism today, noting the lapses by
the researchers in bland, bureaucratic language while they presented the
preliminary results of the inquiry into the death.

   Dr. Jay P. Siegel, the agency official who supervises gene therapy reviews,
noted that the experiment had been monitored closely. The F.D.A., Dr. Siegel
said, had reviewed 20 amendments to the original protocol, and the two sides had
communicated either by telephone or fax 50 times in the course of the two-year
clinical trial.

   Afterward, Dr. W. French Anderson, a gene therapy expert at the University of
Southern California who is regarded as the father of the field, hinted that some
kind of compromise had been reached.

   "There was a realization that this had gone too far," Mr. Anderson said,
referring to the F.D.A. "Yesterday they were blasting Penn. Today they basically
accepted Pennsylvania as dealing with them in good faith."

   There were a few interesting facts to come out of today's meeting. The Penn
scientists are still not certain why Jesse, who suffered from ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, suffered a reaction to the adenovirus that was so
severe that it killed him.

   Autopsy findings discussed today offered a possible explanation: Jesse's bone
marrow had abnormalities that might have existed before the therapy, suggesting
that, unbeknownst to the researchers, he might have been infected with a second
cold virus, parvovirus.

   Were that the case, Dr. Anderson said, the parvovirus could have triggered
the reactions -- jaundice, a blood-clotting disorder, kidney failure, lung
failure and ultimately brain death -- that Jesse had suffered after receiving
the adenovirus.

   With their ability to infect cells, viruses are useful in gene therapy
because doctors can use them to deliver healthy DNA to patients. Adenovirus has
been used in a quarter of the more than 300 gene therapy experiments conducted
since 1990.

   Researchers said today that it seemed clear that patients who received
adenovirus tolerated it well up to a certain point, but once the dosage passed a
threshold, the side effects became dramatic.

   In the Penn study, 19 patients with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency
were divided into three groups, each receiving a higher dose than the last.
Investigators had expected to see a gradual escalation of side effects, Dr.
Wilson said, so that the study could be stopped before any patients were hurt.

   But Jesse's death suggested that the curve followed an elbow-shaped path, he
said.

   More than science, today was a day for patients, including the mothers of
children with the deficiency, a disorder that, even when not fatal in infancy,
often causes coma and brain damage. The mothers pleaded to allow the research to
continue, saying it was their only hope.

   Mindy Rosen, of Cherry Hill, N.J., told the committee what her 17-year-old
son said this morning as she kissed him before leaving for the meeting: "Mom,
please tell them I want to have gene therapy. I hate being sick."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1104 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 10, 1999 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A37

LENGTH: 973 words

HEADLINE: GENE-THERAPY INQUIRY URGES BETTER MONITORING, NO-CONFLICT RULE

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   In the wake of the nation's first gene-therapy death, a government watchdog
group yesterday suggested far-reaching changes in the burgeoning but as yet
unproven field.

   The recommendations followed two days of scrutiny of the death at the
University of Pennsylvania. They ranged from more aggressive monitoring of
patients and side effects to stricter financial guidelines for researchers.

   The suggestions by members of the government's Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee (RAC) came on a day when regulators from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration flagged yet more instances of how Penn scientists broke stringent
rules that govern novel gene-therapy experiments.

   And even as the red flags went up, mothers of children with incurable genetic
disorders begged regulators not to slow the development of gene-therapy drugs. "
Gene therapy is just beginning. Please give it a chance," said Tish Simon, of
Union, N.J., whose son died at age 14 from the same genetic disorder that the
Penn scientists were trying to cure.

   The discussions underscored how little scientists understand about this
cutting edge of medicine or why Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died in the Penn trial.

   His September death has brought anguish to the field and much soul searching.
James M. Wilson, the Penn geneticist who oversaw the trial, said that scientists
had "an absolute obligation" to learn as much as they could about why Jesse
Gelsinger died. "It is going to be an incredibly positive experience," he said.
"This will be Jesse's legacy."

   Among the problems identified by the DNA advisory committee:

   Scientists do not have standardized measurements to compare gene-therapy
experiments from one lab to another.

   They can't be sure that their medicines are getting to the right targets in
patients' bodies and not going to organs where they can cause harm.

   Researchers don't share the information that is critical to protect patients.

   Among proposals the committee said it would consider to make the field safe
for patients to participate in clinical trials were conflict-of-interest rules
for scientists who stood to gain financially from the research.

   "You can't be a principal investigator in a project if you are part of a
company that has a stake on manufacturing the product," said Arthur Beaudet,
professor of genetics at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas, making a
recommendation that will be discussed in detail by the committee.

   It was unseemly, he said, when stock prices of companies shot up after
scientists made announcements of research breakthroughs - when the same
scientists profited from the stock boom.

   "There are so many potential conflicts," he said. "The investigator may be
perceived to have conflicts in their desire to be successful."

   Some of the criticism around Penn's gene-therapy trial has focused on Genovo,
a company founded by Wilson. The private company contributes about $4.7 million
annually to Wilson's lab, said a Penn spokeswoman, but did not contribute
directly to the gene-therapy trial that killed Gelsinger. The Arizona teenager
had ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a liver disorder in which toxic
levels of ammonia could build up leading to coma and death. He died four days
after getting the experimental gene therapy.

   After two days of scientific testimony, the committee members had no clear
idea why Gelsinger died. There were many theories: an underlying viral infection
unknown to the Penn scientists before they gave him the gene therapy; an
excessively high dose of the gene-therapy drug; some underlying genetic
predisposition that caused him to react adversely.

   Penn's scientists said the teenager's death was triggered by an acute immune
system response that shut down his lungs and caused his organs to fail. In
detailed testimony yesterday, Wilson said the scientists did not know why such a
response was not seen in any other patient.

   Although the trial that killed Gelsinger was designed to test the safety of
the gene drug, scientists had hoped to see some evidence that the genes were
entering cells and producing the enzyme that OTC patients lack. Yesterday, the
researchers said that they saw some evidence of efficacy in three of the 18
patients but that the change was not statistically significant.

   Wilson and his colleagues, Steve Raper and Mark Batshaw, apologized to the
FDA and the advisory committee for violating their protocol.

   The federal agency has said that the Penn team did not provide prompt reports
of patients' side effects and that the researchers had treated Gelsinger when
the level of ammonia in his blood was over a limit set by the agency.

   Yesterday, the agency also revealed that the Penn team had recruited
Gelsinger as the 18th patient in their trial, when they were supposed to have
recruited a woman.

   The Penn team has said that the various mistakes were oversights or involved
differences in judgment with the agency and the committee - and that they did
not play a role in Gelsinger's death.

   "I really regret the fact that we didn't inform the RAC," said Wilson,
referring to one change in the protocol that the scientists made without the
committee's knowledge. He said that the team had "great respect for this group"
and that "if we could do it over again, it would be very easy" to keep the
committee fully informed.

   At times, the atmosphere in the meeting room verged on the surreal. As Penn
scientists flashed slides of Gelsinger's damaged liver and organs, his father
looked on stoically. "That's Jesse's body, not his spirit," he explained later.

   In an emotional statement that brought tears to many committee members, Paul
Gelsinger addressed the crowd. He said his son died for a "pure" cause - people
working together to cure a deadly illness. "We need to keep that going," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1105 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

           December 10, 1999, Friday, 39REGION 24 DEFLANG1033 EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-26

LENGTH: 812 words

HEADLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BYLINE: PAUL RECER

BODY:


   Researchers told a federal advisory board that the injection of a gene
transfer virus seemedto touch off "an immune revolt" in the body of an Arizona
teen-ager.

   0 gene therapy death stunned patient's doctors

   BETHESDA, Md. -

   The swift plunge into respiratory failure and death by a patient in a gene
therapy experiment stunned his doctors, and researchers said yesterday they
still were trying to understand what happened.

   The researchers from the University of Pennsylvania told a federal advisory
board that the injection of a gene transfer virus seemed to touch off "an immune
revolt" in the body of an Arizona teen-ager.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died within four days of the injection; the
major organs of his body were riddled with dead cells. He is the first patient
to die as a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

   "At no time did we expect to see what we saw with Jesse," said Dr. James
Wilson, leader of the University of Pennsylvania team. Wilson and his colleagues
reported on the death of Gelsinger at a special meeting of the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, an advisory board to the National Institutes of Health.

   Gene therapy is a technique to correct an inherited mutation or to combat
some diseases by injecting corrective genes. The field is considered one of the
most promising in medicine, and researchers have conducted more than 300 gene
therapy trials involving about 5,000 patients.

   Gelsinger was suffering from an inherited disorder, ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, or OTC, a condition that blocks the proper
processing in the body of nitrogen. The disorder usually kills boys at a young
age, but Gelsinger had controlled his condition with drugs and a diet low in
protein, which adds nitrogen to the body.

   Researchers hoped to correct the problem by injecting into his liver a cold
virus that had been modified to carry a gene that would control OTC.

   Gelsinger was the 18th patient to receive the gene therapy at Pennsylvania.
Some of the earlier patients experienced some side effects that quickly were
corrected.

   But it was different for Gelsinger, said Wilson.

   "We may have activated his immune system very early," Wilson said. Tests show
there was a swift rise of immune system proteins, just as there was with the
other patients. But for Gelsinger the proteins never went back down.

   "Something kicked in," said Wilson, and the morning after the injection
Gelsinger developed a high fever, an erratic heart beat and a fogged mind.

   Over the next two days he was placed in an intensive care unit and a tube was
placed down his throat to help him breath. Soon his organs began to fail and he
was placed on an artificial lung.

   "We had a number of organs failing," said Dr. Steven Raper, one of the
Pennsylvania researchers. Even if Gelsinger had survived, said Raper, he may
have suffered the loss of some brain function.

   Finally, the machines were turned off and Gelsinger was pronounced dead.

   An autopsy showed his lungs were inflamed and filled with fluid, clear
evidence of adult respiratory distress syndrome.

   Raper said the kidneys and brain all were "severely affected" and riddled
with lesions caused by a lack of oxygen.

   Wilson said his team tested the altered virus used on Gelsinger, injecting it
into monkeys. The animals did fine, he said.

   "There didn't seem to be anything different to explain the significant
response we saw in Jesse," Wilson said.

   A Food and Drug Administration report on the death said that Gelsinger had
elevated levels of ammonia, an indication of a distressed liver, at the time he
was given the injection.

   FDA officials said that the experiment protocol approved by the agency called
for ammonia levels to be at a value of 70 before a patient could enroll in the
gene therapy trial.

   Gelsinger tested at 91 to 114 just before the injection.

   Raper said that Gelsinger's ammonia levels were below 70 at the time he
enrolled, but that was two months before the injection.

   He said it was thought his ammonia levels were well within a manageable limit
at the time of the injection.

   The FDA also said there was a question about Gelsinger being "clinically
stable." He had been hospitalized a few weeks before with a liver crisis and
required breathing assistance.

   An FDA report also said the Pennsylvania team proceeded with some gene
therapy injections in the experiment series without getting formal approval as
required by the research protocol.

   Gelsinger, for instance, was injected earlier than originally planned.

   The Pennsylvania team also was charged by the FDA with failing to report the
death of some monkeys used in the gene therapy research.

   The RAC today was to consider tough new rules that will require researchers
to report all deaths or serious illnesses experienced by patients in gene
therapy research.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1106 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            December 10, 1999 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: Panel hears scientists on DNA therapy death of teen

BYLINE: Paul Recer, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   The swift plunge into respiratory failure and death by a patient in a gene
therapy experiment stunned his doctors, and researchers said yesterday they
still are trying to understand what happened.

    The researchers from the University of Pennsylvania told a federal advisory
board that the injection of a gene transfer virus seemed to touch off "an immune
revolt" in the body of an Arizona teenager.

    Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died within four days of the injection; the
major organs of his body were riddled with dead cells. He is the first patient
to die as a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

    "At no time did we expect to see what we saw with Jesse," said Dr. James
Wilson, leader of the University of Pennsylvania team. Wilson and his colleagues
reported on the death of Gelsinger at a special meeting of the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, an advisory board to the National Institutes of Health.

    The RAC will consider tough new rules that will require researchers to
report all deaths or serious illnesses experienced by patients in gene therapy
research.

    Gene therapy is a technique to correct an inherited mutation or to combat
some diseases by injecting corrective genes. The field is considered one of the
most promising in medicine, and researchers have conducted more than 300 gene
therapy trials involving about 5,000 patients.

    Gelsinger was suffering from an inherited disorder, ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, or OTC, a condition that blocks the proper
processing of nitrogen in the body. The disorder usually kills boys at a young
age, but Gelsinger had controlled his condition with drugs and diet low in
protein, which adds nitrogen to the body.

   Experiment failed

   Researchers hoped to correct the problem by injecting into his liver a cold
virus that had been modified to carry a gene that would control OTC.

    Gelsinger was the 18th patient to receive the gene therapy at Pennsylvania.
Some of the earlier patients experienced some side effects that quickly were
corrected.

    But it was different for Jesse, said Wilson.

    "We may have activated his immune system very early," Wilson said. Tests
show there was a swift rise of immune system proteins, just as there was with
the other patients. But for Gelsinger the proteins never went back down.

    "Something kicked in," said Wilson, and the morning after the injection
Gelsinger developed a high fever, an erratic heartbeat and a fogged mind. Over
the next two days he was placed in an intensive care unit, and a tube was placed
down his throat to help him breathe. Soon his organs began to fail and he was
placed on an artificial lung.

    "We had a number of organs failing," said Dr. Steven Raper, one of the
Pennsylvania researchers. Even if Gelsinger had survived, said Raper, he may
have suffered the loss of some brain function.

    Finally, the machines were turned off and Gelsinger was pronounced dead.

    An autopsy showed his lungs were inflamed and filled with fluid, clear
evidence of adult respiratory distress syndrome.

    Raper said the kidneys and brain were "severely affected" and riddled with
lesions caused by a lack of oxygen.

    Wilson said his team tested the altered virus used on Gelsinger, injecting
it into monkeys. The animals did fine, he said.

    "There didn't seem to be anything different to explain the significant
response we saw in Jesse," Wilson said.

    A Food and Drug Administration report on the death said that Gelsinger had
elevated levels of ammonia, an indication of a distressed liver, at the time he
was given the injection.

    FDA officials said that the experiment protocol approved by the agency
called for ammonia levels to be at a value of 70 before a patient could enroll
in the gene therapy trial.

    Gelsinger tested at 91 to 114 just before the injection.

    Raper said that Gelsinger's ammonia levels were below 70 at the time he
enrolled, but that was two months before the injection. He said it was thought
his ammonia levels were well within manageable limits at the time of the
injection.

    The FDA also said there was a question about Gelsinger being "clinically
stable."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1107 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       December 10, 1999 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E5

LENGTH: 215 words

HEADLINE: TWO NEW HEART SURGERY TECHNIQUES SHOW PROMISE

BYLINE: The Dallas Morning News

BODY:

   Two techniques at the frontier of heart disease treatment appear to be
holding up to their promise in early tests, according to presentations at the
heart sessions.

   The first involves the use of robotic arms to perform coronary bypass
surgeries. Scientists at Penn State University report that they have tested the
technology on 15 patients so far, and that all appear to be doing well. Robot
arms have the advantage of being able to perform precise, minuscule movements
too delicate for humans to master. As a result, doctors can perform bypass
surgeries that do not require the chest cavity to be exposed. Patients would be
left with only a tiny scar and a quicker recovery time.

   The second new technique uses gene therapy to help keep newly replaced veins
from clogging up again. In this case, researchers from Harvard Medical School
studied patients who needed surgery to replace veins blocked in their legs. In
half the cases, the researchers bathed the new veins, or grafts, in a fluid that
contained genetic material designed to short-circuit the genes that can cause
the veins to close again.

   After a year, the 17 patients who had gene therapy on the grafts in their
legs were less than half as likely as a comparison group to experience a
reblockage of the same vein.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1108 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    December 10, 1999, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Gene Researchers Apologize for Lapses in Teen's Fatal Treatment

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   During yet another day of new revelations of problems in a fatal University
of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment, researchers apologized for their lapses
while parents of sick children pleaded with federal regulators not to slow the
pace of research on inherited diseases.

   In an unusually emotional meeting of regulators and scientists in a crowded
auditorium at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, federal
investigators revealed additional evidence that Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona
teenager who died from the treatment, should not have undergone the experimental
treatment in September.

   They also made public for the first time that the Penn researchers changed
the rules for inclusion in the study without the required approval of the Food
and Drug Administration. And they provided details of deaths of monkeys getting
a treatment similar to the one Gelsinger got--deaths that according to FDA
regulations should have been reported within 15 days, but which did not get
reported until after Gelsinger died, more than a year later.

   Those problems stand in addition to previous findings of improprieties,
including that Gelsinger was too sick to meet the criteria for participating in
the study and that scientists failed to halt the experiment and notify federal
officials as required in two instances when volunteers suffered serious toxic
reactions before Gelsinger was enrolled.

   All three of the principal researchers apologized for the growing list of
deficiencies cited by the FDA this week as part of its ongoing investigation
into Gelsinger's death.

   "We could have done better . . . and we apologize," said Mark Batshaw of the
Children's National Medical Center in the District.

   "I really regret" the oversights, said Penn gene researcher James Wilson.

   "We now recognize we should have contacted FDA," said Penn surgeon Steven
Raper.

   Their conciliatory comments marked a rhetorical shift from the single brief
statement that Wilson made Wednesday, in which the scientist indicated the team
had been in compliance with federal regulations.

   The Penn researchers also said for the first time that none of the volunteers
definitively improved from the treatment. The "corrections" the team had
previously reported in three patients were not statistically significant,
meaning the small improvements seen on some laboratory tests could have been
caused by chance alone.

   The new information came out at a public, three-day meeting of an NIH gene
therapy oversight committee, which ends today.

   The experiment, which has now been halted, called for the infusion of
trillions of gene-altered viruses known to be capable of triggering liver
failure and death. The treatment was designed to treat a rare liver disorder
that Gelsinger inherited.

   The 18-year-old Gelsinger died Sept. 17, four days after getting his
infusion, from multiple organ failure that the researchers acknowledge was
caused by the treatment. His death is the first to be attributed directly to
gene therapy, an unproved approach to treating cancer and other diseases.

   In the midst of a mostly scientific and regulatory discussion about
Gelsinger's death, parents of children who have the liver disorder or whose
children have already died of the disease delivered passionate pleas for the
research to go forward.

   "There are children alive today who might possibly become adults if this
treatment works," said Tish Simon of Union, N.J., her voice quavering with
emotion. Simon lost her 14-year-old son in 1996 to the liver disease--ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency.

   Claudia Mickelson, head of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC),
which sponsored the meeting, choked up as she told parents that the committee
had no intention of slowing research unnecessarily. But there is no point in
conducting studies that are poorly designed or carried out, she said, since they
could jeopardize the health of volunteers without generating any useful
information.

   The FDA reported that Gelsinger was the second volunteer to get the highest
dose even though the protocol required that the first two participants at each
new dose be women since they are less severely affected. In addition,
researchers changed the protocol to allow the inclusion of volunteers with
greater liver dysfunction than approved by the agency.



LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1109 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   December 9, 1999, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3450 words

HEADLINE: CHOOSING NAIA / A FAMILY'S JOURNEY FIFTH OF SIX PARTS;
MENDING A HEART

BYLINE: By Mitchell Zuckoff, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The doctor in blue surgical scrubs holds out Naia to her worried parents.
"Give her a kiss," he says.

   Tierney and Greg take turns touching their lips to Naia's soft cheeks, then
looking at each other with watery eyes and a shared thought: He's telling us to
say goodbye.

   Dr. Craig Bonnani, an anesthesiologist, says nothing. He either doesn't sense
their anxiety or doesn't want to make it worse. Bonnani leaves with a bouncy
walk, holding Naia in one arm, like a football.

   Doctor and patient are headed down the hall to an operating room at
Connecticut Children's Medical Center.

   Over the next five hours, if all goes according to plan, Naia's plum-sized
heart will be stopped, her blood will be circulated by machine, her breathing
will be done by mechanical lungs. Her chest will be sawed open, and her
malformed heart will be rebuilt to support her growing body.       And, barring
a catastrophe, her life will begin anew.

   It is March 31, 1999, the day of the surgery Tierney Temple-Fairchild and
Greg Fairchild knew would be needed ever since they decided eight months ago to
bear a child with Down syndrome and a major heart defect.

   For a few difficult days last summer, fears that the heart problem was a
death sentence made them strongly consider abortion. They went ahead with
Tierney's pregnancy only after learning that the odds of successful surgery were
good.

   Now, as they watch Bonnani walk away with Naia, all they can do is wait, and
wonder, and pray they made the right choice.

   "She'll be OK," Tierney says to no one in particular.

   "She'll be OK," Greg repeats, wiping his eyes.

   Last night, Greg's mother, Mary Fairchild, gave Naia a leisurely bath,
letting her splash around on her stomach as though she were swimming. Tierney
gingerly clipped Naia's fingernails and placed her in a battery-powered swing.

   Before Naia fell asleep, Tierney read to her from a children's book of
prayer. On one page was a pastel drawing of a little bear in bed, a blanket
pulled up to her chin. Next to it was the "When I'm Afraid Prayer":

   "I'm scared, God,

   So please help me,

   And keep me in your care.

   I always feel much safer,

   Just knowing you are there.

   Amen."

   Then Tierney tucked the book into Naia's cradle and kissed her goodnight.
Greg came over and did the same.

   With surgery just hours away, Naia was the only one who slept peacefully.
Greg sat bolt upright at 3:30 a.m., having dreamt that they overslept and missed
the operation. Tierney awoke three times just to check the alarm. It was working
fine.

   They dressed at dawn and arrived at the hospital at 6:30 a.m. A half-hour
later they settled into the preoperation holding area, a hive of activity among
doctors, nurses, and parents.

   While the adults scurried around, most of the children remained quiet -
little ones in cribs, big ones in beds - all wearing hospital gowns adorned with
cartoons of Bugs Bunny and Tweety Bird. One father rode his toddler son around
the room on a miniature all-terrain vehicle. The mother sat on the boy's bed,
trying to muster a smile. Her sad eyes made an unavoidable point: For all the
effort to make it seem like a children's playroom, there is no denying the fear
here.

   Twenty-six children are scheduled for operations today. "For the most part,
they're healthy kids coming in for day surgery, pretty minor stuff," said nurse
Fran Macoomb.

   Naia, facing major open-heart surgery, is the exception. She is also the
smallest child in the room. Though more than four months old, she is 8 pounds 8
ounces, smaller than some robust newborns. In fact, Naia is in the bottom 5
percent for growth among children her age with Down syndrome.

   At 7:30 a.m., technician Debbie LaBelle came to Naia's metal crib to draw
blood, to match her type for a transfusion, and to complete routine presurgery
tests. Naia's cries rang through the room as LaBelle tried repeatedly to find a
vein. Greg gripped the bars of the crib. Tierney closed her eyes.

   When LaBelle finished, Greg sat with Naia in a rocking chair, whispering all
the things a father says to a daughter when he's scared and she's too young to
understand his words. He held one of her hands. In Naia's other hand was her
Elmo doll.

   It is 7:45 a.m. when Bonnani arrives, picks up Naia, asks Greg and Tierney to
kiss her, then takes her away to Operating Room 3.

   It is a 20-by-30-foot room bathed in artificial light. All around are trays
of gleaming steel surgical tools covered by sterile blue cloths. There is a bank
of flashing monitors, one of which shows Naia's oxygen saturation - the level of
oxygen in her bloodstream. It reads 84 percent. "Normal would be in the 90s.
It's a good thing she's here," says Cookie Eckel, one of two nurses assisting
Bonnani.

   A backlit screen on one wall displays X-rays of Naia's chest, front and side
view, taken two weeks ago. To a trained eye, the X-rays reveal an enlarged
heart. It's a side effect of Naia's malformation, called a complete
atrioventricular canal defect.

   In a healthy heart, oxygen-rich blood and oxygen-depleted blood are kept
apart by walls that separate the four chambers. But like the hearts of many
children with Down syndrome, Naia's heart has a hole between the upper and lower
chambers. Also, it has only one valve, where there should be two, to regulate
the passage of blood through the chambers.

   As a result of the hole and the valve problem, blood in Naia's heart that is
saturated with oxygen mixes with blood that is not. Mixed blood acts on the body
like watered-down gasoline in an engine, causing it to sputter and stall. The
heart also has to work overtime to supply the oxygen the body craves, adding
extra stress to an already weakened system.

   Near the X-ray light board is the machine that will breathe and pump blood
for Naia during the operation. And right in the middle of the room is a padded
table where Bonnani places Naia.

   Surrounded by all the equipment, all the activity, Naia seems even tinier
than usual.

   She lies on her back, naked, content at first to watch Bonnani and the
nurses. Eckel briefly pulls down her face mask and kisses Naia on the cheek. "I
just can't resist," she says.

   But Naia's calm is shattered when Eckel and another nurse pin down her arms
for Bonnani to cover her face with a plastic mask, through which flows an
anesthetic gas. Naia cries, fighting to get free. "Hey, you are strong," Eckel
tells her.

   Fifteen seconds later Naia is asleep, a blue pillow supporting her motionless
head. Bonnani puts a breathing tube down her throat. He tapes her eyes shut. A
nurse inserts a catheter. Warm air is blown over her body to ward off a chill. A
pad under Naia's back forces her chest to arch upward, giving the surgeon the
best possible angle to work.

   "How're you doing, sweetcakes?" Eckel asks Naia. "You sure look comfortable."
In fact, she looks anything but.

   At 8:02 a.m., in walks Dr. Lee Ellison, pediatric cardiac surgeon. Tall and
lean, he wears scrubs, white clogs, and a thoughtful expression. He carries
himself with none of the stereotypical bluster of some surgeons. Rather, there
is a quiet confidence, a low-decibel voice of authority.

   He starts by measuring Naia's bony torso. To guide his scalpel, Ellison
carefully draws a four-inch line down the center of Naia's chest.

   As he works, a song begins to play on a radio speaker overhead. It's the
1960s hit, "Never My Love."

   There are now nine people in the room with Naia: Ellison, Bonnani, and a
second surgeon, Dr. Chester Humphrey; one scrub nurse; one circulating nurse; a
nurse anesthetist; one physician's assistant; and two technicians who run the
pump machine that will keep Naia alive while her heart is immobilized. They move
quickly in pairs and threes.

   Just before the operation begins, Ellison paints Naia's chest with brown
antiseptic liquid, then covers her with blue cloths. Only a candy bar-sized
patch of skin on her chest is exposed.

   At 8:44 a.m., Ellison makes the incision. He takes pride in making a
particularly fine line, especially on girls. The scar, in time, will become
almost invisible.

   The incision made, the blood wiped away, Ellison takes a small power saw and
cuts through Naia's breastbone.

   While Ellison works, Greg and Tierney take refuge in the hospital cafeteria.
It's a round room with 40-foot walls painted to resemble a fantasy galaxy of
planets and stars. One of the painters was a Star Trek fan; a tiny Starship
Enterprise soars through space in an inconspicuous spot.

   They talk about the weather, the war in Kosovo, the coffee, the sunlight that
pours through the cafeteria's glass ceiling. But now and then, the conversation
turns back to a recent discussion about Naia's future if the surgery goes as
hoped.

   Lately, Greg has been thinking that as prenatal testing becomes more routine,
and as the tests become more sophisticated and less risky, the number of people
with Down syndrome will fall. The prospect worries him.

   "There's safety in numbers," he says. "When there are other children in the
school system who are different, when Naia isn't the only one, it makes it
easier in terms of advocacy."

   Greg also wonders if advances in genetic therapy might eventually allow
doctors to remove or repair the extra chromosome that causes Down syndrome.

   "As I sit here now, I'm not sure I'd want that," he says. "I'll bet money
that 12 years from now if someone walked up to me and said, 'Would you change
who Naia is?' the answer would probably be no. Part of what I love about Naia
might be directly related to the fact she has Down syndrome."

   Yet Tierney is intrigued by the idea of correcting genetic flaws while a baby
is still in the womb.

   "In the papers last week there was a story about a child who had spina bifida
corrected to some extent in utero," she tells Greg, referring to the
debilitating spinal disorder. "If it's fixable, then why not? Why wouldn't we
want every opportunity for everything to go right?"

   "It's not that I wouldn't appreciate Naia for exactly who she is," Tierney
adds. "But it could become similar to whether or not my child has polio. Of
course you'd fix that."

   Greg agrees, as long as nothing changes the Naia they love.

   At 10:50 a.m., a woman with a familiar face enters the cafeteria, smiling and
heading toward their table. It's Karen Mazzarella, the cardiology nurse who
eight months ago spoke the first encouraging words about their unborn child's
prospects. She arrives with an update from Operating Room 3.

   "Everything is going fine. Smooth as silk," she says. "You always like to
have a very dull surgery."

   Greg's shoulders relax. Tierney sighs. They touch hands. There's a long way
to go, but signs are good.

   At that moment Naia's grandmothers enter the cafeteria. Greg's father, Bob,
is en route from Virginia. Tierney's father, Ernie, is home in New Hampshire. He
offered encouragement by phone two days ago, but he won't be coming.

   When they hear Mazzarella's report, Mary Fairchild and Joan Temple bask in
the news, making grandmotherly plans for Naia's future. First, though, Joan
voices mock frustration with her granddaughter.

   "I didn't get my kiss from Naia this morning," she says. "I want to get it."

   After sawing through Naia's breastbone, Ellison carefully spreads it apart to
expose the pericardium, a leather-like sac that surrounds the heart. With a
practiced hand, he cuts through it, setting aside a piece the size of a
half-dollar for use later during internal repairs.

   With the calm that comes from 25 years of holding life in his hands, Ellison
prepares to put Naia on the heart-lung machine.

   He inserts plastic tubes with metal ends into the veins that bring blood to
her heart. The blood is diverted to the heart-lung machine, where it is
oxygenated then returned to Naia's aorta for distribution to her body, bypassing
the heart altogether.

   Throughout the operation, Ellison and his team take care to prevent air from
entering Naia's circulatory system. Even a tiny amount could travel to her brain
and cause a paralyzing stroke.

   Ellison's next step is to stop Naia's heart, so he doesn't have to work on a
moving target. He injects a solution into her coronary circulation system that
paralyzes the muscle. At the same time, he cools Naia's heart with ice.

   The maneuvers work; Naia's heart grows eerily still. In precise medical
jargon, Ellison calls it "an excellent cardiac arrest." In any other
circumstance, it would mean death.

   Now, 20 minutes after the incision, the only thing keeping Naia alive is the
heart-lung machine. In addition to its work as a pump, the machine cools Naia's
blood, lowering her body temperature to 82.4 degrees Farenheit. Just as people
can survive relatively long periods at the bottom of a frozen pond, the cold
brings Naia's system to the point of suspended animation, limiting the risk of
brain damage.

   His preparations complete, Ellison begins his repairs by opening Naia's
heart. He cuts through the right atrium, the chamber where depleted blood enters
the heart to begin the process of being saturated with oxygen and pumped to the
body.

   Through tiny magnifying lenses attached to his glasses, Ellison peers inside.
With the blood drained and the beating stopped, he can clearly see the hole in
Naia's heart.

   To fix it, Ellison cuts a piece of white Dacron cloth to roughly the size of
a Chiclet. That's how much he needs to patch the lower half of the hole, between
the left and right ventricles.

   He sews the Dacron patch into place, then picks up the piece of Naia's
pericardium that he had set aside. With it, he patches the upper half of the
hole, between the left and right atria.

   As he sews each patch into place, Ellison uses deft suturing techniques to
convert the single large valve Naia had at birth into two separate valves, each
of which must open and close thousands of times each day.

   As the internal repairs are nearing completion, Ellison begins warming Naia's
body. Then he sews closed the heart and allows blood to return. He watches
proudly as the rebuilt muscle grows pink with warm blood. It shivers for a
moment then starts to pump on its own, quickly falling into a normal rhythm.

   Ellison's next concern is whether the hole is closed and the new valves work
properly. He tests with an echocardiogram, a machine that uses sound waves to
monitor heart function.

   It shows that Naia's hole is closed completely. However, as Ellison
suspected, the rebuilt valves allow a small amount of blood to flow backwards
from whence it came. Ellison calls it a "trivial leak" that won't affect Naia's
recovery or health.

   Overall, Ellison is satisfied, calling it "an excellent result." He believes
there is little chance Naia will need future heart surgery.

   Ellison sutures closed the pericardium, then uses stainless steel wires to
rebuild Naia's breastbone. Then he sews her skin back together, taking care to
make the scar as straight and small as possible.

   At 11:35 a.m., while Ellison is still patching and sewing, Greg, Tierney, and
their mothers move from the cafeteria to a waiting room near Operating Room 3.

   Toys are scattered around, along with poignant memorials to children who
didn't survive. A wall plaque is engraved with a lost child's name and a passage
from a favorite children's book: "In memory of Jason Michael Cianci. Love you
forever, love you for always. As long as I'm living, my baby you'll be."

   As they wait, no one mentions the memorials. The grandmothers chat about how
wonderful Naia is. Tierney recounts the first stroller ride she gave Naia, only
last week, when the weather warmed enough to risk taking her outside. Greg says
little.

   At 12:55 p.m., Ellison walks in. Everyone stands. He smiles.

   "She's all done," the surgeon says warmly. "We did exactly what we talked
about, and so far everything looks just right." He explains her need for a blood
transfusion and more sedation, describes the breathing tube still in her throat,
and mentions that the rebuilt heart valves show small signs of leakage.

   All Tierney and Greg hear is that their daughter is OK.

   "That's great," Greg says. The tension drains from their faces, their bodies.
They embrace.

   "Yay for Naia!" Tierney calls out. "Naia the great!"

   As he leaves, Ellison turns and warns them not to be alarmed by how Naia
looks. "Just treat her like you're at home," he says. "Just smooch her."

   A half-hour later, Naia's parents and grandmothers are escorted to Room 306
of the pediatric intensive care unit.

   Naia lies on her back, motionless, her eyes closed. She has lines attached to
all four limbs, her torso, and her head. She looks like a crumpled marionette.

   A breathing tube brings air to her lungs. A drainage tube removes blood from
her chest. An intravenous line supplies nutrition to her depleted system. A
nasogastric tube is in her nose for future feedings. A catheter takes away her
urine. An arterial line in her wrist checks her blood pressure. A pulse oximeter
measures the oxygen level in her blood. It reads 96 percent, just where it's
supposed to be.

   It makes them cry to see her like this. Greg fingers Naia's fine hair.
Tierney follows doctor's orders and kisses her.

   A nurse, Wendy Lord, comes in to check Naia's pupils and adjust the monitors.
Mostly for modesty's sake, she puts a doll-sized diaper on Naia. Lord wears a
Black Dog T-shirt, the unofficial symbol of Martha's Vineyard. For Greg and
Tierney, it sparks rueful memories of the day last summer when an ultrasound
test changed their lives, just hours before they planned to leave for a Vineyard
vacation.

   Nurse Cookie Eckel comes by to see how Naia is doing. "She's one feisty
little lady," Eckel tells Greg and Tierney. Eckel says the surgery was flawless,
and necessary. "She had a big hole in there. You got your money's worth."

   Greg and Tierney can't help but smile.

   Eckel leaves and Tierney's mother takes care of her unfinished business.
Tears streaming down her face, Joan bends low and kisses Naia on the forehead.

   "Grandma loves you," she whispers.

   It is April 4, Easter Sunday, four days after the operation. Naia's recovery
has gone slowly.

   She's still in the pediatric intensive care unit, two days longer than Greg
and Tierney expected. She'll be here at least one more day, breathing with help
from a ventilator. She's fighting a fever, and her blood pressure is low. She
remains sedated with morphine.

   Naia has resisted attempts to get her to breathe on her own. When the doctors
turn down the respirator - hoping her own breathing system will kick in - she
barely responds. Today, though, they hope to wean her from the respirator
entirely.

   The day begins with a visit from a nearly six-foot Easter Bunny who leaves a
basket of toys and a blue-and-yellow quilt sewn by Girl Scout Troop 988. Naia
sleeps through the visit.

   At 11:30 a.m., Ellison removes the drainage tube from Naia's chest. Then, at
4:30 p.m., he returns to remove the breathing tube. Naia is deep in a
morphine-induced sleep.

   Greg and Tierney expect Naia to scream when the tube comes out, but there is
only silence. They fear the worst. "It's like her birth, when she didn't cry,"
Tierney says.

   Ellison calms them, telling them to "look at the big picture." In fact,
though she remains asleep, Naia has begun breathing for herself.

   As the hours drag on, Naia confounds expectations and continues to sleep. The
doctors order an antidote for the morphine, called Narcan, and she finally
begins to stir. Then she starts to thrash, pulling at the tubes in her nose and
on her foot. After a few scary moments, she settles down.

   At 11:30 p.m., Greg and Tierney go to a nearby parents' room for a dinner
delivered by her mother. Like the Thanksgiving after Naia's birth, their Easter
dinner is another holiday meal eaten in the sanitary confines of a hospital.
Exhausted, they quietly savor lamb, Swiss chard, mashed potatoes, and black
olives, a family favorite.

   The days go slowly. A planned five-day stay stretches to 10. But with the
extra time and extra care, Naia's strength gradually begins to return.

   Now, on April 9, it's time to go home.

   Greg and Tierney are buoyant. Naia is snuggled in pink-and-green pajamas.
There is something different about her.

   It's partly the silky ribbon a nurse has tied to a lock of her hair. And it's
partly the smiles she showers on passersby like rice at a wedding. Most of all,
though, it's her coloring.

   Now that her heart is working well, Naia's skin has taken on a healthy glow.
It's not the white of her mother, nor the black of her father. It's not the
yellow of jaundice, nor the blue of heart failure, nor the pink of a photo
clerk's baby ideal.

   It's her own unique color.

   TOMORROW: Life with Naia

GRAPHIC: 1. DR. LEE ELLISON, a cardiac surgeon, draws a line down the center of
Naia's chest to guide his incision as he begins open-heart surgery on March 31,
1999. 2. NAIA CRIESas Dr. Craig Bonnani, an anesthesiologist, and Cookie Eckel,
a nurse, prepare to sedate her before surgery. 3. A TIRED TIERNEY awaits the
outcome of Naia's surgery near a rocking chair that commemorates a child that
died. 4. DR. LEE ELLISON, the pediatric cardiac surgeon who performed Naia's
surgery, brings good news to Tierney, Greg, and their mothers, Joan Temple
(left) and Mary Fairchild. 5. JOAN TEMPLE and her daughter Tierney watch over
Naia in the intensive care unit following the successful surgery. 6. TIERNEY
WHISPERS words of encouragement to Naia, whose upbeat prognosis belies her
appearance. / Photographs by Suzanne Kreiter

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1999


                             1110 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               December 09, 1999, THURSDAY, Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; NATION/WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Last 2 teens who fled youth camp after attack are caught

BODY:


   The last two teen boys who escaped from a wilderness program in Utah for
troubled youths after allegedly assaulting two counselors were taken into
custody early Wednesday. The last of the eight boys were caught after one of
them flagged down a freight train in the middle of the night in a ranching area
25 miles from the camp. It was their fourth freezing night outdoors since their
escape. The boys, ages 14 to 17, were part of a 60-day survival outing in the
mile-high Utah desert. Their parents paid $ 15,500 for each boy to attend. They
were accused of beating counselor Kirk Stock, 23, with sticks and binding him
with duct tape, then tying counselor Sunshine Fuller, 22, to a tree Saturday.

   Hubble repairs delayed again For the second time this week, NASA on Wednesday
delayed the launch of space shuttle Discovery to the crippled Hubble Space
Telescope, this time because of a dented fuel line. Lift-off had been scheduled
for Saturday night. Shuttle managers decided to put off the launch by at least
one day, and possibly several days, while engineers decide whether repairs will
be needed. It was the sixth delay for the Hubble repair mission, which was
supposed to take place in October.

   Federal hearings begin on gene therapy death An Arizona teenager who died in
a gene therapy experiment should never have been part of the study, and
researchers who conducted it violated at least two rules of the testing, federal
Food and Drug Administration officials said Wednesday. Researchers at the
University of Pennsylvania, where the experiment was part of a series of gene
therapy trials, denied the accusation and said they would defend their work at a
hearing today at the National Institutes of Health.

   Cuban exiles beat charges of assassination plot A federal jury in San Juan,
Puerto Rico, acquitted five Cuban exiles Wednesday of charges that they plotted
in 1997 to assassinate Fidel Castro, quashing the first U.S. attempt to convict
anyone for trying to kill Cuba's communist leader. The men, who fled Cuba after
Castro's 1959 revolution, testified they wanted to help members of his entourage
defect from a summit being held on Venezuela's Isla Margarita.

LOAD-DATE: December 09, 1999


                             1111 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 09, 1999, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy expert defends his conduct in fatal experiment

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: DEBORAH NELSON, RICK WEISS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON- The gene therapy researcher who oversaw the experiment that
killed a Tucson, Ariz., teen in September acknowledged Wednesday that he treated
the young man even though Jesse Gelsinger's blood tests were "slightly"
abnormal.

   However, he "felt comfortable with the decision" to proceed with the infusion
of gene-altered viruses because he believed that Gelsinger's condition had been
stabilized with medicines given the night before.

   Food and Drug Administration officials have said that decision was one of
several lapses uncovered in an ongoing federal investigation of the University
of Pennsylvania study, which was testing the safety of a new genetic treatment
for a rare inherited liver condition.

   Agency officials reiterated that position Wednesday following a meeting at
the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. The researcher, James M.
Wilson, then read a brief, prepared statement that gave his justification for
treating Gelsinger, 18.

   Wilson said that Gelsinger's blood ammonia levels - a measure of liver
vitality - had been within an acceptable range when the teen was first enrolled
in the study. He said it was his understanding that this was the time the FDA
rules applied to.

   In the days preceding the treatment, those levels rose to a level higher than
the maximum allowable under rules agreed to in advance by the researchers and
the FDA.

   Gelsinger was given conventional medicines the night before he was infused
with the viruses.

   It remained unclear Wednesday whether the medicines he received before the
experiment successfully lowered his ammonia levels, and Wilson refused to answer
questions.

   Kathryn Zoon, chief of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation, said
preliminary findings show Gelsinger had elevated ammonia in his blood, an
indication of a distressed liver, when he received the gene injection.

   "The entry levels for ammonia (readings) were not met," said Zoon.

   The FDA Wednesday also said that four volunteers - more than previously
reported - had experienced serious "Grade 3" toxic reactions before Gelsinger
was enrolled, but the researchers alerted the agency only to the first two.

   Paul Gelsinger, father of the dead teen, said he blamed the FDA for not
supervising the experiment more closely. He noted that the agency discussed
establishing a Web site that would reveal gene therapy problems. The site was
never created.

   "I told the FDA that they had dropped the ball in overseeing Jesse's case,"
Gelsinger said. He defended the Pennsylvania team: "They have told me
everything. I want them to continue their work. That's what Jesse would want."

   Gelsinger said his son's liver condition was being controlled by diet and
medication and there was no urgency for the teen-ager to seek the gene therapy.
However, he said, Jesse wanted to be cured of a disorder that threatened to
become worse.

   Gelsinger defended Wilson: "I touched souls with this man. There is nothing
wrong with Wilson."



LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000


                             1112 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    December 9, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 16; National Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: U.S. WANTS MORE SUNLIGHT ON RESEARCHERS;
 HEALTH: AGENCIES URGE FULL REPORTING ON FEDERALLY FUNDED MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS
THAT END IN FATALITY OR CAUSE SERIOUS SIDE-EFFECTS. TEEN'S DEATH BRINGS
SCRUTINY.

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Federal health officials said Wednesday that they will seek stricter
enforcement of guidelines requiring federally funded medical researchers to
promptly report all deaths or serious side effects that occur during the course
of experimental medical treatments.

   The comments came in the aftermath of the death of an 18-year-old Arizona man
who received gene therapy for a rare genetic disease. The Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institutes of Health, which oversee such
research, are investigating the September death, including possible lapses by
the study's principal researchers in reporting potentially serious side effects,
as well as other violations of research procedures.

   FDA and NIH officials stressed that scientists must abide by these federal
rules--which require reporting to both agencies--and said that researchers
cannot declare their reports confidential to prevent them from being shared with
other researchers or the public.

   The FDA is not allowed to publicly release the information; the NIH is under
no such restrictions.

   Lana Skirboll, director of the NIH's office of science policy, said that both
agencies plan to exchange information each receives more often so "if an
investigator has not submitted something to the NIH, we will know from the FDA."

   Until recently, she added, "we didn't know what we didn't know."

   Under revised guidelines proposed recently by the NIH, researchers would have
to report deaths and adverse events to both agencies within 15 days, even if the
illnesses do not appear related to the therapy. Also, such reports should not
contain "proprietary or trade secret information" or any "individually
identifiable patient information," so they may not be declared confidential.

   The proposed revisions must undergo a period of comment of several months and
may be changed before becoming final.

   Skirboll's remarks Wednesday came during the first of three days of hearings
by the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. The committee, which publicly
reviews genetic research and offers recommendations to the NIH, is examining the
latest events involving gene therapy--a promising field that is under intense
scrutiny as a result of its first patient death and the ensuing investigation.

   Gene therapy, which has been under study for 10 years, is viewed as a
potentially cutting-edge approach to treating numerous diseases caused by
genetic flaws. The treatment involves finding ways to introduce healthy genes
into the body that can repair or replace defective ones.

   More than 300 gene therapy studies are underway, and at least 2,500 patients
have been treated, without apparent harm.

   The FDA is looking into the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, who suffered
from an often-fatal disorder called ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, which
prevents the liver from breaking down ammonia, a byproduct of protein digestion.
He had volunteered for experimental gene therapy at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy.

   Gelsinger died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus, called
an adenovirus--one cause of the common cold--into his liver in an attempt to
introduce genes that could correct those responsible for his disorder.

   Researchers said Wednesday that Gelsinger died of acute respiratory distress
syndrome, although it is unclear exactly what role the gene therapy may have
played.

   The FDA is investigating whether researchers violated several federal
guidelines in conducting the study, among them the fact that Gelsinger was
included even though his health status apparently did not meet entry
requirements.

   Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's center for biologics evaluation and
research, said that the agency is looking into two possible "deviations" from
required rules in the case, including whether Gelsinger should have been treated
at all.

   University of Pennsylvania researchers have denied the accusations and are
scheduled to offer a detailed defense of their work at today's hearing. Reading
from a brief statement Wednesday, chief researcher James M. Wilson said that,
when Gelsinger enrolled in the study, his blood ammonia was at acceptable levels
but later increased to levels higher than those set under rules prearranged by
researchers and the FDA. Wilson said, however, that he believed the FDA rules
pertained to the period when Gelsinger first enrolled.

   After the hearing, Gelsinger's father, Paul, said that he does not blame
Wilson for his son's death. "I touched souls with this man," Gelsinger said.
"There is nothing wrong with Wilson."

   The case has sent a collective chill among researchers who see the work as
the most exciting and promising in the treatment of genetically based diseases.

   USC's W. French Anderson, who a decade ago was among the first to conduct a
gene therapy experiment, delivered an impassioned defense of the field before
the advisory committee Wednesday.

   "Cutting-edge medical research is risky. Bad things happen," Anderson said.
". . . If mistakes were made, they were honest mistakes made by compassionate
physicians desperately trying to help their patients."

   The Washington-based Biotechnology Industry Organization expressed some
reservations about the broadened guidelines, particularly the requirement that
every death or serious illness be reported. Such a rule, the group said in a
statement, "could be detrimental to the development of potentially life-saving
new therapies."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1113 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        December 9, 1999, Thursday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 13

LENGTH: 87 words

HEADLINE: Teen's gene therapy said to have violated rules

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel wire reports

DATELINE: Bethesda, Md.

BODY:

   An Arizona teenager who died in a gene therapy experiment should never have
been part of the study and researchers who conducted it violated rules of the
testing, federal officials said Wednesday.

   Food and Drug Administration officials said Jesse Gelsinger, 18, "did not
meet the entry criterion" for participating in an experiment in which his liver
was injected with a virus carrying a corrective gene.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where the experiment was
performed, denied the accusation.


LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1114 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Officials Fault Penn Team in Gene Therapy Death

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Dec. 8

BODY:

   Officials of the Food and Drug Administration said today that Jesse
Gelsinger, the 18-year-old Arizona man who lost his life in a gene therapy
experiment in September, was ineligible for the clinical trial and should not
have been treated because his liver was not functioning well enough before
doctors infused him with a dose of corrective genes.

   In announcing the preliminary results of their inquiry into Mr. Gelsinger's
death, the officials also said the University of Pennsylvania scientists running
the study had violated F.D.A. requirements by failing to report immediately
information about two patients who, long before the death, had experienced
serious side effects.

    And they said the informed-consent form that the investigators gave patients
deviated from one the agency had approved, in that it omitted information about
the death of monkeys that had received treatment similar to that given Mr.
Gelsinger, although much more powerful.

   "We don't know what the impact of these deviations are" on Mr. Gelsinger's
death, said Dr. Kathryn Zoon, director of the agency's Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, which monitors gene therapy studies. But "they're
important," she said, adding that when the agency concludes its inquiry, it will
take "appropriate action." She declined to say what that action might be.

   In response, Dr. James Wilson, the lead scientist for the Penn study,
vigoriously defended his conduct. In interviews, Dr. Wilson, who directs one of
the most respected academic gene therapy programs in the country, has said
repeatedly that there was no evidence from either animal or human testing that
could have foretold Mr. Gelsinger's death.

   In a brief statement he read to reporters today, Dr. Wilson maintained that
at the time Mr. Gelsinger was enrolled in the study -- three months before he
was treated -- blood tests showed that his liver was functioning within the
study's parameters.

   "We remain fully comfortable with the clinical decision" to treat him, Dr.
Wilson said.

   While he acknowledged that he had not telephoned the F.D.A. immediately with
information about the other patients' side effects -- highly elevated enzyme
levels -- Dr. Wilson said the agency had been given "comprehensive data" in
writing about those effects eight months before Mr. Gelsinger died. He did not
address the issue of the informed-consent form, and he did not take questions.

   The dispute over Mr. Gelsinger's treatment, aired in dueling news
conferences, lent a bizarre, circuslike air to the first day of a three-day
session of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the National Institutes of
Health panel that oversees gene therapy research. The meeting room here was
packed with scientists, reporters and others, including Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's
father, who sat in the back and quietly took notes on a yellow legal pad.

   In an interview, Mr. Gelsinger said he remained supportive of the scientists
at Penn. "These guys didn't do anything wrong," he said.

   The panel is not scheduled to hear formal presentations from Dr. Wilson and
the F.D.A. until Thursday. Inside the meeting room, today's session stuck
strictly to the agenda, as a parade of gene therapy researchers reported about
the safety and toxicity of adenovirus, the weakened cold virus that was used as
a "vector" to deliver healthy DNA to Mr. Gelsinger and the 17 other patients
treated in the Penn study.

   Outside the meeting, Dr. Wilson, trailed by press aides and a lawyer,
scrambled to respond to the F.D.A.'s accusations, first reported today by The
Washington Post.

   The debate is likely to intensify concern over the conduct of researchers in
gene therapy, a nine-year-old field that has enjoyed few treatment successes
but, until the Penn study, never experienced the death of a patient. Officials
at the advisory committee have complained that beyond Dr. Wilson, some gene
therapy researchers have failed to make their safety data public, as guidelines
of the National Institutes of Health require. On Friday, the committee will
discuss new rules that would force greater openness.

   One reason the Penn study has generated so much controversy is that Jesse
Gelsinger was not sick before he died. He suffered from a relatively mild form
of ornithine transcarbamylase, or OTC, deficiency -- a rare hereditary metabolic
disorder in which the liver is unable to process ammonia, a toxic breakdown
product of protein. When ammonia builds up in the blood, it can travel to the
brain, causing coma and death; Mr. Gelsinger's ammonia levels were kept in check
through diet and drugs, although he had slipped into a coma for a time eight
months before he was treated in the study.

   The study was not designed to benefit people like Mr. Gelsinger; it was to
test the safety of a treatment for babies with a fatal form of his disorder.

   Acting on the advice of medical ethicists, the Penn scientists decided it was
not proper to test the treatment on babies. So their study called for stable
adults, including female carriers of the defective OTC gene and men, like Mr.
Gelsinger, who had what scientists call a "partial enzyme deficiency," to
receive the treatment: an infusion of trillions of particles of weakened
adenovirus, each with the OTC gene tucked inside it. The infusion was given
through the hepatic artery, which leads directly to the liver.

   Scientists and doctors who specialize in genetic disorders, including some
who reviewed the experiment for the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, raised
questions about the study's safety from the outset, and those questions are now
being raised anew. In an interview today, Dr. Holmes Morton, an expert in
metabolic diseases who runs the Clinic for Special Children in Strasburg, Pa.,
said there had been enough evidence about the side effects of adenovirus to
raise serious doubts about the wisdom of giving it to someone with OTC
deficiency.

   Gene therapy experts have known for some time that adenovirus provokes an
immune system response that frequently includes high fevers.  Mr. Gelsinger's
temperature rose to 104.5 degrees the night he received his gene infusion. After
the fever, he experienced jaundice, then a blood clotting disorder. His ammonia
levels began to rise uncontrollably; he then suffered kidney failure, lung
failure and brain death.

   Dr. Morton said high fevers were particularly dangerous for someone with Mr.
Gelsinger's disorder, and might have caused the subsequent reactions. "Any time
a patient with that disorder is stressed by illness, and in particular any time
they develop a fever, their underlying disease becomes not only unstable but
life-threatening," Dr. Morton said. "That, in a sense, is a quite predictable
problem."

   But Dr. W. French Anderson, the scientist who conducted the first gene
therapy experiment, and who is regarded as the father of the field, said he was
convinced that it had been reasonable to proceed with the experiment. Dr.
Anderson added that in a busy laboratory like Dr. Wilson's, "sometimes things
fall through the cracks."

   "What this meeting is doing," he said, "is to tighten everything up."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1115 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-17

U.S. Says Israel and Syria Agree to Resume Talks
President Clinton announced that Israel and Syria would begin top-level peace
talks next week in Washington after a nearly four-year suspension. He said both
sides wanted to reach an agreement as soon as possible.   A1


   Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright met with President Hafez al-Assad in
Damascus. She apparently found a formula that would allow for direct
Israeli-Syrian talks.   A17

U.S. Arrests Russian as Spy
Federal agents arrested a Russian diplomat believed to be an intelligence agent
who had tried to obtain classified information from the State Department,
officials said.   A1

Clinton Defends Negotiations
President Clinton defended his handling of the failed Seattle trade talks and
said his insistence that labor and environmental issues be central was not
intended to provide political cover for the Gore campaign.   A12

Russia-Belarus Confederation
Russia and Belarus agreed in principle to form an economic and political
confederation roughly modeled after the European Union.   A8

Airport Seized in Montenegro
Yugoslav troops seized Podgorica airport, raising tensions between federal
authorities and the independence-minded republic.   A15

Pakistani Ex-Leader Charged
Prosecutors formally charged the ousted prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, and six
others with hijacking, kidnapping, attempted murder and plotting to wage war
against the state.   A12

German Won't Raise Offer
Chancellor Gerhard Schroder dismissed demands to improve Germany's latest offer
of $4.2 billion to compensate Nazi-era slave laborers.   A5

France Keeps British Beef Ban
France decided to maintain its ban on British beef imports over fears of mad cow
disease, setting the stage for a legal battle with London.   A6

New History of Pearl Harbor
Freshly discovered diplomatic papers published in Tokyo seem to overturn
standard versions of the events leading up to the attack.   A3

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A18-25

Soldier Guilty of Murder In Gay Bias Killing
A court-martial at Fort Campbell, Ky., convicted Pvt. Calvin Glover, 18, of the
premeditated murder of Pfc. Barry Winchell, 21, who had been subjected to
anti-gay taunts by Private Glover and others.   A18

Overdose No Bar to Execution
Texas executed a convicted murderer who overdosed on anti-psychotic on Monday
and had been placed under intensive care, after courts rejected final appeals.
   A18

Clinton News Conference
President Clinton reflected on the fate of a Cuban boy torn between feuding
family members, on a year marked by numerous policy defeats and on the legacy of
the figure he pronounced the century's greatest, Franklin D. Roosevelt.   A20

State Department officials seemed willing to consider reuniting the Cuban boy
with his father in Cuba.   A20

Acquittal in Alleged Castro Plot
A federal jury in Puerto Rico acquitted five Cuban exiles charged with plotting
to kill Fidel Castro at a Caribbean summit meeting in 1997.   A20

New Strategy to Fight Drugs
The White House's director of national drug policy, Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey,
urged integration of drug testing and treatment into virtually all phases of the
criminal justice process.   A23

Jury Finds Anti-King Conspiracy
A jury in a civil suit brought by the family of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr. decided that a retired Memphis cafe owner was part of a conspiracy to kill
Dr. King.   A25

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Inquiry on Gene Therapy Death
F.D.A. officials said they had concluded that Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old
man who lost his life in a gene therapy experiment in September, should not have
been treated because of his liver's condition.   A1

Autism Treatment Fails Trial
The hormone secretin, trumpeted in the news media and on the Internet as a
potential cure for autism, worked no better than saltwater in its first
controlled clinical trial.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-32

Court Bars Enforcement Of New City Shelter Rules
A state court ordered a temporary halt to the Giuliani administration's plan to
make homeless families work for shelter, characterizing a measure that would
place the children of people who fail to meet the requirement in foster care as
frightening.   A1

Pentagon's Gay Policy Faulted
Hillary Rodham Clinton told a group of gay contributors this week that the
Clinton administration's "don't ask, don't tell" policy on gays in the military
had been a failure and that she would work to overturn it if elected to the
Senate, aides said.   A1

Prospects for Transit Strike
Union members and government officials said a walkout sometime after the
contract deadline next Wednesday was more likely now than at any time in the
past two decades.   B1

Mayor's Aide Is Questioned
Mayor Giuliani's chief of staff, Anthony V. Carbonetti, has been questioned by
investigators from the Brooklyn district attorney's office looking into whether
Hasidic builders in Brooklyn benefited from their political connections to City
Hall.   B1

Rise in Cigarette Tax Weighed
Negotiators for Governor Pataki and the Legislature were said to be considering
raising the state cigarette tax by at least 25 cents a pack to pay for a
comprehensive health care plan that would expand medical coverage for low-income
people.   B1

Charges of Illegal Catches
Thousands of pounds of striped bass illegally caught in polluted waters have
passed through the Fulton Fish Market to prominent Manhattan restaurants and
clubs in recent years, said federal officials who filed charges against five
fish dealers.   B3

NEEDIEST CASES   B5

SPORTS   D1-8

Seeking to Buy the Jets
Final bids to acquire the Jets from Leon Hess's estate were submitted to
Goldman, Sachs, but the offers were not made public.   D2

BUSINESS DAY   C1-28

Ruling Against French Tobacco
A French court ruled that Seita, maker of Gauloise and Gitane cigarettes, was
partly responsible for the death of a three-pack-a-day smoker. The company said
it would appeal. The damages sought are less than $500,000 and the court, by
ruling that the smoker had been partly responsible, indicated that damages
awarded would be less than that.   C1

Deal for Optical Technology
Nortel Networks, seeking to stay on top of the fast-changing optical
communications market, was said to be nearing a deal to acquire Qtera for up to
$3.5 billion in stock.   C1

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   B15

CIRCUITS   G1-16

ARTS   E1-14

HOUSE & HOME   F1-18

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: Two steps forward in the Mideast; the school testing inquiry; ending
the brutality in Chechnya; Nassau County's fiscal crisis.
Columns: William Safire.

Bridge   E10
TV Listings   E13
Crossword   E10
Weather   B12
Public Lives   B2


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1116 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 67 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

BODY:


   Gene Therapy Study Faulted
A man who died in a gene therapy experiment should not have been treated because
his liver was not functioning well enough, the Food and Drug Administration
concluded.
PAGE A22


   Autism Treatment Fails Trial
A hormone trumpeted as a potential therapy for autism worked no better than
saltwater in its first controlled clinical trial, scientists report.
PAGE A20

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1117 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 DECEMBER 9, 1999 Thursday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: FEDS RIP PENN RESEARCHERS IN GENE THERAPY DEATH

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   An Arizona teen-ager who died in a gene therapy experiment should never have
been part of the study and researchers who conducted it violated at least two
rules of the testing, federal officials said yesterday.

   Food and Drug Administration officials said Jesse Gelsinger, 18, "did not
meet the entry criterion" for participating in an experiment in which his liver
was injected with a virus carrying a corrective gene.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where the experiment was part
of a series of gene therapy trials, denied the accusation and said they would
defend their work at a hearing today at the National Institutes of Health.

   The allegations were announced yesterday after a daylong hearing before an
NIH advisory committee investigating the death and looking at safety issues in
gene therapy experiments. The panel, called the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, or RAC, also is considering new guidelines that would sharpen federal
control and force the public disclosure of problems in gene therapy experiments.

   Gelsinger's death, the first directly blamed on a gene therapy experiment,
prompted the review of the emerging medical treatment.

   The Tucson teen-ager suffered from a genetic liver disorder and was enrolled
in a University of Pennsylvania trial designed to correct his condition by
inserting normal genes into his liver.

   Gelsinger died within days of the experiment.

   Kathryn Zoon, chief of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation, said
preliminary findings of an FDA investigation show Gelsinger had elevated ammonia
in his blood, an indication of a distressed liver, when he received the gene
injection.

   "The entry levels for ammonia [readings] were not met," said Zoon.

   She also said the Pennsylvania researchers failed to notify the FDA of two
other patients in the therapy experiments who suffered liver damage severe
enough to halt the trial.

   "The investigators were supposed to have notified the FDA by call or fax
immediately," said Zoon. She said the researchers also failed to mention on
patient consent forms that a monkey died after receiving experimental gene
therapy.

   Dr. James Wilson, head of the University of Pennsylvania team, said Gelsinger
did meet the FDA requirements when he enrolled in the trial, but his ammonia
levels were "slightly elevated" just prior to the gene therapy injection.

   In addition, he said the FDA was notified of the two other patients who
suffered liver damage.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1118 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 9, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: PENN PIONEER'S FIRM PROVIDES MILLIONS FOR GENE THERAPY INSTITUTE
FOUNDED IN 1992, GENOVO INC. IS ONE OF MANY BIOTECH COMPANIES WAITING TO PROFIT
FROM RESEARCH BREAKTHROUGHS.

BYLINE: Donna Shaw and Andrea Gerlin, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Genovo Inc., the company set up by a University of Pennsylvania gene-therapy
pioneer, is among a growing number of young biotechnology firms seeking to
profit from cutting-edge science performed in academic and government
laboratories.

   Founded in 1992 by James M. Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human
Gene Therapy, the privately held Sharon Hill company provides $4.7 million a
year for the institute's research under a patent-licensing agreement with the
university, Wilson has said.

   Wilson has said he holds stock in Genovo. A spokesman for Genovo, Fred Spar,
declined to identify the other shareholders or the amount of Wilson's ownership
stake.

   Genovo provides the largest corporate support for the institute, which is
part of Penn's School of Medicine. The institute's annual budget is $22 million,
said Chris Koch, the medical school's director of finance. The medical school
contributes 10 to 12 percent of that budget, Koch said. Of the balance, about
half comes from the National Institutes of Health and a quarter from private
foundations. Corporations provide the remainder, and Genovo is the largest
funding source in that group, Koch said.

   To help pay for its gene-therapy work and the 20 people it employs, Genovo
has received substantial funding from two publicly held biotech corporations. It
also has a potentially lucrative joint venture with a third company, according
to documents filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

   In 1995, Biogen Inc., of Cambridge, Mass., agreed to pay approximately $37
million over five years to fund research at Genovo and the institute. Another
Cambridge biotech company, Genzyme Corp., this year paid $3.4 million to
purchase 122,750 shares of Genovo preferred stock.

   A third Cambridge biotech, Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc., entered into a joint
venture with Genovo in 1997 to develop and commercialize gene-therapy medicines.
The venture, in which each partner pays its own costs, plans to develop not only
products for specific diseases but to collaborate with other companies and grant
commercialization licenses to third parties, according to an SEC document.

   In its venture with Ariad, the companies are trying to develop a biologic
vehicle to deliver treatments for numerous diseases. If successful, they could
tap a market potentially valued at $11 billion a year, according to Ariad.

   In an address before the American Society of Gene Therapy in Washington in
June, Wilson said that he had "little experience" in developing gene therapy as
a business. But, noting that industry would manufacture and sell whatever
academia developed, he added: "We must identify and address any potential
barriers to commercial success."

   Wilson, then president of the society, exhorted his colleagues to proceed
"aggressively but thoughtfully, not getting ahead of ourselves."

   "I have no doubt with the talent and energy that I see in this room," he
concluded, "that we will eventually succeed beyond our current expectations."

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1119 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 9, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1291 words

HEADLINE: PENN DENIES THERAPY LAPSE KILLED TEEN THE FDA FOUND 2 VIOLATIONS IN
THE GENE TEST. SCIENTISTS CALLED ONE A TECHNICALITY, THE OTHER A JUDGMENT CALL.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   University of Pennsylvania officials yesterday acknowledged that a
gene-therapy treatment that caused the death of an Arizona teenager didn't
perfectly comply with federal regulations, but they disputed whether the
violations led to the teenager's death.

   The scientists who oversaw the experimental therapy that killed Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, said the first violation involved a technicality in
reporting adverse reactions. The second, they said, came down to a judgment call
about whether elevated levels of ammonia in the boy's bloodstream should have
halted the experiment.

   "We discussed whether or not we should continue with this modest elevation,"
said Mark Batshaw, the study's principal investigator. "We made the decision to
go forward."

   At a packed news conference here yesterday afternoon, regulators from the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration said their preliminary investigation of the
Penn death had found evidence of two "protocol deviations" - changes that Penn
scientists made without FDA consent.

   "We do not know the impact of those deviations," said Kathryn Zoon, the lead
FDA investigator. She said that if the Penn team had followed the rules, the
teenager might never have been allowed in the trial. "In that sense, it is
important," Zoon said.

   She declined to say what sanctions, if any, might be imposed on Penn.
However, she said the agency's options ranged from administrative penalties to
"the most severe - criminal" prosecution.

   Defenders of the university dismissed the idea that Penn's actions were
egregious enough to rise to the level of criminal.

   The comments came on the first day of a contentious meeting of the
government's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a 15-member group of
scientists, ethicists and others who review the safety issues involved in
gene-therapy experiments.

   The meeting, which runs through tomorrow at the National Institutes of
Health, was called to publicly air the safety of Penn's experiment, which led to
the first known gene-therapy death in nearly 10 years of research.

   Hundreds of representatives of biotechnology companies filled the meeting
hall, fearful that federal regulators might use the death as reason to put
brakes on the burgeoning field.

   Gelsinger had a genetic disorder known as ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency (OTC) in which his liver failed to make an enzyme the body needs to
get rid of ammonia, a byproduct of metabolism. Although he had the disease under
control through diet and medications, he was eager to be in the trial in the
hope that it would some day lead to a cure.

   The teenager was the 18th and last patient to be treated in the Penn
experiment, which injected a bioengineered virus containing a corrective gene
into the liver through the organ's main artery. Gelsinger, who received the
highest dose of the drug, died on Sept. 17, four days after the therapy.

   The FDA charges that Penn scientists did not report an adverse reaction
suffered by the 13th patient in the trial. The patient had elevated levels of
certain liver enzymes which the scientists term "grade 3," considered serious.
Federal guidelines require scientists to report such side effects.

   Penn scientists argue that they did report the adverse reaction, but not
immediately. They argue that the brief delay had no impact on Gelsinger since
the agency was informed well before his treatment.

   "The fact is that in January of 1999 - fully eight months prior to Jesse's
therapy - the FDA was provided comprehensive data," James M. Wilson, director of
Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, said in a brief statement he read at
the news conference.

   The second FDA charge was that Gelsinger had elevated levels of ammonia in
his blood at the time he was treated - a finding that might have stopped the
trial if the agency had been kept informed.

   When Gelsinger was enrolled in the experiment on June 22, 1999, his ammonia
level was 47 micromoles per liter, said Batshaw, chief academic officer at
Children's National Medical Center in Washington and a leading expert on OTC.
But on Sept. 12, the day before he got the gene infusion, his ammonia level was
91.

   Penn said that under its experimental protocol, approved by the FDA,
patients' ammonia readings had to be under 75 on the day they enrolled. The
protocol makes no mention of readings on the day of the treatment.

   Even so, they did not consider the level of 91 a problem, calling the
elevation "modest." Gelsinger seemed fine, and fluctuations in ammonia levels,
the scientists knew, are common in OTC patients.

   Batshaw said he consulted with Steve Raper, the Penn surgeon in charge of
day-to-day monitoring of the trial participants. The two physicians decided to
proceed with the experiment, Batshaw said, while giving Gelsinger intravenous
medicines to lower his ammonia.

   Batshaw said the next ammonia reading, taken about two hours after the gene
infusion on Sept. 13, was down to 60. "Our feeling is we, in fact, followed the
protocol we had set forward," he said. "I think it's fair for people to say we
made an error of judgment, and that's for others to say. I believe we filled
what we had written in the protocol."

   The FDA also criticized Penn for revising its patient consent forms to omit
information about animal deaths during testing.

   The form submitted to the FDA noted that monkeys getting the highest dose of
the experimental therapy had died. The form signed by patients did not note
that.

   "The change in the consent form had to do with the fact that we changed the
vector [the virus used to deliver the gene]," said Rebecca Harmon, Penn
spokeswoman. "We had designed a safer, better vector, so it was no longer
appropriate to refer to the monkey deaths."

   Even with the improved vector, however, the monkeys fell ill with hepatitis -
a fact that also was not included in the final consent form.

   Both the original and the final consent forms, however, did spell out that
the therapy ran the risk of patients developing hepatitis or other liver
problems which potentially could be fatal.

   The Penn scientists also said yesterday they were aware of several adverse
reactions that occurred in a similar gene-therapy trial sponsored by
Schering-Plough Corp. of Madison, N.J. But they said the reactions - elevated
levels of liver enzymes - were not of concern because the levels returned to
normal and the patients were not harmed, at least not according to the data made
available by the drug company.

   Yesterday, officials at Schering-Plough testified that one of the three
adverse events occurred at Penn itself and that the university's institutional
review board, which must approve all trials involving human subjects, had been
informed of it on Oct. 22, 1998, a little more than a month after it happened,
and nearly a year before Gelsinger underwent his treatment.

   Today, FDA officials are expected to release their preliminary report on the
Penn experiment, but the final report will not be completed for weeks,
regulators said. Also today, Penn is scheduled to make a full accounting of
Gelsinger's death. The Penn researchers concluded, in a report submitted to
federal officials last week, that there was no "human error" involved and that
the teenager died because of an unusual immune-system reaction to the vector - a
modified adenovirus outfitted with the missing gene.

   Tomorrow, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee will consider proposals to
strengthen the government's guidelines for reporting deaths and serious
side-effects from novel gene-therapy experiments. The proposed requirements
would ensure that some information now kept secret by the FDA is made public.
Drug companies say the proposed changes go too far.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1120 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 9, 1999, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPIST DEFENDS DECISION THAT PROVED FATAL

BYLINE: DEBORAH NELSONAND RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The gene therapy researcher who oversaw the medical experiment that killed a
Tucson teen-ager in September acknowledged yesterday that he treated the young
man even though Jesse Gelsinger's blood tests were "slightly" abnormal.

   However, he said, he "felt comfortable with the decision" to proceed with the
infusion of gene-altered viruses because he believed that Gelsinger's condition
had been stabilized with medicines given the night before.

   Food and Drug Administration officials have said that decision was one of
several serious lapses uncovered in an ongoing federal investigation of the
University of Pennsylvania study, which was testing the safety of a new genetic
treatment for a rare inherited liver condition.

   Agency officials reiterated that position during a news conference yesterday
following a special gene therapy meeting at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md.

   The researcher, James M. Wilson, who was attending the meeting, then read a
brief, prepared statement that provided his justification for treating
Gelsinger.

   Wilson said that Gelsinger's blood ammonia levels - a measure of liver
vitality - had been within an acceptable range when the teen was first enrolled
in the study. He said it was his understanding that this was the time the FDA
rules applied to. In the days preceding the treatment, those levels rose to a
level higher than the maximum allowable under rules agreed to in advance by the
researchers and the FDA.

   Gelsinger was given conventional medicines the night before he was infused
with the viruses.

   It remained unclear yesterday whether the medicines he received the night
before the experiment successfully lowered his ammonia levels.

   Wilson refused to answer questions.

   The FDA yesterday also said that four volunteers - more than previously
reported - had experienced serious "Grade 3" toxic reactions before Gelsinger
was enrolled, but the researchers alerted the agency only to the first two.

   Wilson said he had provided all patient data to the agency, but the FDA
countered that the researchers had neither specifically flagged the worrisome
results nor halted the study as required.

   Also yesterday, NIH officials said that the Penn researchers had not reported
those serious side effects to the NIH Office of Biotechnology Activities, as
required.

   That oversight office's first notice of any problems in the NIH-funded study
was a report from the researchers of Gelsinger's death.

   In an impromptu presentation after the meeting, Gelsinger's father, Paul,
defended Wilson.

   "I touched souls with this man," Gelsinger said. "There is nothing wrong with
Wilson."

   He blamed the FDA for failing to stop the experiment.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1121 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       December 9, 1999, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Officials hammerfatal gene study

BYLINE: Paul Recer




BODY: BETHESDA, Md. - An Arizona youth who died in a gene therapyexperiment
should never have been part of the study, andresearchers who conducted it
violated at least two rules of thetesting, federal officials said Wednesday.

    Food and Drug Administration officials said Jesse Gelsinger, 18,"did not
meet the entry criterion" for participating in anexperiment in which his liver
was injected with a virus carrying acorrective gene.

    Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where the experimentwas part
of a series of gene therapy trials, denied the accusationand said they would
defend their work at a hearing today at theNational Institutes of Health.

    The allegations were announced Wednesday after a daylong hearingbefore an
NIH advisory committee investigating the death andlooking at safety issues in
gene therapy experiments. The panel,called the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, or RAC, also isconsidering new guidelines that would sharpen federal
control andforce the public disclosure of problems in gene therapyexperiments.

    The RAC's hearing, before a packed auditorium, is to resume todayand is
expected to continue through Friday.

    Gelsinger's death, the first directly blamed on a gene therapyexperiment,
prompted the review of the emerging medical treatment.

    The Tucson teen suffered from a genetic liver disorder and wasenrolled in a
University of Pennsylvania trial designed to correcthis condition by inserting
normal genes into his liver.

    Gelsinger died within days of the experiment.

    Kathryn Zoon, chief of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation,said
preliminary findings of an FDA investigation show Gelsingerhad elevated ammonia
in his blood, an indication of a distressedliver, when he got the gene
injection.

    Zoon said the Pennsylvania researchers failed to notify the FDA oftwo other
patients in the therapy experiments who suffered liverdamage severe enough to
halt the trial.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1122 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               December 9, 1999, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A13

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: FATAL GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT BROKE TWO TEST RULES, U.S. OFFICIALS
SAY;
TEEN-AGER WHO DIED OF LIVER DISEASE DID NOT MEET ENTRY STANDARDS, THEY SAY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:


   An Arizona teen-ager who died in a gene therapy experiment should never have
been part of the study, and researchers who conducted it violated at least two
rules of the testing, federal officials said Wednesday.

   Food and Drug Administration officials said the victim, Jesse Gelsinger, 18,
"did not meet the entry criterion" for participating in an experiment in which
his liver was injected with a virus carrying a corrective gene.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where the experiment was part
of gene therapy trials, denied the federal accusations. University officials
said they would defend their work at a hearing today at the National Institutes
of Health.

   The allegations were announced Wednesday after a daylong hearing before an
NIH advisory committee that is investigating the teen's death and looking at
safety issues in gene therapy experiments. The panel, called the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, is considering guidelines that would boost federal control
over such studies and force public disclosure of problems in gene therapy
experiments.

The hearing is expected to continue through Friday.

   Gelsinger's death was the first directly blamed on a gene therapy experiment.
He was enrolled in a University of Pennsylvania trial that sought to correct his
liver disorder by inserting normal genes into his liver. Gelsinger died within
days of the experiment.

   Kathryn Zoon, chief of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation, said the
agency's preliminary findings showed that Gelsinger had elevated ammonia in his
blood, an indication of a distressed liver, when he got the gene injection.

"The entry levels for ammonia (readings) were not met," Zoon said.

   She also said the researchers failed to notify her agency that two other
patients in the therapy experiments suffered liver damage severe enough to halt
the trial.

   Zoon also said the researchers failed to mention on patient consent forms
that a monkey died after receiving gene therapy.

   Using genes to correct conditions from cancer to heart disease is considered
one of the most promising therapies on the medical horizon.

   "We've treated 5,000 patients with only one death, and that is
extraordinary," said Dr. W. French Anderson, a University of Southern California
researcher who was among the first to conduct gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1123 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           December 9, 1999 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Fatal gene therapy experiment broke rules, federal officials say

BYLINE: Paul Recer, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   An Arizona teenager who died in a gene therapy experiment should never have
been part of the study, and researchers who conducted it violated at least two
rules of the testing, federal officials said yesterday.

    Food and Drug Administration officials said Jesse Gelsinger, 18, "did not
meet the entry criterion" for participating in an experiment in which his liver
was injected with a virus carrying a corrective gene.

    Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where the experiment was part
of a series of gene therapy trials, denied the accusation and said they would
defend their work at a hearing today at the National Institutes of Health.

    The allegations were announced yesterday after a day-long hearing before an
NIH advisory committee investigating the death and looking at safety issues in
gene therapy experiments. The panel, called the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, or RAC, also is considering new guidelines that would sharpen federal
control and force the public disclosure of problems in gene therapy experiments.

    Gelsinger's death, the first directly blamed on a gene therapy experiment,
prompted the review of the emerging medical treatment.

    The Tucson teenager suffered from a genetic liver disorder and was enrolled
in a University of Pennsylvania trial designed to correct his condition by
inserting normal genes into his liver.

    Gelsinger died within days of the experiment.

    Kathryn Zoon, chief of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation, said
preliminary findings of an FDA investigation show Gelsinger had elevated ammonia
in his blood, an indication of a distressed liver, when he received the gene
injection.

    She also said the Pennsylvania researchers failed to notify the FDA of two
other patients in the therapy experiments who suffered liver damage severe
enough to halt the trial.

    "The investigators were supposed to have notified the FDA by call or fax
immediately," said Zoon. She said the researchers also failed to mention on
patient consent forms that a monkey died after receiving experimental gene
therapy.

    Dr. James Wilson, head of the University of Pennsylvania team, said
Gelsinger did meet the FDA requirements when he enrolled in the trial, but his
ammonia levels were "slightly elevated" just prior to the gene therapy
injection.

    "We remain fully comfortable with the clinical decision to use alternate
pathways to lower that level and proceed with the trial," Wilson said in a
statement.

    In addition, he said the FDA was notified of the two other patients who
suffered liver damage.

   Paul Gelsinger, father of the dead teen, said he blamed the FDA for not
supervising the experiment more closely.

    "I told the FDA that they had dropped the ball in overseeing Jesse's case,"
Gelsinger said. He defended the University of Pennsylvania team, saying, "They
have told me everything. I want them to continue their work. That's what Jesse
would want."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1124 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       December 9, 1999 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 491 words

HEADLINE: FDA BERATES RESEARCHERS AT GENE THERAPY SAFETY HEARING

BYLINE: By Paul Recer Ap science writer

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:

   An Arizona teen-ager who died in a gene therapy experiment should never have
been part of the study and researchers who conducted it violated at least two
rules of the testing, federal officials said Wednesday.

   Food and Drug Administration officials said Jesse Gelsinger, 18, "did not
meet the entry criterion" for participating in an experiment in which his liver
was injected with a virus carrying a corrective gene.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where the experiment was part
of a series of gene therapy trials, denied the accusation and said they would
defend their work at a hearing today at the National Institutes of Health.

   The allegations were announced Wednesday after a daylong hearing before an
NIH advisory committee investigating the death and looking at safety issues in
gene therapy experiments. The panel, called the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, also is considering new guidelines that would sharpen federal control
and force the public disclosure of problems in gene therapy experiments.

   The committee's hearing, before a packed auditorium, is to resume today and
is expected to continue through Friday.

   Gelsinger's death, the first directly blamed on a gene therapy experiment,
prompted the review of the emerging medical treatment.

   The Tucson teen-ager suffered from a genetic liver disorder and was enrolled
in a University of Pennsylvania trial designed to correct his condition by
inserting normal genes into his liver.

   Gelsinger died within days of the experiment.

   Kathryn Zoon, chief of the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation, said
preliminary findings of an FDA investigation show Gelsinger had elevated ammonia
in his blood, an indication of a distressed liver, when he received the gene
injection.

   She also said the Pennsylvania researchers failed to notify the FDA of two
other patients in the therapy experiments who suffered liver damage severe
enough to halt the trial.

   Zoon also said the researchers failed to mention on patient consent forms
that a monkey died after receiving experimental gene therapy.

   Dr. James Wilson, head of the University of Pennsylvania team, said Gelsinger
did meet the FDA requirements when he enrolled in the trial, but his ammonia
levels were "slightly elevated" just prior to the gene therapy injection.

   In addition, he said the FDA was notified of the two other patients who
suffered liver damage.

   Paul Gelsinger, father of the dead teen, said he blamed the FDA for not
supervising the experiment more closely.

   Gene therapy has been used for a variety of disorders, including correcting
inherited mutations and prompting the body to mount a defense against cancer.
One study was designed to grow new blood vessels for ailing hearts. Most of the
work is still in the early stages of research.

   Using genes to correct conditions from cancer to heart disease is considered
one of the most promising therapies on the medical horizon.

GRAPHIC: The death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., shown in
this undated family photo, is the first blamed directly on
experimental gene therapy. Gelsinger had an inherited liver
condition.
AP PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1125 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 9, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: Scientists violated gene-therapy rules in teen's case, FDA says

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. -- Food and Drug Administration officials accused
scientists at the University of Pennsylvania on Wednesday of violating
gene-therapy study regulations that might have prevented the death
of a Tucson teenager in September.

   The charge, disclosed by The Washington Post and repeated
at a media briefing on the first day of a gene-therapy conference
at the National Institutes of Health, surprised the Penn scientists
and prompted the patient's father to accuse the FDA of shoddy
oversight. The FDA is the leading regulatory agency for gene-therapy
studies.


   The conference is being held specifically to discuss the death
of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, during gene-therapy treatment Sept. 17,
and to hear reports of possible problems in other studies. Normally,
federal agencies withhold comment until the last day of such meetings,
after all of the data has been presented.

   Gelsinger, who had volunteered for a gene-therapy study at Penn,
was suffering from an inherited liver disorder. The study involved
injections of a cold virus carrying healthy genes directly into
the liver's main artery.

   The virus, called adenovirus, is believed to have triggered a
chain of events that led to the death. It has been the most commonly
used vehicle for delivering genes in gene-therapy experiments.
Gelsinger is believed to be the first patient to die directly
from a gene-therapy procedure.

   Kathyrn Zoon, director of FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, said an investigation that was launched after Gelsinger's
death shows "preliminary evidence of two protocol deviations"
by the Penn team.

   Zoon said James Wilson and Steven Raper of Penn and Mark Batshaw
of the Children's National Medical Center in Washington appear
to have withheld information about high ammonia levels in Gelsinger's
blood that would have prevented him from being enrolled in the
study. Zoon said the team also failed to inform the FDA of potentially
serious elevations of liver enzymes in another patient.

   "I don't know whether the death could have been prevented. The
deviations would impact whether or not the patient would have
been treated in the first place," Zoon said.

   Paul Gelsinger, the teen's father, said he informed the FDA Monday
that he believed the agency overlooked potential problems and
that his son's death could have been prevented.

   Visibly distraught, the elder Gelsinger defended Wilson and the
gene-therapy team.

   "We are disappointed that the FDA has apparently decided prior
to the presentations scheduled for (today) to publicly disclose
what they have characterized as 'preliminary findings,' " Wilson
said. "We would like to clarify some of the information that
appears inaccurate, with the goal of more thoroughly reviewing
the trial."

   Wilson maintains that the information about liver toxicity was
provided to the FDA eight months before Gelsinger's treatment
and that the ammonia levels in his blood were within guidelines
for acceptance into the study.

   Friday, the NIH is likely to recommend stricter federal guidelines
for reporting "adverse events" that occur in gene therapy studies
and boosting NIH's role in overseeing the research.

GRAPHIC: Jesse Gelsinger: The 18-year-old died during gene-therapy treatment.

LOAD-DATE: December 09, 1999


                             1126 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 9, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 807 words

HEADLINE: Evil and the Organ Transplant

BYLINE: Sally Squires, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   THE EXPERIMENT

   By John Darnton

   Dutton. 421 pp. $ 24.95


   By Sally Squires, a staff writer for the Health section of The Post.


   Ever since Scottish scientist Ian Wilmut announced that he and his colleagues
had successfully cloned a sheep named Dolly, there has been wide speculation
about one day cloning humans. The technology to clone a human does not yet
exist. But what if it did? And what if a group of unethical scientists were
already ahead of the pack, cloning people to provide a cache of unlimited,
perfect organs for a few wealthy movers and shakers?

   Such is the premise of "The Experiment" by John Darnton, a medical thriller
that catapults some of the most dire possibilities of cloning into today's
world. Ever since Mary Shelley created Frankenstein, the notion of an evil, mad
scientist trying to play God has been a common theme of medical thrillers. As
one best-selling author of this genre once confided during an interview, the
secret is to take a classic and spin it into a new tale with a modern medical
twist.

   Darnton seems to have gravitated to that formula. "The Experiment" centers on
a very real medical problem: the desperate shortage of organs. There are an
estimated 80,000 candidates for organ transplants in the United States, and more
than 4,000 people die every year while waiting for a new liver, kidney, heart or
lungs.

   In "The Experiment," a scientific cult led by a mysterious Dr. Rincon
discovers how to clone people and promptly withdraws from society, hoarding the
information for its own nefarious purposes. Bankrolled by a secretive, eccentric
billionaire, the group sets up a cloning facility on a remote island off the
coast of Georgia. The clones of the scientists and their children are called
Jimminies--a bastardization of the word Gemini or twins--and are raised like
fatted calves by Elder Physicians, who impose strict rules about good nutrition,
regular exercise, no sex and, of course, no contact with the outside world. The
Jimminies live in Spartan barracks and learn Rincon's Laws, in which science is
God. Researchers alter DNA, insert new genes and try to achieve a kind of
immortality for them and their families using the perfect spare parts of the
clones when something goes wrong.

   The tale begins when two Jimminies--twenty-somethings Skyler and
Julia--discover the gutted remains of Patrick, a fellow clone. Patrick's heart
was "harvested." Since it isn't the first time that one of the Jimminies has
turned up dead, Skyler and Julia correctly deduce that their time is probably
coming, although they don't know why. They have never left their tiny island,
and there seems little that they can do to prevent the inevitable.

   Enter Jude Harley, an aggressive young reporter for a Manhattan tabloid
called the Mirror. Harley is assigned to cover a murder in Upstate New York. The
victim has been executed with a single shot to the back of the head and his face
and fingerprints have been methodically removed, along with a single small piece
of skin from the inside of one thigh.

   When Harley's story on the murder gets bumped to the back of the Mirror by a
juicier murder, committed by a twin, he's assigned to do a sidebar on what makes
twins tick. He meets Tizzie Tierney, a dazzling young researcher at Rockefeller
University, who tutors him on the various aspects of twin research. Identical
twins have the same genetic code, making those separated at birth the ideal
candidates to explore the age-old question of nature vs. nurture.

   A romance quickly develops between Tierney and Harley. But there's something
missing in the relationship--Harley detects a troubling distance. Only when a
series of events deposits Skyler on his New York doorstep does Harley begin to
unravel the mystery that links him and Tierney with the Jimminies. In his quest,
he solves the strange murder (including why the victim's identity was covered
up), uncovers a conspiracy that stretches high into the ranks of the FBI and
learns some painful truths about himself and his family.

   Darnton, who is the cultural news editor of the New York Times and author of
the best-selling "Neanderthal," is a facile writer, who weaves many twists and
turns into the story and gets the science right. The beginning and end of "The
Experiment" are fast-paced but the middle sometimes bogs down, and Darnton
relies a bit too much on a deus ex machina to resolve his plot.

   Still, "The Experiment" is an important, interesting and cautionary tale of
what could happen to a society that lets scientists tinker too much. The amazing
possibilities of genetics and gene therapy provide a vast new Pandora's box for
the millennium. The questions, as "The Experiment" aptly illustrates, are how
eager should we be to open it and what safeguards do we need before we peek
inside?


LOAD-DATE: December 09, 1999


                             1127 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 9, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 456 words

HEADLINE: Gene Researcher Defends Test on Teen

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   The gene therapy researcher who oversaw the medical experiment that killed a
Tucson teenager in September acknowledged yesterday that he treated the young
man even though Jesse Gelsinger's blood tests were "slightly" abnormal.

   However, he said, he "felt comfortable with the decision" to proceed with the
infusion of gene-altered viruses because he believed that Gelsinger's condition
had been stabilized with medicines given the night before.

   Food and Drug Administration officials have said that decision was one of
several serious lapses uncovered in an ongoing federal investigation of the
University of Pennsylvania study, which was testing the safety of a new genetic
treatment for a rare inherited liver condition.

   Agency officials reiterated that position during a news conference yesterday
following a special gene therapy meeting at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda.

   The researcher, James M. Wilson, who was attending the meeting, then read a
brief, prepared statement that provided his justification for treating
Gelsinger.

   Wilson said that Gelsinger's blood ammonia levels--a measure of liver
vitality--had been within an acceptable range when the teenager was first
enrolled in the study. He said it was his understanding that this was the time
the FDA rules applied to. In the days preceding the treatment, those levels rose
to a level higher than the maximum allowable under rules agreed to in advance by
the researchers and the FDA. Gelsinger was given conventional medicines the
night before he was infused with the viruses.

   It remained unclear yesterday whether the medicines he received the night
before the experiment successfully lowered his ammonia levels, and Wilson
refused to answer questions.

   The FDA yesterday also said that four volunteers--more than previously
reported--had experienced serious "Grade 3" toxic reactions before Gelsinger was
enrolled, but the researchers alerted the agency only to the first two.

   Wilson said he had provided all patient data to the agency, but the FDA
countered that the researchers had neither specifically flagged the worrisome
results nor halted the study as required.

   Also yesterday, NIH officials said that the Penn researchers had not reported
those serious side effects to the NIH Office of Biotechnology Activities, as
required. That oversight office's first notice of any problems in the NIH-funded
study was a report from the researchers of Gelsinger's death.

   In an impromptu presentation after the meeting, Gelsinger's father, Paul,
defended Wilson. "I touched souls with this man," Gelsinger said. "There is
nothing wrong with Wilson."

   He blamed the FDA for failing to stop the experiment before his son's death.


LOAD-DATE: December 09, 1999


                             1128 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                          December 08, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: NWABUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs

BODY:

   *NW EDITION*
Soybeans increase; corn, wheat decline
CHICAGO -- Soybean futures prices were higher and grain futures prices were
lower in trading Tuesday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Soybean futures received a lift as concerns over dryness in the soybean-growing
areas of Argentina and Brazil persist. Trading was quiet as there was little
fresh news to guide the market.
Wheat futures prices were slightly lower as pressure came from forecasts a storm
system will move across the Great Plains and the Midwest later this week. The
precipitation is expected to help development of the soft and hard red winter
wheat crop.
Corn futures prices were slightly lower in dull trading, with little news to
move the market strongly in any direction. The corn market continues to suffer
from high inventory and routine export demand.
Wheat for March delivery was 2 cents lower at $ 2.453/4 a bushel; March corn was
11/4 cents lower at $ 2.031/4 a bushel; March oats were a 1/2 cent lower at $
1.131/2 a bushel; January soybeans were 33/4 cents higher at $ 4.801/4 a bushel.

Cattle futures prices were higher and pork futures prices were mixed in trading
on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Hog futures fell on ideas that packers are about to cut slaughter rates in
response to declining profit margins. Pork belly futures were lifted by
continued strong demand for bacon.
Cattle futures prices were lifted by ideas demand will remain strong.
February live cattle were 0.13 cent higher at 69.40 cents a pound; January
feeder cattle were 0.28 cent higher at 84.75 cents a pound; February lean hogs
were 1.03 cents lower at 56.27 cents a pound; February pork bellies were 1.07
cents higher at 76.77 cents a pound. (AP)
Internet Partners buys Ozark provider
FORT SMITH -- Internet Partners of America, the Fort Smith-based subsidiary of
OneMain.Com Inc., has purchased Internet service provider Ozark Internet.
Ozark Internet provided dial-up Internet access and other Internet services to
its customers in and around Ozark. Those customers are now serviced by Internet
Partners, which has announced that it will upgrade its network capacity in
Ozark. Plans include bringing high-speed services and applications to area
businesses that heavily utilize the Internet.
Internet Partners currently serves customers in 600 cities in Arkansas, Missouri
and Oklahoma. Internet Partners was bought by OneMain.Com in March, the same
month the company went public on the Nasdaq stock exchange.
OneMain.Com's World Wide Web page said it specializes in providing Internet
service in smaller cities and rural communities. The company posted a $ 25.4
million loss for the quarter ending Sept. 30.
World Wide Travel sues former worker
World Wide Travel Service Inc. has sued a former employee, accusing her of
violating a noncompetition agreement by trying to recruit former co-workers.
The lawsuit, filed in Pulaski County Chancery Court on Dec. 6, says Jayne B.
White Woodiel tried to recruit two World Wide Travel agents after leaving that
agency to work for Poe Travel Service, a competitor.
By doing that, she violated an agreement she had signed promising not to "entice
away" employees of World Wide Travel, the lawsuit says.
The suit also says Woodiel misrepresented the compensation she had received from
World Wide Travel while trying to recruit her former co-workers. In an
interview, World Wide Travel attorney Gordon S. Rather Jr. said Woodiel made it
sound like the agency had paid her less than it did.
Reached at a travel conference in Florida, Woodiel said she was unaware of the
lawsuit, but called its claims "very incorrect." (Arkansas Democrat-Gazette)
Method prods hogs' growth hormones
WASHINGTON -- Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured out a way to
make young hogs grow 40 percent larger and faster.
Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of the pigs' growth
hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers -- and eventually could even be
used to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle deterioration
in AIDS and cancer patients.
"We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining technology that
will change the face of how agriculture is done," said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston.
The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions in a growing
worldwide debate over genetically engineered food. The United States already is
locked in a trade war with the European Union over the EU's ban on beef from
cattle injected with hormones.
Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in genetics, nutrition and
housing and the use of hormones in cattle.
But the results reported by Schwartz's team, which are published in the December
issue of Nature Biotechnology, are especially dramatic. All the improvements
made in hog production over the past two decades have pigs maturing only 10
percent faster than they used to. (AP)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2000


                             1129 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                          December 08, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 688 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs

BODY:

   Soybeans increase; corn, wheat decline
CHICAGO -- Soybean futures prices were higher and grain futures prices were
lower in trading Tuesday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Soybean futures received a lift as concerns over dryness in the soybean-growing
areas of Argentina and Brazil persist. Trading was quiet as there was little
fresh news to guide the market.
Wheat futures prices were slightly lower as pressure came from forecasts a storm
system will move across the Great Plains and the Midwest later this week. The
precipitation is expected to help development of the soft and hard red winter
wheat crop.
Corn futures prices were slightly lower in dull trading, with little news to
move the market strongly in any direction. The corn market continues to suffer
from high inventory and routine export demand.
Wheat for March delivery was 2 cents lower at $ 2.453/4 a bushel; March corn was
11/4 cents lower at $ 2.031/4 a bushel; March oats were a 1/2 cent lower at $
1.131/2 a bushel; January soybeans were 33/4 cents higher at $ 4.801/4 a bushel.

Cattle futures prices were higher and pork futures prices were mixed in trading
on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Hog futures fell on ideas that packers are about to cut slaughter rates in
response to declining profit margins. Pork belly futures were lifted by
continued strong demand for bacon.
Cattle futures prices were lifted by ideas demand will remain strong.
February live cattle were 0.13 cent higher at 69.40 cents a pound; January
feeder cattle were 0.28 cent higher at 84.75 cents a pound; February lean hogs
were 1.03 cents lower at 56.27 cents a pound; February pork bellies were 1.07
cents higher at 76.77 cents a pound. (AP)
World Wide Travel sues former worker
World Wide Travel Service Inc. has sued a former employee, accusing her of
violating a noncompetition agreement by trying to recruit former co-workers.
The lawsuit, filed in Pulaski County Chancery Court on Dec. 6, says Jayne B.
White Woodiel tried to recruit two World Wide Travel agents after leaving that
agency to work for Poe Travel Service, a competitor.
By doing that, she violated an agreement she had signed promising not to "entice
away" employees of World Wide Travel, the lawsuit says.
The suit also says Woodiel misrepresented the compensation she had received from
World Wide Travel while trying to recruit her former co-workers. In an
interview, World Wide Travel attorney Gordon S. Rather Jr. said Woodiel made it
sound like the agency had paid her less than it did.
Reached at a travel conference in Florida, Woodiel said she was unaware of the
lawsuit, but called its claims "very incorrect." (Arkansas Democrat-Gazette)
Method prods hogs' growth hormones
WASHINGTON -- Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured out a way to
make young hogs grow 40 percent larger and faster.
Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of the pigs' growth
hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers -- and eventually could even be
used to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle deterioration
in AIDS and cancer patients.
"We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining technology that
will change the face of how agriculture is done," said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston.
The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions in a growing
worldwide debate over genetically engineered food. The United States already is
locked in a trade war with the European Union over the EU's ban on beef from
cattle injected with hormones.
Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in genetics, nutrition and
housing and the use of hormones in cattle.
But the results reported by Schwartz's team, which are published in the December
issue of Nature Biotechnology, are especially dramatic. All the improvements
made in hog production over the past two decades have pigs maturing only 10
percent faster than they used to. (AP)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2000


                             1130 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     December 8, 1999 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-06

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: Researchers work to build a bigger, better bacon Gene therapy has hogs
heading to market 2 weeks earlier

BYLINE: By Philip Brasher, The Associated Press,

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Here come the super pigs. Medical researchers  using gene
therapy have figured out a way to make young hogs grow  40 percent larger and
faster.

   Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of  the pigs'
growth hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers -  and eventually could
even be used to treat children with growth  problems and to prevent muscle
deterioration in AIDS and cancer  patients.

   'We think that over the long term this is going to be a  defining technology
that will change the face of how agriculture  is done,' said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor  of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in  Houston.

   The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new  questions in a
growing worldwide controversy over genetically  engineered food. The United
States already is locked in a trade  war with the European Union over the EU's
ban on beef from cattle  injected with hormones.

   'I don't think most consumers are very interested in eating  hormone-treated
meats,' Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist for the  Environmental Defense Fund,
said Tuesday.

   Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger,  leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in  genetics, nutrition and
housing and the use of hormones in cattle.

   But the results reported by Schwartz's team, which are  published in the
December issue of Nature Biotechnology, are  especially dramatic. All the
improvements made in hog production  over the past two decades had pigs maturing
only 10 percent faster  than they used to.

   The key to the new technology is a synthetic chemical that's  inserted into a
biodegradable piece of DNA, then injected into the  leg of a 2-week-old pig. The
chemical in turn causes the pig's  pituitary gland to secrete higher than normal
levels of growth  hormone.

   Two months after the injection, treated pigs weighed 92  pounds, compared
with 65 pounds for an untreated hog. The treated  pigs eat 25 percent less feed,
which would amount to huge savings  for the farmer, and they are ready for
slaughter two weeks  earlier, Schwartz said in an interview Tuesday. The price
of feed  can account for half the cost of raising a hog.

   The pigs also are expected to produce less manure, he said.     Additional
research will have to be done to show that the meat is  safe for human
consumption, and that the treatment has no negative  long-term impact on
animals. The treatment would have to be  approved by the Food and Drug
Administration before it could be  used commercially.

   The technology could be used in humans as a less-expensive,  more natural
alternative to injecting AIDS patients with growth  hormones, a treatment that
costs as much as $ 20,000 a year,  Schwartz said. A drug could be administered
to switch patients'  hormone secretion off and on.

   'This is extremely interesting work, but it has some problems  with how the
consumer will receive it,' said Max Rothschild of  Iowa State University, one of
the nation's leading authorities on  pig genetics.

   'Will consumers eat animals that are treated in such a  fashion. The jury is
still out. ... In Europe, the answer is  absolutely not.'

GRAPHIC:  A bigger pig

LOAD-DATE: December 08, 1999


                             1131 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 8, 1999, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS BUILD BIGGER PIG, BUT WILL WORLD GO HOG WILD?

BYLINE: PHILIP BRASHER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON -

BODY:


   Here come the super pigs. Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured
out a way to make young hogs grow 40 percent larger and faster.

   Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of the pigs' growth
hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers - and eventually could even be
used to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle deterioration
in AIDS and cancer patients.

   "We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining technology
that will change the face of how agriculture is done," said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston.

   The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions in a
growing worldwide controversy over genetically engineered food. The United
States already is locked in a trade war with the European Union over the EU's
ban on beef from cattle injected with hormones.

   Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in genetics, nutrition and
housing and the use of hormones in cattle.

   The key to the new technology is a synthetic chemical that's inserted into a
biodegradable piece of DNA, then injected into the leg of a 2week-old pig. The
chemical in turn causes the pig's pituitary gland to secrete higher than normal
levels of growth hormone.

   Two months after the injection, treated pigs weighed 92 pounds, compared with
65 pounds for an untreated hog. The treated pigs eat 25 percent less feed, and
they are ready for slaughter two weeks earlier, Schwartz said in an interview
yesterday

   The pigs also are expected to produce less manure, he said. Hog waste is a
growing environmental concern in many states.

   More research will have to be done to show that the meat is safe for humans,
and the treatment has no negative long-term impact on animals. The treatment
would have to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration before it could be
used commercially.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1132 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 8, 1999, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-7

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FATALITY WAS TOO SICK FOR EXPERIMENT

BYLINE: RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON, THE WASHINGTON POST

BODY:


   Federal investigators have uncovered serious problems in the University of
Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment that killed a young Arizona man in
September, including new evidence that the young man should not have been
allowed into the risky study because he was too sick at the time.

   The liver of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, wasn't functioning at the
minimal level regulators had required for inclusion in the study when Penn
researchers infused trillions of genetically engineered viruses into him, Food
and Drug Administration officials said.

   Moreover, they said, the researchers failed to notify the agency when two
earlier experiment volunteers suffered side effects so severe that the study
should have been put on immediate hold, according to rules established in
advance by the scientists and the FDA.

   Penn researchers also didn't tell federal regulators about some crucial
animal experiment results that might have influenced the FDA judgment of the
study's safety, officials said. Nor did they report a key wording change on the
patient consent form, which ultimately left volunteers unaware of the deaths of
four monkeys that had undergone similar treatment.

   The new information is the first to emerge from an ongoing federal inquiry
into Gelsinger's death and raises fresh questions about the conduct of
scientists involved.

   It stands in stark contrast to a public statement the Penn team released last
week that attributed his death to the gene therapy but claimed that no "human
error" had contributed.

   More broadly, discovery of so many apparent lapses at one of the nation's
leading gene therapy centers deals a serious blow to a beleaguered experimental
medicine branch that for nine years has sought to cure cancer and other diseases
by giving people new genes but has yet to achieve its first cure.

   The field has come under increased scrutiny in the past two months after
evidence emerged that researchers in New York and Boston had failed to tell the
National Institutes of Health about several deaths and serious side effects in
gene therapy patients, in violation of federal reporting rules.

   Tomorrow, the Penn team and the FDA are to present the preliminary results of
their separate investigations into Gelsinger's death as part of a special
three-day meeting beginning today at the NIH, at which biotechnology industry
representatives have said they will call for reduced federal oversight of gene
therapy experiments.

   The Penn team, led by James M. Wilson and Steven E. Raper of Penn and Mark L.
Batshaw of Children's Hospital in Washington, said in a statement: "We are
disappointed by the FDA's release to certain media outlets of its preliminary
findings about our gene therapy clinical trial ... prior to either completing
their report or communicating these findings to us. Upon completion of the FDA's
review, we are confident that a clearer understanding will emerge."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                             1133 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               December 8, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    December 8, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: FDA SAYS LIVER PATIENT WAS UNFIT FOR GENE THERAPY

BODY:

   Federal investigators have uncovered serious problems in the gene therapy
experiment that killed a Tucson teenager in September, including new evidence
that the young man should not have been allowed into the risky study because he
was too sick at the time.

   Jesse Gelsinger's liver was not functioning at the minimal level regulators
had required for inclusion in the study when University of Pennsylvania
researchers infused trillions of genetically engineered viruses into the
18-year-old, Food and Drug Administration officials said.

   Moreover, officials said, the researchers failed to notify the agency when
two earlier volunteers in the experiment suffered side effects so severe that
the study should have been put on immediate hold, according to rules the
scientists and the FDA established in advance.

   The Penn researchers also did not tell federal regulators about the results
of some crucial animal experiments that might have influenced the agency's
judgment of the study's safety, officials said. Nor did the researchers tell the
FDA about a key change in wording on the study's patient consent form, which
ultimately left volunteers in the dark about the deaths of four monkeys that had
undergone a similar treatment.

   The new information is the first to emerge from an ongoing federal
investigation into Gelsinger's death and raises fresh questions about the
conduct of the scientists involved. It stands in stark contrast to a public
statement released last week by the Penn team that attributed Gelsinger's death
to the gene therapy but claimed that no "human error" had contributed to his
demise.

   Tomorrow, the Penn team and the FDA are to present the preliminary results of
their separate investigations into Gelsinger's death as part of a special
three-day meeting beginning today at the NIH, at which biotechnology industry
representatives have said they will call for reduced federal oversight of gene
therapy experiments.

   The Penn team, led by James M. Wilson and Steven E. Raper of Penn, and Mark
L. Batshaw of Children's Hospital in Washington, declined to answer questions
yesterday but released a written statement.

   "We are disappointed by the FDA's release to certain media outlets of its
preliminary findings about our gene therapy clinical trial ... prior to either
completing their report or communicating these findings to us," the team said.
"Upon completion of the FDA's review, we are confident that a clearer
understanding will emerge."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1134 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               December 8, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    December 8, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: HORMONE SHOTS PORKING UP HOGS FASTER, CHEAPER

BYLINE: By PHILIP BRASHER; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Here come the super pigs. Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured
out a way to make young hogs grow 40 percent larger and faster.

   Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of the pigs' growth
hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers - and eventually could even be
used to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle deterioration
in AIDS and cancer patients.

   "We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining technology
that will change the face of how agriculture is done," said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston.

   The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions in a
growing worldwide controversy over genetically engineered food. The United
States already is locked in a trade war with the European Union over the EU's
ban on beef from cattle injected with hormones.

   "I don't think most consumers are very interested in eating hormone-treated
meats," Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist for the Environmental Defense Fund,
said yesterday.

   The results reported by Schwartz's team, which are published in the December
issue of Nature Biotechnology, are especially dramatic. All the improvements
made in hog production over the last two decades have pigs maturing only 10
percent faster than they used to.

   The key to the new technology is a synthetic chemical that's inserted into a
biodegradable piece of DNA, then injected into the leg of a 2-week-old pig. The
chemical causes the pig's pituitary gland to secrete higher than normal levels
of growth hormone.

   Two months after the injection, treated pigs weighed 92 pounds, compared with
65 pounds for an untreated hog. The treated pigs eat 25 percent less feed, which
would amount to huge savings for the farmer, and they are ready for slaughter
two weeks earlier, Schwartz said in an interview yesterday. The price of feed
alone accounts for half the cost of raising a hog.

   The pigs also are expected to produce less manure, he said. Hog waste is a
growing environmental concern in many states.

   Additional research will have to be done to show that the meat is safe for
human consumption, and that the treatment has no negative long-term impact on
animals. The treatment would have to be approved by the Food and Drug
Administration before it could be used commercially.

   The technology, if it proves safe, could be used in humans as a
less-expensive, more natural alternative to injecting AIDS patients with growth
hormones, a treatment that costs as much as $20,000 a year, Schwartz said. A
drug could be administered to switch patients' hormone secretion off and on.

   "This is extremely interesting work, but it has some problems with how the
consumer will receive it," said Max Rothschild of Iowa State University, one of
the nation's leading authorities on pig genetics.

   "Will consumers eat animals that are treated in such a fashion? The jury is
still out. ... In Europe, the answer is absolutely not."

GRAPHIC: BOX: ASSOCIATED PRESS; A bigger pig

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999


                             1135 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      December 8, 1999, Wednesday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Medicine; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy produces bigger hogs


SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY: WASHINGTON - Here come the super pigs. Medical
researchers using gene therapy have figured out a way to make young
hogs grow 40 percent larger and faster.


    Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of the
pigs' growth hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers - and
eventually could even be used to treat children with growth
problems and to prevent muscle deterioration in AIDS and cancer
patients.


    "We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining
technology that will change the face of how agriculture is done,"
said the lead scientist, Robert Schwartz, a professor of molecular
and cellular biology at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.


    The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions
in a growing worldwide controversy about genetically engineered
food. The United States already is locked in a trade war with the
European Union about the EU's ban on beef from cattle injected with
hormones.


    "I don't think most consumers are very interested in eating
hormone-treated meats," said Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist for
the Environmental Defense Fund.


    Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in genetics,
nutrition and housing and the use of hormones in cattle.



LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1999


                             1136 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              December 8, 1999, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC TREATMENT MAKES HOGS GROW 40 PERCENT FATTER THAN USUAL,
SCIENTISTS SAY;
THERAPY COULD HELP PATIENTS WITH AIDS, CANCER

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Here come the superpigs. Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured
out a way to make young hogs grow 40 percent larger and at a faster rate.

   The technique stimulates production of the pigs' growth hormones. While
livestock farmers would be the first to benefit, the technique eventually could
even be used to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle
deterioration in AIDS and cancer patients.

   "We think that over the long term this is going to be a defining technology
that will change the face of how agriculture is done," said the lead scientist,
Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston.

   The prospect of biotech hogs also is likely to raise new questions in a
growing worldwide controversy over genetically engineered food. The United
States already is locked in a trade war with the European Union over the EU's
ban on beef from cattle injected with hormones.

   "I don't think most consumers are very interested in eating hormone-treated
meats," Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist for the Environmental Defense Fund,
said Tuesday.

   Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and
faster-growing for years because of improvements in genetics, nutrition and
housing and the use of hormones in cattle.

   But the results reported by Schwartz's team, which are published in the
December issue of Nature Biotechnology, are especially dramatic. All the
improvements made in hog production over the past two decades have pigs maturing
only 10 percent faster.

   The key to the new technology is a synthetic chemical that's inserted into a
biodegradable piece of DNA, then injected into the leg of a 2-week-old pig. The
chemical in turn causes the pig's pituitary gland to secrete higher than normal
levels of growth hormone.

   Two months after the injection, treated pigs averaged 92 pounds, compared
with 65 pounds for an untreated hog. The treated pigs eat 25 percent less feed,
which would amount to huge savings for the farmer, and they are ready for
slaughter two weeks earlier, Schwartz said in an interview Tuesday. The price of
feed alone accounts for half the cost of raising a hog.

   Additional research will have to be done to show that the meat is safe for
human consumption, and the treatment has no negative long-term impact on
animals. The treatment would have to be approved by the Food and Drug
Administration before it could be used commercially.

   The technology could be used in humans as a less-expensive, more natural
alternative to injecting AIDS patients with growth hormones, a trea tment that
costs as much as $ 20,000 a year, Schwartz said. A drug could be administered to
switch patients' hormone secretion off and on.

   Max Rothschild of Iowa State University, one of the nation's leading
authorities on pig genetics, said it's unknown whether pork consumers will
accept the technology.

   "This is extremely interesting work, but it has some problems with how the
consumer will receive it," Rothschild said. "Will consumers eat animals that are
treated in such a fashion? The jury is still out. ... In Europe, the answer is
absolutely not."

   Goldburg said it will take considerably more research to prove the technology
is safe for both pigs and humans. "I'm not confident that these pigs will be as
healthy as pigs without the hormone," she said. "Animals as a whole are less
plastic than plants. When their systems are disturbed by genetic engineering,
their whole system can go out of whack."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC AP Color Graphic/Chart - A bigger pig
 Source: Baylor College of Medicine
 Using gene therapy, medical researchers can make pigs grow faster and larger.
(Bar graphs)

 Approximate number of weeks to maturity* (*ready for slaughter)
 Gene-altered pig: 19.4
 Unaltered pig:    21.4

 Weight at 65 days old  Gene-altered pig: 92 lbs.
 Unaltered pig:    65 lbs.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1999


                             1137 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           December 8, 1999 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: FDA: Teen who died in gene therapy was too ill for experiment

BYLINE: Rick Weiss and Deborah Nelson, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   Federal investigators have uncovered serious problems in the gene therapy
experiment that killed a Tucson teenager in September, including new evidence
that the young man should not have been allowed into the risky study because he
was too sick at the time.

    Jesse Gelsinger's liver was not functioning at the minimal level that
regulators had required for inclusion in the study when University of
Pennsylvania researchers infused trillions of genetically engineered viruses
into the 18-year-old, Food and Drug Administration officials said.

    Moreover, officials said, the researchers failed to notify the agency when
two earlier volunteers in the experiment suffered side effects so severe that
the study should have been put on immediate hold, according to rules established
in advance by the scientists and the FDA.

    The Penn researchers also did not tell federal regulators about the results
of some crucial animal experiments that might have influenced the agency's
judgment on the study's safety, officials said. Nor did the researchers tell the
FDA about a key change in wording on the study's patient consent form, which
ultimately left volunteers in the dark about the deaths of four monkeys that had
undergone a similar treatment.

    The new information is the first to emerge from an ongoing federal
investigation into Gelsinger's death and raises fresh questions about the
conduct of the scientists involved. It stands in stark contrast to a public
statement released last week by the Penn team that attributed Gelsinger's death
to the gene therapy but claimed that no "human error" had contributed to his
demise.

    More broadly, the discovery of so many apparent lapses at one of the
nation's leading gene therapy centers deals a serious blow to an already
beleaguered branch of experimental medicine, which for nine years has sought to
cure cancer and other diseases by giving people new genes but has yet to achieve
its first cure.

    The field has come under increased scrutiny in the past two months after
evidence emerged that researchers in New York and Boston had failed to tell the
National Institutes of Health about several deaths and serious side effects in
gene therapy patients, in violation of federal reporting rules.

    The Penn team, led by James M. Wilson and Steven E. Raper of Penn, and Mark
L. Batshaw of Children's Hospital in Washington, declined to answer questions
yesterday but released a written statement.

    "We are disappointed by the FDA's release to certain media outlets of its
preliminary findings about our gene therapy clinical trial . . . prior to either
completing their report or communicating these findings to us," the team said.
"Upon completion of the FDA's review, we are confident that a clearer
understanding will emerge."

    Gelsinger's father has said in the past that he did not blame the
researchers for his son's death and that even if they had made mistakes, he
still supported their efforts. He was en route to the NIH meeting yesterday and
could not be reached for comment.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1138 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 8, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1387 words

HEADLINE: Methods Faulted In Gene Test Death; Teen Too Ill for Therapy, Probe
Finds

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Federal investigators have uncovered serious problems in the gene therapy
experiment that killed a Tucson teenager in September, including new evidence
that the young man should not have been allowed into the risky study because he
was too sick at the time.

   Jesse Gelsinger's liver was not functioning at the minimal level that
regulators had required for inclusion in the study when University of
Pennsylvania researchers infused trillions of genetically engineered viruses
into the 18-year-old, Food and Drug Administration officials said.

   Moreover, officials said, the researchers failed to notify the agency when
two earlier volunteers in the experiment suffered side effects so severe that
the study should have been put on immediate hold, according to rules established
in advance by the scientists and the FDA.

   The Penn researchers also did not tell federal regulators about the results
of some crucial animal experiments that might have influenced the agency's
judgment of the study's safety, officials said. Nor did the researchers tell the
FDA about a key change in wording on the study's patient consent form, which
ultimately left volunteers in the dark about the deaths of four monkeys that had
undergone a similar treatment.

   The new information is the first to emerge from an ongoing federal
investigation into Gelsinger's death and raises fresh questions about the
conduct of the scientists involved. It stands in stark contrast to a public
statement released last week by the Penn team that attributed Gelsinger's death
to the gene therapy but claimed that no "human error" had contributed to his
demise.

   More broadly, the discovery of so many apparent lapses at one of the nation's
leading gene therapy centers deals a serious blow to an already beleaguered
branch of experimental medicine, which for nine years has sought to cure cancer
and other diseases by giving people new genes but has yet to achieve its first
cure.

   The field has come under increased scrutiny in the past two months after
evidence emerged that researchers in New York and Boston had failed to tell the
National Institutes of Health about several deaths and serious side effects in
gene therapy patients, in violation of federal reporting rules.

   On Thursday, the Penn team and the FDA are to present the preliminary results
of their separate investigations into Gelsinger's death as part of a special
three-day meeting beginning today at the NIH, at which biotechnology industry
representatives have said they will call for reduced federal oversight of gene
therapy experiments.

   The Penn team, led by James M. Wilson and Steven E. Raper of Penn, and Mark
L. Batshaw of Children's National Medical Center in Washington, declined to
answer questions yesterday but released a written statement.

   "We are disappointed by the FDA's release to certain media outlets of its
preliminary findings about our gene therapy clinical trial . . .  prior to
either completing their report or communicating these findings to us," the team
said. "Upon completion of the FDA's review, we are confident that a clearer
understanding will emerge."

   Gelsinger's father has said in the past that he did not blame the researchers
for his son's death and that even if they had made mistakes, he still supported
their efforts. He was en route to the NIH meeting yesterday and could not be
reached for comment.

   Although many patients have died from their underlying diseases while getting
gene therapy, Gelsinger's death is believed to be the first directly caused by
it. The experiment in which he participated aimed to treat ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, an inherited liver disease that causes
life-threatening levels of ammonia to build up in the blood.

   The experiment has stirred controversy since it was first proposed in 1995
because it calls for the infusion of high doses of a toxic virus into healthy
volunteers or patients who, like Gelsinger, have their disease under control
with conventional treatment.

   The Washington Post reported last month that the researchers went ahead with
the study despite evidence of serious side effects in animals and in at least
one earlier volunteer. The story also disclosed that a company founded by Wilson
had a financial interest in the study's success, a factor he has denied
influenced the decision to forge ahead.

   The FDA began investigating the Gelsinger case immediately after it learned
of the Sept. 17 death, officials said, and the inquiry has gradually expanded
since then. About a week ago, FDA officials visited the Penn campus, where a
review of research records raised serious concerns, they said.

   Most notably, investigators discovered that Gelsinger's blood had elevated
ammonia levels, an indication that his liver was working even less efficiently
than usual. Although the levels exceeded the maximum allowed for volunteers in
the study, the scientists went ahead with the infusion of gene-altered viruses,
FDA officials said.

   Gelsinger's acceptance into the study is one of "a number of different areas
that we have concerns about," said Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's Center
for Biologics Evaluation and Research, which oversees gene therapy.

   In their statement yesterday, the Penn team said Gelsinger's ammonia levels
were within allowable limits when he was "enrolled." The FDA did not dispute
that finding, but said the levels were no longer acceptable on the day Gelsinger
was infused, which they said was the relevant measure.

   FDA officials said it's difficult to know whether Gelsinger's weakened liver
contributed to his death. The virus-based therapy is known to cause potentially
life-threatening liver inflammation--one of the reasons that NIH reviewers had
questioned the wisdom of trying the experiment on OTC patients. Because
Gelsinger was one of the last volunteers to get into the study, he received the
highest dose allowed.

   Zoon said that at least two earlier volunteers who received lower doses than
Gelsinger's suffered "Grade 3" liver damage, which required that researchers
immediately halt the study and notify the FDA for a decision on whether they
could proceed. But the FDA was not notified of those cases, Zoon said.

   The study was designed so that doses were to be increased every three or four
patients, but only if the FDA received assurances from researchers that those
volunteers had done well.

   Soon after Gelsinger's death, Wilson told The Post that no volunteers had
suffered serious side effects except Gelsinger. Later, he acknowledged a single
case of serious liver damage at a dose level two steps lower than the one
Gelsinger got, but he did not mention the second incident that the FDA says it
has documented at that same level.

   Wilson also repeatedly said that at the next higher dose level--the one just
below the one that Gelsinger got--none of the three volunteers had serious liver
reactions. Tish Simon of Union, N.J., said in an interview yesterday that she
was one of those three. She said a blood test two weeks after her infusion
showed liver enzyme levels about five times the norm--a level that, according to
the study protocol, demands at least FDA notification and possibly a halt to the
study. Simon is apparently not among the two cases cited by the FDA.

   She was called back four days later to Penn for repeat tests, which indicated
the levels had dropped, she said.

   The Penn team said yesterday it had provided the FDA with "comprehensive"
data on patient toxicity.

   Separately, Zoon said she was concerned that the informed consent form
approved by the National Institutes of Health and FDA had noted that monkeys
receiving a similar treatment had died, but the form that patients ultimately
read and signed made no mention of those deaths--a discrepancy she said "we are
very concerned about."

   Zoon said the FDA does not have ultimate authority to approve the wording of
consent forms; that responsibility belongs to review boards run by the
institutions where the research is being done. Officials from Penn's review
board did not respond to inquiries from The Post yesterday. A government
investigation last year concluded that such boards are overworked and
underfunded and are failing to adequately protect volunteers in medical
experiments.




LOAD-DATE: December 08, 1999


                             1139 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     December 7, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 021

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: Study: Gene therapy could help reverse damage to hearts

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital have shown that gene therapy
may be able to reverse the damage that causes heart failure, an experiment that
one day could prove an alternative to heart transplantation.

   In their study, a team led by Dr. Roger Hajjar injected a gene responsible
for helping heart muscle cells to contract into the failing hearts taken from
patients about to undergo heart transplantation.

   "After 24 hours, the contractile function was normalized," Hajjar said.

   "This represents an important step toward gene therapy for heart failure."

   The gene, SERCA2a, expresses a protein found to be lacking in patients whose
hearts are failing. As a result, the cells don't contract normally and the
hearts can't pump.

   The hearts that got the gene soon began producing elevated levels of the
protein, which controls the levels of calcium in the cells. The organs soon
began to function in a normal fashion, he said.

   The gene was introduced using an adenovirus as a vehicle of delivery. Use of
such viruses has been controversial since a patient undergoing gene therapy died
in September at the University of Pennsylvania four days after getting an
injection of gene therapy delivered by such a virus.

   In the case of the MGH experiments, the 10 hearts getting the virus
injections were already removed from the patients' bodies, so there was no
possibility of harm, Hajjar noted.

   Hajjar said the experiment is unlikely to be tried on hearts still in
patients' bodies for several years. By that time, there may be a better way of
delivering the gene, he said.

   Heart failure is currently treated with drugs such as ACE inhibitors or beta
blockers, but transplantation is the route of last resort once the problem
progresses.

   Half of all patients diagnosed with heart failure die within five years.

   The gene therapy experiment for heart failure is different from gene therapy
experiments under way on patients with coronary artery disease.

   In the artery disease experiments, doctors at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center
and other places have injected genes into patients' hearts, enabling them to
grow new blood vessels to supply the organ.

LOAD-DATE: December 07, 1999


                             1140 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Offering Hope for Hemophiliacs

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Doctors have successfully used gene therapy to treat a form of hemophilia,
they reported yesterday, injecting patients with a gene that produced a
blood-clotting protein without adverse side effects.

   And in a more preliminary but likewise promising study, researchers at
Massachusetts General Hospital are reporting today that they have used gene
therapy to revive failing heart cells.

    The studies offer some positive news for gene therapy, which has been
battered by bad publicity after the death of a young man from Arizona in an
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in September.

   This week the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a panel at the National
Institutes of Health that reviews gene therapy research, will hold a three-day
meeting to examine the Pennsylvania experiment and the safety of the virus used
to carry the genes into the young man's cells. That virus was used in the heart
research being announced today, but not in the hemophilia tests.

   The blood-clotting research involves hemophilia B, which afflicts about 5,000
Americans, or 20 percent of hemophiliacs in the United States. The patients, who
lack the protein Factor IX, are subject to spontaneous bleeding, arthritis and,
in some cases, severe disability or death from bleeding into the central nervous
system. Typically, they must undergo intravenous infusions of Factor IX protein
concentrates, which provide temporary relief but last only a few days in the
bloodstream.

   Researchers from Avigen Inc., a biotechnology company in Alameda, Calif., and
from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Stanford University Medical Center
injected three patients with a genetically engineered virus used as a carrier,
or vector, for the gene that prompts cells to produce Factor IX.

   Although this was primarily a safety trial, using low doses, the three
patients began producing Factor IX within eight weeks and have continued to do
so for six months, researchers said yesterday at the annual meeting of the
American Society of Hematology in New Orleans.

   The researchers said this was a combination of the first two of the three
phases required by the Food and Drug Administration for approval of a new drug.
The first phase, in a small number of patients, is to establish safety; the
second is to show efficacy; and the third, in a larger group, to confirm
efficacy.

   Because hemophilia treatments yield unambiguous results -- the patient's
blood either clots or does not -- they can be approved on the basis of small
trials. Avigen says it plans to test an increased dose in three additional
patients and conclude with a further increased dose in three more patients.

   "What we have observed is that the gene has been successfully delivered and
is producing biologically active Factor IX," said John Monahan, Avigen's
president and chief executive. "Over the last several months, we were pleased to
observe that the increase in Factor IX protein activity correlated with a
significant reduction of Factor IX concentrate usage by these patients."

   Gene therapy commonly uses viruses as vectors to carry DNA into cells, and a
vector called adenovirus was implicated in the Pennsylvania death. The vector
used by Avigen in its hemophilia research was adeno-associated virus, which
despite its name is not related to adenovirus. Adeno-associated virus, though
ubiquitous in humans, has no health consequences.

   "This particular virus is not capable of replicating by itself, so when it
enters a cell it doesn't do a thing," said Dr. Savio Woo, president of the
American Society for Gene Therapy.

   But the adeno-associated virus is small, so it apparently cannot carry large
genes, like the one for Factor VIII, whose absence causes the much more common
hemophilia A.

   Nevertheless, Avigen is doing research on delivering the Factor VIII gene
with the adeno-associated virus, and expects to seek permission from the F.D.A.
to begin a clinical trial in hemophilia A next year. The Chiron Corporation, a
biotechnology company in Emeryville, Calif., has treated eight hemophilia A
patients with a gene therapy using a retrovirus as a vector, and plans to
release data by the middle of next year.

   Dr. Jeanne Lusher, chairwoman of the National Hemophilia Foundation's Medical
and Scientific Advisory Committee, called yesterday's announcement "very
exciting and encouraging, even though it's a Phase 1 study," and added that gene
therapy was "a very promising approach and may lead to a cure for people with
hemophilia B."

   Although the study on heart cells is at a far earlier stage, researchers said
it showed the potential for gene therapy to treat heart failure. In the study,
which appears in today's issue of the journal Circulation, the researchers
report delivering additional copies of a gene, Serca2a, to muscle cells from
failing human hearts. Cells that incorporated the gene began to function in a
normal fashion, contracting more quickly and more powerfully.

   "This ability to modify the contraction of failing human cardiac cells
represents an important step toward gene therapy for heart failure," said Dr.
Roger Hajjar of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cardiovascular Research
Center, who led the study, along with collaborators from Boston University
Medical Center and Imperial College in London.

   Although this study used an adenovirus vector, Dr. Hajjar said he believed
that one of the new vectors in development would yield long-lasting results.

   "These results in isolated cardiac cells need to be validated in the whole
human heart," he said, "but we're optimistic that this goal will be
accomplished."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                             1141 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1223 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

Russians Issue Ultimatum To the Chechen Capital
The Russian military dropped thousands of leaflets over Grozny, the capital of
Chechnya, warning residents of the besieged city to get out by Saturday or risk
death. "Everybody who has not left the city will be destroyed," the leaflets
said.   A1


   The chairman of Europe's leading intergovernmental organization promoting
democracy and human rights, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, said he would proceed with a restricted visit to Chechnya next week
despite profound differences with Russia over the conduct of its war and in
particular its threat against Grozny.   A11

Clinton on Human Rights
President Clinton, in a speech on human rights, criticized China's crackdown on
the Falun Gong spiritual movement and said Russia "will pay a heavy price" if it
carries out the destruction of Grozny.   A11

Admission in Deadly Fire
An American nurse who worked for the billionaire banker Edmond Safra, left,
admitted to setting the fire that killed Mr. Safra as he took refuge in a
bathroom in his luxury penthouse in Monte Carlo on Friday, Monaco's chief
prosecutor said. The prosecutor said the nurse asserted that he was trying "to
draw attention to himself" and did not intend to kill anyone.   A1

Audit Finds Nazi Era Accounts
A three-year outside audit of Swiss banks found records of 54,000 accounts that
were probably linked to victims of Nazi persecution, a draft report said. It
described in detail how some of the banks had issued "deliberately misleading
statements" for decades to Jews who had come looking for family assets.   A13

Ulster Call for Investment
Britain's senior minister for Northern Ireland called on the Clinton
administration to work with American businesses to step up investment in
Northern Ireland to support the peace agreement by ending poverty and
deprivation there.   A14

Pakistan Shaken by Killings
A wealthy and disturbed man admitted in a letter that he had sexually molested
and killed 100 boys in revenge for an attack on him that was ignored by the
police.   A3

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A15-19

Court to Reconsider Landmark Miranda Ruling
The Supreme Court said it would decide whether Congress had effectively
overruled the 33-year-old Miranda decision on the rights of suspects with a law
enacted in 1968 for that purpose but long since ignored.   A1

Combating Medical Malpractice
President Clinton will order federal agencies to take steps to reduce medical
errors blamed for tens of thousands of deaths, such as precautions against the
dispensing of wrong medications and investigations of errors that cause serious
injury or death.   A1

Questioning Age Projections
The Social Security Administration is not being optimistic enough about how long
Americans will live in the 21st century and has thus underestimated how much
benefits will cost, a federal advisory panel said.   A17

G.O.P. Candidates Meet
Six Republican presidential candidates debated on national television for the
second time in a week.   A18

5 Oklahoma Students Wounded
A seventh grader wounded five fellow students at an Oklahoma middle school when
he opened fire on them with a pistol, officials said.   A15

Hunt for Runaway Boys
Officials were searching for the last two boys of a group of eight who
overpowered counselors in a troubled-youth program on Saturday and fled into the
Utah wilderness.   A15

Company Guilty in Crash Trial
SabreTech, an aircraft maintenance company, was convicted of improperly handling
hazardous materials linked to the crash of ValuJet Flight 592 in 1996. Two
employees were acquitted of lying on records.   A19

Effort on Foreign Airline Safety
The Transportation Department announced a plan to require United Stated airlines
to report on the safety of their foreign partners.   A19

Union Leader Resigning
Arthur A. Coia, 56, president of the Laborers' Union, announced his retirement,
two months after federal and several union officials said he would step down as
part of a deal in which he would plead guilty to fraud charges. Union officials
yesterday asserted that Mr. Coia's retirement had nothing to do with any deal.
   A17

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-12

Charges Are Dropped Against Art Dealer
Charges were dismissed against Mary Boone, the Manhattan art dealer arrested two
months ago after her gallery displayed a sculpture of firearms and a vase of
9-millimeter cartridges that visitors could take.   B1

S.I. Stadium Plan Advances
A City Council panel voted to spend $76 million -- quadruple the original
estimate -- for a minor league baseball stadium on Staten Island.   B3

Tentative Deal in Ballet Strike
A tentative agreement has been reached between the New York City Ballet and its
orchestra, which has been on strike for two weeks over proposed new work rules.
   B3

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

SPORTS   D1-8

EDUCATION

Backed for SUNY Chancellor
A search committee unanimously recommended Robert L. King, Governor Pataki's
budget director, as the next chancellor of the 64-campus system, the largest in
the nation. The board is expected to approve Mr. King.   B1

FASHION   B13

ARTS   E1-12

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Still No Word From Mars
Mission controller heard no word from the Mars Polar Lander, which was to have
landed on Friday.   A1

Advances in Gene Therapy
Doctors reported that they had used gene therapy to treat a form of hemophilia
without adverse side effects. In a separate study, researchers said they had
used gene therapy to revive failing heart cells.   A21

Health & Fitness   F7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-32

Coke's Chief to Leave
Coca-Cola's top executive, M. Douglas Ivester, 52, left, said he would step down
in April, barely two years since taking the post. Douglas N. Daft, who oversees
operations in Asia and the Middle East, will succeed him. In the last year, Coke
has been beset by falling profits, scuttled acquisitions and its biggest product
recall ever.   C1

Claim of Cracking Cell Code
Two Israeli researchers say they have found an efficient way to crack the
encryption scheme that protects the privacy of conversations and data
transmissions over a type of wireless phone used by more than 215 million people
worldwide.   C1

No Benefits for Gay Partners
The new Exxon Mobil Corporation revoked a Mobil policy offering health care
coverage to partners of newly hired gay employees.   C1

Japan Recovery Falters
Economic growth in Japan fell at an unexpectedly steep rate -- 1 percent in the
July through September period -- partly because of sharply declining spending on
public works projects. Economists asserted that the data did not suggest that
Japan might slip back into recession.   C1

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   C31

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Miranda revisited; the deceptions of Swiss banks; Senator McCain's
health; a positive shift in foster care.
Columns: Anthony Lewis, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E8

TV Listings   E11

Public Lives   B2

Weather   B12


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                             1142 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    DECEMBER 7, 1999 Tuesday SFCITY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 815 words

HEADLINE: SMALL, FIRST STEP A SUCCESS IN CONTROL OF HEMOPHILIA / CHILDREN'S
HOSPITAL RAN A GENE-THERAPY TRIAL WITH ONLY 3 / PEOPLE. THE PRELIMINARY DATA ARE
SEEN AS ENCOURAGING.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists yesterday reported encouraging but very preliminary data from a
widely watched human trial of gene therapy to treat or possibly cure one form of
hemophilia.

   If the approach works, it would be the first gene-therapy success ever.

   The approach, developed by a team at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
aims to insert the gene for blood-clotting factor IX into the cells of people
with hemophilia B.

   An estimated 2,800 males in the United States suffer from that form of
hemophilia, an inherited disorder that prevents the blood from clotting.
Hemophiliacs bleed easily. Internal bleeding is dangerous, especially when it
occurs in the skull, causing brain damage or death. Although it is carried by
the mother, it occurs only in males.

   Preliminary data from a nine-patient trial, presented at the American Society
of Hematology meeting in New Orleans, show there is "a clear benefit" from the
experimental therapy, said biochemist John Monahan of Avigen, an Alameda,
Calif., firm that has licensed the approach from Children's Hospital.

   He reported that the first three people in the trial, who were given a low
dose of the experimental gene-therapy drug, were now producing their own factor
IX, allowing them to "significantly reduce" their reliance on weekly injections
of artificial factor IX protein, which causes the blood to clot.

   Many hemophilia B sufferers must inject themselves two or three times a week
at a cost of about $100,000 a year.

   The experimental gene therapy involves onetime multiple injections in the
thigh, all done in a 15-minute session, Monahan said. The first patient to be
injected has now been producing factor IX for five months, he said.

   Katherine High, a hematologist at Children's who developed the approach,
declined comment because a manuscript to present the data in a medical journal
is in process. "If she were to comment, it would put her paper in jeopardy,"
said Karen Muldoon, the hospital's public relations director.

   Mark Kay, a doctor at Stanford University, which is co-sponsoring the
clinical trial with the hospital, also declined comment until after the paper is
published. He confirmed, however, that Avigen's numbers were accurate.

   The trial, which began in June, is designed to test the safety of the gene
therapy at three different dosing levels - low, medium and high. Three patients
are to be enrolled in each group. The results reported yesterday are from the
three patients in the low-dose group. Enrollment in the other groups is not yet
complete.

   Monahan said the scientists had not expected that the low-dose regimen would
allow patients to reduce their reliance on artificial clotting factor and were
pleasantly surprised when it did.

   He declined to quantify the extent of the reduction, but expressed confidence
that the higher-dose regimens would allow people to discontinue their artificial
factor altogether.

   Monahan said the for-profit company decided to release the preliminary
findings prior to their publication in a medical journal because of the bad
publicity generated from a recent gene-therapy death at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   An 18-year-old Arizona man died at Penn in September following infusion with
a genetically engineered cold virus, known as adenovirus, that carried a gene to
correct a rare liver disorder. The Penn researchers reported last week that the
adenovirus apparently set off a fatal immune reaction, causing his lungs to shut
down.

   The researchers at Children's are using a different virus to deliver the gene
for factor IX.

   It is known as adeno-associated virus, or AAV, which commonly infects humans
but causes no known disease. The AAV has little in common with adenovirus except
for its name.

   Monahan said that none of the three hemophilia patients treated with the
low-dose AAV engineered to carry the clotting-factor gene showed any ill effects
from the therapy. He said they had no antibody response to the AAV - nor even
any swelling or inflammation at the site of the injection.

   However, he said the researchers have not monitored patients for an
immune-system chemical known as IL-6.

   Penn scientists have blamed a high buildup of IL-6 for the death of the
Arizona man. That case has cast a shadow over gene-therapy research generally,
even though the Penn fatality is believed to be the first in a decade of
gene-therapy protocols across the country.

   Despite its promise, however, the field has yet to come up with any proven
treatments for disease.

   The most common form of hemophilia is hemophilia A, which afflicts about
10,000 Americans. It is caused by the absence of a different clotting factor -
factor VIII. Avigen, which makes the AAV vector used in the hemophilia B trial,
says that it is also working on a gene therapy for hemophilia A, but that it is
not as far along as the hemophilia B treatment.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1143 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

           December 7, 1999, Tuesday, 31REGION 24 DEFLANG1033 EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-11

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

BYLINE: LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:


   Gene therapy successes on hemophilia, heart reported

   Doctors have successfully used gene therapy to treat a form of hemophilia,
they reported yesterday, injecting patients with a gene that produced a
blood-clotting protein without adverse side effects.

   And in a more preliminary but likewise promising study, researchers at
Massachusetts General Hospital are reporting today that they have used gene
therapy to revive failing heart cells.

   The blood-clotting research involves hemophilia B, which afflicts about 5,000
Americans, or 20 percent of all hemophiliacs in the United States. The patients,
who lack a protein called Factor IX, are subject to spontaneous bleeding,
arthritis and, in some cases, severe disability or death from bleeding into the
central nervous system. Typically, they must undergo intravenous infusions of
Factor IX protein concentrates, which provide temporary relief but last only a
few days in the bloodstream.

   Researchers from Avigen Inc., a biotechnology company based in Alameda,
Calif., and from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Stanford University
Medical Center injected three patients with a genetically engineered virus used
as a carrier, or vector, for the gene that prompts cells to produce the Factor
IX protein.

   Although this was primarily a safety trial, using low doses, the three
patients began producing Factor IX within eight weeks and have continued to do
so for six months, researchers said yesterday at the annual meeting of the
American Society of Hematology in New Orleans.

   The researchers said this was a combination of the first two of the three
phases required by the Food and Drug Administration for approval of a new drug.
The first phase, in a small number of patients, is to establish safety; the
second is to show efficacy; and the third, in a larger group, to confirm
efficacy.

   Because hemophilia treatments yield unambiguous results - the patient's blood
either clots or does not - they can be approved on the basis of small trials.
Avigen says it plans to test an increased dose in three additional patients, and
conclude with an increased dose in three more patients.

   The trial has been closely watched by hemophilia patients and by scientists
pursuing gene therapy, who have had a barrage of negative publicity in recent
months prompted by the death of a patient in a trial at the University of
Pennsylvania and by disappointing outcomes in other studies.

   Gene therapy commonly uses viruses as vectors to carry DNA into cells, and a
vector called adenovirus was implicated in the Pennsylvania death. The vector
used by Avigen in its hemophilia research was adenoassociated virus, which
despite its name is not related to adenovirus. Adeno-associated virus, though
ubiquitous in humans, has no health consequences.

   Dr. Jeanne Lusher, chairwoman of the National Hemophilia Foundation's Medical
and Scientific Advisory Committee, called the announcement "very exciting and
encouraging, even though it's a Phase 1 study."

   Although the study on heart cells is at a far earlier stage, researchers said
it was exciting because it showed the potential for gene therapy to treat heart
failure. In the study, which appears in today's issue of the journal
Circulation, the researchers report delivering additional copies of a gene
called Serca2a to muscle cells from failing human hearts. Cells that
incorporated the gene began to function in a normal fashion, contracting more
quickly and more powerfully.

   "This ability to modify the contraction of failing human cardiac cells
represents an important step toward gene therapy for heart failure," said Dr.
Roger Hajjar of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cardiovascular Research
Center, who led the study, along with collaborators from Boston University
Medical Center and Imperial College in London.

   Although this study used an adenovirus vector, Hajjar said he believed one of
the new vectors in development would yield long-lasting results.

   "These results in isolated cardiac cells need to be validated in the whole
human heart, but we're optimistic that this goal will be accomplished," he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                             1144 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    DECEMBER 7, 1999, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: Alameda Biotech Firm Boosts Gene Therapy;

Avigen's hemophilia treatment excites scientists, industry

BYLINE: Tom Abate, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
A biotech firm in Alameda gave the embattled field of gene therapy a boost
yesterday by reporting that it had restored partial blood clotting ability in
three hemophiliacs by injecting them with an experimental drug containing the
short length of DNA they were born without.  Although Avigen Inc. said it was
far too early to proclaim its treatment a cure, the results it reported at a
scientific meeting in New Orleans were hailed as one of the first successes in
more than 10 years and 300 experiments aimed at fighting disease by repairing
defects in DNA.

    "It's very significant that what we're seeing now is the first hint of
effective gene therapy trials," said Dr. Estuardo Aguilar, a gene therapist at
Baylor University. Aguilar said that at the same meeting on Sunday, a European
gene therapy group also reported an early stage success in combatting an immune
disease. Still, he cautioned that both experiments are still early in the
drug-testing process. "We have yet to see any definitive success stories," he
said.

    Long hyped as a magic bullet against diseases, gene therapy came under fire
this fall after a healthy patient died after getting an experimental drug that
used a cold virus to deliver DNA into the subject's cells.

    Many gene therapy experiments work by packing a useful pieces of DNA into a
virus and using the bug as delivery vehicle, taking advantage of the fact that
viruses are adept at burrowing into cells.

   A National Institutes of Health advisory committee will meet in Washington,
D.C., tomorrow to look into the reported instances of deaths during gene therapy
trials.

    Avigen chief executive John Monahan said his company had used a different
virus than the cold bug now being investigated by the NIH. Monahan said Avigen's
experiments are based on adeno-associated virus, a common bug that seems to have
no disease-causing effect in human beings.

    Blood clotting normally occurs when two proteins, Factor 8 and Factor 9,
combine to plug leaks. Each of these clotting proteins is made by a different
gene. Hemophiliacs are born without one of the two genes.

    About 5,000 people in the United States have the form of hemophilia caused
by a deficiency in the Factor 9 gene. Avigen's therapy is aimed at them.

    Scientists at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia and Stanford Medical
Center, who have been working with Avigen, gave the three human subjects in the
experiment a single shot of the gene therapy drug six months ago.

    Monahan said none of the subjects showed any reaction or side effect from
the virus itself. But within two months of receiving their gene therapy shots,
each of the three test patients began to create detectable amounts of the Factor
9 clotting protein.

    "What we have observed is that the gene has been successfully delivered and
is producing biologically active Factor 9," Monahan said.

    Avigen will continue to test its gene therapy in six more human subjects
over the rest of the year, giving each patient a somewhat higher dose of the
drug. The idea is to establish what dose patients can safely tolerate. Avigen
will also be eager to see whether higher doses of the gene therapy produce
enough Factor 9 to free hemophiliacs from the need to take expensive protein
supplements every few days to stop uncontrolled bleeding.

    The U.S. market for Factor 9 hemophilia remedies is now worth roughly $200
million.

    In recent months, Avigen's stock price has more than quadrupled, as
investors have begun to bet that this tiny Alameda firm might break the gene
therapy jinx and come up with a useful drug.

   Avigen's shares rose $4.63 today to close at $35.25 before the gene therapy
news was announced.



LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                             1145 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    December 7, 1999, Tuesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: VARIETY; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: FYI;
Looking ahead, look out

BYLINE: Dave Matheny; Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Oxford University Press anthology "Predictions" is a look at the 21st
century as envisioned by scientists, writers and philosophers. It's a small
volume with big ideas, set for release early next year in the United States.

       "Nobody is predicting the end of the world," said Sian Griffiths, the
anthology editor. But some of the predictions are attention-getting:

        - Science-fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, author of "2001: A Space
Odyssey," forecasts space travel by Prince Charles' younger son, Harry. By 2021,
humans will land on Mars; in 2057, the centennial of the Sputnik satellite
launch will include celebrations on Earth, the moon, Mars, Jupiter's moons
Europa and Ganymede, and Saturn's largest moon, Titan. He also predicts that
after 2020 there will be two intelligent species on Earth: humans and one
evolving from artificial intelligence.

        - Neuroscientist Susan Greenfield, less optimistic, wonders if George
Orwell's world of 1984 might arrive by 2084, with humans monitored "from their
genes and molecules through to their mental worlds." As the young interact with
virtual-reality products, Greenfield says, there is a risk the attention span
and imagination needed to read may no longer exist and "we may end up a society
of restless, unimaginative individuals."

        - Feminist Andrea Dworkin describes what she wants for women, including
"a woman-dominated legal system in every country."

        - W. French Anderson, sometimes called the father of gene therapy,
boldly predicts that gene-based therapy will revolutionize medical practice by
2030, yet cautions that "the downside of this powerful technology might be that
eugenics will be practiced on a scale far larger than any 'selective breeding'
policy could accomplish."

        - Cybernetics professor Kevin Warwick sees humans using implant
technology to link with computers. Through the power of the mind and the
computer, people will open doors and turn on lights. There could be
brain-to-brain communication via the Internet, he suggests, and "we will simply
be able to think to each other."

        - Linguist and author Noam Chomsky is perhaps the most downbeat,
wondering "whether humans are a kind of lethal mutation."

   _ Baltimore Sun

   .

   Heads up

   A long-ago war

        Today is Pearl Harbor Day, the date on which the Japanese attacked the
United States in Hawaii in 1941.

        Another battle will be discussed on Thursday at Historic Fort Snelling:
The Battle of the Bulge took place in the forests of Belgium and in Luxembourg's
Ardennes region in late 1944 and early 1945.

        Five veterans of the Battle of the Bulge will discuss the event, all
members of the 99th Infantry Division, which held a long defensive front along
the northern edge of the Bulge. Although the war had gone well for the Allies
(that included us, for those who haven't learned much history) after the success
of D-Day and the liberation of Paris in August, Allied forces had settled down,
poised to invade Germany. In a last mad attempt to break through the Allied
line, Hitler launched a massive counteroffensive in December, pushing a small,
65-mile bulge into the Allied line. Ultimately the Germans failed, but in the
battle, nearly 20,000 Americans were killed and more than 60,000 injured. (For
comparison, about 55,000 Americans died in combat during the entire decade-long
Vietnam War.)

        - When: 7 p.m. Thursday.

        - Where: Historic Fort Snelling, Hwys. 5 and 55, near the Mendota
Bridge.

        - Admission: Free. Donations accepted.

        - Call: 612-726-1171.

   _ Dave Matheny

   .

   Comments

        If you have comments about this section, call Assistant Managing
Editor/Features Susie Eaton Hopper at 612-673-4530, or e-mail
variety@gw.startribune.com. For inquiries or complaints, call the Star Tribune's
reader representative at 612-673-4450 or e-mail readerrep@gw.startribune.com.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                             1146 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            December 7, 1999 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 63

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: IBM aims to decode the body

BYLINE: Kevin Coughlin, Star-Ledger Staff

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Imagine visiting the doctor with a vague ailment. She swabs your cheek for a
DNA sample, obtains an instant diagnosis, then orders a drug genetically
tailored to your specific malady.

    IBM researchers say that may be the upshot of a bold $100 million computer
project unveiled yesterday.

    Dubbed "Blue Gene," the five-year venture aims to create a supercomputer
1,000 times more powerful than the one that humbled chess champ Garry Kasparov
in 1997 - and 500 times faster than today's swiftest machines - that can
simulate the folding of a human protein.

    "We are going to unlock the secrets of how the human body works," boasted
Paul Horn, IBM's vice president for research, at a press conference near Wall
Street.

    It's a daunting task that IBM says could lead to better medicines, genetic
therapies, agricultural products and even nanotechnologies, in which atoms are
instructed to arrange themselves into microscopic machines.

    Intended to harness 1 million processors performing a quadrillion computing
operations per second (one "petaflop"), the Blue Gene supercomputer also might
be used for weather forecasting, financial risk assessment and oil drilling
predictions, according to IBM.

    IBM hopes to achieve these goals not with any radical new microchip design,
but rather by boosting efficiency of conventional chips and daisy-chaining more
of them together than ever before. In this way, IBM hopes to achieve in five
years what otherwise might take 15 years at the current pace of chip
improvements.

    "We're not using any exotic technologies. We're using technology that's not
risky, that's one generation below" the cutting edge, explained Ambuj Goyal,
head of computer science at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown
Heights, N.Y., where Blue Gene will reside.

    Unlike the chess-tuned Deep Blue computer that stunned Kasparov, Blue Gene
is being designed as a general-purpose monster - one that's about 2 million
times faster than the best home PCs.

    IBM calls its new approach SMASH - short for Simple, Many And Self-Healing.

    The idea is to simplify computing by greatly reducing the number of encoded
instructions that guide each processor. Also, memory will be stored on each
chip, rather than in a separate "cache," to speed information retrieval.

    Goyal said the toughest challenge may be programming Blue Gene to repair
itself on the fly. Its processors may be likened to a million cooks,
simultaneously preparing 8 million "recipes," or threads. The supercomputer must
not stumble over a tangled thread.

    IBM officials compared Blue Gene to erecting a skyscraper 500 times taller
than the World Trade Center. They said its internal capacity for shuttling
information could transport the entire contents of the Internet - 100 trillion
bytes of data - in less than one second.

    Blue Gene will match the computing power of today's two fastest
supercomputers - run by the U.S. Department of Energy and filling 8,000 square
feet - on a board measuring just 4 square feet, IBM claims. The final machine
will consist of 64 racks linked together, covering less than 2,000 square feet.

   IBM will need every bit of that horsepower to figure out a single human
protein.

    Proteins are the engines of the human body, directing many of life's crucial
processes. Nature folds them into distinctive three-dimensional shapes that
dictate their functions and interactions. They always fold the same way. "We
don't have a clue why or how that happens," said Horn, who is a physicist.

    When the process screws up, diseases or genetic defects may result. Horn
said about 600 amino acids form a hemoglobin protein. If one amino acid in the
sequence is wrong, he said, the protein folds the wrong way and sickle cell
anemia occurs.

    "If we could understand it, we could prevent it folding the wrong way," said
Horn, suggesting future treatments for AIDS, hepatitis and herpes.

    By knowing the chemistry and thermodynamics that fold a protein, scientists
hope to engineer medicines that precisely latch onto those shapes, like a key
fitting a lock, to enhance beneficial cell activities or shut down harmful ones,
said Ronald Levy, a chemistry professor at Rutgers University. Levy has been
trying to unravel these mysteries by linking hundreds of computers as part of
the Rutgers Computational Grid.

    The Blue Gene project will target a protein, as yet unchosen, containing
about 300 amino acids. It's expected to take the supercomputer a whole year of
nonstop operation to fold a protein of that size. As a warm-up, IBM soon plans
to start modeling much smaller proteins; it already is building a dictionary of
basic human proteins.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1147 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    December 7, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:


   Hemophilia Gene Therapy Results


   Scientists reported yesterday encouraging but preliminary data from a widely
watched human test of gene therapy that could treat or possibly cure one form of
hemophilia.

   If the approach works, it would be the first gene therapy success ever.

   The approach, developed by a team at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
aims to insert the gene for blood-clotting factor IX into the cells of people
with hemophilia B.

   An estimated 2,800 males in the United States suffer from that form of
hemophilia, an inherited disorder that prevents the blood from clotting.
Although it is carried by the mother, it occurs only in males.

   Preliminary data from a nine-patient trial, presented at the American Society
of Hematology meeting in New Orleans, shows that there is "a clear benefit" from
the experimental therapy, said John Monahan, a biochemist at Avigen, an Alameda,
Calif., firm that has licensed the approach from the hospital.

   He reported that the first three people in the trial, who were given a low
dose of the experimental gene-therapy drug, were now producing their own factor
IX, allowing them to "significantly reduce" their reliance on weekly injections
of artificial factor IX protein, which causes the blood to clot.

   Many hemophilia B sufferers must inject themselves two or three times a week
at a cost of about $ 100,000 a year.

   The experimental gene therapy involves one-time multiple injections in the
thigh, all done in a 15-minute session, Monahan said. The first patient to be
injected has been producing factor IX for five months, he said.

   The trial, which began in June, is designed to test the safety of the gene
therapy at three different dosing levels--low, medium and high. Three patients
will be enrolled in each group. The reported results are from the three patients
in the low-dose group. Enrollment in the other groups is not yet complete.


   Academy Rejects Oral Polio Vaccine


   The American Academy of Pediatrics recommended that doctors abandon oral
polio vaccines for routine childhood vaccinations and switch over to safer
injections that contain no live polio virus.

   The recommendation is a change from one the group issued a year ago when it
suggested that injections be used for the first two vaccinations at 2 and 4
months, followed by shots or oral doses for the next treatments at 6 to 18
months and again at 4 to 6 years of age.

   There has been a long-running controversy over the oral vaccine, which
contains the live but weakened polio virus, because the live virus carries the
possibility of causing the disease it is designed to prevent. The academy's new
policy states that vaccine-caused cases of polio "cannot be totally eliminated
until oral polio virus vaccine no longer is given."

   The statement, published in the December issue of Pediatrics, the journal of
the academy, said the all-injection schedule should be in place at the start of
the new year.



LOAD-DATE: December 07, 1999


                             1148 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    December 06, 1999, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: D; Pg. 7 Medicine

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH;
Baylor scientist creates blood cells from muscle cells in mice

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

   Houston researchers have produced blood cells from muscle cells, a discovery
that offers promise as an alternative source of blood for bone-marrow
transplants.

   Defying the long-held conventional wisdom that a specific type of cell can
duplicate only its own cell type, researchers at Baylor College of Medicine
found that cells derived from the muscle of adult mice become mature blood cells
when injected into the bloodstream of mice.

   "Scientists used to think that blood cells came from blood cells only, and
muscle cells came from muscle cells only," said Dr. Margaret Goodell, the
study's principal investigator and assistant professor in the International
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy at Baylor, Methodist Hospital and Texas
Children's Hospital. "But this suggests cells may be programmed by their
environment rather than their history."

   Stem cells are immature cells that haven't specialized to become a certain
type of cell, such as nerve, blood or muscle. Blood cells usually originate from
stem cells in marrow, the vascular tissue that fills the cavities of most bones.

   About 30,000 transplants worldwide are performed each year on patients whose
marrow is unable to make sufficient blood, either because of a genetic defect or
because of disease, such as leukemia. Thirty percent of patients never find a
suitable match, and even for many of those who find one, the limited pool of
donors can make it a risky procedure.

   Goodell reported her discovery at the American Society of Hematology's annual
meeting Sunday in New Orleans. On Tuesday, the study will appear in the journal
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The study involved injecting
two types of stem cells into the bloodstream of mice: muscle cells that had been
taken from adult mice and tagged with genetic markers for tracing; and
bone-marrow cells from other adult mice.

   Six and 12 weeks later, Goodell's team found that more than 10 times as many
blood cells had come from the specially marked muscle cells than from the
bone-marrow cells. Furthermore, the muscle cells retained their regenerative
potential after bone marrow from one of the six mice was harvested and
transplanted into secondary recipients.

   The discovery is the latest in a string of recent discoveries about stem-cell
properties. In a key breakthrough five years ago, Goodell learned how to isolate
a special subpopulation of bone-marrow stem cells that form the blood system,
cells thought to be ancestral to normal bone-marrow cells and, thus, more
versatile. The technique was used earlier this year by Boston Children's
Hospital biologists to turn bone-marrow cells into muscle, offering hope for
gene therapy for muscular dystrophy.

   Goodell said the Boston research hinted at cells' potential and gave her the
idea to experiment with muscle cells.

   "A year ago, what we did would have seemed a crazy idea, but the new research
suggested things never before thought about," said Goodell. "Eventually, it may
mean we can turn stem cells into kidney cells or liver cells or any of a number
of cells and open the way for new therapies."











GRAPHIC: Mug: Dr. Margaret Goodell

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2000


                             1149 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    December 6, 1999, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A26; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Risks of Gene Therapy Research

BODY:


   Our research team was disheartened by The Post's interpretation of our
motivations and actions in the design and implementation of our gene therapy
clinical trial for ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency -- a rare, and
often fatal, inherited liver disorder ["Hasty Decisions in Race to a Cure?"
front page, Nov. 21]. In addition to myself, The Post article named researchers
Steven Raper and Mark Batshaw.

   The OTC study has been through exhaustive and ongoing review by all
appropriate oversight bodies (including the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
of the National Institutes of Health, the Food and Drug Administration and
relevant human subjects review boards), beginning two years before the trial
began in April 1997.

   All data from other published studies as well as from our own work in animal
models were incorporated into the protocol design to further ensure patient
safety. Seventeen volunteers participated in the OTC trial before Jesse
Gelsinger; the patient who immediately preceded him received the same dose of
the vector yet showed no unexpected adverse reactions.

   The alleged lure of potential financial gain played no role in any clinical
decisions. The decision to use adults in the protocol was based on the
collective input and recommendations from the University of Pennsylvania's own
bioethicists, as well as from families of diseased children and other metabolic
disease experts not associated with the study. The informed-consent document
signed by Jesse Gelsinger and all participants in the OTC trial accurately
reflected risks, including death.

   We have been pained and truly humbled by Jesse Gelsinger's unexpected and
tragic death. As we continue to search for answers about the cause or causes of
his death, we are sustained by the knowledge that our motives and actions have
been consistent with the ideal of advancing our understanding of this
devastating disease so that an effective treatment may be developed.

   JAMES M. WILSON

   Director

   Institute for Human Gene Therapy

   University of Pennsylvania

   Philadelphia



LOAD-DATE: December 06, 1999


                             1150 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            December 5, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: INSIGHT, Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE SOMETIMES DEFIES EXPERTS' BEST PREDICTIONS

BYLINE: David Lore

BODY:


   The 21st century approaches less as a storm than as a fog, penetrated only
lightly by the headlamps of our experience.

   Several years ago, I asked Alvin Toffler, the godfather of futurism, how he
managed in all his books and speeches to overlook the Y2K computer problem, a
trillion-dollar glitch visible to computer scientists since the 1960s.

   All he could do was shrug and admit missing that wave.

   Last week, I baited futurist Stephen Millett at Battelle.

   Steve, I asked, how come Battelle in its 1996 and 1998 technology forecasts
didn't tip us to the explosion called the Internet?

   What counts, Millett responded, are the ends -- the Internet's impact on
business, the economy and society -- and not the means.

   "What has the Internet changed?'' he asked. "The answer is damn little --
it's just another form of communications.''

   Yet pity the futurist who, early in this century, didn't foresee the impact
of radio, television and telephones, or the automobile and airplane -- all just
new forms of communication or transportation.

   Century and millennial forecasts are rolling in like Christmas catalogs this
month, probing the mist on low beam and high.

   Battelle last week predicted that in the world of 2020, micromachines will
run our houses, clean up our messes and even infiltrate our bodies to root out
disease.

   If anything, Battelle is probably too cautious. Last year, for example, its
futurists predicted that hand-held computers, high-definition TV and e- commerce
wouldn't be widely used before 2008.

   "The forecasts are coming true faster than we expected,'' Millett admitted
last week. "That's why we went out 20 years this time.''

   The World Future Society last week predicted that by 2010 we'll be checking
our body chemistry and hormone levels pretty much as we check the time -- by
looking at a device on our wrists.

   Microchips in our forearm, the society says, will turn on the heat and lights
when we enter a building. By midcentury, TV sets and computers will disappear as
the electronics are incorporated into our clothing or other small devices. Even
hospitals will disappear as micro-surgical techniques make long hospital stays
unnecessary.

   It's great fun to review these predictions every decade or two.

   Battelle, for example, said in 1983 that "the remainder of this century is
expected to be characterized by change, but not by dramatic change.''

   "Despite advances in electronics, telecommunications, automation and
materials sciences, the technology of 2000 will be more like than unlike that of
1980.''

   In its new report, the World Future Society writes its own scorecard, taking
credit for predicting in 1967 that gene therapy, artificial intelligence and
network computing would all flourish by 2000.

   Misses, the society admits, were its predictions in the '60s that by 2000,
bacterial and viral diseases would be "virtually eliminated,'' the colonization
of the solar system would have begun and we'd all be globe-hopping in
"magnet-controlled luxurious flying-saucer-type devices.''

   Forecasts are useful exercises and good fun. In that spirit, this column will
continue to mine this avalanche of informed and not-so-informed speculations
during the weeks ahead. Just don't hold me to their accuracy.

   David Lore, science reporter for The Dispatch, is online at
dlore@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                             1151 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         December 5, 1999 Sunday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 1795 words

HEADLINE: CAUSE OF GENE THERAPY DEATH DEFIES EXPLANATION;
LACK OF ANSWERS FRUSTRATES FAMILY, SCIENTISTS IN FIELD

BYLINE: By Donald C. Drake Knight Ridder Newspapers

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   As 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger lay dying in a nearby intensive care unit, 10
grim-faced scientists sat around a conference table in the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, planning his autopsy.

   No patient, to their knowledge, had ever died of gene therapy, even though
some 4,000 people had participated in more than 350 trials.

   Gelsinger had ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a rare genetic
liver ailment. But he had arrived at Penn from Tucson, Ariz., in otherwise good
health on his 18th birthday -- the minimum age to volunteer for the trial.

   Within a day of being treated on Sept. 13, his lungs began to shut down. Now,
four days later, he was about to die, and the researchers knew it was probably
because of something they had done.

   Sitting at the table, James Wilson, the driving, 44-year-old director of the
institute, stressed how important it was that they find out what went wrong.

   Not only did Gelsinger's family deserve to know why he had died, it was
essential for the entire field of gene therapy.

   If their investigation showed that a lab mistake or misjudgment had killed
him, it would have little impact on the emerging field that held out so much
promise for halting or even curing genetic diseases like cystic fibrosis and
hemophelia and major killers like heart disease and cancer.

   But if it turned out to be something basic -- that giving high doses of gene
drugs can cause death -- then the impact could be profound.

   The scientists left the meeting bewildered by the impending death, some
wondering if the critics had been right in saying that a trial like this
shouldn't have been attempted.

   *** Many questions, no answers ***

   But nothing had predicted the cascade of crises that on Sept. 17 killed
Gelsinger -- not the animal studies; not published reports from other
researchers; not the FDA, which had approved the trial, not the critics who had
raised a plethora of other concerns.

   Some members of the federal gene oversight group that had approved the trial
had worried that the gene drug, inserted with a catheter into the liver's
artery, would damage the liver. They worried that the gene drug could aggravate
the patient's underlying genetic disease.

   Wilson and the principal investigator Mark Batshaw, chairman of the
pediatrics department at George Washington University, realized that they were
pushing the envelope with this study.

   Never before had a gene drug been infused through the bloodstream and never
before had the test subjects been relatively healthy. In all other trials, the
drug was injected directly into the tissue of organs, limiting its spreadeuken-6
(IL-6).

   IL-6 is a cytokine, an intracellular messenger produced in response to
infection or other injuries. The IL-6 prompts inflammation in the lungs, which
are apparently more sensitive to this cytokine than other organs.

   *** Focus was on liver ***

   Checking the dwindling supply of blood samples repeatedly taken from the 18
patients, Chirmule found that Gelsinger's IL-6 level was almost five times
higher than the patients in the other cohorts.

   It started rising remarkably fast, while the gene drug was being infused into
his liver, reaching a peak 6 1/2 hours later. Two days later, ARDS was
destroying his lungs.

   The doctors hadn't been measuring IL-6 during the trial. Animal studies
suggested that the liver was the most likely organ to become inflamed and they
were using liver-function tests to pick this up. Liver inflammation caused by
the drug was a major concern of those who approved the trial.

   None of the tests they did with mice, rhesus monkeys and baboons suggested
that the adenovirus, delivered to the liver, would affect IL-6 levels or damage
the lungs.

   Ronald Crystal, a researcher at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, had
reported in 1994 that one cystic fibrosis patient developed lung problems after
adenoviruses were injected directly into her lungs. She didn't die.

   Wilson was aware of this report, but didn't think it was applicable to his
trial, involving the liver.

   If they had been monitoring IL-6, they would have seen that Jennifer
Christenson, who got the same dose of drug, also had a spike in her IL-6.
Chirmule's review of the blood samples revealed that Christenson's IL-6 quickly
dropped after reaching a peak. Gelsinger's never came down.

   Wilson said later he would have stopped the trial to find out why
Christenson's IL-6 climbed so much had he known, and Gelsinger never would have
been treated.

   Chirmule found another type of cytokine that was very high in Gelsinger and
Christenson -- IL-10. This cytokine is supposed to stop production of IL-6 when
enough has been made. It did what it was supposed to do in the woman, but had no
effect on Gelsinger's IL-6 even though he was making more IL-10 than
Christenson.

   This suggested that Gelsinger's body was doing its best to control the IL-6,
but something was stopping it from working.

   *** Going to the FDA ***

   On Nov. 1, six weeks after Gelsinger's death, Wilson, Batshaw, Raper and
others involved in the trial went to FDA headquarters in Rockville, Md., to
deliver a preliminary report.

   They had already sent to the FDA 15 volumes of data collected during the
investigation.

   Holding to a secrecy policy, the FDA refused to confirm that the meeting took
place, let alone say what happened there. Wilson said they met with about 30 FDA
officials, including most of the 20 clinical reviewers who monitor all human
gene trials in the country.

   They were particularly interested in the IL-6 findings and talked about them
extensively.

   What they didn't talk about were reports of serious adverse effects the FDA
had received from two other adenovirus studies, including a liver cancer trial
by the Schering-Plough Corp. Federal law forbids the FDA to share proprietary
information.

   Wilson said he had heard through the grapevine that some patients in the
Schering-Plough trial had suffered drops in blood pressure during infusion, but
no other side effects that could be seen as warnings for his OTC trial.

   None of the OTC patients had a blood-pressure drop.

   Another piece of the puzzle was fitted in by Phil Leopold, a researcher at
Cornell who studies how viruses infect cells.

   A Cornell colleague, Ronald Crystal, who is using gene therapy in heart
disease, had speculated two years earlier that adenoviruses had an affinity for
a component of the immune system called macrophages. But at the time this wasn't
seen as a problem and he never followed it up.

   Since macrophages are a primary source of IL-6 and IL-10, this speculation
became a hot lead for the Gelsinger investigation. Leopold suggested tagging the
adenoviruses with fluorescent dye, injecting them into mice and watching to see
if they lit up the marcophages.

   If the virus did latch on to the macrophages, the scientists should see
splotches of fluorescence on the liver where marcophages were concentrated,
rather than throughout the organ.

   *** Explanation unfolding ***

   It was just getting dark on Nov. 10 when Timothy Baradet, who runs the
cell-imaging lab in Wilson's laboratory, walked into his office with colored
photographs of the mice livers.

   The organs were splotched with fluorescence.

   Though a lot of questions remained, Wilson now could partially explain
Gelsinger's death.

   Within 90 minutes of the start of infusion, the macrophages in Gelsinger's
body began churning out IL-6. And the lungs became so inflamed that they shut
down.

   Because the reaction happened so fast, Wilson thinks that something in the
adenovirus' coat activates the macrophages. And because it happened in both
Christenson and Gelsinger, he thinks it's because of the high dose of drug and
not something specific to Gelsinger. But Gelsinger might have had a genetic
defect that prevented him from shutting down the massive build-up of IL-6.

   Wilson said the investigation of Gelsinger's death leads to several
conclusion.

   Animal models are not totally reliable in predicting dangerous events, which
can happen suddenly in human trials, even when drug doses are slowly increased.
Scientists will have to spend more time in the laboratory trying to anticipate
problems before moving on to human trials,

   Wilson said adenoviruses should not be used in the liver or delivered through
the bloodstream.

   But this will affect only a few trials. Most gene drugs are injected directly
into tissue and Wilson doesn't think this is risky.

   Paul Gelsinger was standing outside his low-lying house next to the dirt bike
he bought his son just before he died when Wilson arrived Nov. 21. Wilson had
come to tell him how his son had died.

   This was the first time the two men met, though they had often spoken on the
phone. Wilson had seen his son only once. He leaves the care of test subjects to
clinicians like Batshaw and Raper so emotional factors won't bias his thinking.
He didn't have to worry about that now.

   On the plane to Tucson, Wilson had pored over the data he had brought, making
notes on a yellow legal pad, trying to map out the best way to present it to
Gelsinger.

   Gelsinger had other things on his mind when Wilson arrived and wouldn't let
Wilson talk. A reporter had called about the Schering-Plough side effects that
had been reported to the FDA well before his son's treatment, but had been kept
under wraps as the law requires.

   "He didn't have to die," Gelsinger said. "My kid is dead so they could make
billions more. You guys would have stopped if you knew about what happened."

    The regulations must be changed, Gelsinger said, so these private companies
publicly reveal adverse side effects.

   *** A time to listen ***

   It wasn't until dark that Gelsinger was ready to listen.

   He told the father how the modified virus had started a chain of events that
destroyed his son's lungs. He told him about the IL-6 and IL-10 and the
macrophages.

   The big mystery, Wilson said, is why this happened to his son and no one
else.

   Because some newspapers had published stories implying that Wilson had
pressed ahead with the OTC trial for personal, financial gain, Wilson told
Gelsinger that like many academic researchers, he had started a small
pharmaceutical company, Genova. He said he had nonvoting stock and was an unpaid
consultant, working for the company one day a week.

   Gelsinger asked Wilson if he would have made money had the OTC experiment
been successful. Wilson said it takes years for a company to develop a product
and Genova has yet to develop one.

   "What you guys were doing and what Jesse was doing was pure," Gelsinger said.
He got quiet. His thoughts returned to the side effects that were never reported
publicly.

   "This shouldn't have happened. This needs to be fixed."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1999


                             1152 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     December 3, 1999, Friday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: DEATH OF GENE-THERAPY PATIENT MAY INHIBIT EXPERIMENTS

BYLINE: JENNIFER BROWN; Associated Press

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   In a setback for one of the most exciting fields of medical research,
investigators confirmed that a young man who died during a gene therapy
experiment in September was killed by the treatment.

   The preliminary report on the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz.,
found that an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a weakened cold virus,
triggered an extreme immune-system reaction that caused multiple organ failure,
said James M. Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania Institute for
Human Gene Therapy.

   Gelsinger, 18, is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result
of gene therapy.

   The case has stirred debate over using patients in gene-therapy experiments
who are not close to death. Gelsinger had a severe gene disorder controlled by
drugs and diet but was relatively healthy when he began the therapy.

   In addition, the results could delay experiments that use viruses to
transport the corrective genes into the body -- currently the most common
treatment method.

   In the Penn trial, the corrective genes were encased in a weakened cold
virus, which researchers had thought was safe for humans because even a
full-blown cold virus usually causes no damage.

   "People say: 'I have a disease and I want gene therapy. I don't care about
the risks.' Then someone dies and everyone says, 'How could you let this
happen?' " bioethicist Arthur Caplan of the University of Pennsylvania said
Thursday. "It will slow it for a while, then the pressures will build again, and
it will get going even faster."

   Gelsinger died Sept. 17, four days after researchers injected the modified
cold virus and engineered genes into an artery leading into his liver. He
suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a genetic disorder that
leaves the body unable to produce enzymes that remove ammonia from the body.
Ammonia is a byproduct of protein processing.

   Most victims of the rare disorder die as infants. Gelsinger had a mild form
that he kept in check with drugs and low-protein foods.

   Researchers said they still do not understand precisely why Gelsinger died.
Seventeen other patients had been through the procedure without ill effects, and
none of the studies on animals indicated that there would be an immune reaction
such as the one that killed Gelsinger, Wilson said.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1999


                             1153 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                  DECEMBER 3, 1999 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 55

LENGTH: 194 words

HEADLINE: MAN DIES FROM GENE TREATMENT

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   In a setback for one of the most exciting fields of medical research,
investigators confirmed that a young man who died during a gene therapy
experiment in September was killed by the treatment.

   The preliminary report on the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz.,
found that an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a weakened cold virus,
triggered an extreme immune-system reaction that caused multiple organ failure,
said James M. Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania Institute for
Human Gene Therapy.

   Gelsinger, 18, is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result
of gene therapy.

   The case has stirred debate over using patients in gene-therapy experiments
who are not close to death. Gelsinger had a severe gene disorder controlled by
drugs and diet, but was relatively healthy when he began the therapy.

   In addition, the results could delay experiments that use viruses to
transport the corrective genes into the body.

   In the Penn trial, the corrective genes were encased in a weakened cold
virus, which researchers had thought was safe for humans since even a full-blown
cold virus usually causes no damage.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1154 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    December 3, 1999, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1342 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY BLAMED IN DEATH;
FINDING SETS BACK RESEARCHERS USING ENGINEERED VIRUS

BYLINE: DONALD C. DRAKE, THE PHILADELPHIA INQURER

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA -

BODY:


   After spending 10 weeks intensively investigating the first known death from
a gene-therapy drug, researchers have concluded that the patient was killed by
an immune reaction that quickly destroyed his lungs.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania Institute for Human Gene
Therapy said that there was no warning that the drug infused into the liver of
Jesse Gelsinger on Sept. 13 would cause harm.

   They said none of the animal studies done before the genetherapy study began
and none of the tests done on the 17 volunteers who preceded Gelsinger in the
trial predicted what happened. Also, they could find no evidence that a mistake
in making or delivering the gene drug or other misjudgment contributed to
Gelsinger's death.

   The finding is likely to shake the confidence of gene therapy researchers
who, until now, had believed that the type of virus used to deliver the needed
gene was safe.

   The data strongly suggests that this type of drug - which consists of
adenoviruses engineered to deliver genes to patients' cells - shouldn't be put
into the bloodstream or the liver the way it was done in this trial until more
is known, said James M. Wilson, director of the institute.

   Since the first experimental gene-therapy treatment in 1990, some 4,000
patients in more than 350 trials have received gene drugs for genetic defects,
cancer and heart disease. About one quarter of the patients were treated with
adenoviruses - the same virus that causes colds, but modified to carry the
needed gene but not cause a cold. Only a couple of the adenovirus trials,
however, infuse the virus into the bloodstream or liver.

   Terrence R. Flotte of the University of Florida in Gainesville said he didn't
think the data should have an effect on research being done with other kinds of
viruses or methods to deliver genes to cells.

   "This should make people more cautious in using adenoviruses," he said, "but
not the other vectors." Flotte is a pioneer in the use of adeno-associated
virus, or AAV, in treating the lung disease cystic fibrosis.

   The Institute on Monday sent its 337-page report to the federal Office of
Recombinant DNA Activities, or ORDA, which will discuss the findings at its
quarterly meeting next week.

   Wilson said he was particularly concerned that none of the institute's
studies in mice, monkeys or baboons indicated that there would be an immune
reaction like the one that killed the 18-year-old youth, five days after
receiving the adenovirus.

   The animal studies suggested that liver inflammation and abnormal blood
clotting would be the most likely problems - at doses 50 times greater than
Gelsinger got. And a member of the federal oversight committee that approved the
trial had also worried this would be a problem.

   Instead, Gelsinger's lungs shut down, a response that, according to Wilson,
had never been seen in animal studies.

   "It's scary," Wilson said, "having no reliable animal models."

   The finding is also likely to rekindle a debate about using patients in gene
therapy trials who are not close to death. The trial involving Gelsinger was the
first in the country to use relatively healthy people.

   Gelsinger had ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. His liver lacked enough
genes to make an enzyme needed to clear his body of ammonia, a natural byproduct
of food metabolism.

   Most babies born with the disease die within a few days of getting protein.
But the government would not approve testing in babies. Ethicists, including
Arthur Caplan at Penn, had objected on the grounds that babies can't give
consent and parents of dying babies might feel coerced.

   Gelsinger had suffered three comas, but his disease was under control with a
regime involving 32 pills a day and a restricted diet.

   Because the animal studies can't be depended upon to reveal the potential
benefits or dangers of a given gene drug, Wilson said that it will now likely
take longer to develop usable gene drugs as wary scientists spend more time in
the laboratory trying to anticipate problems.

   The 10-week investigation enabled researchers to reconstruct what probably
happened after they infused 38 trillion adenoviruses through a catheter inserted
into the artery that fed the right side of Gelsinger's liver.

   One of the most likely scenarios for the lethal immune response, according to
Wilson, was the following:

   Ninety minutes into the two-hour infusion, the adenovirus activated
macrophages, disease-fighting cells of the immune system.

   The macrophages started churning out interleuken-6, which causes inflammation
as part of the body's defense system. Particularly sensitive to IL-6, his lungs
became inflamed.

   Normally, another interleuken, IL-10, eventually shuts off IL-6 production.
But for unknown reasons it didn't work in Gelsinger and the inflammation went on
to destroy the lungs.

   Within 24 hours of the infusion, Gelsinger plunged into a coma from which he
never emerged, as one by one his organs died, starved for oxygen the lungs could
no longer provide.

   Gelsinger and the patient immediately preceding him in the OTC trial,
Jennifer Christenson, 18, a Pittsburgh college student, got the highest doses of
drug in the study.

   Christenson's IL-6 levels also climbed much higher than any of the other
patients in the trial, but quickly fell back down and suffered no apparent ill
effects.

   The mystery is why the IL-6 remained high in Gelsinger but none of the 17
other patients in the trial.

   Though none of the 350 gene therapy trials has resulted in a successful
treatment, none has resulted in death or serious side effects until now, or at
least that's what scientists believe.

   They can't be sure because adverse events are not always made public. They
must be reported to the Food and Drug Administration, but the FDA is prohibited
by law from revealing the data, which is considered proprietary information.

   This means that researchers who might be working with similar drugs don't get
information that could be used to protect patients.

   ORDA, which oversees gene therapy projects for the National Institutes of
Health, does release this information. However, only researchers receiving
federal funds are required to report adverse effects to the agency.

   After Penn reported Gelsinger's death, ORDA asked the 70 or so investigators
doing human trials with adenovirues to report any side effects.

   Practically all have responded, said ORDA director Amy Patterson, and the
data is being reviewed by a panel of experts. The data will be used by the
agency and the FDA to determine what changes should be made in the way gene
therapy research is done.

   Since Gelsinger's death, the media have published stories about several
deaths and side effects involving gene therapy patients that were not previously
made public, though they may have been reported to the FDA.

   The researchers in those trials insisted that the events were not related to
the gene therapy and didn't have to be immediately reported to regulatory
agencies.

   Patterson said a lot of deaths have occurred with gene trials, but most if
not all of the deaths probably were due to the underlying disease.

   Because of news about deaths and side effects going unreported, part of
ORDA's three-day meeting is expected to focus on this question of secrecy in
gene therapy research.

   Following Gelsinger's death, the Washington Post raised questions about
whether Wilson's ties to Genova, a company he founded, may have encouraged him
to push too quickly ahead with the trial.

   The Post also said that Wilson moved ahead with the trial even though
experimental animals had died in toxicity studies.

   Wilson said that in drug toxicity trials, the death of the animal is how
researchers determine the maximum safe dose.

   Wilson insists that financial motives did not play a role in any of his
decisions involving the OTC trial. He said plans for the trial were drawn up 14
months before Genova was formed after the drug was found to control the disease
in mice specially bred with OTC.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Jesse Gelsinger poses at the Rocky Balboa statue in Philadelphia

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1999


                             1155 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               December 3, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      December 3, 1999 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: INVESTIGATORS CONFIRM DEATH CAUSED BY GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By JENNIFER BROWN; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   In a setback for one of the most exciting fields of medical research,
investigators confirmed that a young man who died during a gene therapy
experiment in September was killed by the treatment.

   The preliminary report on the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz.,
found that an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a weakened cold virus,
triggered an extreme immune-system reaction that caused multiple organ failure,
said James M. Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania Institute for
Human Gene Therapy.

   Gelsinger, 18, is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result
of gene therapy.

   The case has stirred debate over using patients in gene-therapy experiments
who are not close to death. Gelsinger had a severe gene disorder controlled by
drugs and diet but was relatively healthy when he began the therapy.

   In addition, the results could delay experiments that use viruses to
transport the corrective genes into the body - currently the most common
treatment method.

   In the Penn trial, the corrective genes were encased in a weakened cold
virus, which researchers had thought was safe for humans since even a full-blown
cold virus usually causes no damage.

   "People say, 'I have a disease and I want gene therapy. I don't care about
the risks.' Then someone dies and everyone says, 'How could you let this
happen?' bioethicist Arthur Caplan of the University of Pennsylvania said
yesterday. "It will slow it for a while, then the pressures will build again,
and it will get going even faster."

   Gelsinger died Sept. 17, four days after researchers injected the modified
cold virus and engineered genes into an artery leading into his liver. He
suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a genetic disorder that
leaves the body unable to produce enzymes that remove ammonia from the body.
Ammonia is a byproduct of protein processing.

   Most victims of the rare disorder die as infants. Gelsinger had a mild form
that he kept in check with medications and low-protein foods.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1999


                             1156 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        December 3, 1999, Friday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 18A

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Patient killed by gene therapy; Death halts experiments

BYLINE: Jennifer Brown

BODY:  PHILADELPHIA - In a setback for one of the most
exciting fields of medical research, investigators confirmed that a
young man who died during a gene therapy experiment in September
was killed by the treatment.


    The preliminary report on the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson,
Ariz., found that an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a
weakened cold virus, triggered an extreme immune-system reaction
that caused multiple organ failure, said James Wilson, director of
the University of Pennsylvania Institute for Human Gene Therapy.


    Gelsinger, 18, is believed to be the first person to die as a
direct result of gene therapy.


    The case has stirred debate over using patients in gene-therapy
experiments who are not close to death. Gelsinger had a severe gene
disorder controlled by drugs and diet but was relatively healthy
when he began the therapy.


    In addition, the results could delay experiments that use viruses
to transport the corrective genes into the body - currently the
most common treatment method.


    In the Penn trial, the corrective genes were encased in a weakened
cold virus, which researchers had thought was safe for humans since
even a full-blown cold virus usually causes no damage.


    "People say, 'I have a disease and I want gene therapy. I don't
care about the risks.' Then someone dies and everyone says, 'How
could you let this happen?'" bioethicist Arthur Caplan of the
University of Pennsylvania said Thursday. "It will slow it for a
while, then the pressures will build again, and it will get going
even faster."


    Gelsinger died Sept. 17, four days after researchers injected the
modified cold virus and engineered genes into an artery leading
into his liver. He suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency, a genetic disorder that leaves the body unable to
produce enzymes that remove ammonia from the body. Ammonia is a
byproduct of protein processing.


    Researchers said they still do not understand precisely why
Gelsinger died. Seventeen other patients had been through the
procedure without ill effects, and none of the studies on animals
indicated that there would be an immune reaction such as the one
that killed Gelsinger, Wilson said.


    Gelsinger's father, Paul, has said his son knew there was a chance
he could die from participating in the study, but he accepted the
odds because he wanted to help himself and others.


    After Gelsinger's death, the university study was stopped and the
Food and Drug Administration ordered a halt in the enrollment of
new patients in two experiments by Schering-Plough to use gene
therapy to treat liver cancer and colorectal cancer.



LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1999


                             1157 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        December 3, 1999, Friday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 18A

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Patient killed by gene therapy; Death halts experiments

BYLINE: Jennifer Brown

BODY:  PHILADELPHIA - In a setback for one of the most
exciting fields of medical research, investigators confirmed that a
young man who died during a gene therapy experiment in September
was killed by the treatment.


    The preliminary report on the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson,
Ariz., found that an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a
weakened cold virus, triggered an extreme immune-system reaction
that caused multiple organ failure, said James Wilson, director of
the University of Pennsylvania Institute for Human Gene Therapy.


    Gelsinger, 18, is believed to be the first person to die as a
direct result of gene therapy.


    The case has stirred debate over using patients in gene-therapy
experiments who are not close to death. Gelsinger had a severe gene
disorder controlled by drugs and diet but was relatively healthy
when he began the therapy.


    In addition, the results could delay experiments that use viruses
to transport the corrective genes into the body - currently the
most common treatment method.


    In the Penn trial, the corrective genes were encased in a weakened
cold virus, which researchers had thought was safe for humans since
even a full-blown cold virus usually causes no damage.


    "People say, 'I have a disease and I want gene therapy. I don't
care about the risks.' Then someone dies and everyone says, 'How
could you let this happen?'" bioethicist Arthur Caplan of the
University of Pennsylvania said Thursday. "It will slow it for a
while, then the pressures will build again, and it will get going
even faster."


    Gelsinger died Sept. 17, four days after researchers injected the
modified cold virus and engineered genes into an artery leading
into his liver. He suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency, a genetic disorder that leaves the body unable to
produce enzymes that remove ammonia from the body. Ammonia is a
byproduct of protein processing.


    Researchers said they still do not understand precisely why
Gelsinger died. Seventeen other patients had been through the
procedure without ill effects, and none of the studies on animals
indicated that there would be an immune reaction such as the one
that killed Gelsinger, Wilson said.


    Gelsinger's father, Paul, has said his son knew there was a chance
he could die from participating in the study, but he accepted the
odds because he wanted to help himself and others.


    After Gelsinger's death, the university study was stopped and the
Food and Drug Administration ordered a halt in the enrollment of
new patients in two experiments by Schering-Plough to use gene
therapy to treat liver cancer and colorectal cancer.



LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1999


                             1158 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 02, 1999, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Treatment, not errors, caused death in gene therapy test, says study

SOURCE: Washington Post

BODY:

   A teen-ager's death during a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania was caused by the treatment but not by any errors by the research
team, according to the preliminary findings of a two-month internal
investigation.

   The death is the first to be attributed to gene therapy, a 9-year-old field
that is trying to find a way to use genes to overcome inherited diseases, cancer
and other problems.

   The findings were disclosed in a brief summary report released Wednesday by
the researchers who conducted the experiment. The researchers declined to
provide the supporting documentation until next week, when they make a public
presentation before a federal oversight board looking into the fatality.

   The experiment had been controversial even before the death of Jesse
Gelsinger, an 18-year-old Tucson, Ariz., resident, because it tested unusually
large doses of a gene-altered virus on relatively healthy volunteers with a rare
liver disorder - ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency.

   "The findings suggest that the experimental drug used in the trial - a
modified cold virus, or vector, incorporating a potentially corrective gene for
Mr. Gelsinger's genetic disease - initiated an unusual and deadly immune-system
response that led to multiple organ failure and death," the report states.

   However, the researchers said they still don't know why the virus, known as
an adenovirus, triggered a lethal reaction in Gelsinger.

   Gelsinger received a significantly larger dose of vector than all but one of
the other participants. But there were no early warnings of trouble in the other
volunteer who received the high dose or in his predecessor or in 16 earlier
volunteers who received smaller doses, the report states.

   The report acknowledges that some participants suffered temporary liver
damage but said a review of the patient data and of animal studies performed
prior to the clinical trial "revealed no information that would have predicted
the events that led to Mr. Gelsinger's death. There was no evidence of human
error in his clinical management."

   The Washington Post reported last week that monkeys given a high dose of a
genetically engineered virus by the Penn team a few years ago had died in a
similar manner to Gelsinger. Penn researchers then developed what they
considered to be a safer version of the virus.

   However, some scientists, citing a growing body of evidence that the virus in
any form causes serious side effects, have questioned the wisdom of using it to
treat genetic diseases.

   Gelsinger died within four days of receiving his infusion on Sept. 13.


LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1999


                             1159 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: New Information on Gene Patient's Death Fails to Resolve Mystery

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1

BODY:

   Ten weeks after an 18-year-old Arizona man died in a gene therapy experiment
at the University of Pennsylvania, scientists there have determined that the
treatment he received -- an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a weakened
cold virus -- triggered "an unusual and deadly immune system response that led
to multiple organ failure" and was directly responsible for his death.

   But in interviews and a statement made public today, the researchers said
they still did not understand precisely why the patient, Jesse Gelsinger, died.
After a series of extensive laboratory tests and a thorough autopsy, Dr. James
Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the university, said
his team was still trying to determine what caused Mr. Gelsinger's immune system
to react so violently against the weakened cold virus, adenovirus, which served
as the "vector" that was to carry an infusion of healthy genes to his liver.

    "The vector provoked an immediate immune response, or inflammation, a
widespread inflammation that was out of control and eventually led to the
failure of his lungs and then the demise of his other organs," Dr. Wilson said.
"What we are trying to understand is, what is it from the vector that initiated
this inflammatory response? What is it?"

   Mr. Gelsinger is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result of
gene therapy, and his death has focused attention on the safety of the
nine-year-old field. Next week the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a panel
at the National Institutes of Health that reviews gene therapy research, will
hold a three-day meeting to examine the experiment that led to Mr. Gelsinger's
death, as well as the safety of the adenovirus vector. Dr. Wilson and his team
will report more extensively on their findings at that meeting; they have
submitted a 300-page report to the panel, a university spokeswoman said.

   One reason for all the attention is that Mr. Gelsinger was not sick before he
died. He suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a metabolic
disorder, but it was controlled through diet and drugs. The experiment in which
he participated was designed to test a treatment for babies with a fatal form of
his disorder.

   But when Mr. Gelsinger received the vector he suffered a chain reaction that,
scientists said, previous animal testing had not predicted: jaundice, a
blood-clotting disorder, kidney failure, lung failure and ultimately brain
death.

   In their statement, the scientists said a review of extensive animal studies
performed before the experiment "revealed no information that would have
predicted the events that led to Mr. Gelsinger's death."

   In one of those studies, three monkeys died after suffering the same
blood-clotting disorder that afflicted Mr. Gelsinger after the gene infusion.
But those animals received a different vector than Mr. Gelsinger; that vector
used a stronger cold virus, and was administered at a dose 20 times higher than
the one Mr. Gelsinger received. In addition, Dr. Wilson said, none of the
animals showed evidence of the lung dysfunction that ultimately killed Mr.
Gelsinger.

   The scientists were surprised by one finding, that Mr. Gelsinger showed a
"marked abnormality" in his bone marrow; results of an autopsy showed that the
marrow was completely lacking in cells that are responsible for the production
of red blood cells. But Dr. Wilson said the researchers did not know what to
make of that finding because it was unclear whether the abnormality existed
before the experiment or came about because of it.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1999


                             1160 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 2, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 1241 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS OFFER CHROMOSOME 22 SEQUENCE THE RESEARCHERS AROUND THE
GLOBE WHO WORKED ON THE PROJECT SAY IT WILL ADVANCE STUDY OF ALL CHROMOSOMES.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In a medical milestone, more than 200 scientists around the world yesterday
delivered what they called the first chapter of the Book of Genes.

   The chapter is the nearly complete genetic sequence of Chromosome 22, the
second smallest of the 23 chromosome pairs that carry the human genetic code.

   By March, the scientists expect to have a working draft of the entire book of
human chromosomes - a monumental feat that will herald a new era in medicine and
human society.

   "It will change the way we see ourselves as profoundly as did the momentous
books of the first two millennia, the great books of religion and the Origin of
the Species," said British biochemist Peter Little.

   In today's landmark issue of the British journal Nature, scientists from the
United States, England and Japan said they had determined the order of 33
million chemical units, known as base pairs, that make up most of the DNA of
Chromosome 22.

   Those units, the researchers reported, include at least 545 genes, many of
which play an important role in early fetal development and an array of human
ills, from cancers to mental retardation.

   Chromosome 22 is the first chromosome to be sequenced under the publicly
supported Human Genome Project, a $3 billion endeavor involving researchers in
the United States, England, Japan, France, Germany and China.

   "To see the entire sequence of a human chromosome for the first time is like
seeing an ocean liner emerge out of the fog when all you've ever seen before
were rowboats," said Francis Collins, director of the federal government's
National Human Genome Research Institute.

   In Philadelphia, the sequencing of Chromosome 22 had special meaning because
it was here, in the early 1990s, that a team of scientists led by Beverly
Emanuel at Children's Hospital pieced together the first rough map of Chromosome
22.

   That map, in turn, was sent to researchers at three sequencing centers - the
Sanger Center in Cambridge, England; Keiyo University in Tokyo; and the
University of Oklahoma in Norman - where it was filled in with the precise
genetic information that was announced yesterday.

   "It's very exciting to think that a human chromosome has been almost
completely sequenced - and that it's our chromosome," said Emanuel, chief of
human genetics and molecular biology at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   She said the sequencing of Chromosome 22 - figuring out the order of the four
chemical units of DNA known by the letters A,T,C,G - would provide an invaluable
tool to understand both health and disease.

   Just as students must rely on records of the past to write a term paper on
Philadelphia's history, Emanuel said, so, too, medical researchers need to know
a chromosome's sequence to figure out what proteins it governs and how those may
go awry.

   "Having the written document, we can now begin to digest it and understand
what is embedded in its code," said Emanuel, 58, a native Philadelphian and a
product of the city's public schools who has spent most of her professional
career working on Chromosome 22.

   Underscoring the importance of sequencing the first human chromosome, Nature
put a religious image on its cover: a rendition of Michelangelo's famous fresco
in the Sistine Chapel, showing the hand of God reaching out to touch the hand of
Adam and thereby beginning the life of humankind.

   While modern molecular biologists aren't creating human life, they are
uncovering the mystery of what makes life work. "Biology is entering a new
world," said Little, who teaches biochemistry at Imperial College in London.
"The challenge is now to translate the new biology into tangible benefits for
humanity."

   The long string of chemical letters identified in Chromosome 22 will have
little immediate impact because researchers still do not know the function of
most of the chromosome's genes.

   But as the roles of those genes are identified, enormous leaps of
understanding will follow. Each gene orders up the production of a protein. And
it is proteins that carry out all the body's functions, from breathing to
digesting food to reading the words on this page.

   Little, writing in a commentary accompanying the Nature paper, said that the
"biological jewel" in Chromosome 22 may turn out to be a gene involved in
schizophrenia. Scientists have strong evidence that the gene lies on 22, but
they have yet to find it.

   Despite the gaps in scientific understanding, the Genome Project is already
fueling important medical advances. Among them:

   New diagnostic tests allowing early detection of genetic disorders;

   The creation of DNA "chips" - glass slides imprinted with every known human
gene - that could rapidly identify genetic mutations leading to certain types of
cancer and allow doctors to prescribe the most effective treatments;

   Medicines that would be tailor-made for each individual, depending on his or
her particular genetic makeup.

   The ultimate use of the genome would be to cure disease through the use of
gene therapy - replacing defective genes with correct genes through
bioengineering. So far, however, the approach has not been proven in human
trials, and the recent death of a patient in a program at the University of
Pennsylvania is likely to take the steam out of gene-therapy research.

   Besides safety concerns, the new world of genetic medicine opens up a host of
difficult social issues - concerns that genetic information will be used to
discriminate against people, that parents will attempt to create designer
babies, that doctors will turn into nothing more than engineers manipulating
genes rather than healers who alleviate human suffering.

   One chief concern of the scientists involved in the public Human Genome
Project is that private companies, which are racing to complete the genome
faster than the government-backed researchers, will lock up access to their
findings through proprietary patents and licenses.

   By its own rules, the Human Genome Project enters its sequences into publicly
accessible databases as soon as they are identified. The sequences for
Chromosome 22, for instance, can be found in the government's GenBank at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/seq

   The government's chief private competitor is the Celera Corp. of Rockville,
Md., headed by J. Craig Venter, a former government scientist. He is using a
different method to sequence the human genome - one that is much faster than the
government's but that leaves many more gaps in the DNA. Venter plans to make
some of his findings public but will withhold others for proprietary reasons.

   In his Nature commentary, Little made an impassioned plea for public and
privately financed genome programs to join forces. "It would be a terrible blow
for science and humanity if the human genome became a commercial property," he
said.

   CHROMOSOME 22 Some of the disorders that scientists have linked to defects on
Chromosome 22:

   * Certain types of schizophrenia.

   * Some forms of autism.

   * Some types of epilepsy.

   * Ewing's sarcoma (bone tumor).

   * A form of cataract.

   * Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (predisposes people to tumors).

   * Burkitt's lymphoma (childhood cancer of the lymph system).

   * "22q" deletion (the deletion of a specific portion of the chromosome that
has been associated with heart defects, immune problems, cleft palate, mental
retardation, and other symptoms sometimes known as DiGeorge syndrome and
Velocardiofacial syndrome).

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Beverly Emanuel and her Philadelphia team first roughed out the chromosome's
map.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1161 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 2, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1212 words

HEADLINE: PENN GENE THERAPY DESTROYED TEEN'S LUNGS NOTHING FORETOLD A FATAL
IMMUNE REACTION TO THE DRUG, INVESTIGATORS SAID. THE FINDING COULD SLOW SOME
RESEARCH.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   After spending 10 weeks intensively investigating the first known death from
a gene-therapy drug, researchers have concluded that the patient was killed by
an immune reaction that quickly destroyed his lungs.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania Institute for Human Gene
Therapy said there was no warning that the drug infused into the liver of Jesse
Gelsinger on Sept. 13 would cause harm.

   They said none of the animal studies done before the gene therapy study began
and none of the tests done on the 17 volunteers who preceded Gelsinger in the
trial predicted what happened. Also, they could find no evidence that a mistake
in making or delivering the gene drug or other misjudgment contributed to
Gelsinger's death.

   The finding is likely to shake the confidence of gene-therapy researchers
who, until now, had believed that the type of virus used to deliver the needed
gene was safe.

   The data strongly suggest that this type of drug - which consists of
adenoviruses engineered to deliver genes to patients' cells - should not be put
into the bloodstream or the liver the way it was done in this trial until more
is known, said James M. Wilson, director of the institute.

   Since the first experimental gene-therapy treatment in 1990, some 4,000
patients have received gene drugs in more than 350 trials for genetic defects,
cancer and heart disease. About one quarter of the patients were treated with
adenoviruses - the same virus that causes colds, but modified to carry the
needed gene but not cause a cold. Only a couple of the adenovirus trials,
however, infuse the virus into the bloodstream or liver.

   Terrence R. Flotte of the University of Florida in Gainesville said he didn't
think the data should have an effect on research being done with other kinds of
viruses or methods to deliver genes to cells.

   "This should make people more cautious in using adenoviruses," he said, "but
not the other vectors." Flotte is a pioneer in the use of adeno-associated virus
(AAV), which he is testing in patients with the lung disease cystic fibrosis.

   The institute on Monday sent its 337-page report to the federal Office of
Recombinant DNA Activities (ORDA), which will discuss the findings at its
quarterly meeting next week.

   Wilson said he was particularly concerned that none of the institute's
studies in mice, monkeys or baboons indicated that there would be an immune
reaction such as the one that killed the 18-year-old youth, four days after
receiving the adenovirus.

   The animal studies suggested that liver inflammation and abnormal blood
clotting would be the most likely problems - at doses 50 times greater than
Gelsinger got. A member of the federal oversight committee that approved the
trial had worried this would be a problem.

   Instead, Gelsinger's lungs shut down, a response which according to Wilson
had never been seen in animal studies.

   "It's scary," Wilson said, "having no reliable animal models."

   The finding is also likely to rekindle a debate about using patients in
gene-therapy trials who are not close to death. The trial involving Gelsinger
was the first in the country to use relatively healthy people.

   Gelsinger had a relatively mild form of ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency. His liver lacked enough genes to make an enzyme needed to clear his
body of ammonia, a natural byproduct of food metabolism.

   Most babies born with the disease die within a few days of getting protein.
But the government would not approve testing in babies. Ethicists, including
Arthur Caplan at Penn, had objected on the grounds that babies can't give
consent and parents of dying babies might feel coerced.

   Gelsinger had suffered three comas, but his disease was under control with a
regime involving 32 pills a day and a restricted diet.

   Because the animal studies can't be depended upon to reveal the potential
benefits or dangers of a given gene drug, Wilson said that it would now likely
take longer to develop usable gene drugs as wary scientists spend more time in
the laboratory trying to anticipate problems.

   Though none of the 350 gene-therapy trials has resulted in a successful
treatment, none has resulted in death or serious side effects until now, or at
least that's what scientists believe.

   They can't be sure because adverse events are not always made public. They
must be reported to the Food and Drug Administration, but the FDA is prohibited
by law from revealing the data, which is considered proprietary information.

   This means that researchers who might be working with similar drugs don't get
information that could be used to protect their patients.

   ORDA, which oversees gene-therapy projects for the National Institutes of
Health, does release this information. However, only researchers receiving
federal funds are required to report adverse effects to the agency.

   After Penn reported Gelsinger's death, ORDA asked the 70 or so investigators
doing human trials with adenoviruses to report any side effects.

   Practically all have responded, said ORDA director Amy Patterson, and the
data are being reviewed by a panel of experts. The data will be used by the
agency and the FDA to determine what changes should be made in the way
gene-therapy research is done.

   Since Gelsinger's death, the media have published stories about several
deaths and side effects involving gene-therapy patients that were not previously
made public, though they may have been reported to the FDA.

   The researchers in those trials insisted that the events were not related to
the gene therapy and didn't have to be immediately reported to regulatory
agencies.

   Patterson said a lot of deaths have occurred with gene trials, but most if
not all of the deaths probably were due to the underlying disease.

   Because of news about deaths and side effects going unreported, part of
ORDA's three-day meeting is expected to focus on this question of secrecy in
gene-therapy research.

   Following Gelsinger's death, the Washington Post raised questions about
whether Wilson's ties to Genova, a Sharon Hill company he founded, might have
encouraged him to push too quickly ahead with the trial.

   The Post also said that Wilson moved ahead with the trial even though
experimental animals had died in toxicity studies.

   Wilson said that in drug-toxicity trials, the death of the animal is how
researchers determine the maximum safe dose.

   Wilson insists that financial motives did not play a role in any of his
decisions involving the OTC trial. He said plans for the trial were drawn up 14
months before Genova was formed in July 1995. The drug had been found to control
the disease in mice specially bred with OTC.

   Wilson said he was an unpaid consultant to Genova and his financial stake is
his non-voting stock in the company. Patents to gene drugs developed in his
laboratory would be held by the University of Pennsylvania, which would license
rights to Genova, sharing proceeds with Wilson's department at Penn and with
researchers other than Wilson.

   The company provides Wilson's lab within the Institute of Human Gene Therapy
with $4.7 million a year in research money - about 20 percent of the lab's total
budget. Genova has yet to make a product or a profit, Wilson said.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1162 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 2, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2526 words

HEADLINE: HOW A WORRIED MEDICAL TEAM PINPOINTED WHAT WENT WRONG

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   As 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger lay dying in a nearby intensive-care unit, 10
grim-faced scientists sat around a conference table in the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, planning his autopsy.

   No patient, to their knowledge, had ever died of gene therapy, even though
some 4,000 people had participated in more than 350 trials.

   Gelsinger had ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a rare genetic
liver ailment. But he had arrived at Penn from Tucson, Ariz., in otherwise good
health on his 18th birthday - the minimum age to volunteer for the trial.

   On Sept. 13, he received a two-hour infusion of a gene-therapy drug. Within
two days, his lungs were shutting down. Now, four days later, he was about to
die, and the researchers knew it was probably because of something they had
done.

   Sitting at the table, James M. Wilson, the driving, 44-year-old director of
the institute, stressed how important it was that they find out what went wrong.

   Not only did Gelsinger's family deserve to know why he had died, it was
essential for the entire field of gene therapy.

   If their investigation showed that a lab mistake or misjudgment had killed
him, it would have little impact on the emerging field that held out so much
promise for halting or even curing genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis and
hemophilia and major killers such as heart disease and cancer.

   But if it turned out to be something basic - that giving high doses of gene
drugs can cause death - then the impact could be profound.

   * The scientists left the meeting bewildered by the impending death, some
wondering whether the critics had been right in saying that a trial such as this
shouldn't have been attempted.

   But nothing had predicted the cascade of crises that on Sept. 17 killed
Gelsinger - not the animal studies; not published reports from other
researchers; not the FDA, which had approved the trial; not the critics who had
raised a plethora of other concerns.

   Some members of the federal gene oversight group that had approved the trial
had worried that the gene drug, inserted with a catheter into the liver's
artery, would damage the liver. They worried that the gene drug could aggravate
the patient's underlying genetic disease.

   Wilson and the principal investigator, Mark Batshaw, chairman of the
pediatrics department at George Washington University, realized that they were
pushing the envelope with this study.

   Never before had a gene drug been infused through the bloodstream and never
before had the test subjects been relatively healthy. In all other trials, the
drug was injected directly into the tissue of organs, limiting its spread, and
the test subjects were in the final stages of incurable, terminal illnesses.

   The researchers thought they had done everything possible to protect
Gelsinger and the other volunteers from unreasonable risk in the trial, designed
to determine the maximum safe dose.

   The first patients got minuscule amounts of the drug, with levels gradually
increasing. None of the 17 patients had bad reactions, at least none that the
doctors could detect.

   The dose Gelsinger had gotten - the highest levels for the trial - was
one-fiftieth the dose that killed monkeys and baboons. One test subject,
Jennifer Christenson, an 18-year-old Pittsburgh college student treated just
before Gelsinger, had gotten the same dose, with no apparent adverse reactions.

   The first and only serious side effect in the trial was Gelsinger's death.

   The drug being tested was made from inactivated cold viruses - adenoviruses -
fitted out with the gene that the victims of OTC lack. The genes make the enzyme
needed to get rid of ammonia, a natural byproduct of metabolizing food. The
drugs are handmade for the trials in a three-month process that involves many
intricate steps, providing many opportunities for mistakes.

   The simplest explanation for Gelsinger's death would be a mistake in making
or administering the drug.

   Researchers checked the two production lots given to Christenson and
Gelsinger. They could find no mistakes. They checked a master seed stock, from
which the drugs for all of the patients were derived. Everything checked out.

   They verified that Gelsinger got the right dose. They did DNA analysis and
proved that the right gene was in the adenovirus making the right enzyme. And on
the chance that some unknown thing had turned the drug into a poison, samples of
the drug, in the same or greater doses that Gelsinger had gotten, were injected
into mice and monkeys. The animals did fine.

   * One of the big fears of the doctors caring for Gelsinger was that they had
missed something in the first patients, a warning sign that indicated they were
getting into trouble and should stop the trial before someone was hurt.

   The patient care during the trial was directed by Steven Raper,
co-investigator in the study, and Batshaw, a world authority on OTC.

   Raper and Batshaw reviewed the medical records of the 18 patients, who had
been grouped into six cohorts of three or four patients, each cohort getting
three times more of the drug than the one before it. They looked at thousands of
lab studies and statistics collected during the 29-month-long trial.

   Some patients developed mild anemia, but they thought this was because so
many blood samples were being taken to detect adverse events.

   Others appeared to be developing blood-clotting problems - the primary cause
of death in animal studies - but the test results quickly reverted to normal
with no apparent ill effects.

   The only hint of danger came with the patients in the fourth cohort, who
received one tenth as much drug as Gelsinger got. Tests showed that liver cells
were dying, raising the fearful possibility of hepatitis, but these problems
also cleared up after a few days.

   The results of the autopsy only added to the mystery. They showed that all of
Gelsinger's organs were severely damaged, but not from the gene drug. Each organ
had suffered the type of damage that comes from not enough oxygen.

   Gelsinger's lungs had been destroyed. Instead of being pink and fluffy, they
were purple and heavy with red and white blood cells.

   They were terribly inflamed. For unknown reasons, Gelsinger's immune system
had attacked his lungs.

   On Oct. 15, almost one month after Gelsinger's death, the first significant
clue came in from the laboratory of Narendra Chirmule, the institute's
immunologist.

   Trying to learn more about lung disease, he had turned to Clifford
Deutschman, a Penn pulmonary expert, who told them about adult respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS), a quickly fatal lung disease, marked by an increase in
Interleuken-6 (IL-6).

   IL-6 is a cytokine, an intracellular messenger produced in response to
infection or other injuries. The IL-6 prompts inflammation in the lungs, which
are apparently more sensitive to this cytokine than other organs.

   Checking the dwindling supply of blood samples repeatedly taken from the 18
patients, Chirmule found that Gelsinger's IL-6 level was almost five times
higher than the patients in the other cohorts.

   It started rising remarkably fast, while the gene drug was being infused into
his liver, reaching a peak 6 1/2 hours later. Two days later, ARDS was
destroying his lungs.

   The doctors hadn't been measuring IL-6 during the trial. Animal studies
suggested that the liver was the most likely organ to become inflamed, and they
were using liver-function tests to pick this up. Liver inflammation caused by
the drug was a major concern of those who approved the trial.

   None of the tests they did with mice, rhesus monkeys and baboons suggested
that the adenovirus, delivered to the liver, would affect IL-6 levels or damage
the lungs.

   Ronald Crystal, a researcher at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, had
reported in 1994 that one cystic fibrosis patient developed lung problems after
adenoviruses were injected directly into her lungs. She didn't die.

   Wilson was aware of this report but didn't think it was applicable to his
trial, involving the liver.

   If they had been monitoring IL-6, they would have seen that Jennifer
Christenson, who got the same dose of drug, also had a spike in her IL-6.
Chirmule's review of the blood samples revealed that Christenson's IL-6 quickly
dropped after reaching a peak. Gelsinger's never came down.

   Wilson said later that had he known, he would have stopped the trial to find
out why Christenson's IL-6 climbed so much. Gelsinger never would have been
treated.

   Chirmule found another type of cytokine that was very high in Gelsinger and
Christenson - IL-10. This cytokine is supposed to shut off production of IL-6
when enough has been made. It did what it was supposed to do in the woman, but
had no effect on Gelsinger's IL-6 even though he was making more IL-10 than
Christenson.

   This suggested that Gelsinger's body was doing its best to control the IL-6,
but something was stopping it from working.

   * On Nov. 1, six weeks after Gelsinger's death, Wilson, Batshaw, Raper and
others involved in the trial went to FDA headquarters in Rockville, Md., to
deliver a preliminary report.

   They had already sent to the FDA, by special messenger, 15 volumes of data
collected during the investigation.

   Holding to a secrecy policy, the FDA refused to confirm that the meeting took
place, let alone say what happened there. Wilson said they met with about 30 FDA
officials, including most of the 20 clinical reviewers who monitor all human
gene trials in the country.

   They were particularly interested in the IL-6 findings and talked about them
extensively.

   What they didn't talk about were reports of serious adverse effects that the
FDA had received from two other adenovirus studies, including a liver cancer
trial by the Schering-Plough Corp. Federal law forbids the FDA from sharing
proprietary information.

   Wilson said he had heard through the grapevine that some patients in the
Schering-Plough trial had suffered drops in blood pressure during infusion, but
no other side effects that could be seen as warnings for his OTC trial.

   None of the OTC patients had a blood-pressure drop.

   Wilson, who had seen none of the adverse-reaction reports sent by other
researchers to the FDA, said he didn't know whether the information would have
spared Gelsinger.

   Another piece of the puzzle was fitted in by Phil Leopold, a researcher at
Cornell Medical Center, who studies how viruses infect cells.

   His colleague, Crystal, who is using gene therapy in heart disease, had
speculated two years earlier that adenoviruses had an affinity for a component
of the immune system called macrophages. But at the time this wasn't seen as a
problem, and he never followed it up.

   Since macrophages are a primary source of IL-6 and IL-10, this speculation
became a hot lead for the Gelsinger investigation. Leopold suggested tagging the
adenoviruses with fluorescent dye, injecting them into mice, and watching to see
if they lit up the macrophages.

   If the virus did latch on to the macrophages, the scientists should see
splotches of fluorescence on the liver where macrophages were concentrated,
rather than throughout the organ.

   It was just getting dark on Nov. 10 when Timothy Baradet, who runs the
cell-imaging lab in Wilson's laboratory, walked into his office with colored
photographs of the mice livers.

   The organs were splotched with fluorescence.

   * Though a lot of questions remained, Wilson now could partially explain
Gelsinger's death.

   Within 90 minutes of the start of infusion, the macrophages in Gelsinger's
body began churning out IL-6. And the lungs became so inflamed that they shut
down.

   Because the reaction happened so fast, Wilson thinks that something in the
adenovirus' coat activates the macrophages. And because it happened in both
Christenson and Gelsinger, he thinks it's because of the high dose of drug and
not something specific to Gelsinger.

   But Gelsinger might have had a genetic defect that prevented him from
shutting down the massive build-up of IL-6.

   Wilson said the investigation of Gelsinger's death leads to several
conclusions.

   Animal models are not totally reliable in predicting dangerous events, which
can happen suddenly in human trials, even when drug doses are slowly increased,
he said. Scientists will have to spend more time in the laboratory trying to
anticipate problems before moving on to human trials. This could delay the
development of gene drugs.

   Wilson said adenoviruses should not be used in the liver or delivered through
the bloodstream.

   But this will affect only a few trials. Most gene drugs are injected directly
into tissue, and Wilson doesn't think this is risky.

   * Paul Gelsinger was standing outside his low-lying house next to the dirt
bike he bought his son just before he died. It was Nov. 21, and Wilson arrived
to tell him how his son had died.

   This was the first time the two men met, though they had often spoken on the
phone. Wilson had seen his son only once. He leaves the care of test subjects to
clinicians such as Batshaw and Raper so that emotional factors won't bias his
thinking. He didn't have to worry about that now.

   On the plane down to Tucson, Wilson had pored over the data he had brought,
making notes on a yellow legal pad, trying to map out the best way to present it
to Gelsinger.

   But Gelsinger had other things on his mind when Wilson arrived and wouldn't
let Wilson talk. A reporter had called him about the Schering-Plough side
effects that had been reported to the FDA well before his son's treatment, but
had been kept under wraps as the law required.

   "He didn't have to die," Gelsinger said. "My kid is dead so they could make
billions more. Love of money is what killed my kid. You guys would have stopped
if you knew about what happened."

   Wilson let Gelsinger talk.

   The regulations must be changed, Gelsinger said, so these private companies
publicly reveal adverse side effects.

   It wasn't until dark that Gelsinger was ready to listen to Wilson.

   He told the father how the modified virus had started a chain of events that
destroyed his son's lungs. He told him about the IL-6 and IL-10 and the
macrophages.

   The big mystery, Wilson said, is why this happened to his son and no one
else.

   "You guys are baffled, aren't you?" Gelsinger said.

   Because some newspapers had published stories implying that Wilson had
pressed ahead with the OTC trial for personal financial gain, Wilson told
Gelsinger that like many academic researchers, he had started a small
pharmaceutical company, Genova. He said he had non-voting stock and was an
unpaid consultant, working for the company one day a week.

   Gelsinger asked Wilson if he would have made money had the OTC experiment
been successful. Wilson said it takes years for a company to develop a product,
and Genova has yet to develop one.

   "What you guys were doing and what Jesse was doing was pure," Gelsinger said.
He got quiet. His thoughts returned to the side effects that were never reported
publicly.

   "This shouldn't have happened. This needs to be fixed."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
James M. Wilson, director of the Penn institute, said more must be known before
infusing the drug into the liver. (DAVID SANDERS, For The Inquirer)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1163 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   DECEMBER 2, 1999, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4; HEALTH REPORT

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: New Theory on Cause Of Gene-Therapy Death

BODY:
Washington -- Ten weeks after an 18-year-old Arizona man died in a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, scientists there have determined
that the treatment he received -- an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a
weakened cold virus -- triggered "an unusual and deadly immune system response
that led to multiple organ failure" and was directly responsible for his death.

    But in interviews and a statement made public yesterday, the researchers
said they still did not understand precisely why the patient, Jesse Gelsinger,
died.

    Gelsinger is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result of
gene therapy, and his death has focused attention on the safety of the
9-year-old field.




LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1999


                             1164 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 2, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy patient died of the procedure, scientists determine

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   A young man who died while undergoing a gene-therapy experiment
was killed by the procedure, raising concerns that human experiments
are moving ahead too aggressively.

   Jesse Gelsinger's death was the first from a gene-therapy trial
to be publicly reported.

   Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died Sept. 17 from a virus used to deliver
genes into his bloodstream during an experiment at the University
of Pennsylvania, scientists said Wednesday.


   "The (virus) did indeed initiate a sequence of events that led
to the patient's death," says James Wilson, head of the research
team treating Gelsinger.

   The death has prompted added scrutiny of gene therapy, a rapidly
evolving area of medical research in which healthy genes are delivered
to the body to replace or restore genes that are absent or malfunctioning,
causing disease.

   Critics say the human experiments are moving forward too fast
and without enough attention to problems that have shown up in
animal studies.

   The National Institutes of Health called for an extensive review
of the circumstances surrounding the death and asked other gene-therapy
researchers involved in dozens of other studies to review their
own data for potential problems.

   The primary vehicles for delivering genes into the cells of the
body are cold viruses that have had their disease-causing portions
deleted but their cell-seizing machinery left intact.

   Gelsinger was being treated for a rare metabolic disorder called
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTC). Wilson says that
genes were delivered directly into the liver using a common cold
virus called an adenovirus.

   Gelsinger first experienced an immune response and fever, followed
by liver damage and extensive blood clotting. He appeared to improve,
then underwent sudden respiratory distress, which killed him.

   Immune reactions and blood clotting had been observed before in
primate studies, but respiratory distress had not been seen before,
Wilson says. Other patients received similar doses of the virus
but had not experienced such severe reactions, he says.

   Wilson says Gelsinger's blood marrow showed abnormalities that
might have existed before the study. He does not know whether
those abnormalities led to Gelsinger's reaction.

LOAD-DATE: December 02, 1999


                             1165 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 2, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 771 words

HEADLINE: Researchers Claim No Error in Gene Therapy Death

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   A teenager's death during a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania was caused by the treatment but not by any errors by the research
team, according to the preliminary findings of a two-month internal
investigation.

   The death is the first attributed to gene therapy, a nine-year-old field of
research that is trying to find a way to use genes to overcome inherited
diseases, cancer and other problems.

   The findings were disclosed in a brief summary report released yesterday by
the researchers who conducted the experiment. The researchers declined to
provide the supporting documentation until next week, when they make a public
presentation before a federal oversight board looking into the death.

   The experiment had been controversial even before the death of Jesse
Gelsinger, an 18-year-old Tucson resident, because it tested unusually large
doses of a gene-altered virus on relatively healthy volunteers with a rare liver
disorder.

   "The findings suggest that the experimental drug used in the trial--a
modified cold virus, or vector, incorporating a potentially corrective gene for
Mr. Gelsinger's genetic disease--initiated an unusual and deadly immune-system
response that led to multiple organ failure and death," the report states.

   However, the researchers say they still don't know why the virus, known as an
adenovirus, triggered a lethal reaction in Gelsinger.

   Gelsinger received a significantly larger dose of vector than all but one of
the other participants. But there were no early warnings of trouble in the other
volunteer who received the high dose or in 16 earlier volunteers who received
smaller doses, the report states.

   The report acknowledges that some participants suffered temporary liver
damage but says a review of patient data and of animal studies performed before
the clinical trial "revealed no information that would have predicted the events
that led to Mr. Gelsinger's death."

   "There was no evidence of human error in his clinical management," the report
says.

   The Washington Post reported last week that monkeys given a high dose of a
genetically engineered virus by the Penn team a few years ago had died in a
manner similar to Gelsinger. Penn researchers subsequently developed what they
considered to be a safer version of the virus for the experiment.

   However, some scientists, citing a growing body of evidence that adenovirus
in any form causes serious side effects, have questioned the wisdom of using it
to treat genetic diseases. The risk might be warranted if the participants were
dying and had exhausted conventional treatments, they said. But the Penn team
chose to experiment on adults with a mild form of a liver disorder--ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency--who either suffered no symptoms or had them under
control with drugs and diet.

   The report states that the researchers were mindful of the potential side
effects and "carefully monitored all patients for liver inflammation and/or
injury using liver-function tests and liver biopsies. While there was evidence
of liver inflammation in some patients, all such episodes proved transitory in
nature," and their livers returned to normal within two weeks.

   Gelsinger died within four days of receiving the infusion on Sept. 13. His
decline began within a day, as he developed a systemic blood clotting disorder
followed by respiratory distress and then liver and kidney failure on Sept. 17.

   In the investigation that ensued, Penn researchers checked the vector for
abnormalities but found none, according to their summary. All laboratory data
that they reviewed pointed to an unusually severe reaction to the genetically
altered virus, the report says.

   "In the context of this unexpected tragedy, the researchers--Dr. James
Wilson, Dr. Steve Raper, and Dr. Mark Batshaw--remain committed to fully
evaluating all potential leads," the report states. "The purpose of these
efforts is to understand the precise nature of Mr. Gelsinger's unfortunate
death, and to share the knowledge gained with the research community and the
public in order to prevent another such occurrence."

   Gelsinger's death prompted the Office of Biotechnology Activities at the
National Institutes of Health to call on all researchers using adenoviruses to
report any ill effects that might shed light on his death or prevent future
injuries.

   The results of that solicitation and of the Penn investigation will be
presented next week in Bethesda to a special NIH advisory committee that
monitors gene therapy experimentation.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died during a gene therapy experiment.

LOAD-DATE: December 06, 1999


                             1166 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Medical Device Research Mixes With Profit Motive
In the world of medical devices, the lines between inventors, researchers,
promoters and investors are often nonexistent. Rare is the truly disinterested
researcher, with no stake in the outcome of a study. It is a phenomenon found in
every medical treatment using devices, from laser surgery to gene therapy.

   Scientists on the front line of such medical research, whose work can help
determine treatment options for countless Americans, often can earn vast wealth
so long as their results are positive. It is an immense financial pressure that
would be unacceptable in any other field of medical research.  Page A1.


   Editor Named at George Magazine
Undaunted by the prospect and challenges of stepping into a role established by
John F. Kennedy Jr., Frank Lalli, left, a former managing editor of Money
magazine, has agreed to take over as editor in chief of George magazine. Jack W.
Kliger, the chief executive of Hachette-Filipacchi Magazines, said he waited
several months to hire an editor because he wanted to do so only after Hachette
had bought out the Kennedy family's 50 percent stake in the magazine, which the
company did in October.  C2.

Some Airlines Halt 3% Fare Increase
A 3 percent increase in air fares last week was quietly rolled back when
American Airlines, Continental Airlines and United Airlines threw in the towel
over the last couple of days. But analysts say that sooner or later, the
airlines will try to raise fares again.  C2.

Stocks Fall as Bond Yields Jump
Worries that the economy is showing few signs of slowing swept through the bond
market, pushing long-term interest rates sharply higher, with the yield on the
30-year issue climbing to 6.30 percent from 6.23 percent. Stock prices fell. The
Dow Jones industrial average fell 40.99 points, to 10,947.92. The Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index slid 8.79 points, to 1,407.83. The Nasdaq composite index
dropped 26.44 points, to 3,421.37.  C14.

Demonstrations at W.T.O. Meeting
A week of trade talks by the World Trade Organization in Seattle began with
disruptions that included a bomb scare, the smashing of a window during protests
at a McDonald's restaurant, and a takeover of a vacant three-story building by a
group of self-described anarchists. Over all, though, the protests against the
trade meeting were peaceful.  A14.

Mannesmann Begins Its Defense
Fighting the largest hostile-takeover attempt ever made, Klaus Esser, chief
executive of Mannesmann of Germany, began a defense against Vodafone AirTouch,
arguing that the $127.7 billion bid was too low.  C18.

Oil Transporter Warns of Losses
Plains All American Pipeline, a partnership that transports and sells oil in the
South and West, said that unauthorized crude oil trading by an employee was
expected to cause $160 million in losses and was forcing the company to
renegotiate credit agreements. The partnership said that its 1999 operating
earnings would be lower and that past profits might have to be restated. Units
of the partnership fell $9.125, or 47 percent, to $10.375.  C2.

Board Approves Unions at Hospitals
In a decision that could lead to improved working conditions for overworked
hospital interns and residents, the National Labor Relations Board ruled that
interns and residents at privately owned hospitals have the right to form unions
under federal law.  A16.

Existing Home Sales Decline 6.6%
Sales of existing homes fell 6.6 percent in October to their lowest level in
almost two years, an industry survey showed, signaling that one of the forces
behind the near-record United States expansion has started to cool.  C14.

President Clinton Signs Budget
Nearly two months after the start of the government's fiscal year, President
Clinton signed the last piece of the federal budget into law, saying the
agreement that he worked out with the Republican-led Congress had been worth the
weeks of negotiations.  A20.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials -- 10,947.92, down 40.99
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 6.30%, up 0.07
The euro -- $1.0095, down 0.0061
The dollar -- 102.35 yen, up 0.71

Graph tracks the share price of Plains All American Pipeline, since last Monday.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1999


                             1167 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 4702 words

HEADLINE: HIDDEN INTEREST --A special report.;
When Physicians Double as Entrepreneurs

BYLINE: By KURT EICHENWALD and GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Thousands of heart specialists watched on closed-circuit television monitors
at the Washington Convention Center as a tiny device was implanted in a
patient's coronary artery. The doctors heard the voice of Dr. Martin Leon, a
prominent cardiologist who was describing the operation taking place in a
hospital many miles away.

   "This is the Paragon stent," Dr. Leon said, as the names of the device and
its manufacturer scrolled across the screen. "It's a very nice stent."

    Dr. Leon, who conducted research on the experimental device,
enthusiastically described its soft feel, its flexibility and its similarity to
a top-selling stent. The remarks seemed the perfect endorsement from an
objective scientist.

   But Dr. Leon was anything but a disinterested observer. What he did not tell
the assembled doctors on that day in the fall of 1997 was that he was an
investor in the company that manufactured the stent, a tiny wire cage that can
hold blocked arteries open. And after a merger of the company announced just
that week, he would be among a group of about 100 investors who stood to share
in as much as $75 million in stock -- provided that the company hit certain
business goals, including sales targets for the stent he had so eagerly
recommended.

   Dr. Leon is not the only one to wear many hats in the world of medical
devices. There, inventors are researchers. Researchers are promoters. Promoters
are investors. And, finishing the circle, investors are inventors. Rare is the
truly disinterested researcher, with no stake in the outcome of a study. It is a
phenomenon found in every medical treatment using devices, from laser surgery to
gene therapy.

   In the end, scientists on the front line of such medical research, whose work
can help determine treatment options for countless Americans, often can earn
vast wealth so long as their results are positive. It is an immense financial
pressure that would be unacceptable in most any other field of medical research.

   To better understand the influence of these conflicts, The New York Times
examined interventional cardiology, a specialty where some of the most rapid
development of devices has occurred.

   The field has emerged over the last 20 years, using tiny devices to remove
the coronary vessel obstructions that can lead to chest pain. Some 12 million
Americans now suffer from coronary disease -- the nation's top killer.

   To profit from this huge market, companies are scurrying to set up
professional and financial relationships with cardiologists who invent and
promote devices.

   "If you are an interventional cardiologist and you are working hand in glove
with the companies and you might have a financial interest, what else is new?"
said Dr. David Hillis, a cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center. "If you have no conflict of interest, then you would stand out
like a sore thumb."

   But the examination by The Times found that those financial ties have
transformed the traditional system of objective medical research and review.
Now, the system used to determine which device is best for heart patients can be
influenced as much by personal financial interests as by scientific data.

   This troubles some doctors. "I treat a disease that's going to kill half of
all people in America," said Dr. Steven Nissen, a cardiologist at the Cleveland
Clinic. "How I treat that disease ought not to be decided by who's lining
someone else's pocket."

   Other cardiologists were less concerned and said they feared changing the
system to eradicate conflicts would slow the progress of a field that has been a
miracle, providing simple procedures that alleviate often crippling pain.

   "I just don't know of any other option," said Dr. Paul S. Teirstein, director
of interventional cardiology at the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation in La
Jolla, Calif. "If you want to ban us from the research, that would crimp
development. We supply a lot of the creativity and push behind these projects."

   But even Dr. Leon expressed regret that what he described as inattentiveness
to potential conflicts would sully the reputation of his medical specialty.
Often, he said, doctors are unaware of their own financial incentives -- for
example, he said he had no idea he was a beneficiary of a sales incentive for
the Paragon stent, and said that he later did not hesitate to present
disappointing data on the device at a medical meeting.

   "We tend to do well on the big things -- taking care of patients," Dr. Leon
said after being presented with findings from the examination by The Times. "We
do less well on the fine details, and the fine details are becoming important
components as to how we behave. It's important to rededicate ourselves and
perhaps redefine what the standards should be."

   At bottom, some cardiologists fear that the influence of potential riches has
distorted medicine's search for truth.

   "The science has been lost in the rush for money," Dr. Nissen of the
Cleveland Clinic said. "We've lost our way. We've terribly, terribly lost our
way."

The Problem
Conflict of Interest? According to Whom?

   Dr. David Brown could scarcely control his anticipation when the business
plan finally arrived from the company developing his new medical device. But
when he flipped through the document on that day in 1997, he was aghast.

   There, on the 10th page, was a list of shareholders in the company, including
partners Dr. Brown had known nothing about. But he certainly knew their names.
They included Dr. Leon, who runs one of the world's most prestigious educational
meetings for interventional cardiologists, and Dr. Teirstein, whose West Coast
meeting is a close competitor in influence. The two men together owned more than
five times the shares allocated to Dr. Brown, the interventional cardiologist
who had invented and patented the device, a probe designed to detect a condition
that leads to heart attacks.

   What would the prominent doctors be doing for their shares? According to the
plan, they would conduct the critical clinical trials on patients, despite
owning stakes in the company, called Medivas/Intravas. On top of that, the
documents said, they would promote the device at the medical meetings they
controlled.

   Through the two men, the plan says, the company "has an ideal forum to
provide visibility for the projects to potential strategic partners." Troubled
by the ethics of the arrangement, Dr. Brown, then at the University of
California at San Diego, turned it down.

   Dr. Brown had just received a crash course in the workings of the
interventional cardiology business. With billions of dollars pouring into the
field, companies are finding ways to use prominent doctors to promote and market
their products.

   In interviews, Dr. Leon and Dr. Teirstein said that they had no idea of the
role the business plan said they were supposed to play and that they would not
preferentially feature one company over another at their meetings.

   Kenneth W. Carpenter, president and chief executive of Medivas, said the
business plan, which he said was confidential, was never formally approved by
the company.

   To deal with conflicts, interventional cardiologists have adopted a loose
policy of voluntary disclosure. Doctors who write for medical journals or make
presentations at educational forums are expected to disclose to their colleagues
every financial conflict that might influence their judgment.

   But such disclosures often are haphazard and incomplete. For example, neither
Dr. Leon nor Dr. Teirstein revealed his stake in Medivas in disclosure
statements that are a routine part of medical meetings. Many speakers, writers
and investigators failed to disclose their patents, investments and other
corporate conflicts.

   Dr. Teirstein said he did not mention his stake in Medivas because there was
no reason to -- the disclosure statements simply ask doctors to tell of
conflicts that are directly related to talks they are giving, and Medivas
products, a confidential list, were not the subject of his talks.

   Dr. Leon said that even when he explicitly asked doctors to disclose their
conflicts, many did not. "There were people who claimed no conflict of interest
who own companies," he said. Others, he said, do not even return the disclosure
forms they receive for his meeting.

   Experts said such poor disclosure was a prime example of the flaws in a
system that relies on individual conscience to counter possible scientific bias.
"Voluntary disclosure is not a very high standard," said Marc A. Rodwin, an
associate professor of law and public policy at the School of Public and
Environmental Affairs at Indiana University who has studied financial conflicts
in medicine.

   He added: "You can't have this up to the individual. The fact that you have a
conflict of interest means that you are not in a good position to judge these
kinds of issues, that your judgment is compromised. That is the defining part of
having a conflict."

   Financial conflicts emerge at every stage of the scientific process.

   For example, Dr. Maurice Buchbinder, then a doctor at the University of
California at San Diego, served as a principal investigator in studies in the
early 1990's examining the Rotablader, a tiny drill used to remove plaque from
arteries. But at the same time, Dr. Buchbinder held a stake worth millions of
dollars in Heart Technologies, the company that sold the device.

   The independence of his studies eventually came under attack. A 1993 Food and
Drug Administration audit of Dr. Buchbinder's research found significant
deficiencies, including failures to conduct proper follow-up or to appropriately
report problems experienced by patients. The university subsequently banned him
from performing other experiments on patients.

   Dr. Buchbinder, who continues to play a significant role in research as
director of interventional cardiology at Scripps Memorial Hospital in San Diego,
did not return telephone calls seeking comment.

   For other doctors, clinical trials can serve as a form of investment
research. For example, Dr. Richard A. Schatz, who directs research in
interventional cardiology at the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, is now
testing a new treatment, gene therapy, using a method developed by a small
company, Vascular Genetics.

   After treating six patients, Dr. Schatz said he was sure the treatment was
working. Now, he said, "I've invested in the company myself."

   Vascular Genetics was founded by Dr. Jeffrey Isner, an interventional
cardiologist at Saint Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston. Dr. Isner, who is
also a major shareholder in the company, directs the company's clinical trials.
He said his multiple roles did not pose a problem.

   "I'm not trying to dismiss this out of hand," Dr. Isner said. "But I'm not
going to be a wimp and roll over because someone is projecting a concern. I
understand what the arguments are, but, quite frankly, I don't agree with most
of them."

   Some investigators are also on the boards of companies that manufacture
devices they are testing. For example, Dr. Leon is a director of Angiosonics
Inc., a device company based in Research Triangle Park, N.C., while Dr.
Buchbinder is on the board of Radiance Medical Systems of Irvine, Calif.

   As directors, both men have a fiduciary obligation to shareholders. But as
clinical investigators, their role is to be neutral about the outcome of tests
on the companies' products. Those two responsibilities, experts said, cannot be
reconciled.

   Dr. Leon said he now thought he should never have served in dual roles, and
that if he was going to be on the board, he should not have been an
investigator. "In retrospect, that wasn't a good idea," he said.

   Other investigators with serious conflicts limit the amount of research they
will conduct. For example, Dr. Spencer King 3rd, director of interventional
cardiology at Emory University and past president of the American College of
Cardiology, conducted studies to determine the feasibility of a device he
invented called the Beta-Cath System. The device irradiates arteries to prevent
the return of coronary blockages pressed open by balloons.

   Dr. King had numerous conflicts. Besides being the inventor of the device, he
was a large shareholder in Novoste, the company that held the rights to the
product. In addition, he had a marketing deal with Novoste that could pay him as
much as $5 million if the device was ever approved for sale.

   Faced with those conflicts, Emory ruled that Dr. King could conduct the early
studies, but could play no role in large-scale trials that would be used by the
government to determine whether to approve Beta-Cath for sale. Still, even Dr.
King's limited role brought him potential benefits: On the day Novoste announced
the results of his study, the company's stock climbed as much as 55 percent.

   Dr. King acknowledged that conflicts in the field had to be handled
carefully. "It's obviously an issue," he said. For trials used to approve a
device, "you cannot have the people collecting and publishing the data being the
same people with the vested interest; this is a conflict that is real."

   The conflicts are not limited to investigators. Sometimes, the doctors with
conflicts are the same people who make presentations at important medical
meetings on the quality and importance of a device.

   For example, Dr. Mark Wholey of the Pittsburgh Vascular Institute was a
featured speaker in September of last year at a prominent medical meeting,
Transcatheter Cardiovascular Therapeutics, universally known by cardiologists as
the T.C.T. The program is the meeting organized by Dr. Leon.

   Dr. Wholey spoke enthusiastically about using stents to open blocked carotid
arteries in the neck, in the hope of preventing strokes.  But, he cautioned,
there was a danger: shards of debris from the procedure could lodge in the brain
and cause a stroke. The way to prevent that complication, he said, was to use a
high-technology filter.

   What he did not disclose -- in either his lecture or in the meeting's
disclosure form -- was that he had helped develop such a filter and was a
director of Angioguard, a Minnesota company preparing to market it. The company
was acquired last July by a division of Johnson & Johnson for an undisclosed
sum.

   Dr. Wholey said he saw no reason to disclose his relationship with
Angioguard, in part because many companies make similar filters. And after all,
he said, his talk was about carotid stenting -- not the filters that can make it
better.

   But some experts were dismayed by the standards in the field.

   "The conflicts are just overwhelming," said Dr. John Wasson, a professor of
medicine at Dartmouth Medical School, when told details of the findings by The
Times. "If you can't trust the opinion leaders, and the so-called experts, and
even worse, in some cases, the studies themselves, what happens to the
profession and what happens to the patients?"

The System
Industry Sees Need To Enlist Doctors

   Dr. Julio Palmaz felt sure that his new idea could alleviate chest pain for
millions of patients -- if only he could persuade somebody to believe him.

   It was the mid-1980's. Interventional cardiology had been developing for less
than a decade, using tiny balloons to squash blockages against artery walls. Dr.
Palmaz, a professor at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San
Antonio, took the idea one step further: he would use the balloon to insert a
tiny, expandable metal cage into the artery. Once the cage was opened, he hoped,
it would keep the vessel clear for far longer. But despite his best efforts, no
one was interested.

   "I worked really hard to get anyone to pay any attention," he said in a
recent interview. "If I had not been passionate about this idea, that idea would
have gone into the trash can."

   Dr. Palmaz said he finally found a financial backer -- an entrepreneur who
had built the Fudruckers restaurant chain -- and began his studies. With support
limited, he and his colleague, Dr. Richard Schatz, had little choice but to
conduct the trials themselves. The results were strong, and soon, the
Palmaz-Schatz stent was acquired by Johnson & Johnson. The inventors became
wealthy men and their story became an inspiration to other cardiologists eager
to sell their ideas to a suddenly attentive industry.

   It is in those beginnings -- where inspired inventors struggled to capture
the attention of companies and investors -- that the conflicts of today first
found root. No longer financially struggling, the industry has sprouted into a
multibillion-dollar business, with thousands of doctors joining the field. Yet
even though the reliance on researchers with conflicts is no longer dictated by
financial necessity, little has changed.

   In the early days, medical companies realized that to develop devices, they
needed close relationships with the interventional cardiologists -- the only
people with the knowledge and experience to come up with new products.

   "Our companies do not have on-staff physicians," said Larry Best, chief
financial officer of the Boston Scientific Corporation, one of the most
prominent device companies.  "We work with physicians in partnership to pioneer
new technology."

   Those collaborations began inauspiciously. In the early 1990's, many of the
companies were small and were still in the development stage. To pay for the
advisers they so desperately needed, the financially struggling companies
provided the doctors with stakes in their companies in place of cash.

   "It's their way of saying, 'You're spending time, you're involved in the
process, you have to show some compensation for your efforts,' " Dr. Leon said
of the equity grants. "I'm not defending it; I'm saying that is the reality."

   But, as the industry was transformed into a big business, fortunes rained on
corporate executives and interventional cardiologists alike.

   Stock options once worth pennies have brought doctors millions. The riches
helped attract an increasing number of doctors to the field. Where once few
cardiologists were available to conduct research, now dozens are begging for a
chance.

   Profit margins for the devices remained high. The price of stents has
remained an almost steady $1,500 for each of the tiny devices even as the number
being implanted, according to industry estimates, grew to almost one million
this year from 561,800 in 1997.

   "If there was ever a profitable market," said Kurt Kruger, an industry
analyst with Banc of America Securities, "it was selling little Bic pen springs
for $1,500."

   As the industry grew, the conflicts created by the relationships between the
cardiologists and industry quickly became important.

   In the world of drug development, companies rely on the types of large-scale
clinical trials that are intended to prevent researchers from knowing which
patients are being treated with a new therapy and which are not. That ensures
that any partiality by researchers is less likely to affect the data.

   But the studies for devices were far looser.  For years, to get a device
approved by the Food and Drug Administration, device makers simply had to
present data from a registry -- the experience of a group of patients whom
doctors, often the inventors of the devices, had treated.

   The temptation, medical experts said, was to enroll patients in the registry
only if they appeared likely to do especially well with the device, and to make
excuses to drop patients if the device was used on them but failed. With
registries, experts said, study results were more likely to come out positive,
no matter what the merits of a device.

   "Most of the clinical trials were just no good," said Dr. Jeffery Brinker, an
interventional cardiologist at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
who saw the data when he was a member of an advisory panel to the F.D.A. "They
were observational studies and they could easily be gamed by physicians,
especially if the doctors were using the device for competitive purposes."

   In time, the F.D.A. started requiring studies that were more scientific,
called randomized trials, which are intended to counter potential bias by
investigators. But by then many of the devices were already on the market.

   Even so, many studies remain small, and are often simply a registry of the
patients treated with one device by one group of doctors.

   New devices that are variations of old ones often do not require the
randomized trials, even in cases where no such trials were conducted on the
original technology. Trials comparing the devices with medical or surgical
treatments -- most of which would not be provided by the cardiologists
themselves -- are rare.

   "A lot of these are soapbox testimonials -- 'We've put this in 26 patients
and it works like a charm,' " said Dr. Eric Topol, an interventional
cardiologist at the Cleveland Clinic.

   He added that in 20 years there had been perhaps 10 rigorous clinical trials
performed with such devices -- a number that many cardiologists consider paltry.

   There is a strong reason for the companies to avoid stricter testing.

   "Once you start a big randomized trial, it requires rigor," said Dr. Sheldon
Goldberg, an interventional cardiologist at Cooper Health Systems in Camden,
N.J. "People don't want to do that now, because it is costly and it may turn out
that your product is not the greatest thing since sliced bread."

The Future
What Happened To Oversight?

   Ask any interventional cardiologist or device company about the future of the
field, and the answer is invariably the same: the business is headed from the
heart out to the rest of the body.

   The trend emerged as early as 1995, at the most important meeting for many
interventional cardiologists, the T.C.T. There, leaders in the field
enthusiastically told their colleagues that they could use stents to open
blockages in the legs, the abdomen and even the carotid artery.

   The reasoning sounded logical: The same process that clogs coronary arteries
also clogs blood vessels throughout the body. So if a stent could open a
coronary artery, why not use one to open an artery elsewhere?

   Many cardiologists could hardly wait to get started. But at least one doctor
in the audience watched the unfolding proceedings with a growing sense of
disbelief.

   Dr. Anne Roberts, now a professor of radiology at the University of
California at San Diego, who has worked with the F.D.A., understood one thing
that was not being highlighted by the speakers: There were no randomized trials
to determine whether these procedures were safe and effective. No one could say
with certainty whether the procedures would help or hurt people.

   "I thought that this was just incredibly terrible -- terrible to basically
promote this as something that everybody should be doing," Dr. Roberts said.
"Nobody was saying, 'We don't know if this works.' "

   But registries soon were under way, and stents, approved by the F.D.A. for
the coronary arteries and for arteries in the leg, could be pressed into use for
blood vessels elsewhere. Now Wall Street analysts say some of the biggest growth
in sales of devices for interventional cardiology will come from doctors using
them outside the heart.

   Many specialists who have traditionally treated these patients are outraged.
They say their new competitors are unqualified to do the work.

   Several interventional cardiologists said the criticism was borne of fear.
The other specialists, these cardiologists said, are afraid of losing business.

   But the critics -- including vascular surgeons; interventional radiologists;
neurologists, and nephrologists, who treat the kidney -- said that far more was
at stake. The cardiologists, they said, may know about vessels leading to the
heart but they are not trained to decide whether or when to treat blocked
vessels elsewhere.

   "We call them 'ologists," said Dr. Samuel R. Money, chief of vascular surgery
at the Ochsner Clinic in New Orleans. "One day they are cardiologists. One day
they are neurologists. Another day they are nephrologists."

   The result, Dr. Money and other critics said, is that patients whose
conditions would traditionally be left alone, without any treatment, are being
wheeled in for unnecessary balloon procedures and stenting.

   "They don't know enough about the lesions, and they often end up treating
lesions that shouldn't be treated," said Dr. Frank Veith, professor and chief of
vascular surgical services at Montefiore Medical Center and Albert Einstein
College of Medicine in the Bronx. "Their leaders are saying, 'If you don't do
this, you're crazy and you're missing an opportunity.' "

   It is hard to say conclusively whether this is truly a debate about patient
safety or a turf battle between newly competing specialties. That is because --
with the exception of treating blocked arteries in the leg -- no randomized
clinical trials have compared stenting with traditional treatments for blocked
vessels outside the heart, including the option of doing nothing.

   With little good data available -- at a time when many device companies are
already including this new market in their sales projections and business plans
-- choices are being made for treatments based on little more than anecdote and
enthusiasm.

   Take carotid stenting. Surgeons had already developed an effective operation
to open the carotid artery leading to the brain and to clear it out. They had
shown in a large clinical trial that the operation could prevent strokes with
low complication rates. When cardiologists got started several years ago, they
reasoned stents could do the same thing.

   There were many failures at first. Dr. Gary S. Roubin, an interventional
cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, said it took him four years to
discover how to do it well and which patients would be helped and which harmed.
During that initial period, patients had major and minor strokes at almost three
times the rate that occurred with the surgery -- 9.3 percent as compared with
3.6 percent.

   "There is a steep learning curve," Dr. Roubin said. But now, he and others
say, they have become better at the technique and their success rates are just
as good as those with surgery. Their evidence? Their own experience with
registries of patients. While the National Institutes of Health is now about to
start a large study in which patients with blocked carotid arteries will be
randomly assigned to have surgery or stents, the results will not be known for
years.

   In the meantime, thousands of patients have had stents implanted in their
carotid arteries.

   The same cardiologists who helped develop devices for use in coronary blood
vessels are, meanwhile, working with companies to develop devices for use in the
carotid. Not only are they working with makers of stents, but they are entering
the newest arenas -- fine filters to catch pieces of blockage from the carotid
artery and prevent them from flowing to the brain, where they can cause strokes,
as stents are implanted.

   But conflicts in this growing part of the field are not limited to corporate
relationships. The cardiologists have a big interest in having their noncardiac
patients choose the treatment that the cardiologists can perform -- inserting
stents. And with the cardiologists diagnosing the blockages and treating them in
their own way, there is little chance that a patient will get the opinions of
other kinds of specialists who might recommend a standard treatment or no
treatment at all.

   Some medical centers are already encouraging patients to request stents. A
recent newspaper advertisement placed by Lenox Hill Hospital described stents as
"these tiny miracle devices" and said they could "help prevent strokes" as well
as save kidneys from failing and alleviate leg pain.

   At bottom, some medical specialists fear, standard oversight is gone.

   "Our field is one where we work with other people, and we always have people
looking over our shoulder," said Dr. Roberts, the interventional radiologist.

   But "nobody is looking over their shoulder," Dr. Roberts said of the
interventional cardiologists. "No one is ever checking on them."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Four kinds of stents made by three manufacturers. The devices
open blocked passages. (Angel Franco/The New York Times)(pg. A1); SMALL DEVICES,
BIG BUSINESS -- Thin flexible wires are used to carry tiny balloons and stents
to blockages in the artery that feeds blood to the heart. The manufacturing of
such devices has become a multibillion-dollar industry. (Angel Franco/The New
York Times)(pg. C16)

Chart/Photo: "A CONFLICT OF INTEREST?"
Here are some of the roles played by Dr. Martin Leon, above, in the field of
interventional cardiology:

Doctor
An interventional cardiologist formerly associated with the Washington Hospital
Center, now with Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.

Educator, Promoter
Runs the T.C.T., the nation's premier educational forum and industry trade show
for interventional cardiologists.

Researcher
Conducts research on an array of cardiology devices for companies like Cordis
and Boston Scientific.

Research Coordinator
A founder of a company that designs and oversees research for device
manufacturers.

Investor
Has held shares or stock options in device manufacturers, including Tyco
International, Angiosonics, Johnson & Johnson, Biosense and, through his
foundation, Instent.

Evaluator
Through a laboratory associated with his foundation, reviews data submitted by
other researchers from studies on experimental devices.

Product Developer
Serves as a principal and shareholder of Medivas, a company that acquires
patents of devices for interventional cardiology and attempts to develop them
for the marketplace.

Director
Sits on the board of Angiosonics.

(Photograph by Carol Powers for The New York Times)(pg. C16)

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1999


                             1168 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 29, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: DAILY DATEBOOK; Pg. D8; JON CARROLL

LENGTH: 639 words

HEADLINE: Sage Advice For Sane Living

BYLINE: JON CARROLL

BODY:
ONCE AGAIN, AS a service to others, we present another in the popular "Too
Stupid to Live" series. In this helpful newspaper feature, clinical expert Jon
Carroll reveals handy hints for woolgatherers, stargazers, garden starers and
the terminally bemused.

    Today's lesson: Never think while changing your clothes. Keep your mind on
the task at hand. Do not speculate. There is a time for philosophical
contemplation, but that ain't it.

    I must change clothes in public now, at my gym. Because I live in
California, where we have adopted an informal lifestyle that is the envy of
Boston, the clothes that I work out in are not that different from the clothes I
wear on the street.

    Sometimes I have changed from a T-shirt to a T-shirt. Occasionally I have
taken off white socks only to put on white socks. Nevertheless, for reasons of
hygiene and grooming, it is necessary to keep the workout clothes separate from
the street clothes. I'm sure you're all following me here, even you, Cynthia.

    The TV sets in the gym are often tuned to CNBC, which is the stock market
channel until it becomes the Chris Matthews Big Sillyhead channel. So naturally
my thoughts turn to the stock market. I have a 401(k) and an IRA and a Keogh and
for all I know a Florsham, and so I am interested in the Dow, whatever that is.

    I know enough about how the world works to distrust conventional wisdom.
Alas, because everyone is now interested in the stock market, there is so much
conventional wisdom around that it is impossible to be contrarian.

    WE ALL KNOW it's going to crash someday, because it always does. On the
other hand, it's been going to crash for just ever now, and it hasn't actually
crashed, and we have gotten through October and Alan Greenspan has coughed twice
and hey ho and up it rises early in the morning.

    And it's made so damn much money (I think to myself, there in the locker
room, toweling down) that even if there's a dread 25 percent "correction," that
takes us back to, what, last January, when were all thinking of selling because
everything was too damn high.

    So it's not as if I'd lose money I actually earned with the sweat of my
fingers. No, I'd lose imaginary money. And I'd still have lots of imaginary
money left. On the other hand, if I actually just dumped all these profits into
money markets right now, that money would no longer be imaginary but spendable
in my twilight years, possibly for gene therapy to allow me to play professional
baseball in 2020.

    On the other hand, doing nothing has been bery bery good to me. Perhaps
proactive sloth is the correct strategy. Maybe my personality is ideal for
money-making in the next millennium.

    SO NOW IT IS time to leave the locker room, perhaps to seek out my wife and
explain my theories about proactive sloth. One last look in the mirror at the
new, more glamorous me:

    I have put on my nice front-button shirt but left my sweatpants on. I have
selected semi-formal socks and shoes for the left foot while retaining that Just
Do It look for my right side. I believe I have put my towel in my gym bag; in
any event, I am just about ready to throw my sweater into the towel bin.

    So I am standing there looking like a damn busker or something, and I must
drag my sorry ass back to the locker to begin repairs. I am conscious that
perhaps my little faux pas has been noticed by the Others.

    This perception does not even depend on the physical presence of any Others;
I am fully prepared to feel shame about the opinion of Others even in an empty
room.

    That was when I formulated my mantra: mindfulness in all things,
particularly socks.

   -----------------------------------------------------

    Our guarantee: Not one joke about safe sox, unless this counts.



   Nothing was said for an hour or more, but I will never forget jrcsfgate.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                             1169 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 29, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1182 words

HEADLINE: Avigen's New Hemophilia Therapy Could Eventually Threaten Bayer;

Alameda firm's stock rises on speculation of breakthrough

BYLINE: TOM ABATE

BODY:
East of Highway 80 in Berkeley, barely visible over the trees, stands the
factory where Bayer Corp. produces one of the marvels of biotechnology, a
protein drug that hemophiliacs take to make their blood clot.

    A few miles to the south, in Alameda, tiny Avigen Inc. is tinkering with a
technology that could, one day, make Bayer's huge, $700 million factory
obsolete, by producing the same protein with microscopic genes.

    The rivalry between Bayer and Avigen exemplifies how constant innovation
makes biotech such a costly and risky enterprise.

    Let's start with Bayer, a German company that has grown beyond the aspirin
business to become a $31 billion-a-year drug and chemical giant. Berkeley is
Bayer's biotechnology headquarters, home to 100 researchers doing early
experiments on new remedies for asthma, multiple sclerosis and cancer.

    But the factory visible from Interstate 80 is Bayer's local profit and
employment engine. It keeps 1,000 people busy making Factor 8, one of two
essential blood-clotting proteins. The U.S. market for Factor 8 products is
worth about $1.3 billion annually.

    Blood clots when two proteins, Factor 8 and Factor 9, combine like an epoxy.
Each of these proteins is made by a different gene. Hemophiliacs are born
without one of these two genes. They fail to make one part of the epoxy and,
thus, when they bleed, their body can't stop the leak unless they take a drug to
supply the missing clotting factor.

    Bayer received Food and Drug Administration approval in 1993 to sell its
Factor 8 protein under the brand name Kogenate. Previously, hemophiliacs had to
take clotting factors extracted from donated blood. In the 1980s, some of this
blood was infected with HIV or hepatitis C. Thousands of hemophiliacs got these
diseases through tainted clotting supplements.

    But Kogenate is pure Factor 8 protein, manufactured through a fermentation
process similar to winemaking, though far more complex. Making any biotech
protein is tough, but Factor 8 protein presented a particular challenge because
it is one of the largest protein molecules in the human body, according to
Michael Kamarck, vice president of manufacturing for Bayer.

    Kamarck said the Factor 8 protein was too big to brew up in huge batches, as
is done with other biotech drugs. The very fermentation process that produces
the protein would have seen those huge Factor 8 molecules as food and would have
digested the protein into an amino acid mush.

    So Bayer perfected a way to siphon off purified Factor 8, drop by drop, in a
continuous fermentation process that Bayer thinks could be adapted to produce
other biotech proteins more economically. "We are looking at manufacturing as
our defining edge," Busse said.

    Of course, that presupposes protein drug manufacturing continues to be done
in traditional factories.

    But at Avigen headquarters in Alameda, scientists are working on a gene
therapy for hemophilia that could put the protein factory where nature intended
-- inside the cells of the human body.

    Every cell in your body is a microscopic factory. Genes are segments of DNA
that act like blueprints, telling the cellular assembly line how to make each
protein. Protein molecules perform most essential functions in our bodies.

    Since hemophiliacs lack one of the two genes their cells need to make
clotting proteins, Avigen is trying to inject these missing genes into
hemophiliacs in hopes of teaching their cells how to produce both clotting
proteins.

    If Avigen succeeds, it would free hemophiliacs from the need to take
periodic doses of clotting factors made in factories like the Bayer plant.

    But gene therapy is the cutting edge of biotechnology. More than 200
experiments have tried -- and failed -- to repair the cellular assembly line.

    At a scientific meeting in New Orleans later this week, Avigen is scheduled
to reveal whether it was able to cause blood clotting in three human
hemophiliacs who received its gene therapy injections.

    "We're not saying anything until then," said Avigen Chief Financial Officer
Thomas J. Paulson.

    But the stock has quadrupled in recent weeks as investors anticipate that
Avigen will finally succeed where all the previous experiments have failed. Stay
tuned for that news.

    Even if Avigen announces a success, it isn't as if Bayer's factory on
Interstate 80 will grind to a halt.

    Bayer makes Factor 8, the larger of the two clotting proteins. Avigen's gene
therapy is designed for hemophiliacs deficient in Factor 9, a protein that is
physically smaller than Factor 8. Using the epoxy analogy, it takes 5 parts
Factor 8 to 1 part of Factor 9 to form a clot.

    Factor 9 deficiency is also rarer, making for a smaller, $200 million market
for remedies.

    So Bayer's factory and market niche are secure, until and unless Avigen or
some other firm -- Chiron is in the race as well -- succeeds in stuffing that
huge Factor 8 gene into a cell and making it work.

    Avigen is working hard on Factor 8. Earlier this month, its scientists
reported they had successfully injected Factor 8 genes into hemophiliac mice.
"We're very hopeful we're on the right track," said Alan McClelland, Avigen's
vice president of research and development.

    Of course, execs at money-losing biotech firms are congenitally hopeful. For
their part, Bayer executives note that there's a huge difference between curing
mice and curing men.

    "We are not afraid of losing the (Factor 8) market in the near future,"
Busse said.

    His estimate may include some element of wishful thinking. Bayer plans to
spend an additional $300 million to improve its Berkeley factory and doesn't
expect to fully recoup its investments until 2006.

    If gene therapy succeeds too soon and prematurely makes the factory
obsolete, that would be a huge financial headache for Bayer.

   -- GRASS ROOTS? Sonoma County organic farmer Bob Cannard is sponsoring a
ballot initiative that would give Californians a chance to request the labeling
of genetically modified foods.

    Cannard, who wrote the measure, knows any such vote would be symbolic,
because states don't control food labels. But given the all-volunteer nature of
his campaign, it would be a huge victory if he gets the 413,000 signatures
required to put the measure on the November 2000 ballot.

    Most petition drives pay people to solicit signatures. Not Cannard, who has
bankrolled the "campaign" with a $5,000 contribution. He used the money to pay
for a Web site (www.calrighttoknow.org) where people can download a copy of the
petition and print it out.

    Cannard is hoping thousands of people will visit the Web site, download the
form and become petition-gathering volunteers -- giving a high-tech meaning to
the term "grassroots."

    A spokesman at the California secretary of state's office said this is the
first time they're aware of anyone has tried to run a petition campaign this
way.


   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                             1170 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    November 29, 1999, Monday, Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1838 words

HEADLINE: PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS VENTURE CAPITAL SURVEY;
Trailing the field;
The funding flow continues to grow in Minnesota, but not as quickly as in some
other states.

BYLINE: Susan Feyder; Staff Writer

BODY:

   When executives of Minneapolis-based Advanced Telecommunications Inc. (ATI)
took to the road last spring in search of $30 million in venture capital, they
focused on the nation's main financial centers such as New York, Boston, Chicago
and Los Angeles.

        "We were out to raise a significant amount of private equity, with a
lead investor that could come up with a minimum of $20 million in one round,"
said Rick Smith, chief financial officer and chief operating officer. "The
traditional big financial centers are the places you're going to find those
kinds of players."

        ATI, a competitive local exchange carrier that provides both voice and
data services, had no trouble raising more than it initially sought and even
turned down several interested investors. Such is the allure of
telecommunications start-ups in the Information Age.

        Some venture capitalists will get another chance in subsequent rounds of
financing, including a $10 million round planned for later this year, Smith
said.

         But when ATI next goes hunting for capital, it also will visit venture
capitalists in cities it hasn't been to before, including the up-and-coming
venture capital communities of Atlanta, Denver and Austin, Texas.

        "Our investment bankers [BancBoston Robertson Stephens] have told us
that these are some of the fast-growing centers of venture capital for tech
firms," Smith said. "If that's where the VCs are, that's where we'll be. You
have to go where the money is."

        What about ATI's home state? The company met with just one venture
capital firm in Minneapolis, which decided not to invest because it already had
holdings in a similar company, Smith said.

        ATI's experience underscores the good-news-bad-news nature of venture
capital trends in Minnesota. The flow of venture capital into Minnesota
continues to grow to record levels. Yet there are increasing signs that the
state is losing ground, not just to big financial centers such as New York or
technology-charged markets such as the Silicon Valley, but to such states as
Colorado, Texas, Georgia and Illinois.

        Because venture capital investments typically are made in start-up
businesses that are perceived to have excellent growth prospects, they are
regarded as one of the vital signs of a healthy regional economy.

        Minnesota's share of venture capital dollars has fallen from between 2
and 3 percent in the halcyon days of the 1980s and early 1990s to between 1 and
2 percent. In the third quarter, the figure was 1.4 percent.

        The slower growth here shows up in relatively fewer dollars coming to
Minnesota-based companies from the nation's venture capital community as a
whole.

       The two problems are linked. Venture capitalists tend to concentrate on
areas where there are more businesses in which to invest. At the same time,
young businesses looking for venture capital investors _ such as ATI _ want to
focus their attention on the biggest and most active venture capital
communities.

        "It's a symbiotic environment," said Jay Hare, a partner in the
PricewaterhouseCoopers technology industry group in Minneapolis. "And it has
changed here in the last few years."

        Figures compiled for the PricewaterhouseCoopers Money Tree Survey of
venture capital activity illustrate the disturbing trends. Since 1995, venture
capital firms based in Minnesota have had slower growth than Georgia, Illinois,
Texas and Colorado, both in the number of deals and amounts of venture-backed
funds provided. At the end of the third quarter, Minnesota's venture capitalists
trailed their counterparts in Illinois and Texas in dollars provided _ the first
time that has happened since PricewaterhouseCoopers began tracking venture
capital activity almost five years ago.

        That's not because Minnesota venture capitalists are investing less. To
the contrary, they are doing more and bigger deals. It's happening because the
number of venture capitalists participating in Minnesota isn't growing. As of
the third quarter, Hare said there were 16 venture capital funds based in
Minnesota, the same number as 1995; the number of funds in Georgia and Colorado
has tripled.

        "We are underserved here," Hare said. "But venture capitalists don't
move into an area willy-nilly. There's got to be a reason. The number of VCs is
a byproduct of the [investment] environment."

        That means a growing supply of young companies to invest in, something
Minnesota has not produced as well as other parts of the country in recent
years. From 1995 to 1998, the number of Minnesota-based businesses receiving
venture capital rose about 15 percent from 67 to 77, according to
PricewaterhouseCoopers. With 58 deals through the third quarter, the state is on
track for about 77 again this year, Hare said.

        Compare that with Texas, where the number of businesses receiving
venture capital more than doubled from 72 in 1995 to 151 in 1998. Texas already
is ahead of last year with 155 deals through the third quarter. Georgia had just
32 deals in 1995 but shot ahead of Minnesota with 83 last year. Colorado also
had 32 deals in 1995 but surpassed Minnesota with 90 deals last year.

        The pattern is the same in the amount of venture-backed dollars invested
in the states' businesses. Minnesota outranked Colorado, Georgia and Illinois in
1995 but since has dropped to fourth place in the pack. Its year-to-date total
of about $291 million is less than half the nearly $700 million in
venture-backed funding for Colorado-based businesses.

   .

   Telecom bandwagon

         Hare and others believe Minnesota's venture capital activity has been
less than it should be mostly because other parts of the country were quicker to
recognize the tremendous investment potential in Internet-related firms.

         Since 1996, the communications, software and information industries
have been the hottest for venture capital investments nationwide, fueling
explosive growth in the traditionally strong high-tech states of California and
Massachusetts but also smaller tech communities elsewhere. Rob Repass, managing
partner for the PricewaterhouseCoopers office in Austin, Texas, describes that
community as "a mini-Silicon Valley," with 80 companies receiving venture-backed
funds so far this year, more than twice the number a year ago.

        Atlanta has been able to cash in on the communications boom largely
because it is home to Bell South and because of sizable investments made in the
the area's communications infrastructure for the 1996 Olympics, said Maureen
Morrison, audit partner in the PricewaterhouseCoopers technology industry group
in Atlanta. The academic community, most notably Emory University and Georgia
Tech, have strong ties to the business community and are active in spinning off
ideas, she said.

        Similarly, Denver's strong presence in communications _ it is home to U
S West Inc., its new parent, Qwest Communications International Inc., and TCI,
the cable giant recently acquired by AT&T _ has helped that area's development
of startup communications firms, said Don Keller, spokesman for the
PricewaterhouseCoopers office in Denver.

        In Minnesota, venture capital investment frequently has gone in recent
years to companies in the consumer, health care and medical industries,
businesses that are out of favor. Jeff Tollefson, managing partner of
Minneapolis-based Crescendo Venture Management, said San Diego's venture capital
community has been one that has continued to succeed with med-tech investing
largely because of the area's focus on attractive niches such as biotech and
gene therapy. Minnesota has continued to focus on medical devices.

   .

   Basic research

        While Minnesota doesn't have a core of biotech companies, there are
efforts to create one.

        In September, Cargill Inc. gave the University of Minnesota $10 million
_ half the amount needed _ for a building devoted to gene study. The university
also is seeking to invest $150 million in molecular and cell biology during the
next few years.

        "The initiatives are underway, but it will take years for those to
result in investment opportunities," Tollefson said.

        The picture this year would look even dimmer had ATI not reported its
$42.7 million in venture capital for the third quarter _ the largest single
investment for a Minnesota company since PricewaterhouseCoopers began the
survey. This was ATI's second major round of financing and part of $140 million
in debt and equity financing raised by the company in the third quarter.

        Founded in 1995, the company has 11,000 small and medium-size business
customers in Minneapolis, Seattle, Denver, Reno and Portland, Ore. The funds
will be used to build the sales force, install large switching platforms in
those markets and expand into new markets. Plans call for moving into Salt Lake
City and Phoenix in the first half of next year and to be in 21 cities in two
years.

        The company has about 330 employees but expects that to rise to about
600 in five years. By then, ATI should be reporting annual revenue of $300
million to $400 million, Smith said.

        ATI's ambitious growth plan and the capital-intensive nature of its
business have fueled the need for venture capital, Smith said. But ATI, which
plans to go public in the next 18 months, has had little trouble raising funds.
      ATI is one of 11 Minnesota-based communications companies that have
received venture-backed funds so far this year, a significant jump over just six
such businesses for all of 1998. That's an encouraging sign, Hare said, but more
needs to be done to revive the area's venture capital activity.

        State industry groups, including the Minnesota High Tech Council and
Minnesota Project Innovation, recently have begun to examine the issue of
tech-related investing in Minnesota, looking at the investment community,
corporations, research institutions and entrepreneurs.

       On Thursday, Minnesota Public Radio's Civic Journalism Initiative will
play host for a day-long interactive summit titled "Minnesota in the Dot.Com
Age." Venture capitalists, company executives and industry observers are
expected to participate.

        "We have issues here relating to financial capital, human capital and
technical capital," Hare said. "This isn't something that can be laid on one
person's doorstep."

   .

        Falling behind

        Minnesota's share of the nation's venture capital dollars has stagnated,
while several states that had a comparable share five years ago have surged
ahead. Annual venture funding, in millions of dollars:

        (See microfilm for chart.)

        .

        A completely different scale

        California and Massachusetts attract the lion's share of venture
capital, thanks to well-established bases of technology companies. Annual
venture funding, in millions of dollars:

        .

        (See microfilm for chart.)



GRAPHIC: CHART; MAP; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1999


                             1171 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 28, 1999, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 140 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC DISEASES THAT STRIKE JEWS

BODY:


   Canavan disease. Baby weakens and has enlarged head by four months.  Suffers
seizures and severe mental retardation and dies by age 5. No treatment.

   Gaucher disease. The most common form causes enlarged liver and spleen,
anemia, easy bruising and pain or fractures in joints and bones. Usually appears
by late childhood, but not everyone is affected. Treatments cost $ 10,000 to $
20,000 a month.

   Fanconi anemia. Patients are small at birth and develop anemia, with bleeding
and easy bruising and skin discoloration and are more prone to leukemia. Only
half live to 25. Treatments include drugs, bone marrow transplants and gene
therapy.

   Tay-Sachs disease. Babies appear normal at birth but stop developing by eight
months. They eventually become blind, paralyzed and severely mentally retarded
and die by age 5. No treatment.

GRAPHIC: See also related story page 10.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                             1172 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 28, 1999, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: U.S. contributions varied and plentiful

BYLINE: JACQUELYN MITCHARD

BODY:

   MY vow was not one single essay on the "M" word, the implications, events and
accomplishments of the past thousand years.

   I mean, the way some writers and media outlets are going about the millennium
thing, it's as if Saint Joan could be mixed and shaken with Margaret Sanger, an
early advocate for birth control; as if anyone could logically trace the links
between paintings of tomato soup cans and Florentine frescoes.

   But no one said anything about the century.

   My Grandpa Bill was born in the first year, died in the 84th, and convinced
me that never before had one life encompassed so much so quickly and - despite
world wars, influenza and Hiroshima - seen so much good.

   This is the season for blessings - for giving thanks for heroism in ancient
times, for a miraculous birth, for family richness.

   So let's just call this list a hundred things we did right in America for the
past 100 years, a random sampling, in no order, compiled not by a panel of
experts but by my friends, family and folks I met at the office-supply store and
the museum.

   And maybe that is a panel of experts, at that.

   Here's what they say we did right:

    The development of radio

    Fred Astaire

    Refrigerated ice cubes (please, fill the tray)

    Breakfast at Tiffany's, the Truman Capote book and the movie

    Stephen Sondheim's lyrics for West Side Story

    The Wilderness Act of 1964

    Wheels on suitcases

    The Salk vaccine

    Vitamin C, and Linus Pauling for never giving up on it

    Our part in the victory in "The Good War"

    Frank Sinatra's way of pronouncing a song

    Brown vs. the Board of Education

    To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee

    Word-processing

    Cordless butane curling irons

    Velcro

    The space program and NASA

    Reversible storm windows and screens

    Johnny Carson

    Alfred Eisenstaedt's photos

    CNN

    Broadway

    Bagels

    The Gershwins

    Walt Disney animated films

    The Peace Corps

    Rosa Parks

    Fluoridated water

    Cell phones

    The blues, Chicago-style

    Pizza

    Littering laws

    Ghostbusters

    Gene therapy

    Touch-tone

    In-vitro fertilization

    The Right Stuff by Tom Wolfe

    The Masters Golf Tournament

    Back to the Future

    Organ transplants

    Smashing White cleaner

    The Natural by Bernard Malamud

    Bette Midler

    Computer animation

    Lorrie Moore's Birds of America, a grand short-story collection

    E-mail

    Bill Cosby

    Andrea Barrett's Ship Fever

    Tom Petty

    Arthur Miller

   That's our first 50. You provide the rest.

   Remember: only this century, only the United States, only things we did
right.

   Please include your name and town.



NOTES: Mitchard welcomes readers' responses by e-mail at mitch@mailbag.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                             1173 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                  November 28, 1999 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 08A

LENGTH: 498 words

HEADLINE: Researchers target dogs with cancer;
More pet owners are turning to human-style care when their animals are sick or
injured.

BYLINE: LAUREN GELFAND; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   DENVER - Like many dog owners, Kirk Milliken anguished over what to do when
his Rottweiler, Aspen, twice fell ill with cancer. He didn't want her to suffer.
Nor did he want to lose her companionship.

   Aspen will mark a year of living cancer-free this Christmas following nearly
$17,000 in treatment, including the amputation of her right rear leg,
chemotherapy and a gene therapy regimen.

   She may not be able to run or go fishing near her Colorado Springs home
anymore. But she still steals cookies from unsuspecting hands and gives sloppy
kisses to passing children.

   "I have often wondered if she hates me for the decisions I made to keep her
around, to keep her with me as long as I could, but it sure doesn't seem that
way," Milliken said.

   Milliken is among a growing number of Americans who seek out human-style care
when their animals are sick or injured.

   "People love their pets. Why shouldn't they give their loved ones the best
possible medical care?" said Dr. Greg Ogilvie, a veterinarian at the Colorado
State University Animal Cancer Center.

   Colorado is at the forefront in canine cancer treatment, with two of the
world's 130 canine oncologists and the Denver-based Morris Animal Foundation,
one of the largest private sources of funding for companion animal health
studies.

   The foundation has donated $1.6 million to canine cancer studies in the past
20 years and this year will support 21 studies, said spokeswoman Jennifer
Chavez.

   Milliken enrolled Aspen in two clinical trials devoted to researching cancer
at the Veterinary Referral Center of Colorado.

   "Cancer is the leading disease-related killer for dogs and the greatest
health concern among the 55 million dog owners in the United States,"  Chavez
said. "We are funding studies that make it possible for animals to live longer,
with a higher quality of life, so that the dogs and their owners can enjoy each
other as long as possible."

   The foundation has helped Ogilvie fund more than 40 studies during the past
20 years, and it currently is contributing $25,000 to his study of new
applications of pain relievers for dogs undergoing chemotherapy.

   "The beauty of what we do is that we get to see an average of 200 to 300
animals a year suffering from these diseases compared to a pediatrician who sees
only 25 cases," Ogilvie said.

   "So we can apply therapies used on humans and adapt them to our patients or
expand the treatments we offer to our patients to be beneficial to humans.
Either way, our understanding of the mechanics of cancer increases."

   At the Veterinary Referral Center in Denver, the foundation has paid $20,000
toward a study on the potential benefits of gene therapy for the type of bone
cancer that afflicted Aspen.

   "I owe my dog's life to the doctors, but, equally, I owe her life to the
people who provided the funding for the studies," Milliken said. "I don't know
what the year 2000 holds for us, but I sure am thankful we're going into it
together."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2002


                             1174 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         November 28, 1999, Sunday All

SECTION: Lifestyle Pg. 1 The Rest of Us

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Gratitude for things done right

BYLINE: JACQUELYN MITCHARD

BODY:

   My vow was not one single essay on the "M" word, the implications, events and
accomplishments, as if St. Joan could be mixed and shaken with Margaret Sanger,
as if anyone could logically trace the links between paintings of tomato soup
cans and Florentine frescoes.

   But no one said anything about the century. My Grandpa Bill was born in the
first year, died in the 84th, and convinced me that never before had one life
encompassed so much so quickly, and, despite World War I, influenza and
Hiroshima, so much good.

   'Tis the season for blessings -- for giving thanks for heroism in ancient
times, for a miraculous birth, for family richness.

   Let's just call them a hundred things we did right in America, a random
sampling, in no order, compiled not by a panel of experts but by my friends,
family and folks I met at the office supply store and the museum. And maybe that
is a panel of experts, indeed.

   Radio

   Fred Astaire

   Refrigerated ice cubes (please, fill the tray)

   "Breakfast at Tiffany's," book and movie

   Stephen Sondheim's lyrics for "West Side Story"

   The Wilderness Preservation Act of 1962

   Wheels on suitcases

   The Salk vaccine

   Vitamin C (and Linus Pauling for never giving up on it)

   Our part in victory in "The Good War"

   Frank Sinatra's way of pronouncing a song

   Brown vs. the Board of Education

   "To Kill a Mockingbird" by Harper Lee

   Word processing

   Cordless butane curling irons

   Velcro

   The space program and NASA

   Reversible storms and screens

   Johnny Carson

   Alfred Eisenstaedt's photos

   CNN

   Broadway

   Bagels

   The Gershwin brothers

   Walt Disney animated films

   The Peace Corps

   Rosa Parks

   Fluoridated

   Cell phones

   The blues, Chicago style

   Pizza

   Littering laws (despite "Alice's Restaurant")

   "Ghostbusters"

   Gene therapy

   Touch-tone

   In-vitro fertilization

   "The Right Stuff" by Tom Wolfe

   The Masters Golf Tournament

   "Back to the Future"

   Organ transplants

   Smashing White cleaner

   "The Natural" by Bernard Malamud

   Bette Midler

   Computer animation

   Lorrie Moore's "Birds of America"

   e-mail

   Bill Cosby

   Andrea Barrett's "Ship Fever"

   Tom Petty

   Arthur Miller

   That's our first 50. You provide the rest. Remember, only this century, only
the United States, only things we did right, mail or e-mail and please include
your name. ------------

   Write to Jacquelyn Mitchard at P.O. Box 259064, Madison, WI 53725-9064 or via
e-mail at mitch@mailbag.com.


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                             1175 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 137; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4912 words

HEADLINE: The Biotech Death of Jesse Gelsinger

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg;  Sheryl Gay Stolberg, who reports on medicine
and health policy for The Times, wrote about pig-to-human organ transplants in
October.

BODY:

   The jagged peak of Mount Wrightson towers 9,450 feet above Tucson,
overlooking a deep gorge where the prickly pear cactus that dots the desert
floor gives way to a lush forest of ponderosa pine. It is said that this is as
close to heaven as you can get in southern Arizona. Jesse Gelsinger loved this
place. So it was here, on a clear Sunday afternoon in early November, that Paul
Gelsinger laid his 18-year-old son to rest, seven weeks after a gene-therapy
experiment cost him his life.

   The ceremony was simple and impromptu. Two dozen mourners -- Jesse's father;
his mother, Pattie; his stepmother, Mickie; and two sisters, a brother, three
doctors and a smattering of friends -- trudged five miles along a steep trail to
reach the rocky outcropping at the top. There, Paul Gelsinger shared stories of
his son, who loved motorcycles and professional wrestling and was, to his
father's irritation, distinctly lacking in ambition. Jesse was the kind of kid
who kept $10.10 in his bank account -- You need $10 to keep it open," Gelsinger
explained -- but those assembled on the mountaintop agreed that he had a sharp
wit and a sensitive heart.

    At Gelsinger's request, the hikers had carried Jesse's medicine bottles
filled with his ashes, and now they were gathered at the edge of the peak. Steve
Raper, the surgeon who gave Jesse what turned out to be a lethal injection of
new genes, pulled a small blue book of poetry from his pocket. "Here rests his
head upon the lap of Earth," Raper read, reciting a passage from an elegy by
Thomas Gray, "a youth to Fortune and Fame unknown./Fair Science frowned not on
his humble birth." Then the surgeon, the grieving father and the rest scattered
Jesse's ashes into the canyon, where they rose on a gust of wind and fell again
in a powerful cloud of fine gray dust. "I will look to you here often, Jess,"
Paul Gelsinger said sadly.

   Jesse Gelsinger was not sick before died. He suffered from ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a rare metabolic disorder, but it was
controlled with a low-protein diet and drugs, 32 pills a day. He knew when he
signed up for the experiment at the University of Pennsylvania that he would not
benefit; the study was to test the safety of a treatment for babies with a fatal
form of his disorder. Still, it offered hope, the promise that someday Jesse
might be rid of the cumbersome medications and diet so restrictive that half a
hot dog was a treat. "What's the worst that can happen to me?" he told a friend
shortly before he left for the Penn hospital, in Philadelphia. "I die, and it's
for the babies."

   As far as government officials know, Jesse's death on Sept. 17 was the first
directly related to gene therapy. The official cause, as listed on the death
certificate filed by Raper, was adult respiratory distress syndrome: his lungs
shut down. The truth is more complicated. Jesse's therapy consisted of an
infusion of corrective genes, encased in a dose of weakened cold virus,
adenovirus, which functioned as what scientists call a vector. Vectors are like
taxicabs that drive healthy DNA into cells; viruses, whose sole purpose is to
get inside cells and infect them, make useful vectors. The Penn researchers had
tested their vector, at the same dose Jesse got, in mice, monkeys, baboons and
one human patient, and had seen expected, flulike side effects, along with some
mild liver inflammation, which disappeared on its own. When Jesse got the
vector, he suffered a chain reaction that the testing had not predicted --
jaundice, a blood-clotting disorder, kidney failure, lung failure and brain
death: in Raper's words, "multiple-organ-system failure." The doctors are still
investigating; their current hypothesis is that the adenovirus triggered an
overwhelming inflammatory reaction -- in essence, an immune-system revolt. What
they do not understand yet is why.

   Every realm of medicine has its defining moment, often with a human face
attached. Polio had Jonas Salk. In vitro fertilization had Louise Brown, the
world's first test-tube baby. Transplant surgery had Barney Clark, the Seattle
dentist with the artificial heart. AIDS had Magic Johnson. Now gene therapy has
Jesse Gelsinger.

   Until Jesse died, gene therapy was a promising idea that had so far failed to
deliver. As scientists map the human genome, they are literally tripping over
mutations that cause rare genetic disorders, including OTC deficiency, Jesse's
disease. The initial goal was simple: to cure, or prevent, these illnesses by
replacing defective genes with healthy ones. Biotech companies have poured
millions into research -- not for rare hereditary disorders but for big-profit
illnesses like cancer, heart disease and AIDS. As of August, the government had
reviewed 331 gene-therapy protocols involving more than 4,000 patients. Just 41
were for the "monogeneic," or single-gene, defect diseases whose patients so
desperately hoped gene therapy would be their salvation.

   At the same time, the science has progressed slowly; researchers have had
trouble devising vectors that can carry genes to the right cells and get them to
work once they are there. Four years ago, Dr. Harold Varmus, the director of the
National Institutes of Health, commissioned a highly critical report about gene
therapy, chiding investigators for creating "the mistaken and widespread
perception of success." Since then, there have been some accomplishments: a team
at Tufts University has used gene therapy to grow new blood vessels for heart
disease patients, for instance. But so far, gene therapy has not cured anyone.
As Ruth Macklin, a bioethicist and member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, the National Institutes of Health panel that oversees gene-therapy
research, says, bluntly, "Gene therapy is not yet therapy."

   On Dec. 8, the "RAC," as the committee is called, will begin a public inquiry
into Jesse's death, as well as the safety of adenovirus, which has been used in
roughly one-quarter of all gene-therapy clinical trials. The Penn scientists
will report on their preliminary results, and investigators, who at the RAC's
request have submitted thousands of pages of patient safety data to the
committee, will discuss the side effects of adenovirus. Among them will be
researchers from the Schering-Plough Corporation, which was running two
experiments in advanced liver cancer patients that used methods similar to
Penn's. Enrollment in those trials was suspended by the Food and Drug
Administration after Jesse's death. The company, under pressure from the RAC,
has since released information showing that some patients experienced serious
side effects, including changes in liver function and blood-cell counts, mental
confusion and nausea; two experienced minor strokes, although one had a history
of them. Once all the data on adenovirus are analyzed at the Dec. 8 meeting, the
RAC may recommend restrictions on its use, which will almost certainly slow down
some aspects of gene-therapy research.

   The meeting will be important for another reason: it will mark an
unprecedented public airing of information about the safety of gene therapy --
precisely the kind of sharing the RAC has unsuccessfully sought in the past.
Officials say gene therapy has claimed no lives besides Jesse's. But since his
death, there have been news reports that other patients died during the course
of experiments -- from their diseases, as opposed to the therapy -- and that the
scientists involved did not report those deaths to the RAC, as is required. This
has created a growing cloud of suspicion over gene therapy, raising questions
about whether other scientists may have withheld information that could have
prevented Jesse's death. That question cannot be answered until all the data are
analyzed. But one thing is certain: four years after the field was rocked by
Varmus's highly critical evaluation, it is now being rocked again, this time
over an issue more fundamental than efficacy -- safety.

   "I think it's a perilous time for gene therapy," says LeRoy Walters, a
bioethicist at Georgetown University and former chairman of the RAC. "Until now,
we have been able to say, 'Well, it hasn't helped many people, but at least it
hasn't hurt people.' That has changed."

   No one, perhaps, is more acutely aware of gene therapy's broken promise than
Mark Batshaw, the pediatrician who proposed the experiment that cost Jesse
Gelsinger his life.

   At 54, Batshaw, who left the University of Pennsylvania last year for
Children's National Medical Center, in Washington, is tall and gangly with
slightly stooped shoulders and a shy smile that gives him the air of an awkward
schoolboy, which he once was. As a child, Batshaw struggled with hyperactivity:
he didn't read until the third grade; in the fourth, his teacher grew so
irritated at his constant chatter that she stuck his chair out in the hall. The
experience has left him with a soft spot for developmentally disabled children,
which is how he has become one of the world's foremost experts in urea-cycle
disorders, among them OTC deficiency.

   The urea cycle is a series of five liver enzymes that help rid the body of
ammonia, a toxic breakdown product of protein. When these enzymes are missing or
deficient, ammonia -- the same ammonia that you scrub your floors with," Batshaw
explains -- accumulates in the blood and travels to the brain, causing coma,
brain damage and death. OTC deficiency is the most common urea-cycle disorder,
occurring in one out of every 40,000 births. Its genetic mutation occurs on the
X chromosome, so women are typically carriers, while their sons suffer the
disease.

   Severe OTC deficiency is, Batshaw says, "a devastating disease." Typically,
newborns slip into a coma within 72 hours of birth. Most suffer severe brain
damage. Half die in the first month, and half of the survivors die by age 5.
Batshaw was a young postdoctoral fellow when he met his first
urea-cycle-disorder patient in 1973, correctly diagnosing the disease at a time
when most other doctors had never heard of it. Within two years, he and his
colleagues had devised the first treatment, a low-protein formula called
keto-acid. Later, they came up with what remains standard therapy to this day:
sodium benzoate, a preservative, and another type of sodium, which bind to
ammonia and help eliminate it from the body.

   But the therapy cannot prevent the coma that is often the first sign of OTC
and ravages the affected infant. By the time Batshaw joined the faculty at Penn
in 1988, he was dreaming of a cure -- gene therapy. Patients were dreaming, too,
says Tish Simon, former co-president of the National Urea Cycle Disorders
Foundation, whose son died of OTC deficiency three years ago. "All of us saw
gene therapy as the hope for the future," Simon says. "And certainly, if anybody
was going to do it, it had to be Mark Batshaw."

   Gene therapy became a reality on Sept. 14, 1990, in a hospital room at the
National Institutes of Health, in Bethesda, Md., when a 4-year-old girl with a
severe immune-system deficiency received a 30-minute infusion of white blood
cells that had been engineered to contain copies of the gene she lacked. Rarely
in modern medicine has an experiment been filled with so much hope; news of the
treatment ricocheted off front pages around the world. The scientist who
conducted it, Dr. W. French Anderson, quickly became known as the father of gene
therapy. "We had got ourselves all hyped up," Anderson now admits, "thinking
there would be rapid, quick, easy, early cures."

   Among those keeping a close eye on Anderson's debut was Jim Wilson, a
square-jawed, sandy-haired Midwesterner who decided to follow his father's
footsteps in medicine when he realized he wasn't going to make it in football.
As a graduate student in biological chemistry, Wilson had taken a keen interest
in rare genetic diseases. "All I did," he says, "was dream about gene therapy."

   Today, as director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University
of Pennsylvania, Wilson is in an excellent position to make that dream a
reality. Headquartered in a century-old building amid the leafy maple trees and
brick sidewalks of the picturesque Penn campus, the six-year-old institute, with
250 employees, state-of-the-art laboratories and a $25 million annual budget, is
the largest academic gene-therapy program in the nation. In a field rife with
big egos, Wilson is regarded as first-rate. "Present company excluded," Anderson
says, "he's the best person in the field."

   Batshaw was banging on Wilson's door even before Wilson arrived at Penn in
March 1993, and within a month they were collaborating on studies of
OTC-deficient mice. Their first task was to develop a vector. Adenovirus seemed
a logical choice.

   There had been some early problems with safety -- a 1993 cystic fibrosis
experiment was shut down when a patient was hospitalized with inflamed lungs --
but Wilson and Batshaw say they figured out how to make a safer vector by
deleting extra viral genes. Adenovirus was the right size: when its viral genes
were excised, the OTC gene fit right in. It had a "ZIP code," on it, Batshaw
says, that would carry it straight to the liver. And while its effects did not
last, it worked quickly, which meant that it might be able to reverse a coma,
sparing babies from brain damage. "It wasn't going to be a cure soon," Batshaw
says, "but it might be a treatment soon."

   The mouse experiments were encouraging. Mice that had the therapy survived
for two to three months even while fed a high-protein diet. Those that lacked
the treatment died. "It wasn't subtle," Wilson says. "We felt pretty compelled
by that." But when the team contemplated testing in people, they ran smack into
an ethical quandary: who should be their subjects?

   To Wilson, the answer seemed obvious: sick babies. Arthur Caplan, the
university's resident bioethics expert, thought otherwise. Caplan says parents
of dying infants are incapable of giving informed consent: "They are coerced by
the disease of their child." He advised Wilson to test only stable adults,
either female carriers or men like Jesse, with partial enzyme deficiencies. The
National Urea Cycle Disorders Foundation agreed. When Batshaw turned up at their
1994 annual meeting asking for volunteers, so many mothers offered to be
screened for the OTC gene that it took him four hours to draw all the blood.

   By the time Mark Batshaw and Jim Wilson submitted their experiment to the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for approval, the panel was in danger of
being disbanded. Varmus, the N.I.H. director, who won the Nobel Prize for his
discovery of a family of cancer-causing genes, had made no secret of his
distaste for the conduct of gene-therapy researchers. He thought the science was
too shoddy to push forward with human testing, and it bothered him that so few
experiments were focusing on genetic diseases. It irked him to have to sign off
on protocols the RAC approved, and it irked him even more to see biotech
companies touting those approvals, like some kind of N.I.H. imprimatur, in the
business pages of the papers. "Some days," says Dr. Nelson Wivel, the
committee's former executive director, who now works for Wilson at Penn, "it
felt as though the RAC was helping the biotech industry raise money. Dr. Varmus
hated that."

   At the same time, the pharmaceutical industry and AIDS activists were
complaining that the RAC was redundant: the F.D.A. already reviewed gene-therapy
proposals. So in mid-1995, after seeking the advice of an expert panel, Varmus
reorganized the RAC, slashing its membership from 25 to 15 and stripping it of
its approval authority -- a decision that, some say, has enabled gene-therapy
researchers to ignore the panel and keep information about safety to themselves.
"The RAC," complains Dr. Robert Erickson, a University of Arizona medical
geneticist who served on the panel, "became a debating society."

   The Batshaw-Wilson protocol was among the last the committee would ever
approve. The plan was for 18 adults (19 eventually signed up, including Tish
Simon, but the last patient was never treated, because of Jesse's death) to
receive an infusion of the OTC gene, tucked inside an adenovirus vector, through
a catheter in the hepatic artery, which leads to the liver. The goal was to find
what Wilson calls "the maximum tolerated dose," one high enough to get the gene
to work, but low enough to spare patients serious side effects. Subjects would
be split into six groups of three, with each group receiving a slightly higher
dose than the last. This is standard fare in safety testing. "You go up in
small-enough increments," Wilson explains, "that you can pull the plug on the
thing before people get hurt."

   The experiment stood in stark contrast to others that had earned Varmus's
scorn. It was paid for by N.I.H., which meant it had withstood the rigors of
scientific peer review. It was aimed at a rare genetic disease, not cancer or
AIDS. It was supported by plenty of animal research: Wilson and his team had
performed more than 20 mouse experiments to test efficacy and a dozen safety
studies on mice, rhesus monkeys and baboons. Still, it made Erickson, one of two
scientists assigned by the RAC to review the experiment, uneasy.

   He was troubled by data showing that three monkeys had died of a
blood-clotting disorder and severe liver inflammation when they received an
earlier, stronger version of the adenovirus vector at a dose 20 times the
highest dose planned for the study. No one had injected adenovirus directly into
the bloodstream before, either via the liver or otherwise, and the scientists
admitted that it was difficult to tell precisely how people would respond. They
planned to confine the infusion to the right lobe of the liver, so that if
damage occurred it would be contained there, sparing the left lobe. And they
outlined the major risks: bleeding, from either the gene-therapy site or a
subsequent liver biopsy, which would require surgery; or serious liver
inflammation, which could require an organ transplant and might lead to death.

   Both Erickson and the other scientific reviewer thought the experiment was
too risky to test on asymptomatic volunteers and recommended rejection. But in
the end, Batshaw and Wilson prevailed. They offered up Caplan's argument that
testing on babies was inappropriate. And they agreed to inject the vector into
the bloodstream, as opposed to putting it directly into the liver. That
decision, however, was later reversed by the F.D.A., which insisted that because
the adenovirus would travel through the blood and wind up in the liver anyway,
the original plan was safer.

   The RAC, in such disarray from Varmus's reorganization that it did not meet
again for another year, was never informed of the change.

   Jesse Gelsinger was 17 when his pediatric geneticist, Dr. Randy Heidenreich,
first told him about the Penn proposal. He wanted to sign up right away. But he
had to wait until he was 18.

   Paul Gelsinger was also enthusiastic. A trim 47-year-old with intense blue
eyes, Gelsinger, who makes his living as a handyman, gained custody of his four
children nine years ago, when he divorced their mother, who suffers from manic
depression. He had been having some difficulty with Jesse then; the boy was in
the midst of an adolescent rebellion and was refusing to take his medicine. "I
said: 'Wow, Jess, they're working on your disorder. Maybe they'll come up with a
cure."'

   Jesse's was not a typical case of OTC deficiency: his mutation appears to
have occurred spontaneously in the womb. His disease having been diagnosed when
he was 2, Jesse was what scientists call a mosaic -- a small portion of his
cells produced the missing enzyme. When he watched what he ate and took his
medicine, he was fine. But one day last December, Paul Gelsinger arrived home to
find his son curled up on the couch. He had been vomiting uncontrollably, a
sign, Paul knew, that Jesse's ammonia was rising. Jesse landed in the hospital,
comatose and on life support. When he recovered, he never missed another pill.

   On June 18, the day Jesse turned 18, the Gelsingers -- Paul, Mickie and the
children -- flew to Philadelphia to see Paul's family. They played tourists,
visiting the Liberty Bell and the Rocky statue, where Jesse was photographed,
fists raised, a picture that would circulate in the newspapers after his death.
On the 22nd, they went to the University of Pennsylvania, where they met Raper,
the surgeon, who explained the experiment and did blood and liver-function tests
to see if Jesse was eligible. He was, and his treatment was scheduled for the
fall. Jesse would be the youngest patient enrolled.

   On Sept. 9, Jesse returned to Philadelphia, this time alone. He took one
duffel bag full of clothes and another full of wrestling videos. Paul Gelsinger
planned to fly in a week later for the liver biopsy, which he considered the
trial's most serious risk.

   The treatment began on Monday, Sept. 13. Jesse would receive the highest
dose. Seventeen patients had already been treated, including one woman who had
been given the same dose that Jesse would get, albeit from a different lot, and
had done "quite well," Raper says. That morning, Jesse was taken to the
interventional-radiology suite, where he was sedated and strapped to a table
while a team of radiologists threaded two catheters into his groin. At 10:30
a.m., Raper drew 30 milliliters of the vector and injected it slowly. At half
past noon, he was done.

   That night, Jesse was sick to his stomach and spiked a fever, 104.5 degrees.
Raper was not particularly surprised: other patients had experienced the same
reaction. Paul Gelsinger called; he and Jesse talked briefly, exchanging I love
yous. Those were the last words they ever spoke.

   Early Tuesday morning a nurse called Raper at home; Jesse seemed disoriented.
When Raper got to the hospital, about 6:15 a.m., he noticed that the whites of
Jesse's eyes were yellow. That meant jaundice, not a good sign. "It was not
something we had seen before," Raper says. A test confirmed that Jesse's
bilirubin, a breakdown product of red blood cells, was four times the normal
level. Raper called Gelsinger, and Batshaw in Washington, who said he would get
on a train and be there in two hours.

   Both doctors knew that the high bilirubin meant one of two things: either
Jesse's liver was failing or he was suffering a clotting disorder in which his
red blood cells were breaking down faster than the liver could metabolize them.
This was the same disorder the scientists had seen in the monkeys that had been
given the stronger vector. The condition is life-threatening for anyone, but
particularly dangerous for someone with Jesse's disease, because red blood cells
liberate protein when they break down.

   By midafternoon Tuesday, a little more than 24 hours after the injection, the
clotting disorder had pushed Jesse into a coma. By 11:30 p.m., his ammonia level
was 393 micromoles per liter of blood. Normal is 35. The doctors began dialysis.

   Paul Gelsinger had booked a red-eye flight. When he arrived in the surgical
intensive care unit at 8 Wednesday morning, Raper and Batshaw told him that
dialysis had brought Jesse's ammonia level down to 72 but that other
complications were developing. He was hyperventilating, which would increase the
level of ammonia in his brain. They wanted to paralyze his muscles and induce a
deeper coma, so that a ventilator could breathe for him. Gelsinger gave consent.
Then he put on scrubs, gloves and a mask and went in to see his son.

   By Wednesday afternoon, Jesse seemed to be stabilizing. Batshaw went back to
Washington. Paul felt comfortable enough to meet his brother for dinner. But
later that night Jesse worsened again. His lungs grew stiff; the doctors were
giving him 100 percent oxygen, but not enough of it was getting to his
bloodstream. They consulted a liver-transplant team and learned that Jesse was
not a good candidate. Raper was beside himself. He consulted with Batshaw and
Wilson, and they decided to take an extraordinary step, a procedure known as
ECMO, for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, essentially an external lung that
filters the blood, removing carbon dioxide and adding oxygen. It had been tried
on only 1,000 people before, Raper says. Only half had survived.

   "If we could just buy his lungs a day or two," Raper said later, they thought
"maybe he would go ahead and heal up."

   The next day, Thursday, Sept. 16, Hurricane Floyd slammed into the East
Coast. Mickie Gelsinger flew in from Tucson just before the airport closed.
(Pattie Gelsinger, Jesse's mother, was being treated in a psychiatric facility
and was unable to leave.) Batshaw spent the day trapped outside Baltimore on an
Amtrak train. He ran down his cell phone calling Raper; when it went dead, he
persuaded another passenger to lend him his. The ECMO, Raper reported, appeared
to be working. But then another problem cropped up: Jesse's kidneys stopped
making urine. "He was sliding into multiple-organ-system failure," Raper says.

   That night, at his hotel, Paul Gelsinger couldn't sleep. He left his wife a
note and walked the half mile to the Penn medical center to see Jesse. The boy
was bloated beyond recognition; even his ears were swollen shut. Gelsinger
noticed blood in Jesse's urine, an indication, he knew, that the kidneys were
shutting down. How can anybody, he thought, survive this?

   On the morning of Friday the 17th, a test showed that Jesse was brain dead.
Paul Gelsinger didn't need to be told: "I knew it already." He called for a
chaplain to hold a bedside service, with prayers for the removal of life
support.

   The room was crowded with equipment and people: 7 of Paul's 15 siblings came
in, plus an array of doctors and nurses. Raper and Batshaw, shellshocked and
exhausted, stood in the back. The chaplain anointed Jesse's forehead with oil,
then read the Lord's Prayer. The doctors fought back tears. When the
intensive-care specialist flipped two toggle switches, one to turn off the
ventilator and the other to turn off the ECMO machine, Raper stepped forward. He
checked the heart-rate monitor, watched the line go flat and noted the time:
2:30 p.m. He put his stethoscope to Jesse's chest, more out of habit than
necessity, and pronounced the death official. "Goodbye, Jesse," he said. "We'll
figure this out."

   Wilson reported the death immediately, drawing praise from government
officials but criticism from Arthur Caplan, who says they should have made the
news public, in a news conference. In the weeks since, the Penn team has put
every detail of Jesse's treatment under a microscope. It has rechecked the
vector to make certain it was not tainted, tested the same lot on monkeys,
re-examined lab and autopsy findings. Wilson's biggest fear was that Jesse died
as a result of human error, but so far there has been no evidence of that.
"That's what's so frightening," French Anderson says. "If they made a mistake,
you would feel a little safer."

   The death has rattled the three doctors in various ways. Wilson has asked
himself over and over again whether he should have done anything differently.
"At this point, I say no, but I'm continuing to re-evaluate constantly." He has
been besieged by worry, about the morale of his staff, about whether his
institute's financial sponsors would pull out, about whether patients would
continue to volunteer, about whether he would lose his bravado -- the death
knell for a scientist on the cutting edge. "My concern," he confessed, over
dinner one night in Philadelphia, "is, I'm going to get timid, that I'll get
risk averse."

   Raper has thrown himself into his work, trying to live up to his promise to
"figure this out." There are a number of possible explanations, he says: the
vector may have reacted badly with Jesse's medication; Jesse's status as a
mosaic may have played a role; or perhaps the early testing in monkeys, which
showed that the stronger vector had deleterious side effects, was more of a
harbinger of danger than the doctors realized. An answer may take months, but he
is determined to find one; only by understanding what happened to Jesse, and how
to prevent it in others, can the research continue. "That," Raper says, "would
be the best tribute to Jesse."

   Of the three, Batshaw seems to have taken it the hardest. He is not a
particularly religious man, but a few days after Jesse died he went to synagogue
to say Kaddish, the Jewish mourner's prayer. He struggles with the idea of
personal responsibility. He has cradled many a dying child in his career, but
never before, he says, has a patient been made worse by his care. "What is the
Hippocratic oath?" Batshaw asks rhetorically, looking into the distance as his
fingers drum the tabletop. He pauses, as if to steel himself, and says, "I did
harm."

   Paul Gelsinger does not hold the doctors responsible, although he is acutely
interested in knowing what other scientists knew about adenovirus before Jesse
died. He has experienced a deep spiritual awakening since losing his son; in
dying, he says, Jesse taught him how to live. He speaks frequently of God, and
of "purity of intent," which is his way of saying that Jesse demonstrated an
altruism the rest of us might do well to emulate. "I hope," he said on the
mountaintop that Sunday afternoon, "that I can die as well as my son has died."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: "A youth to Fortune and Fame unknown": Paul Gelsinger, Dr.
Raper (in blue) and a clutch of other friends and family members pay tribute to
Jesse on an Arizona mountaintop. (Robbie McClaran); Jesse, feeling victorious,
the day after he underwent testing and found out he would be eligible for the
gene-therapy experiment. (Mary Gelsinger)

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1999


                             1176 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       November 28, 1999, Sunday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 548 words

HEADLINE: Owners doing more to battle cancer in pets; More funds going to animal
care

BYLINE: Lauren Gelfand

BODY:  DENVER - Like many dog owners, Kirk Millikenanguished over what to do
when his Rottweiler, Aspen, twice fellill with cancer. He didn't want her to
suffer. Nor did he want tolose her companionship.

    Aspen will celebrate a year of living cancer-free this Christmasfollowing
nearly $17,000 in treatment, including the amputation ofher right rear leg,
chemotherapy and a gene therapy regimen.

    She may not be able to run or go fishing near her Colorado Springshome
anymore. But she still steals cookies from unsuspecting handsand gives sloppy
kisses to passing children.

    "I have often wondered if she hates me for the decisions I made tokeep her
around, to keep her with me as long as I could, but itsure doesn't seem that
way," Milliken said.

    Milliken is among a growing number of Americans who treat theirpets like
members of the family and seek out human-style care whentheir animals are
ailing.

    "With the urbanization of our society, pets have gone from the backyard to
the bedroom, and the vast majority of them are even on thebed," said Dr. Greg
Ogilvie, a veterinarian at the Colorado StateUniversity Animal Cancer Center.
"People love their pets. Whyshouldn't they give their loved ones the best
possible medicalcare?"

    Colorado is at the forefront in canine cancer treatment, with twoof the
world's 130 canine oncologists and the Denver-based MorrisAnimal Foundation, one
of the largest private sources of fundingfor companion animal health studies.

    The foundation has donated $1.6 million to canine cancer studies inthe past
20 years and in 1999 will support 21 different studies,spokeswoman Jennifer
Chavez said.

    Milliken enrolled Aspen in two clinical trials devoted toresearching cancer
at the Veterinary Referral Center of Colorado.The first was funded by Bayer
Corp., the second by the foundation.

    "Cancer is the leading disease-related killer for dogs and thegreatest
health concern among the 55 million dog owners in theUnited States," Chavez
said. "We are funding studies that make itpossible for animals to live longer,
with a higher quality of lifeso that the dogs and their owners can enjoy each
other as long aspossible."

    The foundation has helped Ogilvie fund more than 40 studies overthe past 20
years, and currently is contributing $25,000 to hisstudy of new applications of
pain relievers for dogs undergoingchemotherapy.

    "The beauty of what we do is that we get to see an average of 200to 300
animals a year suffering from these diseases compared to apediatrician who sees
only 25 cases," Ogilvie said.

    "So we can apply therapies used on humans and adapt them to ourpatients or
expand the treatments we offer to our patients to bebeneficial to humans. Either
way, our understanding of themechanics of cancer increases."

    At the Veterinary Referral Center in Denver, the foundation alsohas paid
$20,000 toward a study by canine oncologist Dr. RobynElmslie of the potential
benefits of gene therapy for the type ofbone cancer that afflicted Aspen.

    "I owe my dog's life to the doctors, but equally, I owe her life tothe
people who provided the funding for the studies," Millikensaid. "I don't know
what the year 2000 holds for us, but I sure amthankful we're going into it
together."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: DAVID ZALUBOWSKI/Associated Press: Kirk Milliken joins Aspen,
his 6-year-old Rottweiler, in looking around the pair's home in Colorado
Springs, Colo., recently. The dog has survived two bouts with cancer.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                             1177 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 28, 1999 Sunday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. G-1

LENGTH: 2001 words

HEADLINE: Progress and pollution;
Behold, the Emerald City

SERIES: ON THE WAY TO THE MILLENNIUM;  Lessons for the 21st Century. Sidebar.

BYLINE: From The Economist, The Economist is Britain's leading newsweekly.

BODY:

   The age since 1900, when Frank Baum wrote "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz," has
been packed with discovery, invention and achievement.

   The atom has been split, the building blocks of life and of matter discerned,
described and manipulated.

   Men have walked on the moon and have seen, through their clever telescopes,
to the edges of the universe.

   Terrible but victorious battles have been fought in the cause of freedom, of
self-determination, against evil empires.

   The saintly Nelson Mandela has been president of South Africa after spending
27 years in jail. To fly from one side of the world to the other has become
routine.

   The cost of communicating with each other around the globe is fast becoming
an irrelevance.

   For all the fears about dumbing down, education and literacy are now basic
expectations, and more books are being written and bought than ever.

   Economic growth marches on and on, with no reason to expect that it faces any
limits that human ingenuity could not breach. Human organs have been
transplanted, and vaccines and antibiotics can conquer most bacteria.

   Some diseases have been virtually eliminated, though mainly thanks to better
sanitation and to insecticides.

   Pretty soon, medicine is likely to be transformed by information technology
and genetics.

   Doctors will diagnose your ills from afar, using sensors and remote
computers.

   They will see even further inside your body and brain than this century's
inventions, X-rays (actually from 1895) and magnetic-resonance imaging, have
allowed. Alongside the conventional cures of drugs, diet and surgery will come
the tools of genetics, reading the way in which you have been programmed to see
how your mind or body behaves and, if it is desired, altering the programming
itself.

   Unlike genetically modified food, which sparks fears of unseen dangers and
contamination, this genetic therapy is likely to be as widely accepted as organ
transplants have been.

   It will bring with it anxious debates about morality and personal
responsibility, but will also promise to cure many currently incurable diseases
and conditions. There is plenty of reason to believe that all those political,
economic and scientific trends will make for a better world -- more prosperous,
more peaceful, less wracked by fear of brutality, poverty or disease, one in
which the press of population eases as the 21st century rolls on.

   Yet there are also plenty of grounds for paranoia, for believing that all
this promise could turn to dust: a financial crash in America that could, as
after 1929, turn the world's leading nation inward; a political development in
China or Russia that brings back aggressive nationalism; a bout of nuclear
terrorism by a state or an individual; a frightening misuse of that new genetic
science. After all, promise turning to dust was a big feature of the century
that is just ending.

   It has been no fairy tale.

   Frank Baum said in the introduction to his story of Oz that it was intended
to be one "in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heartaches and
nightmares are left out."

   By 1939, when Judy Garland starred in MGM's movie version, the real world had
had heartaches and nightmares aplenty, and worse were to come. Some of them
involved the very science that has laid the foundations of much of the human
wonderment of today.

   At the peak of 19th-century fervor, enthusiasts came to consider science to
be morally superior.

   There was no such thing as sin or evil, thought the most mechanistic
scientists, just ignorance; in due course they would be able to transform man
and control nature.

   In 1899 Ernst Haeckel, a German disciple of Charles Darwin, wrote a
best-selling book called "The Riddle of the Universe," in which he argued that
science would soon solve all problems, and in doing so would eliminate war. With
Hitler's gas chambers, Stalin's experiments in agricultural biology and the
Japanese imperial army's in human biology, any moral authority that such zealots
ascribed to science was buried with its victims.

   Science, it became clear, had no particular moral content: it could serve
good, but could also bring evil. Today, both the authority of science and
popular admiration for it are again justifiably high.

   But it makes no claim to moral superiority.

   Where it still errs is in its occasional air of certainty, though this is
often attributed to science by politicians, companies, pressure groups or the
media rather than claimed by the scientists themselves.

   The most common examples lie in the bewildering array of findings and
recommendations on food and diet.

   Another came in the 1950s and 1960s, when the danger of bacteria developing
resistance to antibiotics was ignored.

   Over-confidence regularly shows up in assessments of the environment, and
will feature in debates about genetic engineering. Science is all about
knowledge, but it is a knowledge that is constantly being tested and challenged
by new theories and findings.

   Indeed, the most striking thing in this great age of scientific discovery is
not how much scientists know but how little.

   Sir John Maddox, a long-time editor of Nature, a renowned scientific journal,
mapped the frontiers in 1998 in a magisterial book, "What Remains to be
Discovered."

   "What stands out," he wrote, "is that there is no field of science that is
free from glaring ignorance, even contradiction."

   That may seem a damning judgment, but is not intended as such.

   Instead, it is meant to offer an inspiring challenge to tomorrow's explorers.
It may also help explain what, to many 19th century scientists and even
economists, might have seemed a puzzling feature of the 1990s: the continued
strength of religion.

   After all, when Darwin produced his ideas about evolution in 1859, it was
widely feared that they would undermine the very foundation of religious belief.
Together with affluence and education, they probably did.

   The genuinely devout are a smaller proportion of the population in all the
rich, originally Judeo-Christian countries, and fewer people there now have
well-formed beliefs about heaven and hell, or an afterlife at all.

   But religious observance and affiliation are nevertheless still strikingly
high, especially in the United States.

   In Gallup polls this year, 88 percent of adult Americans said that religion
was either very important or fairly important in their lives, down surprisingly
little from the 95 percent who made that statement in 1952. Some of the
explanation for this is social rather than religious.

   But alongside it should also be placed the burgeoning of the "new age,"
spiritualist beliefs of many kinds.

   In Western Europe, church membership and attendance have declined sharply.

   However, even there, some revival can be detected in the 1980s and 1990s, as
well as lots of new-age activity. And, as in the United States, the figures
conceal a big transfer from older, traditional churches to new independent
bodies.

   A similar movement has taken place in Japan. Those points about science and
religion are worth keeping in mind for the next time someone tells you that you
are living in a knowledge economy.

   To be told this is irritating for two reasons: first, because it is old hat,
in that the economic shift from manpower to brainpower has been going on
throughout this century; and second, because it is so inappropriate.

   The most important knowledge that has been gained is of the scope of our
ignorance. Perhaps most of all, this applies to the discipline that gives The
Economist its name.

   Depressions have been created by over-confident economists and their
followers, as have inflations, hyperinflations and unemployment.

   The notion that economics is a science, in the sense that it can accurately
map human behavior and then predict and manage the consequences of a given
action, is scorned in the common speech of most politicians and many economists.

   Yet the actions of those same politicians and economists when in government,
both in the capitalist and the communist worlds, belie that scorn.

   Governments run their economies as though they could be certain about the
outcomes, and have mostly been proved wrong. What economists need most is
humility. The liberal presumption in favor of the market, of capitalism and
indeed of freedom itself, is driven by intellectual humility: the acceptance
that a process of constant experimentation, involving the freely expressed views
and actions of millions of people, is likely to produce a better, more adaptable
outcome than one involving a committee of economists, politicians, bureaucrats,
businessmen or even journalists, drawing up a grand blueprint.

   This presumption is humble because it acknowledges the extent of our
ignorance. Liberalism involves, or should involve, an awareness that science
cannot have all the answers, and that technological change will not inevitably
make things better.

   Humbly, it should realize that there is no one right way to manage an
organization, and no one right way to arrange social relationships, whatever a
sociologist or psychologist may claim.

   Above all, the humble liberal has to be aware of a paradox: that when you
think you have come up with a series of solutions to political or practical
problems, the thing that should scare you most is the idea that someone might be
able to assemble the power actually to implement them all. Famously, Lord Acton,
a 19th century liberal, observed that "power tends to corrupt, and absolute
power corrupts absolutely.

   What is generally remembered is the second half of that phrase, especially as
this century has had so many cases of the horror of absolute power.

   But the first half is, if anything, more important.

   And the point it contains, that holders of power will, sometimes consciously,
sometimes unconsciously, exploit it for their own ends, lies behind the
liberal's suspicion not only of government -- even in democracies -- but also of
big business, trade unions, pressure groups and all others who accumulate power.

   Man is not perfectible, but neither is government or any other big group.
Isaiah Berlin, an emigre Jew from Latvia and then an eminent political theorist
at Oxford, gave the best summary of the century's basic issue in his 1958 essay
on "Two Concepts of Liberty."

   This contrasted negative liberty -- individuals' freedom to make their own
choices -- with the idea, essential to socialism and other philosophies of
centralized direction, of positive liberty, the notion that people should be
helped, or forced, to do what was deemed to be in their best interests.

   The moral case against positive liberty is easy to see.

   The practical case against it is that those doing the deeming, even when
well-meaning, are claiming a knowledge and certainty which they do not -- and
cannot -- have. The extremes of positive liberty were seen in the false claims
of communism.

   But they are also inherent in attempts, whether by conservatives, socialists
or anyone else, to force people to live in particular ways, to shape their
businesses in a certain manner or work for particular firms, to refrain from
smoking cigarettes even in private, to bear costs and obligations for the sake
of society or a presumed community interest.

   Such illiberal behavior may be commonly associated with dictatorship but it
is also a strong tendency in democracy, for majority votes are in effect
mandates to do things that minorities did not want. Which is one of the biggest
reasons why, along with the justified optimism about economic, social and
scientific possibilities which we should take with us into the 21st century, we
must keep by us that winemakers' paranoia.

   Things can go wrong, not just because of the acts of chance or God that vex
the viticulturalist, but also because of the many acts of man that, deliberately
or in error, threaten our liberties and our freedom of choice, that are liable
through false claims of certainty to send us in new and dangerous directions,
even in the most mature democracies. Let the final words belong to Thomas
Jefferson: "The price of liberty," he wrote, is "eternal vigilance."

GRAPHIC: 2 DRAWINGS

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1178 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            November 28, 1999 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: Sick child? Cost no object for some, even if the child happens to be a
dog

BYLINE: Lauren Gelfand, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: DENVER

BODY:

   Like many dog owners, Kirk Milliken anguished over what to do when his
Rottweiler, Aspen, twice fell ill with cancer. He didn't want her to suffer. Nor
did he want to lose her companionship.

    Aspen will celebrate a year of living cancer-free this Christmas following
nearly $17,000 in treatment, including the amputation of her right rear leg,
chemotherapy and a gene therapy regimen.

    She may no longer be able to run or go fishing near her Colorado Springs
home. But she still steals cookies from unsuspecting hands and gives sloppy
kisses to passing children.

    "I have often wondered if she hates me for the decisions I made to keep her
around, to keep her with me as long as I could, but it sure doesn't seem that
way," Milliken said.

    Milliken is among a growing number of Americans who treat their pets like
members of the family, and who seek out human-style care when their animals are
sick or injured.

    "With the urbanization of our society, pets have gone from the back yard to
the bedroom and the vast majority of them are even on the bed," said Dr. Greg
Ogilvie, a veterinarian at the Colorado State University Animal Cancer Center.
"People love their pets. Why shouldn't they give their loved ones the best
possible medical care?"

    Colorado is at the forefront in canine cancer treatment, with two of the
world's 130 canine oncologists and the Denver-based Morris Animal Foundation,
one of the largest private sources of funding for companion animal health
studies.

    The foundation has donated $1.6 million to canine cancer studies in the last
20 years and in 1999 will support 21 different studies, said spokeswoman
Jennifer Chavez.

    Milliken enrolled Aspen in two clinical trials devoted to researching cancer
at the Veterinary Referral Center of Colorado. The first was funded by Bayer
Corp., the second by the foundation.

    "Cancer is the leading disease-related killer for dogs and the greatest
health concern among the 55 million dog owners in the United States," Chavez
said. "We are funding studies that make it possible for animals to live longer,
with a higher quality of life so that the dogs and their owners can enjoy each
other as long as possible."

    The foundation has helped Ogilvie fund more than 40 studies over the past 20
years, and is currently contributing $25,000 to his study of new applications of
pain relievers for dogs undergoing chemotherapy.

    "The beauty of what we do is that we get to see an average of 200 to 300
animals a year suffering from these diseases compared to a pediatrician who sees
only 25 cases," Ogilvie said.

    "So we can apply therapies used on humans and adapt them to our patients or
expand the treatments we offer to our patients to be beneficial to humans.
Either way our understanding of the mechanics of cancer increases."

    At the Veterinary Referral Center in Denver, the foundation also has paid
$20,000 toward a study by canine oncologist Dr. Robyn Elmslie of the potential
benefits of gene therapy for the type of bone cancer that afflicted Aspen.

    "I owe my dog's life to the doctors, but equally, I owe her life to the
people who provided the funding for the studies," Milliken said. "I don't know
what the year 2000 holds for us, but I sure am thankful we're going into it
together."

GRAPHIC: 1. Kirk Milliken with his 6-year-old Rottweiler, Aspen, at his home in
Colorado Springs. Milliken has spent close to $17,000 on an amputation,
chemotherapy and gene therapy for the animal.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1179 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    November 28, 1999, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: Toy list grows ever more gruesome;

BODY:


   HARTFORD, Conn. - The playthings topping a Hartford minister's annual "warped
toy" list have grown  increasingly gruesome in 13 years.

   The toy topping the Rev. Christopher Rose's list this year: Curse of Spawn
action figure Ryan  Hatchet, the bloody disemboweled corpse of a former high
school student.  $ 17,000 later, pooch is fine

   DENVER - Like many dog owners, Kirk Milliken anguished over what to do when
his Rottweiler,  Aspen, twice fell ill with cancer.

   Aspen will celebrate a year of living cancer-free this Christmas following
nearly $ 17,000 in  treatment, including the amputation of her right rear leg,
chemotherapy and a gene therapy regimen.

   "I have often wondered if she hates me for the decisions I made to keep her
around, to keep her  with me as long as I could, but it sure doesn't seem that
way," Milliken said.  Chernobyl plant fired up again

   KIEV, Ukraine - Ukraine's Chernobyl power plant was scheduled to reach half
its normal output  Saturday evening, after being restarted despite international
opposition.

   Chernobyl power plant operators planned to launch a turbo-alternator of the
plant's only working  reactor Saturday night, sending out 50 percent of its
electrical capacity, officials said.

   Western governments and environmental groups have urged the former Soviet
country to close the  plant after reactor No. 4 exploded in 1986 and covered
much of Europe with a radioactive cloud.

   A 1995 agreement between Ukraine and the Group of Seven leading
industrialized nations said the  plant should be closed by the year 2000. But
Ukraine says it doesn't have $ 1.2 billion needed for  new reactors.

NOTES: IN BRIEF NEWS OF THE NATION NEWS OF THE WORLD

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1999


                             1180 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   November 25, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Rockdale Extra; Pg. 10JR

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: WalkAmerica kicks off Jan. 25 to raise funds to fight birth defects

BYLINE: Salome G. Rowe, For the Journal-Constitution

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
Rockdale County citizens are expected to lead the way to help the March of Dimes
WalkAmerica 2000 spread the word that Georgia's babies need your support.

   This year, 5-year-old Nick Slade of Conyers was selected as Youth Ambassador
2000 for the March of Dimes' Rockdale WalkAmerica.

   Slade's family knows the March of Dimes mission saves lives.

   Nick was born with anophthalmia, a rare disease that prevents growth of globe
and ocular tissue in his eyes. The disease is also known as microphthalmia.

   Nick has undergone 15 surgeries and still can't see.

   Scientists are hoping to isolate a gene involved in developing the eyes,
which would give them many answers about the disease. It would also enable
geneticists to better determine who would be at risk for developing the birth
defect.

   Volunteers in Rockdale say they will continue to press ahead to make the
public more aware of the disease. CIGNA HealthCare of Georgia is presenting the
WalkAmerica campaign for the March of Dimes.

   "We will continue our fight to stamp out birth defects and save the babies,"
said Jacquelyn Johnson, WalkAmerica coordinator. "This year we have a group of
committed volunteers. It is important that we get the word out early so that
residents can plan to attend and support us in these efforts."

   On Jan. 25, the Rockdale WalkAmerica will begin with a kickoff luncheon at
the Outback Steakhouse at 1188 Dogwood Drive in Conyers from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
The next WalkAmerica march will begin on April 15 at the Rockdale Lewis Vaughn
Pavilion in Olde Town.

   Hundreds are expected to participate in the fund-raiser.

   Maj. Bob Hunter of the Conyers Police Department is a member of the
WalkAmerica 2000 Committee.

   "I am proud to assist with the WalkAmerica campaign. Anything to raise funds
and awareness for such a worthy cause is well worth it," Hunter said.

   Hunter and Capt. David Cathcart of the Conyers police became involved in
WalkAmerica several years ago.

   They set up for the march and handle the routing.

   The March of Dimes, a national nonprofit organization founded in 1938, is
investing $ 11.25 million in research over six years to attempt to cure birth
defects through gene therapy. Last year, the Rockdale WalkAmerica raised $ 51,
697.31. The goal for 2000 is $ 50,000.

   For information, call 404-350-9800.

GRAPHIC: Photo
Why they walk: Nicholas Slade, 5, of Conyers, who suffers from a birth defect
that causes blindness, is this year's Youth Ambassador 2000 for the March of
Dimes' Rockdale WalkAmerica. With him are his parents, Russell and Pat Slade.
Holding Nicholas is Becky Danyo.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1999


                             1181 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  November 24, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 1110 words

HEADLINE: Calls Grow for More Oversight of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Some scientists, bioethicists and patient advocates are calling for stronger
federal oversight of human gene therapy, a fledgling field of promising but
unproven medicine that seeks to cure diseases by giving people new genes.

   The call for closer scrutiny comes in the wake of recent revelations that
biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies have been withholding information
about patient deaths in gene therapy experiments, and amid concerns that an
18-year-old's death in a recent Pennsylvania gene therapy study might have been
avoided with closer oversight.

   "The field is being driven by companies that care about the stock market,"
said Abbey S. Meyers, president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders
in New Fairfield, Conn., who is among those in favor of a larger federal
oversight role. "But it doesn't work yet, and the companies aren't being honest
about the side effects. Families with genetic disease are not being told the
truth."

   The renewed focus on federal regulation of gene therapy--which may climax in
a showdown between federal officials and drug companies at a Dec. 8-10 meeting
at the National Institutes of Health--comes three years after NIH Director
Harold Varmus made the controversial decision to scale back his agency's role in
reviewing proposed gene therapy studies.

   That retreat, which allowed researchers to skip certain layers of scientific
and ethical review, was the result of pressure from AIDS patients desperate for
novel therapies, and biotechnology companies chafing under what they felt was an
overly burdensome regulatory system. Both groups wanted to accelerate gene
therapy's transition from a laboratory science to a medical art.

   In some ways the streamlining worked: The number of new genetic therapies
being tested in people increased immediately and has continued to climb steeply
ever since. And while academic researchers dominated the field through the early
1990s, about 40 percent of the new studies proposed in the past three years have
had industry sponsors that hope to commercialize genetic cures.

   At the same time, however, the Office of Recombinant DNA Activities (ORDA),
which oversees gene therapy at the NIH, suffered budgetary and staff reductions
and then was given a new range of policymaking responsibilities for such
difficult and controversial issues as genetic testing and cross-species organ
transplants into people. That has left the office--recently renamed the Office
of Biotechnology Activities, reflecting its new responsibilities--hard pressed
to manage even the reduced levels of gene therapy oversight that it was left
with in 1996, experts outside that office said.

   For example, the office is supposed to update and manage a publicly
accessible database of every gene therapy experiment in the country, including a
description of side effects that researchers have encountered. But the database
has not been updated since 1995 "because of a lack of money and support," said
A. Dusty Miller, a gene researcher at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
in Seattle and a former member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC),
the panel of scientists, ethicists and others that reviewed all gene therapy
protocols for ORDA before the 1996 cutback.

   Now some observers are wondering whether the database might have saved the
life of teenager Jesse Gelsinger, who died mysteriously in September while
participating in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.
Only after Gelsinger's death did the Penn researchers who directed his treatment
become aware that other scientists conducting similar experiments had documented
serious side effects.

   "It's tragic that the death of one generous young man had to be the occasion
for us to see clearly the price we have paid in diminishing the RAC's power and
prestige," said Erik Parens, of the Hastings Center, a bioethics think tank in
Garrison, N.Y. "Perhaps one significant good that will come of this is that we
will rethink the proper place and power of RAC."

   James Wilson, the lead gene researcher in the Gelsinger study, was among
those who wrote letters to the NIH during the summer of 1996 in favor of
reducing RAC oversight--especially its power to approve or disapprove gene
therapy proposals--saying the reduction was necessary "to allow continued
evolution of this field in an unencumbered way."

   A spokesman for Wilson said yesterday that Wilson is "still committed to the
principles" behind the 1996 changes, particularly the principle that all data
relevant to the safety of gene therapy should be openly shared. Wilson and his
colleagues have been praised by many in the gene therapy world for their
immediate disclosure of Gelsinger's death and the provision of details
surrounding that tragedy.

   But with the NIH database still incomplete and offline--and with some experts
concerned that the informed-consent forms that spell out medical risks to gene
therapy volunteers may not be getting properly reviewed since the RAC lost its
power to approve them--some in Congress are wondering whether the RAC needs to
be beefed up again.

   Yesterday Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Calif.), who opposed the 1996 cutback, was
preparing a letter to Varmus expressing anew his concern about the NIH's
diminished standing. A spokesman for Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) yesterday said
the senator was still awaiting a reply to his Nov. 4 letter to Varmus addressing
similar concerns. An NIH spokesman said a response was being crafted and would
be completed "very soon."

   Frist's letter cited recent reports that at least seven deaths among
participants in gene therapy trials in the past 20 months were not reported
promptly to the RAC (some were reported later, but lacking details required by
NIH); three additional deaths were reported, but the scientists or companies
submitting the reports tried to keep them from becoming public.

   All the deaths were reported to the Food and Drug Administration, which also
reviews adverse events but which, unlike the RAC, meets behind closed doors.

   Varmus said yesterday that the 1996 cutback did not change the NIH
requirement that gene researchers must promptly report all significant adverse
events to the RAC. "The rules are there and they're pretty clear," he said.

   But some companies have said they will argue against that rule at the
upcoming RAC meeting--a meeting at which Wilson will describe the results of
Penn's investigation into the cause of Gelsinger's death.

    BACKING THE TESTS (This chart was not available) Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died
mysteriously in September in a gene therapy test in Pennsylvania.


GRAPHIC: CH,,TWP

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1999


                             1182 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              November 22, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     November 22, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENE THERAPY RAISES ISSUE OF ETHICS;
CRITICS ASK WHY PENN RESEARCHERS CHOSE TREATMENT FOR TEEN WHO DIED

BYLINE: By DEBORAH NELSON; and RICK WEISS; WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   Four days after scientists infused trillions of genetically engineered
viruses into Jesse Gelsinger's liver as part of a novel gene-therapy experiment,
the 18-year-old lay dying at the University of Pennsylvania.

   His liver had failed, and his blood was thickening like jelly and clogging
key vessels while his kidneys, brain and other organs shut down.

   It was a rare and irreversible blood reaction, but it wasn't the first time
the researchers had seen it. Unknown to Gelsinger, who had signed up for the
experimental treatment for a rare and often fatal liver disorder, monkeys that
the Penn team had similarly treated had succumbed in very much the same way.

   The team had moved forward with the human experiment despite the monkey
deaths, and despite criticism from other researchers who thought it was too
dangerous, because they believed a new version of genetically altered virus they
had developed was safer than the one that had killed the monkeys.

   "Now I have to think, 'Was I blind?' said James Wilson, head of Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy and a lead scientist in the trial. "I'm asking
myself that question a lot these days."

   So far, the Penn team's investigation into Gelsinger's death in September -
thought to be the first fatality from gene therapy - has yielded no clear
indication of what triggered the fatal reaction, so it's too soon to say whether
it should have been predicted and prevented.

   Gelsinger's father remains highly supportive of the Penn team, and Gelsinger
himself was eager to participate, despite the risks.

   But many experts wonder whether an impatient Penn team overlooked the study's
pitfalls out of eagerness to win a nine-year-old race to produce the world's
first gene-based cure.

   As scientists work to cure diseases by giving people new, healthy genes, some
are asking whether federal regulators' enthusiasm for the hot new field - and
their enchantment with Wilson's stellar reputation - may have led them to give
Wilson the benefit of the doubt at too many key decision points along the way.

   Also anxious for success were the corporate investors who have funneled tens
of millions of dollars into a gene-therapy company Wilson founded and into his
lab at Penn on the bet that he'd push the field forward.

   Wilson denies that he was influenced by financial concerns. But such tight
ties between university researchers and private industry are worrisome to
ethicists.

   "People will say they cannot cure patients and now they're killing them,"
said Guenter Cichon of Berlin's Humboldt University, one of several researchers
who have documented the potentially deadly nature of the viruses that were given
to Gelsinger in the Penn study.

   Gelsinger suffered from a disease called ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency. Victims are born with a genetic mutation that leaves their livers
unable to break down ammonia, a normal byproduct of metabolism. High ammonia
levels can quickly become fatal, and the disease affects newborn boys most
seriously, killing about half of them soon after birth.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1999


                             1183 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 21, 1999, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: Rough draft of human gene 'map' due soon

BYLINE: BY JOHN CARPENTER

BODY:


   Scientists are even further ahead of schedule than previously reported in the
race to map the entire human genetic code, a University of Chicago geneticist
said Saturday.

   The effort, which will dramatically speed the process of identifying which
genes are associated with countless human diseases, should yield a "rough draft"
of the map by early next year, said David H. Leadbetter, chairman of the
university's human genetics department.

   "Within four or five months, we should know 90 percent of the human genetic
sequence," Leadbetter told about 100 attendees at a daylong seminar on the
future of genetic research.

   The body contains about 100,000 genes that essentially form the blueprint for
a functioning human being. Genes tell cells how to produce specific proteins
that make our bodies work.

   Each gene is identified through sequences of letters. And each letter -- A,
T, C or G -- represents one of four chemicals. The sequences form three-letter
words, which are grouped together into "sentences." The entire human genome has
more than 3 billion letters.

   In the last several years, scientists have found several specific genes
associated with deadly diseases, from breast cancer to cystic fibrosis. Finding
these genes offers several potential benefits, from helping develop drugs for
treatment to early detection and prevention. There also is the new field of gene
therapy, which involves altering a defective gene.

   Leadbetter pointed out that much attention has been paid to controversial
gene therapies, which he said are still far in the future. Often overlooked, he
said, are the potentials for better drugs and better traditional medical
treatments that can be developed from genetic research.

   "The medical students I talk to still don't understand the practical
near-term ramifications of genetics," Leadbetter said.

   The Human Genome Project is a government-funded international scientific
effort. Started in 1990, it originally was scheduled to take 15 years. Since
then, however, privately funded researchers have joined the race, prompting the
government-funded project to pick up the pace, Leadbetter said.

   Officials originally moved up the target for producing a rough draft map to
2001. But Leadbetter said Saturday that progress is being made more quickly than
expected.

   That "race" is not merely for bragging rights. Potentially lucrative genetic
patents are at stake that could make millions for private researchers and
inhibit future study, Leadbetter said.

   In fact, government-funded scientists working on the Human Genome Project
must publish their findings on the Internet every night so they are in the
public domain as quickly as possible, he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1999


                             1184 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 21, 1999, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Sports; Part D; Page 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: STILL SEEING BLUE;
 BILL VEECK'S GRANDDAUGHTER GETS SPECIAL LOOK INTO BASEBALL HALL OF FAME

BYLINE: DAVE KINDRED, THE SPORTING NEWS

BODY:


   Rebecca Veeck, 8, went to Cooperstown to see her grandfather. Looking at a
photograph of Bill Veeck with Larry Doby, she took off her sunglasses and asked,
"Which one is Grandpa?"

   Mike Veeck knew it was a matter of light and shadow. His daughter is losing
her sight. Her eyes were slow to adjust to the room's brightness. Black was
white, and white was black. And if for only a moment, the colors were the
same--Which one is Grandpa? Mike Veeck recognized that moment. "A lovely
thought," he said.

   He took his daughter to baseball's Hall of Fame because her grandpa earned a
place there, and he wanted her to see it while she can. At home, she had seen
pictures of her daddy's daddy. What a man Bill Veeck was, robust and roaring in
laughter, even about the wooden leg replacing one lost in war. Just two things
to be afraid of, he said: "fire and termites."

   "Look, Daddy, Grandpa's got two feet," Rebecca Veeck said at Cooperstown. The
old man she had seen in pictures she now saw as a young man. The wizened face
was unlined. The little girl saw her grandpa for the first time with two feet.
She saw him with Larry Doby, who came from the Negro National League to play for
Veeck's Indians.

   Now a Hall of Famer alongside his old boss, Doby came to Cooperstown with
Rebecca and her father, because of all the wonders Bill Veeck did as
owner/president/marketer, what he did best was look at black and white and see
those colors as the same.

   Doby saw Rebecca see her grandfather, and he heard her ask, "Where's the
exploding scoreboard?" Bill Veeck's ballparks sparkled with circuses and
fireworks. Rebecca's question and laugh resonated with Doby: "She's like a chip
off the old block. You see it in her, the same qualities that her grandfather
had."

   It's the family trade. Rebecca's first baseball job was to recline in her
bassinet until called on; then she'd sit up and say hi to folks entering her
daddy's ballpark. She was not yet talking when she first sang, "Take Me Out to
the Ball Game." At 6, she handed out schedules and announced lineups.

   In 1917, the sportswriter William Veeck Sr. wrote articles telling Cubs Owner
William Wrigley how to run his forlorn organization. Wrigley hired him. Until
his death in 1933, the reformed writer nudged the Cubs toward respectability.

   Then his son, a college graduate without a job, went to work for the Cubs at
$ 18 a week as an office boy reporting to Phil Wrigley, the son of the man who
had hired his father.

   Bill Veeck and his father had intended to start a small-town newspaper. But
during the Depression, an $ 18 salary was a powerful lure. Veeck soon discovered
he loved the world inside a ballpark. For 50 more years, he taught us to love
it.

   Happily, Mike Veeck is his father's son. Would anyone other than a Veeck
train a half-ton pig named Hambino to deliver baseballs to the home plate
umpire? Offer a free vasectomy to a lucky man at a Father's Day game? Celebrate
"Two Dead Fat Guys Day" on Aug. 16, the date on which Babe Ruth and Elvis
Presley died?

   He was able to do such fun and foolishness because he did it for a good boss:
himself. With ownership interests in five minor league teams from South Carolina
to South Dakota, Veeck, now 48, calls himself "a minor league guy. I'll go to my
grave a minor league guy."

   He forgot that for a minute. In October 1998, he took a major league job as
vice president of sales and marketing for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays.

   That same month, Rebecca went in for an eye examination and couldn't see the
big E on the chart.

   "We thought she was goofin' because that's the kind of fun kid she is," Veeck
says. "But we found out she'd been living in shadows her whole life."

   The diagnosis was retinitis pigmentosa. How long Rebecca will see, no one can
say, but the disease often moves rapidly.

   One Sunday morning this spring, Rebecca said, "Daddy, look at the sky. How
blue."

   Veeck had worked eight months of marathon days trying to sell baseball to a
Florida audience not buying. He also had worked for another reason. "But you
can't work hard enough," he says, "to forget you're this afraid."

   So when your daughter, going blind, has to remind you how blue the sky is,
it's time to be a daddy. This summer, Veeck quit the Devil Rays and now wants
Rebecca to see everything. She saw Grandpa at Cooperstown. Soon she'll see Death
Valley, the Grand Canyon and Yosemite.

   Veeck and his wife, Libby, talked to Rebecca about making her story public.
She said no; kids already made fun of her sunglasses. She changed her mind when
her parents said bringing attention to The Foundation Fighting Blindness might
help other children.

   Recent tests show Rebecca's eyesight improved a little, the deterioration
slowing, though still inevitable. Researchers hope that medicine, gene therapy
and even computer-chip implants someday will restore vision to patients with
Rebecca's disease.

   "I treasure this time with Rebecca," Mike Veeck says. "I'm a different person
than I was a year ago. While I suffer fools easily because I am one, I no longer
am able to see the loss of 20 Devil Rays season tickets as 'a failure of tragic
proportions.' "

   The baseball man says he now knows what's important. He knows what makes him
cry.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1999


                             1185 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    November 21, 1999, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3066 words

HEADLINE: Pedal to the Metal; In the Tech-Led New Economy, Speed Begets
Productivity

SERIES: UPTIME; Pg. 1/2

BYLINE: Mark Leibovich, Washington Post Staff Writer

DATELINE: MIDLAND, Mich.

BODY:



   First of two articles


   Trucker Bill Frizzell revved his 65-foot rig through another industrial
strip, past the shiny silos of Dow Chemical Co. and a drab procession of
drive-through food options. There's little downtime to his trips now, scarce
chance to eat bacon and eggs and play video games at the Flying J truck stop in
Walton, Ky., or worship at the Transport for Christ ministry near Gary, Ind.

   But he's not complaining. Frizzell has more highway to cover than ever, more
cargo to haul and headier aspirations for Miracle Transport, the trucking firm
he runs out of his basement. His workdays and work nights have gone from grind
to sprint, his once-uninterrupted drives now fragmented by newfound pickups and
drop-offs. Frizzell's pace and his business have been recalibrated to the
souped-up speeds, demands and possibilities of what's come to be known as the
New Economy.

   Like many U.S. businesses today, Miracle Transport is using the Internet to
wring fresh revenue from its equipment and workers. In May, the company joined
an online network, National Transportation Exchange Inc., which helps drivers
and dispatchers find cargo in range of their trucks. NTE fills the empty rig
space that can turn driver time unproductive, and the Downers Grove, Ill.,
start-up will help generate an estimated $ 75 million in sales this year for the
trucking industry.

   Frizzell is hardly the archetypal high-flier for these boom times. He has a
bearded, sober bearing, wears scuffed brown cowboy boots and listens to Merle
Haggard CDs as he drives. He cares more about giving 10 percent of his income to
Midland's Christian Celebration Center than buying a Gulfstream jet. He has
never been to Silicon Valley except once, to pick up a big computer when he
drove for United Van Lines.

   But Frizzell is just as much a participant in the changes sweeping the U.S.
economy as any bull market zillionaire or geek tycoon. And the transformation of
Miracle Transport is perhaps just what Alan Greenspan meant when the
ever-cautious Federal Reserve chairman gave a kind of papal blessing to the
innovations he sees pervading the country. "An impressive proliferation of new
technologies," he told a congressional panel last summer, "is inducing major
shifts in the underlying structure of the American economy."


   Speed and Information


   The "New Economy" has become a rubric that seems to encompass every
development of the late-century boom--from telecommuting to casual Fridays to
the latest mega-stock offering. But at the heart of a broad notion is a simple
idea: Thanks to a wave of computing advances, American businesses can do far
more than they ever could before, and they can do it faster and cheaper.

   In real terms, this means that airlines can save about $ 7 a ticket by
processing a ticket online instead of on paper; that Navistar International
Corp. can now produce 300,000 diesel engines a year with 1,800 workers, compared
with 100,000 engines with 1,200 workers in 1994; that new software helps the
Weather Channel answer 250 e-mail messages a day instead of 80; and that Detroit
now takes less than 48 months to produce a new-model car, compared with 60 to 70
months five years ago.

   For Frizzell, it meant logging on to NTE before a recent run from Pigeon,
Mich., to Chicago Heights, Ill., and finding extra cargo for one of his truckers
to haul along the way. This led to pickups in River View, Mich.; Greenville,
Ohio; Richmond, Ind.; and Plymouth, Ind. He also discovered several
"backhauls"--loads for his trucker's return trip--which made for seven
additional stops.

   The added cargo meant the trip earned $ 1,925 for Miracle Transport instead
of $ 1,125. In the last six months, Frizzell said, NTE has spurred about $
60,000 in extra revenue--half the company's overall business. "I thank the Lord
first and I thank NTE second," said Frizzell, who at age 41 has driven trucks
half his life.


   Productivity Rising


   The collective gauge of these technological advances is an economic statistic
called productivity, the key indicator of how efficiently the nation's labor
force is working. The Labor Department recently reported that business
productivity shot up at the unusually high annual rate of 4.2 percent in the
third quarter, the latest in a run of momentous signals over the past four
years. A recent report by Macroeconomic Advisers, a St. Louis forecasting firm,
said improvements in technology have raised the productivity level so sharply
that the nation's economy should be able to grow 3 percent a year in the next
decade without adding to inflation.

   Economists have debated the true measure and meaning of productivity rates
for years. Robert J. Gordon of Northwestern University argues that recent
productivity gains have occurred disproportionately in the high-tech sector.
Others have downplayed the significance of technology, maintaining that cheap
imports, liberalized trade and low interest rates have played a greater role in
helping companies cut costs by making them more efficient.

   But beyond these expert debates, the New Economy is driven by a powerful
ethos, a conviction that new technology can eliminate traditional drains on
efficiency--the time, for instance, that truckers spend working the phones at
truck stops in search of loads. It is a crusade for streamlining rooted in the
principle of "uptime," originally a computer term from the 1950s to define when
the room-size machines could function.

   "Uptime" now extends to humans and entire organizations, meaning a working
rhythm with minimal lags--and all the savings that can bring. Phone equipment
maker Nortel Networks Corp. said it saves $ 2.4 million a year by managing all
of its real estate properties from a single desktop in Virginia, instead of
having 20 people crisscrossing the country at any given time. Dow Chemical can
process its quarterly financial results in 16 fewer days by consolidating its
company information on sophisticated "data warehouse" software.

   It used to require a phone call to track a FedEx parcel, and a wait for the
customer service agent; now, more customers visit the FedEx Web site than call
its 800 number. And FedEx's customer service reps can spend their increased
uptime on pursuits more constructive than simply finding information that many
customers can get with a point and click.

   "Instantaneous execution has become the era's defining business promise,"
said Keri Pearlson, an assistant professor of information systems at the
University of Texas's graduate school of business. And that has been made
possible by a confluence of innovations--in microprocessor, software, laser,
fiber-optic and satellite technologies--that have sped the flow of information
to a radical degree, and reduced its cost dramatically.


   Data at the Fingertips


   At a Louisiana-Pacific Corp. wood products mill in Houlton, Maine, for
instance, the plant's uptime rate (95 percent) is updated and flashed constantly
for the plant's 116 plant employees to see. So is the most seemingly arcane
data, about menaces such as "flaker starts," an electrical blip that can cause a
few seconds of downtime on the production line. The numbers are available to all
on a company Intranet.

   Such data, however minute, are a defining currency in the contemporary
organization. Once tightly controlled, the flow of information has been
democratized by networking and database technologies, with profound implications
both for the way a company is run and for its potential to be more efficient.

   In "Old Economy" organizations, information typically remained at management
level. "Today, with information filtering everywhere, it would be dysfunctional
to use the old model of a single decision maker," said Erik Brynjolfsson, a
productivity expert at MIT's Sloan School of Management.

   Brynjolfsson, who has studied data from 600 large U.S. firms, said the
computerized dissemination of information has had a leveling effect on
organizations. It has led many to break down hierarchies and institute more
team-oriented structures.

   "We put out the information to everyone as fast as we can," said Jerry Nason,
Louisiana-Pacific's plant manager in Houlton. "Who knows more about uptime than
the people who do the work?"


   Savings From Technology


   To many economists, increased uptime provides an explanation for the most
surprising facet of the U.S. economy this decade--for the first time in memory,
the nation is experiencing low unemployment and low inflation simultaneously.

   When unemployment is down, businesses traditionally compete for workers by
offering higher wages. This cost is often passed on to consumers, resulting in
inflation. Yet the pattern has shifted in the 1990s, and a prevailing theory is
that once-unforeseen efficiencies have helped companies cut costs and keep
prices low--a necessity in today's intensely competitive economy.

   "We're seeing only the tip of the iceberg in terms of technology-enabled
savings and efficiencies," said John Chambers, the chief executive of Cisco
Systems Inc., the Silicon Valley computer network company that's building much
of the Internet's hardware infrastructure.

   Chambers, whose company is reaping staggering profits and stock valuations
from the online boom, posits Cisco as an object lesson for conducting business
electronically. The Internet has accounted for a 20 percent increase in the
firm's productivity rate, he said, and saves $ 500 million a year in operating
costs. One small piece of this occurs every time Cisco hires a new employee.
Since much of Cisco's recruiting and application process takes place online, its
"cost per hire" is $ 6,381 compared with the high-tech industry average of $
10,800, the company said.

   Chambers works in a crammed and modest cubby at Cisco's headquarters in San
Jose. Cisco Executive Vice President Don Listwin sits in an adjoining office and
monitors that day's sales flow from his "Executive Dashboard." Listwin can study
every aspect of Cisco's business: How many people did Cisco hire that day in
Asia? How many network routers did it sell in South America? "The essence of the
New Economy company is using technology to optimize your information," Listwin
said.


   Old Practices Abandoned


   Windfalls are being reaped across numerous sectors, new and entrenched, in
every region of the country. Ford Motor Co., the auto icon that perfected the
assembly line early in the century, is saving tens of millions of dollars a year
by simulating many of the cumbersome and costly car design processes on powerful
supercomputers.

   The company has reduced the number of clay automobile models by 80 percent to
90 percent, said Charles Schloff, a 34-year-old Ford product manager at the
company's Dearborn, Mich., headquarters. Instead of technicians having to use
heavy tools to tinker with a clay automobile, they can tap a few buttons on a
keyboard for the same simulated effect. It saves huge amounts of time, along
with the $ 250,000 to $ 500,000 it costs to build each clay model.

   Similar efficiencies have struck Big Oil, like the auto industry a pillar of
the traditional economy based on manufacturing and natural resources. When he
started work at Texaco Inc. 22 years ago, geologist Ronald Cupich would spend
months studying paper prints of seismic data in the part of the world he was
exploring. "We would be moving up and down, folding big sheets of paper the size
of horse blankets," Cupich said. "This was tedious, inefficient time."

   What once took months now takes hours. Cupich sits in a Houston office park,
in an elaborate 3-D simulation center where Texaco geologists are homing in on
potential drill sites off the coast of West Africa. It costs about $ 50 million
to drill an oil hole and most of these turn out empty, but the hit rate has
risen considerably since the center was built--for about $ 3 million.

   The Silicon Graphics Onyx2 Infinite Reality supercomputer allows Cupich and
his team to turn the undersea terrain over like fluorescent clay on a
25-by-8-foot screen. By bright color coding, he can sift for sand, shale and
faults that could be fatal to a dig. He says he spends about 98 percent of his
time in front of a computer now, compared with about 30 percent five years ago.

   "Technology is getting up to the speed of how the brain works," said Jesse
Mericle, Texaco's vice president of West Africa exploration. "Or maybe it's the
other way around."


   Rise of Entrepreneurs


   As the price of computing power has dropped and chip speed has accelerated,
the barriers to being a technical innovator, or an industrial pioneer, have been
lowered appreciably. A would-be entrepreneur doesn't need much to start, say, an
Internet business. No inventory, no store, no physical proximity to customers
and not a lot of money. Ambitions have soared accordingly.

   Gene Riechers, a venture capitalist who invests in start-up technology firms
for Arlington brokerage Friedman, Billings, Ramsey Group Inc., said he gets 150
business plans a month from would-be entrepreneurs, double the number of two
years ago. "There is room for literally millions of people to redefine lives,"
said Riechers, to make them more convenient and productive. That's the promise
of so much new technology, he said.

   And it's spawned the New Economy's most celebrated figure, the Internet
entrepreneur.

   Five years ago, Matthew Pittinsky graduated from college and came to
Washington with an education career in mind. He took a job as a student teacher
in a District junior high school. Then the Internet triggered bigger ambitions.

   In June 1997, Pittinsky co-founded Blackboard Inc., a Web-based service that
allows colleges to put their course material online. Today, it is used by more
than 1,600 universities and public school districts in 70 countries. A college
dropout in Tanzania might soon attend a virtual Harvard. Pipe dream or no,
Pittinsky said he has a rejiggered sense of what is possible. Why try to scale a
corporate ladder when you can make a new industry from a desktop?

   And another thing: In the next year, Blackboard will likely hold an initial
public offering, and Pittinsky stands to become a paper multimillionaire at the
age of 28.


   Longer, Harder Hours?


   In time, the expectation of instantaneous information will become
"hard-wired" into organizational expectations, said Gopi Bala, the director of
management strategy at Yankee Group, a Boston technology consultancy. "It will
create a new economic ecosystem."

   Bala compares today's U.S. economy to contemporary athletes. They are bigger,
stronger and faster than their forebears, and it's no fluke of evolution.
Rather, the athletes have benefited from nutritional breakthroughs, new training
tools and techniques, even economic incentives and information that, presumably,
expanded the population of available talent. By the same measure, today's
economy has been nourished to better fitness by technology.

   Fitness is an appropriate metaphor, as the New Economy has bred a runaway
workweek unmatched in the industrialized world. U.S. workers are toiling the
equivalent of two additional 40-hour weeks a year, compared with Japanese
workers, according a new study by the International Labor Organization, a United
Nations agency. They worked nearly 2,000 hours per capita in 1997, an increase
of 4 percent from 1980.

   "When I was a kid reading Popular Science in the Sixties, everyone said the
appliances of the future would let us work 25-hour weeks," Riechers said. "That
nirvana certainly never materialized."

   This is in part due to basic supply and demand: With a 4.1 percent
unemployment rate, and countless jobs going unfilled, there is simply more work
being done by fewer people. Nineteen percent of Americans say they are working
more than 49 hours a week, according to a Bureau of Labor Statistics report, up
from 16 percent in 1985.

   But it also gets to a crux of a New Economy debate: the question of whether
workers are producing more because they have better tools, or because they're
simply working more hours.

   What's clear is that human stamina is often the only barrier to total uptime
in "our interconnected, hyperactive, e-mail-fueled, sleep-deprived economy,"
said corporate consultant and historian Daniel Yergin, the chairman of Cambridge
Energy Research Associates. Bodily rest, so unproductive, is often a casualty in
the sleepless business cycle. Yergin half-jokes that "the next frontier is
biotechnology. People are going to need genetic therapy to keep up with the
demands of the New Economy."


   Back on the Road


   But in its most hopeful manifestation, the New Economy is about what can be
done and what can be dreamed. Miracle Transport began as a one-truck operation
last November. Frizzell added two more trucks after he joined NTE six months
ago. He envisions a small empire of 150 trucks. "I want to be your man to call
for one-stop shipping around Midland," said Frizzell.

   Sitting in his Midland home office one morning this month, he signed onto
America Online, jumped to National Transportation Exchange and contemplated an
electronic menu of loads: perhaps a run from Muskegon Heights, Mich., to
Carterville, Ga., another from Prairie du Chien, Wis., to Centralia, Ill.

   As he browsed, Rick Armstrong, Frizzell's church pal and a Miracle driver,
walked in. Armstrong was in the midst of a long haul of cement products that
began in Baltimore and would end in Wyoming, Mich., 2 1/4 hours from here.

   It was 11 a.m. and he'd been driving since 2:30 a.m. He sat down and joined
Frizzell in gulping some coffee before they both rolled out again.



   Staff researcher Richard Drezen contributed to this report.


   Next: Workplace strains at Amazon.com

    Technology's Push (This graphic was not available) Picking Up More Business
(This graphic was not available) Geologists are using a 3-D simulation center at
Texaco, above, to find potential drilling sites off the coast of West Africa,
saving millions of dollars for the company with their more accurate predictions.
Right, geologists in the early 1950s and more recently labored over drafting
tables. Trucking entrepreneur Bill Frizzell of Midland, Mich., locates extra
transport work using the Internet in his home office for his new business,
Miracle Transport.


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post; Map, william mcnulty

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1999


                             1186 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    November 21, 1999, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 4207 words

HEADLINE: Hasty Decisions in the Race to a Cure?; Gene Therapy Study Proceeded
Despite Safety, Ethics Concerns

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   Four days after scientists infused trillions of genetically engineered
viruses into Jesse Gelsinger's liver as part of a novel gene therapy experiment,
the 18-year-old lay dying in a hospital bed at the University of Pennsylvania.

   His liver had failed, and the teenager's blood was thickening like jelly and
clogging key vessels while his kidneys, brain and other organs shut down.

   It was a rare and irreversible blood reaction, but it wasn't the first time
the researchers had seen it. Unbeknown to Gelsinger, who had signed up for the
experimental treatment for a rare and often fatal liver disorder, monkeys that
the Penn team had similarly treated had succumbed in very much the same way.

   The team had moved forward with the human experiment despite the monkey
deaths, and despite criticism from other researchers who thought it was too
dangerous, because they believed that a new version of genetically altered virus
they had developed was safer than the one that had killed the monkeys.

   "Now I have to think, 'Was I blind?' " said James Wilson, head of Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy and a lead scientist in the trial. "I'm asking
myself that question a lot these days."

   So far, the Penn team's investigation into Gelsinger's death in
September--thought to be the first fatality from gene therapy--has yielded no
clear indication of what triggered the fatal reaction, so it's too soon to say
whether it should have been predicted and prevented. Besides, experimental
therapies by definition often are dangerous, and the distinction between
laudable perseverance and unjustifiable risk-taking can be blurry.

   Gelsinger's father remains highly supportive of the Penn team. And Gelsinger
himself was eager to participate, despite the risks.

   But a close look at the Penn research provides a rare snapshot of that subtle
scientific and ethical landscape known as the cutting edge of medicine. And it
resurrects old questions about whether the Penn experiment ever should have
begun.

   Many experts wonder, for example, whether an impatient Penn team overlooked
the study's pitfalls out of eagerness to win a nine-year-old race to produce the
world's first gene-based cure. As scientists work to cure diseases by giving
people new, healthy genes, some are asking whether federal regulators'
enthusiasm for the hot new field--and their enchantment with Wilson's stellar
reputation--may have led them to give Wilson the benefit of the doubt at too
many key decision points along the way.

   Also anxious for success were the corporate investors who have funneled tens
of millions of dollars into a gene therapy company Wilson founded and into his
lab at Penn on the bet that he'd push the field forward.

   Wilson adamantly denies that he was influenced by financial concerns. But
such tight ties between university researchers and private industry are
worrisome to ethicists.

   A detailed examination of research records, along with interviews with
scientists and government officials, has revealed:


   * The Penn experiment was the first to shoot such a heavy dose of
gene-altered viruses directly into the bloodstream of patients with a genetic
disease, even as researchers acknowledged that it had no chance of curing that
disease and despite widespread uncertainty in the field about toxic side
effects.


   * Contrary to most high-risk research, the Penn study experimented with the
healthiest rather than sickest segment of the patient population--people such as
Gelsinger, who had the disease under control with conventional drugs and diet,
or people who had no symptoms at all.


   * Researchers were not deterred by early indications of toxicity as they
gradually increased doses in their experiment, including an especially severe
case of liver damage in one participant. And they discounted or missed evidence
of serious side effects in their own and other animal and human studies.


   * Volunteers were recruited in ways that federal officials had explicitly
precluded as being too potentially coercive, with direct appeals on a patient
advocacy Web site that heralded "promising" early results from the clinical
trial and said the experiment used "very low doses" when in fact they were
relatively high.


   * The original consent form, reviewed publicly by the National Institutes of
Health, clearly notified prospective participants that monkeys had died from a
related treatment, but the final version given to patients eliminated any
mention of the deaths.


   * Wilson has a financial interest in a private company he founded, Genovo
Inc. of Sharon Hill, Pa., which has rights to discoveries made by Wilson at his
lab on the Penn campus and which has a substantial financial stake in seeing
liver-directed gene therapy succeed.


   Gelsinger's death may never be fully explained. But already it has
revitalized longstanding criticisms that gene therapy researchers, whose
treatments have disappointed more than 3,000 patients since 1990, are
experimenting on too many people too soon. It may be hard to argue against
rushing to test novel treatments for incurable diseases, experts said. But
moving ahead too quickly could do more than just place patients at risk. It
could undermine the public trust that is so crucial to gene therapy, a field
long seen as controversial because of its goal of altering people's fundamental
genetic makeup.

   "People will say they cannot cure patients and now they're killing them,"
said Guenter Cichon of Berlin's Humboldt University, one of several researchers
who have documented the potentially deadly nature of the viruses that were given
to Gelsinger in the Penn study.


   Focusing on OTC Disease


   Gelsinger suffered from a disease called ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency. Victims are born with a genetic mutation that leaves their livers
unable to break down ammonia, a normal byproduct of metabolism. High ammonia
levels can quickly become fatal, and the disease affects newborn boys most
seriously, killing about half of them soon after birth.

   An estimated 1 in 40,000 babies is born with a defective OTC gene, a tiny
population of patients for a major scientific effort. But Wilson, one of the
country's leading geneticists, saw an opportunity to tackle a horrific disease
while perfecting his technique for delivering genes to the liver, which he
considered the key to curing many other more common diseases that have their
roots in that organ.

   In discussions with colleague Mark Batshaw, who pioneered a drug-and-diet
regimen for OTC survivors that has saved numerous lives, Wilson became convinced
that OTC deficiency was the perfect disease to prove the potential of gene
therapy for the liver. Together, Wilson and Batshaw, with surgeon Steven Raper
from Penn, developed a plan to use gene-altered viruses to deliver healthy
copies of the OTC gene to affected newborns as soon as they were
diagnosed--generally when they were on the brink of death from skyrocketing
ammonia levels soon after birth.

   The scientists knew the therapy was potentially dangerous, because the
gene-altered virus they would use to get the new genes into the newborns' cells
can trigger life-threatening reactions. They also knew the therapy would be
short-lived, because the babies' immune systems would shut down the new genes
within a few days or weeks.

   But in such a desperately ill population, for whom no effective treatment
exists, the risk of the new therapy would be justified, the researchers
reasoned. And once these infants made it through their first crisis, they could
be placed on Batshaw's diet-and-drug regimen and perhaps live fairly normal
lives.

   It seemed like medicine at its best: trying to save babies from an incurable
disease. So the team was shocked when Penn's own ethicists rejected the
proposal. Parents whose children are so close to death cannot be counted on to
make rational decisions about whether to enter those children into a new,
potentially dangerous and unproved experiment, they said.

   Thus began a change of focus that, in many experts' eyes, triggered an
unconscionable shift in the study's balance of risks and benefits: Rather than
drop their focus on OTC altogether, the researchers decided to experiment on
healthy or stable adult OTC patients such as Gelsinger, who had survived to
adulthood because they had milder forms of the disease.

   If the treatment proved safe, the researchers could bolster their case for
testing its usefulness in newborns. But first they would have to test its safety
in adults for whom safe and conventional treatments already existed, whose
livers were already stressed because of their disease, and who stood no chance
of getting any lasting benefit from the experimental approach.

   That shift in focus stirred intense debate in 1995 when the study was
reviewed by federal officials. But despite concerns that the researchers still
needed to answer some basic scientific questions before moving ahead, the
plan--like many other gene therapy protocols then and today--was approved by
federal regulators amid a wave of optimism that scientists were on the brink of
a breakthrough that would forever change the face of medicine.

   "We had to select one disease to move forward in for gene therapy to the
liver," Wilson recalled recently. "I thought the severity of the disease would
warrant and justify trying this therapy. It's such a compelling story."


   In the Business of Science


   Wilson also had financial incentives to stay focused on the liver, although
he denies that they influenced him in any way.

   Since Wilson founded Genovo in 1992, the company has attracted two major
corporate investors. While neither of those companies is interested in OTC
specifically--it afflicts too few people to be commercially attractive--both are
interested in gene delivery to the liver and both were drawn to Genovo's access
to Wilson's discoveries.

   Biogen Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., has paid Genovo $ 37 million since 1995 for
the right to eventually market various liver- and lung-related genetic therapies
developed by Genovo. The deal, which is up for renewal next year, called for
Genovo to make progress in moving gene therapy toward a marketable product, said
Genovo President Eric Aguiar. Under the agreement, Genovo must share the Biogen
money with Wilson's institute at Penn, which today depends on that arrangement
for about 20 percent of its budget.

   In August, Genovo sealed an additional deal with Genzyme Corp., another
biotechnology company in Cambridge, to develop liver-directed gene therapy for
metabolic disorders.

   Genovo has a direct stake in the genetically engineered adenovirus that
Wilson developed for the OTC trial, according to Wilson and Aguiar. If Wilson
and his colleagues can demonstrate that the virus is a good vehicle for ferrying
genes into the body, the company and Wilson could benefit financially.

   In a posting on the Genovo Web site, Aguiar boasts that the relationship with
Wilson not only provides the company with access to Wilson's discoveries, but
also minimizes business risks, because the company can wait until Wilson's lab
tests new treatments on humans before deciding whether to invest in them.

   Wilson said he went to great pains to ensure that his business interests
would not influence his judgment during the OTC adenovirus trial. Although he
was a senior scientist, for example, he gave Raper control over medical and
patient care decisions.

   "To suggest that I acted or was influenced by money is really offensive to
me," he said. "I don't think about how my doing this work is going to make me
rich. It's about leadership and notoriety and accomplishment. Publishing in
first-rate journals. That's what turns us on. You've got to be on the cutting
edge and take risks if you're going to stay on top."

   Nevertheless, Wilson's own financial disclosure statement says Wilson and
Genovo "have a financial interest in a successful outcome from the research
involved in this study." Wilson acknowledged that the ties with Genovo are tight
enough to require him to include that statement on research papers and the
consent forms that patients sign when entering his clinical trials, including
the OTC experiment.

   Academic researchers increasingly are setting up their own companies or
business deals on the side. Forty percent of the gene therapy protocols approved
in the past three years have had corporate sponsors. Wilson and others argue
that sponsorship provides an important source of funding for research and an
eventual pipeline to get cures to the public.

   Yet the business-academia pipeline has been the subject of much criticism in
recent years, because it may sometimes force scientists to choose between good
science and good business.

   Aguiar said Wilson is too much a scientist to compromise. But Wilson is also
very plugged in to the company, Aguiar acknowledged, and calls him on the
telephone frequently during the week.

   One of those calls from Wilson stands out in both men's memories. It was in
September, and the talk was about business. When Aguiar asked how things were
going, Wilson said he was having a stressful day. Gelsinger had reacted badly to
the treatment and was heading into multiple organ failure in the hospital
intensive care unit. "He was really upset about it," Aguiar said.


   Problematic Genetic Messenger


   In their worst-case scenarios, Wilson, Batshaw and Raper thought they might
see an inflamed liver in their patients. But the researchers thought they had
licked earlier problems with a new, safer brew of genetically engineered
adenovirus.

   Adenoviruses, a class of viruses that cause the common cold and
conjunctivitis, or pinkeye, are extraordinarily efficient at infecting many
kinds of human cells. Because of that, they have become popular with gene
therapists as a way of delivering helpful genes to sick people. But there are
downsides: Adenoviruses trigger intense immune system reactions and can prompt a
life-threatening inflammatory response.

   Because of those possible problems, many scientists have stopped using
adenoviruses to treat genetic diseases and are looking for other, more promising
gene delivery systems.

   But Wilson's team had worked feverishly during the early 1990s to develop a
less inflammatory adenovirus. Over several years, the researchers methodically
deleted different combinations of the virus's genes until they had one that
seemed to be safe enough to use in the fairly high doses needed to be effective.

   The team also spliced copies of the OTC gene into the virus--the payload to
be delivered to OTC-deficient patients.

   While all four rhesus monkeys that had been given high doses of the
first-generation virus had died in previous experiments, subsequent tests of the
later viruses on monkeys and mice seemed to confirm that it was less toxic,
although it still triggered liver inflammation. By cutting back the dose two
hundredfold, the scientists and the FDA concluded that they could deliver it
safely to humans with no or minimal side effects, especially because humans are
so much bigger than monkeys. That is a presumption that federal regulators now
question.

   But at the time, the Penn researchers were confident in their plan, which
included monitoring for early signs of trouble as they gradually increased doses
and treating unexpected crises with a proven backup treatment. They commenced
treatments in 1997.

   Some scientists today remain supportive of Wilson's decision to go forward.
"I don't know anyone in gene therapy who has done more animal studies before
starting in people," said A. Dusty Miller, a gene therapist at the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

   But while the new virus appeared to be safer, there remained wide
disagreement over how much safer.

   And between the start of the clinical trial and Gelsinger's death in
September, new research elsewhere in the field provided further evidence of
toxicity and the need for caution in using adenoviruses in the liver.

   "Not many people consider it appropriate for treating genetic diseases," said
NIH investigator Richard Morgan.

   The NIH tested a closely related adenovirus on the livers of three macaque
monkeys, which fell seriously ill with symptoms similar to those that killed
Gelsinger. They recovered, but one suffered permanent liver damage. A German
study involving similar adenoviruses caused acute, toxic responses in rabbits
that also resembled those that killed Gelsinger. Cichon, the Berlin researcher
who led that study, concluded that adenoviruses should be used only in dire
circumstances, such as when the only other alternative is a liver transplant. It
is a standard that other scientists say they have adopted.

   To give adenoviruses to patients like Gelsinger "would never be justified,"
Cichon said. "And I am not the only one who thinks this way. We do not
understand why [researchers] are taking these risks."

   Meanwhile, Schering-Plough Corp. of Madison, N.J., and the University of
California at San Francisco had begun a clinical trial that infused high doses
of adenovirus into the livers of dying cancer patients, a situation in which
greater risks are allowed because patients have little other hope. The company
lowered the dose when two early participants experienced serious drops in blood
pressure. But even at that lower dose--which was lower than the total dose
eventually given to Gelsinger--two patients suffered serious stroke-like
attacks.

   Wilson said he was only vaguely aware of those studies, none of which had
been published in peer-reviewed journals until after Gelsinger's death. However,
the information was widely disseminated in other, less formal ways, such as
postings on Web sites and presentations at scientific meetings.

   Some scientists at a leading gene therapy meeting that Wilson attended in
Washington in June saw disturbing similarities in the NIH and the Penn team's
preliminary results, which described some drops in white blood cell counts among
participants and evidence of increasing liver damage with each increase in
dosage.

   Wilson said no one approached him at the conference with concerns. But
neither did Wilson reveal in his written report at the meeting that one patient
had suffered an especially serious reaction to the treatment--a reaction that
threatened hopes of getting Food and Drug Administration approval to move up to
the next dosage level.

   Ultimately, the team tested its virus on an additional monkey. "We did it and
the animal got hepatitis but it lived," Wilson said. "That was reassuring." The
FDA was aware of all the data, Wilson said. If the study was too risky, he
asked, why didn't federal regulators stop it?


   The Regulation Process


   In fact, it hadn't been easy for Wilson and his team to convince federal
regulators that they should be allowed to try their approach in people. In 1995,
when the researchers first pitched their plan to the NIH committee of scientists
and ethicists that then reviewed all gene therapy proposals in advance, several
committee members expressed strong reservations. The approach looked too
dangerous, they said. And because the immune system would quickly destroy the
genetically repaired cells, the treatment would not have any lasting benefit.

   But according to several scientists and some NIH committee members, Wilson's
charismatic style and his good reputation as a scientist won the day. "Wilson
said that you should let people be heroes if they want to be," said Robert
Erickson, a committee member at the time and a University of Arizona scientist.
"In retrospect, I wish I hadn't been convinced."

   The committee approved the protocol but insisted on two changes. The viruses
should be infused into a distant blood vessel, not directly into the liver,
hopefully reducing the trauma to that already diseased organ. And the
researchers should recruit their subjects only through physicians, not by making
direct appeals to patients, who might be swayed too easily into participating in
the potentially dangerous study.

   The researchers agreed, but that's not what happened. First, the FDA became
convinced that direct infusion to the liver was preferable and made the team
switch back. Penn is now investigating whether that direct infusion contributed
to Gelsinger's reaction.

   The committee never had a chance to review the change because in 1996,
shortly after approving the Penn trial, its powers were greatly reduced by the
NIH, under pressure from biotechnology companies seeking relief from federal
regulations that the industry deemed overly burdensome.

   The NIH committee members say they also never got word of a significant
change in the consent form. Although the final form included a perfunctory
clause stating that the experiment could result in injury or death, it dropped
mention of the original fatal animal studies. Neither the FDA nor the Penn team
can explain today why the reference to monkey deaths was dropped.

   The Penn team also broke its assurance to the NIH committee that it would
recruit participants only through physicians.

   In the summer and fall of 1997, Batshaw wrote pieces that appeared in the
National Urea Cycle Disorders Foundation newsletter and on its Web site, seeking
volunteers. "Obviously, the faster we can complete the Phase I study," he wrote,
"the sooner we can move on to the treatment phase in children."

   When asked about his call for volunteers, Batshaw said: "We did recruit
through the foundation newsletter. It was passive recruitment in that it just
appeared there. I wouldn't want to say it was advertised." The possibility of
volunteering was merely "posed," he said. As for his comments that some
participants had experienced some "correction," he now concedes that might be an
overstatement. "Perhaps it could have been stated better."


   Volunteering 'to Help the Babies'


   There's little question that Gelsinger was a willing and eager participant in
the Penn experiment.

   He had a mild form of the disease that could be controlled through diet and
drugs. He didn't always follow the grueling regimen, and a year ago nearly died
from an ammonia attack. But since then, he'd felt better than ever, thanks to a
new regimen developed by Batshaw.

   After hearing about the experiment from his doctor, he tried to volunteer at
age 17--too young for the protocol--then returned as soon as he turned 18. The
research team made it clear that the experiment wouldn't cure him, and the
teenager also knew there was a small chance it could hurt him. But he was swayed
by the scientists' dream that the treatment might someday help severely stricken
newborns.

   "He wanted to help the babies," said his father, Paul Gelsinger, in a recent
interview. "My son had the purest intent."

   Paul Gelsinger also remains an outspoken fan of the researchers, whom he
considers "very ethical men."

   "Kids are dying all the time from these orphan diseases," he said. "How long
do you wait to do something?"

   Raper, Batshaw and Wilson are deep into their investigation of Gelsinger's
death and will present their results to the NIH Dec. 8-10.

   "As a scientist it's very difficult to do the tests, because of what they
might show," Wilson said. However, he added, "If a mistake was made, we've got
to own up to it and learn from it. Ultimately, the tragedy of Jesse's death
would be if we don't learn anything."



   Staff researcher Alice Crites contributed to this report.


   The New Biology


   Human cloning, once thought impossible, today seems possible, and perhaps
even probable. Growing spare body parts in the laboratory, once the stuff of
science fiction, is being pursued by scientists everywhere. Embryos are being
genetically selected to be healthy, or male; "designer babies" may not be too
far behind. Plants genetically engineered to produce their own pesticides, and
even certain types of plastics, are growing in fields. Science is entering a new
world where the once-unthinkable is suddenly doable. The Washington Post is
examining this scientific revolution in a series of occasional articles about
this new biology exploding at the turn of the century.


   OTC Gene Therapy


   Genetically engineered viruses inject potentially curative genes into a
patient's liver cells.


   A mutated gene blocks a metabolic pathway in patients with OTC deficiency. A
dangerous buildup of ammonia develops.


   Genetically engineered adenovirus (with some toxic genes removed) infects
liver, injecting normal OTC genes into liver cell DNA.


   Altered liver cells engage in normal OTC metabolism, breaking down ammonia.

    Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a rare liver disorder, died during the
gene therapy study. James Wilson, front, surgeon Steven Raper, at the overhead
projector, and another University of Pennsylvania research team member knew the
risks of their study but thought they were justified. Wilson on the phone with
FDA officials early in the study. If it was too risky, he wonders now, why
wasn't it stopped? Jesse Gelsinger so wanted to help other patients that he
tried to get into the study before he turned 18.




GRAPHIC: Illustration, patterson clark

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1999


                             1187 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: New Data Released on Side Effects in Gene Therapy Experiments

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19

BODY:

   Six weeks after the Food and Drug Administration placed a hold on two gene
therapy trials for liver cancer, new documents show that some patients in those
experiments suffered serious side effects, including changes in liver function
and blood cell counts, nausea and mental confusion. Also, a patient with a
history of strokes had a minor one.

   The side effects, which involved three patients in studies conducted by the
Schering-Plough Corporation, are significant because the company used methods
similar to those used by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, where an
18-year-old Arizona man, Jesse Gelsinger, died Sept. 17 in a gene therapy trial.

    Mr. Gelsinger's death, which government officials say is the first directly
related to gene therapy, has focused increased attention on the safety of the
technology. After Mr. Gelsinger died, the Food and Drug Administration stopped
new patients from enrolling in the Schering-Plough trials.

   The information about the liver cancer studies was contained in reports
released today by the Office of Recombinant DNA Research, the arm of the
National Institutes of Health that oversees gene therapy research, which
obtained them from the company. A spokesman for Schering-Plough declined to
discuss the data in detail but said the side effects may have been due to the
patients' underlying condition.

   "These are late-stage patients who are very sick and have other illnesses and
problems," said the spokesman, Robert Consalvo. "Many of these side effects,
although serious, are not unexpected in this patient population."

   Since Mr. Gelsinger's death, the recombinant DNA office has been collecting
information from gene therapy investigators who use adenovirus, a deactivated
cold virus, as the vehicle -- or vector, in scientific terms -- to deliver
healthy DNA to sick patients.

   Both the University of Pennsylvania study and the Schering-Plough liver
cancer trials used adenovirus. In both cases, doctors injected the adenovirus
vector into the hepatic artery, which supplies blood to the liver. But while the
Schering-Plough researchers were trying to treat liver cancer, the Pennsylvania
scientists were attempting to correct a rare metabolic disorder, ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency.

   Investigators at the university are still trying to figure out what caused
Mr. Gelsinger's death. They expect to present their findings at a meeting of the
N.I.H.'s recombinant DNA advisory committee in early December. Scientists from
Schering-Plough will also speak at that meeting, which experts say may result in
restrictions on the use of adenovirus.

   The reports made public today did not identify the Schering-Plough patients
or list their ages or sexes. One patient experienced changes in liver function
and an elevated white blood cell count after undergoing a gene therapy infusion;
the investigator conducting the experiment determined that the blood cell
changes were related to the therapy, although Schering-Plough officials
disagreed.

   Another patient suffered a minor stroke -- although it was unclear if it was
related to the therapy, because the patient had a history of them. According to
the report, the patient experienced chest pain during the infusion and later
suffered the stroke after being sent home. The company concluded that the gene
therapy may have contributed to the stroke by exacerbating the patient's
underlying condition. The report said another patient also suffered a stroke,
but did not provide details.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1999


                             1188 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 18, 1999, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1148 words

HEADLINE: PATENT FIGHT PENDING AMGEN, UPSTART MASS. FIRM SQUARE OFF OVER
ANTIANEMIA DRUG UPSTART MASS. FIRM TAKES ON AMGEN

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The key reason Amgen Corp. is the nation's largest biotech company is its
antianemia drug, erythropoietin, or EPO, which is expected to generate $1.8
billion in sales this year.

   But when Amgen looks over its shoulder, it sees a midget, Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, nipping at its heels.    Dr. Richard F. Selden, the
founder and president of Transkaryotic Therapies, says he can make an improved
and less expensive version of the drug without violating Amgen's five patents.

   Amgen says he can't. So next April, both companies - along with TKT's
partner, Hoechst Marion Roussel, the large European pharmaceutical company -
will square off in US District Court in Boston to decide if TKT and Hoechst can
sell an anemia drug that would rival Amgen's drug.

   The high-profile legal battle, which began 2 1/2 years ago, is being closely
watched in biotech and legal circles because of its implications for patent law.
So far, TKT and Hoechst have been allowed to test the drug, but the court has
yet to decide whther the company may legally market it. Amgen claims its two
rivals are violating its patents and should be stopped from marketing it, even
if it gains US Food and Drug Administration approval.

   TKT maintains it has developed a new manufacturing process that does not
infringe on Amgen's patents.

   Biotechnology industry specialists are divided on the claims.

   "We think the technology is sufficiently different that TKT with Hoechst
should prevail," said Jonas V. Alsenas, biotechnology analyst with ING Baring
Furman Selz LLC in New York. "TKT is starting with human cells and using
production technologies a decade advanced over Amgen's."

   But other analysts disagree. Meirav Chovav at Salomon Smith Barney maintains
that TKT is clarly infringing on patents Amgen holds for its version of EPO,
which is sold as Epogen.

   If TKT prevails in court, its product is expected to do well.

   "It is apparent that the market would be receptive to the lower-cost Epogen
equivalent," noted Eric T. Schmidt, SG Cowen biotechnology analyst.

   SG Cowen & Co., a New York investment bank, predicts that the TKT/Hoechst
version of EPO, now in final phase 3 clinical trials, could capture as much as 8
percent of Amgen's market in 2001 and 15 percent in 2002 if the FDA clears it
for sale.

   Cowen has projected Amgen's Epogen sales at more than $1.9 billion in 2001.

   For TKT's Selden, 41, a former pediatrician who did genetic research while at
Harvard Medical School, winning against Amgen could lead to the company's first
product revenues under its financial arrangement with Hoechst.

   Gordon Binder, Amgen's chief executive, maintains the forthcoming legal
tussle was not unexpected as Amgen seeks to protect its control of Epogen, which
was approved by the US Food and

   Drug Administration 10 years ago.

   The drug supplements a naturally occurring hormone made in the kidneys to
stimulate red blood cell production and correct anemia because of kidney
failure. In addition, Amgen earlier this month gained expanded FDA approval to
market Epogen to children with kidney problems who are undergoing dialysis - a
use that should further sales.

   Amgen's Epogen sales already are soaring, up 28 percent to $449 million
during the third quarter of this year alone. The drug's success makes it a
target for others.

   Indeed, Amgen is in a simultaneous battle with Johnson & Johnson, of New
Brunswick, N.J. Under an Amgen license, J&J makes and sells EPO under the name
Procrit, and expects this year to have $1 billion in revenue from the drug.

   But Amgen charges that Johnson & Johnson has gone beyond the terms of its
license by selling it for treatment of patients on kidney dialysis. Amgen claims
it holds exclusive rights to EPO for that purpose. The dispute is in
arbitration.

   "When you're on top it's not surprising that others will want to go after
you. To me this is Hoechst with TKT trying to get around our patents to get into
the EPO market," said Binder. "This is just business - we've come to expect it
and we don't think TKT's arguments have much merit. We'll see what the judge
says."

   Binder made his comments during an interview in Boston last week at a
groundbreaking ceremony for a new Amgen East Coast research facility in
Cambridge, a mile from TKT's offices. Amgen's home office is in Thousand Oaks,
Calif.

   Last week, Amgen asked US District Court Judge William Young for summary
judgment to dismiss the TKT case. His ruling on the motion is expected around
Dec. 15.

   "I think we'll go to trial - we're ready," said Selden, who nearly 11 years
ago created TKT, but only focused on EPO since 1996.

   That was when TKT developed a technology called gene activation that enables
it to make EPO from human cells. The company saw that EPO genes are in all human
cells, but are generally dormant. TKT's discovery was able to selectively turn
on cells to express naturally occurring EPO, using a fragment of DNA as a
switch.

   By contrast, Amgen makes Epogen starting with a more traditional
biotechnology manufacturing process patented in 1983. It begins with Chinese
hamster ovaries and inserts the complete coding sequence of the EPO gene to
create a close copy of the human EPO protein.

   TKT's all-human-cell approach, vs. Amgen's reliance on splicing or
transporting from one cell to another to create human EPO production, is at the
heart of the dispute - even though in 1996, Amgen modified some of its patents
to account for different production methods. Amgen also is now testing a
second-generation EPO product.

   TKT's future does not rest entirely on EPO. Under Douglas Treco, senior vice
president of research and development (and TKT's first employee), the company is
working on six other gene-activation proteins along with a second set of drugs
to treat rare diseases.

   One of those is Fabry's disease, a rare genetic disorder where a metabolizing
enzyme is missing. TKT is in a race to finish work on this drug before its
closest rival, Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge, which is developing a similar drug
using a different technology.

   To finance its future, TKT - which has 200 employees and is publicly traded -
recently raised $132 million in a private financing. The new funds will be used
to develop and test forthcoming drugs. This is in addition to Hoechst's $125
million investment in TKT, which includes a 10 percent stake in the company as
well as rights to EPO.

   Despite this extensive funding and a strong technology, Wall Street support
for TKT has been mixed. But the company's stock price has held up, closing
yesterday at 46, down 1/4. It set a 52-week high of 53 Oct. 1.

   "We started as a gene-therapy company and knew it would take as much as 15
years to get a product to market, so we knew we needed other products to provide
us with revenue, and our EPO will be our first," said Selden confidently.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Richard F. Selden (background), president of Transkaryotic
Therapies, with Douglas Treco, senior vice president of research and
development, at the firm's Cambridge office. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / DAVID L. RYAN
2. Douglas Treco (left), senior vice president of research and development at
Transkaryotic Therapies, confers with Richard F. Selden, founder and president
of the Cambridge firm. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / DAVID L. RYAN

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1999


                             1189 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     NOVEMBER 18, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: LIFESTYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1698 words

HEADLINE: TRUSTING IN ANGIOPLASTY THE PROCEDURE IS COMMON - EVEN MORE THAN
BYPASS SURGERY - THOUGH NOT MINOR. AS FEARED, HOWEVER, COMPLICATIONS AROSE.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Lying on the narrow, hard table in the catheterization room, I stared up at
the mountain of X-ray equipment hanging over me. I was waiting for the doctors
to push a wire up a blood vessel in my leg and into one of the arteries of my
heart.

   Partially covered with only a green paper bathrobe and sheet, I felt utterly
vulnerable as the nurses bustled efficiently, preparing me for angioplasty. The
equipment blocked my view. I could not see the doctor at the other end of the
table, but I could feel his fingers looking for the femoral artery in my leg,
through which doctors would introduce the tubelike catheter and guide wires.

   The plan was to push a catheter tipped with a balloon into my coronary
arteries until it lay over the plaque that clogged them. Then, the balloon would
be inflated, pressing the plaque against the arterial walls and opening the
vessels.

   I thought about the three surgeons who had urged me to have a coronary-bypass
operation instead.

   Although less radical than surgery, angioplasty is not a minor procedure,
they told me. Things can go wrong. The catheters can rip the vessel or
temporarily block blood flow and cause a heart attack. With several blocked
arteries, they had said, I could suffer a fatal heart attack. Why risk it with a
procedure that was not going to produce as good results?

   Despite the disconcerting warnings, the odds were only four in a thousand
that the doctors in this room were about to kill me. That was 5 to 10 times
better than the surgeons' statistics.

   "A little pinch," said a disembodied voice at the other end of the table. It
was Bruce Klugherz, the doctor assisting John W. Hirshfeld Jr.

   I felt a slight prick near my groin as Klugherz injected the drug to numb the
area that would be sliced open to reach my femoral artery.

   I remembered the first time I saw angioplasty - as a medical writer, 25 years
before. It was a medical breakthrough. Doctors reamed out a blocked artery in
the leg of a man who could hardly walk because the pain was so bad.

   The next day, he was up and about. I said to the doctor that this would be a
great way to treat heart disease. I remember how he shook his head and said it
was far too dangerous to do angioplasty on the arteries lying on top of the
heart, the ones that nourished it with blood.

   Last year, angioplasty was used to ream out the coronary arteries of more
than half a million Americans. It was done on more patients than even bypass
surgery, one of the most frequently performed operations in the country.

   "All right, we are about ready to begin," said another voice. Hirshfeld,
director of the cath lab at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, had
just entered the room and suddenly appeared on my right side.

   He looked down and smiled, as though to say: "Forget what those other doctors
said. I know what I'm doing, and everything is going to be just fine."

   A soft-spoken, understated man, he never would have said something so cocky,
but that was how I chose to interpret the smile, which at that moment was far
more reassuring than all the survival statistics.

   Wearing a bright red lead tunic for protection against the X-rays he would
use to visualize my arteries, Hirshfeld disappeared to join his colleague at the
other end of my body.

   My right coronary artery was totally blocked. It probably had been that way
since my 1980 heart attack and was beyond the reach of angioplasty. Two major
branches of the artery running down the left side of my heart were partially
blocked and the cause of increasingly frequent pain. My heart was getting only
half of the blood that a healthy coronary-artery system delivers.

   The plan was to dilate the LAD (left anterior descending) branch, which feeds
the front half of the heart. If that was successfully opened, the doctors would
go after the blockage in the "obtuse marginal segment of the circumflex branch,"
which feeds the back of the heart.

   The surgeons had questioned whether the cardiologists could safely reach
either blockage. The top part of my LAD had twists and turns that might be
difficult to navigate with a catheter. The segment of the circumflex was
probably too small for the catheters, the surgeons had said.

   According to Hirshfeld, this might have been true a year or two ago, but the
new devices are so small and flexible that they can reach once-inaccessible
areas.

   Hirshfeld conceded that mine was not an easy case, but he thought he could
dilate the LAD and was "reasonably confident" that he could do the circumflex.

   If successful, he thought, he could boost the amount of blood nourishing my
heart by more than 50 percent - to about 80 percent of normal. This would make
it possible for me to lead a fairly active, pain-free life, but I still would
have to take heart drugs and probably would get chest pain with a lot exertion,
especially after eating. On the other hand, coronary-bypass surgery probably
would restore blood flow to normal and eliminate most, if not all, symptoms of
heart disease.

   "You're going to feel a little pressure, Don," Hirshfeld said.

   There was no pain, but I could feel him pushing near my groin as he put a
sheath into my artery to make it easier to introduce the catheters and guide
wire. Because arteries have no pain-sensing nerve endings, I couldn't feel
anything as they pushed the catheter up the femoral artery to my heart.

   I heard a whirring and grinding. Hirshfeld had activated the contraption over
my chest, and a movie camera started taking X-ray pictures of my heart and
arteries, which were displayed on a television screen above the cath table.

   Hirshfeld chatted as the procedure began, but suddenly became quiet. I asked
him some questions, but, uncharacteristically, he did not reply.

   Occasionally, I could hear hushed words between him and Klugherz. I sensed
something was wrong.

   They had successfully pushed three feet of guide wire up through the artery
in my leg, high into my chest, and then down toward the coronary arteries. But,
as I later would learn, they were having trouble navigating the balloon-tipped
catheter through the turns above the LAD blockage, just as one of the surgeons
had predicted.

   "Have you gotten through the LAD?" I called out, hoping that the catheter's
circuitous journey was uneventful.

   "We're doing fine," Hirshfeld said. The way he said it didn't sound as if
they were doing fine.

   There was some more pushing and tugging near my groin. The device on top of
me came alive again with a clatter.

   I felt a slight tightness in my chest, vaguely similar to the angina that
happened when I overworked my compromised heart.

   Hirshfeld had just inflated the balloon, temporarily blocking all blood
through that artery.

   "Are you through with the LAD yet?" I called out again.

   "Nope, not yet."

   I looked at a clock on the wall. It was 11 a.m. After a torturous trip
through the curves of my artery, Hirshfeld had finally reached the plaque and
inserted a metal stent.

   About a half-inch long, stents are sausage-shaped tubes of scaffolding that
the inflated balloon expands and presses into the plaque. The stents work the
way lath does in holding up plaster.

   Hirshfeld said something to Klugherz, too hushed for me to understand. Later,
I would learn that he was not happy with the way the stent looked on the video
screen. At its edge was rough tissue. The angioplasty had torn the lining of the
arterial wall, which could prompt a clot to form and cause a heart attack.

   This type of complication used to send patients as emergencies to the
operating room. Again, I felt movement near my groin area, followed by the
clatter of the movie camera. Instead of rushing me off to a surgeon, Hirshfeld
put a second stent through the first one, closing up the tear as though the
stent were a metallic Band-Aid.

   But the tissue tore around the end of the second stent, forcing Hirshfeld to
put a third one through the first two, like extensions of a collapsible
telescope - at a cost of $1,500 per stent. The third one worked, and Hirshfeld
moved on to the next artery.

   "Are you still fooling around with the LAD?" I asked, having no idea of the
construction job that had just taken place inside my body.

   "All done," Hirshfeld said. "We're doing the circ now."

   I looked at the clock. It was 11:25 a.m. All told, it had taken about 25
minutes to dilate and stent the LAD, a job that normally took Hirshfeld 10
minutes.

   A few minutes later, I heard the wonderful words:

   "OK, we're finished."

   Though I'd been counting the minutes, the announcement, so abrupt, seemed
anticlimactic. That's it? It's all over?

   As they wheeled me to the intermediate coronary-care unit for my overnight
stay, I felt as though a weight had been taken from my shoulders.

   For the first time in three months, I was free to think again about all the
wonderful things in my life, free from the obsession with the angina and the
worries about what I should do about it.

   Epilogue

   I returned to work two days after the procedure and resumed my usual
activities, without angina.

   I am still taking drugs to ease the workload on my heart, and occasionally -
maybe once or twice a month - I have to take a nitroglycerin pill, usually only
when I exert myself after eating. My cardiologist thinks adjustments in my
medicines may eliminate even that.

   The drugs have helped bring my very high total cholesterol level - 305 - to
below the U.S. average. I am hoping that the drugs will slow, if not stop, the
progression of my disease.

   I realize that this may be overly optimistic - thinking that drugs will stop
atherosclerosis - and I could be facing a crisis again in a few years. But by
then, some of the uncertainty and problems that now trouble this fast-moving
field may well be resolved.

   And who knows? Maybe the gene-therapy people will have found a way to ease
angina with a pill that grows blood vessels around clogged arteries. They have
started human trials with such a drug, and it looks encouraging.

   Monday: In Health & Science, surgeons do intricate heart surgery using a
robot's steady hands.

   Don Drake's e-mail address is ddrake@phillynews.com

NOTES: To Fix His Heart
At risk of a heart attack, an Inquirer medical writer seeks
direction in a time of rapid change. Last of five parts.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DIAGRAM;
PHOTO
Don Drake undergoes a nonsurgical repair of clogged arteries at the Hospital of
the University of Pennsylvania. He decided on angioplasty after weighing his
options for three months. (BONNIE WELLER, Inquirer Staff Photographer)
One of the stents that were implanted in the vessels. During the angioplasty,
Hirshfeld used three of the metal stents on one artery after the arterial-wall
lining tore. (BONNIE WELLER, Inquirer Staff Photographer)
Don Drake lifts his bike on a path for a ride along the Schuylkill. He has
resumed usual activities, without angina. (BONNIE WELLER, Inquirer Staff
Photographer)
John W. Hirshfeld Jr., a surgeon at HUP, talks with Don Drake during an earlier
catheterization. He performed the angioplasty in March. (VICKI VALERIO, Inquirer
Staff Photographer)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1190 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 17, 1999, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

SERIES: STORIES THAT SHAPED THE CENTURY

HEADLINE: STORIES THAT SHAPED THE CENTURY;
 DOUBLE HELIX THAT CHANGED THE SHAPE OF LIFE SCIENCES

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Historic breakthroughs are rare in science, particularly in biology.
Knowledge grows by bits and pieces, accretions and deletions. Often, the work of
hundreds of scientists must come together before it is obvious that substantive
progress has been achieved.

   But on April 25, 1953, American biochemist James D. Watson and British
biophysicist Francis H.C. Crick, working at Cambridge University, published a
paper in Nature that is considered a masterpiece of understatement. They began:
"We wish to suggest a structure for the salt of deoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA).
The structure has novel features which are of biological interest."

   That publication was a true watershed in biology, forevermore changing the
face of research on genetic inheritance. Although 20 more years would pass
before scientists had acquired all the tools necessary to work effectively with
DNA, it set the stage for a massive change in the practice of medicine and the
art of agriculture.

   Gene therapy, genetically engineered drugs, monoclonal antibodies, transgenic
animals and genetically modified foods are among the results.

   Given today's impressive accomplishments, it is difficult to imagine how
little we actually knew before Watson and Crick's breakthrough.

   Historically, scientists and farmers had the idea that traits were passed
down from parent to offspring, a knowledge that was used in domesticating corn,
wheat, dogs and a host of other plants and animals by selective breeding. How
this happened, however, was a complete mystery.

   The first insight came from an obscure 19th century Austrian monk named
Gregor Johann Mendel, who performed precisely designed, carefully controlled
breeding experiments with peas. He concluded that every trait of the plants--and
by extension, all living things--was controlled by two "factors," one inherited
from each parent, and demonstrated how these factors interacted with each other.
The factors later came to be known as genes.

   Shortly after the beginning of this century, it became clear that genes
resided in DNA. Over the next 40 years, biologists learned that DNA contained
only four principle chemicals, called bases: adenine, thymine, cytosine and
guanine. They also knew that the amounts of adenine and thymine were identical,
as were the amounts of cytosine and guanine. Not an impressive amount of
information to explain how such complex genetic traits as vision or thinking
ability could be passed along.

   Watson and Crick changed that. Using X-ray images taken by Maurice H.F.
Wilkins, they concluded that DNA formed the now famous double-stranded double
helix. The key feature was that the two strands were mirror images, with adenine
always pairing with thymine and cytosine pairing with guanine. This allowed
genetic information to be retained when the new strands separated during
replication.

   The pair published a second paper in Nature on May 30 pointing out another
key feature of their model. "Any sequence of the pairs of bases can fit into the
structure. . . . It therefore seems likely that the precise sequence of the
bases is the code which carries the genetical information."

   Their achievement won them the 1962 Nobel Prize for physiology or medicine.


   *

   Biologists now routinely put genes into bacteria to make proteins for medical
uses. They insert genes into viruses to use for gene therapy in humans. They add
genes to plants to introduce desirable new characteristics, such as the ability
to resist pesticides used on weeds in fields or the production of amino acids
needed in the human diet. They add genes to animal embryos or subtract them to
produce animal models of human disease, to make food animals that are leaner and
more healthy for human consumption, or even to make animal tissues more like
those of humans so that they can be safely transplanted.

   Meanwhile, the quest for understanding DNA continues. Researchers throughout
the country are now racing to sequence the entire 3 billion bases that make up
the complete human genetic blueprint and have found a broad variety of genes
that represent tempting targets for new therapies in treating diseases ranging
from cancer to mental illness.

   Progress, however, always brings fears. Europeans, for example, have recently
been up in arms about the supposed dangers of genetically modified foods. Animal
rights proponents object to any genetic engineering experiments in animals. Less
extreme opponents fear that the use of transgenic animals for human transplants
may introduce dangerous new viruses into the human population. Gene therapy
opponents decry the possibility of modifying humans to give them desired traits
such as increased intelligence or athletic abilities.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (Front Page, L.A. Times: Friday, October 19, 1962) ID NUMBER:
19991117hme0034

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1999


                             1191 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   NOVEMBER 16, 1999, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 1361 words

HEADLINE: DATABOOK;

AGING;

Happy 150th Birthday;

Scientific advances may lead to longer lives and many more years of youthfulness

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:
Some things in life are inevitable, but getting old may soon become just another
subject to argue with the HMO about.

    Scientists appear to be closing in on the molecular underpinnings of the
aging process. Human life spans, they say, are governed by internal clocks whose
mechanisms are starting to show themselves.

    If the research pans out, our built-in programs of self-destruction will
soon be subject to reprogramming, perhaps just by swallowing a few longevity
pills.

    For generations born in the 21st century, living well past 100 -- and
looking and feeling youthful virtually until the end -- might be no big deal at
all.

    In the past, mythic fountains of youth have always turned out to be dry
wells of wishful thinking. Now, molecular biologists are embracing the radical
notion that the real fountain of youth was inside us all the time -- hidden in
the complicated workings of our genes and cellular machinery.

    Whether the Holy Grail of aging research will be found in time for people
alive today is anybody's guess. But the excitement is building among scientists.

    "As recently as 10 years ago, most scientists thought aging is inevitable
and that animals just wear out," said Cynthia Kenyon, a professor of
biochemistry and biophysics at the University of California at San Francisco.
"Now, we have shown clearly that, at least in some animals, there are specific
genes that determine how fast an animal ages."

    Kenyon's research has created mutant worms with double the normal life span.
Three aging-related genes have been identified in the worms, a commonly studied
species called C. elegans that typically lives only about two weeks.

    Even the mutants that last four weeks or longer remain microscopic critters
many miles down the evolutionary ladder from humans. Yet genes similar to those
Kenyon has found in the worms also are present in people, as well as mice and
most other animals.

    The big question is just how these genes might affect human physiology.
Although scientific results are not yet in, the possibilities for the year 2020
seem truly startling.

    "The fact that changing a single gene can double a worm's life span -- and
also double its youthful period -- definitely makes one wonder whether the same
could be true for humans," Kenyon said. "But we could be different from worms.
Personally, I'm optimistic."

    At a minimum, it seems all but certain that the next decade will be marked
by a radical rethinking of some deeply held attitudes as the implications of the
research start to sink in.

    By 2020, young people might be able to take a pill that would effectively
slow the molecular machinery in their bodies that tells hair when to turn gray,
skin to wrinkle and muscles to atrophy. Not only might these people live longer,
but they would stay youthful longer, too. In the not-so-far-off future, the
typical 60-year-old could look like today's 40-year-old.

    Elizabeth Blackburn, another UCSF scientist prominent in the field of
cellular aging, helped identify an enzyme called telomerase, which helps to
replenish the frayed ends of aging chromosomes.

    Chromosomes are tightly wound coils of DNA containing the genetic code
necessary for cells to continue dividing. Without telomerase, the ends of the
chromosomes gradually wear down and further division becomes difficult. "You
need working telomerase to keep these cells growing," Blackburn said.

    Research so far suggests that telomerase may have something to do with the
seemingly inevitable wear and tear that ultimately causes entire body systems to
grow old. If the enzyme does turn out to be a key engine of cellular longevity,
it may be possible to engineer long-lived cells, and ultimately more durable
human physiologies, just by inserting more telomerase in just the right place.

    It's a simple concept, but it's maddeningly difficult to prove that it will
work, as years of frustrating efforts in gene therapy have shown. But
researchers like Blackburn insist that it's time to think the unthinkable.

    By 2020 or so, she said, people might have tiny diagnostic devices implanted
that would monitor the early signals of aging, picking up age-related changes at
the level of individual cells before they give out. From there, it's not a huge
leap to imagine ways of forestalling the changes we now take for granted.

    "We have hygiene procedures, we have vaccinations," Blackburn said. "We
forestall (diseases) before they even happen, right? So why not do the same for
processes of aging?"


   ------------------------------------------------------------

   WHAT RESEARCHERS ARE LEARNING ABOUT AGING

    Nobody has found a sure way to extend the human life span, but laboratory
studies are starting to point to some intriguing possibilities.

    By studying individual genes and molecules, even if only in simple
laboratory critters for now, scientists have begun tracing the process of aging
to its biological roots.

    Big questions remain as to what really contributes to aging in humans and
which critical molecules are involved. Restricting caloric intake is the only
known method for reliably extending the life span of nearly any organism. But as
the molecular details of aging emerge, it might be possible to design drugs to
affect the process.

    So far, research has been limited mainly to experiments in yeast, worms,
fruit flies, mice and other animals. How relevant these results might be to
humans is not yet clear. Some highlights of the latest work:

    -- Biologists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are studying a
gene called SIR2, which appears to help protect the stability of DNA.
Experiments in yeast show that inserting an extra copy of SIR2 can extend life
span by 30 percent to 40 percent. Studies are now under way in mice.

    As for humans? "Prospects are really excellent, but the time frame is
unclear," said MIT biologist Leonard Guarente.

    -- A gene known as daf-2 has been found to influence aging in a tiny
nematode worm called C. elegans. By reducing the level of daf-2 activity in some
cells, Cynthia Kenyon and colleagues at the University of California at San
Francisco have reported, the life span of the laboratory worms can be
effectively doubled.

    But it's not a simple process. Daf-2 also plays a role in fertility and may
generate a so-called signaling cascade with profound effects throughout the
body, including the nervous system. In humans, the equivalent of the daf-2 gene
yields a cell receptor for insulin and a related protein involved in metabolism.

    -- Working with fruit flies, a team of Canadian researchers found that
inserting a human gene called SOD1 protected against oxidative damage to the
nerve cells involved in movement.

    More recently, scientists at Columbia University Researchers reported that
an enzyme called cytosolic catalase also protected against oxidative damage.

    Simon Melov and his colleagues at the new Buck Center on Aging in Marin have
concentrated on blocking oxidative stress in cell structures known as
mitochondria.

    A synthetic anti-oxidant was shown last year to extend the life span of
specially grown laboratory mice. Now, researchers are hunting for other
compounds that might affect the same process.

   -- Carl Hall

   ------------------------------------------------------------

   UNRAVELING MORTALITY

    Scientists have found that cellular death is partly responsible for the
aging process by cells' diminishing ability to divide and duplicate at the
genetic level.

   .

    TELOMERASE

    Telomerase is a protein enzyme that is active in stem cells, cells that
create sperm and egg and in single-celled organisms and germ cells. It helps
replenish the frayed ends of aging chromosomes. Also, cancerous cells have shown
to activate telomerase. These cells can replicate without limit.

   .

    TELOMERES

    Telomeres are found on the tips of DNA strands. They help maintain the
integrity of DNA and ensure complete replication. After splitting into two new
DNA strands, one will have an end with a gap. It is believed that a sufficiently
shortened telomere will signal the death of the cell.

   Source: New York Times Science Friday, Chronicle research



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC, Photo Illustration by Russell Yip / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1999


                             1192 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      November 15, 1999 Monday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY RESULTS SURPRISE SCIENTISTS

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Rats treated with gene therapy to combat high blood pressure passed on the
health benefit to their offspring, startling researchers at the University of
Florida in Gainesville, who said they never intended to make a permanent genetic
change in the rodents' DNA.

   Their findings published Friday in the journal Circulation Research also
raise questions as to how far researchers should pursue a technology that has
the potential to change genes people inherit.

   "If this is true, it raises a lot of ethical issues," said Timothy Hla, a
vascular biologist at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington.

   Scientists working on a variety of animals have passed genetic information to
the next generation.  They've typically done so by manipulating sex cells that
carry the DNA inherited by offspring. Such work raises the specter of the
engineering of human beings.

   University of Florida researchers said they did not expect to change
offspring's genes.

   The rats were injected with an engineered retrovirus designed to deliver into
cells a gene that fights high blood pressure.

   Retroviruses, including the AIDS virus, can inject themselves directly into
cells.

   Dr. Mohan Raizada, a co-author of the University of Florida study, said the
initial experiment was to see how long the gene would combat high blood pressure
in the rats. After 200 days, researchers discovered the gene that blocks
production of angiotensin, a protein that causes high blood pressure, was still
active in the rats. They decided to breed the rats.

   "We did not anticipate the outcome," Raizada said.

   The engineered retrovirus with the gene that blocks angiotensin was found in
the rats' children and grandchildren.

   Raizada said his colleagues speculate that the engineered retrovirus
insinuated itself into the sex cells of the initial generation of adult rats,
which passed them onto their offspring.

   "But we really don't know," he said.

   In a yet-to-be-published research project, Raizada and his staff used the
same virus engineered with a different gene and found that new gene was passed
to offspring as well.

   Hla at UConn said he had never heard of a genetically altered virus that
could change the hosts' genome. He said most retroviruses used in gene therapy
are designed to be "one-hit vectors."

   Asked how the work has been received by his colleagues, Raizada said: "They
believe the data. They just don't believe how it happened."

   Raizada said at this point he is interested only in producing a gene therapy
to reduce high blood pressure in human patients, not in their children.


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1999


                             1193 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                     November 12, 1999 Friday Tris Edition

SECTION: MET; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

BYLINE: TIM BONFIELD, The Cincinnati Enquirer

BODY:

   Four projects in expansion

   $155M program more than half completed

   By TIM BONFIELD

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   As construction cranes tower above Burnet and Erkenbrecher avenues, an
extensive expansion at Children's Hospital Medical Center has passed the halfway
point.

   Four construction projects totaling more than $155 million are transforming
the face of Children's Hospital, one of the nation's three busiest pediatric
treatment and research institutions.

   When the pounding stops, the hospital will have a new clinical building,
research wing, education and conference center, and parking garage. Three of the
projects are expected to be complete by late next year while the largest effort
-- the clinical building -- will push into mid-2002.

   Next week at the same intersection, a $10 million construction project
officially begins to build a bigger Ronald McDonald House to house the families
of young patients traveling to Cincinnati for care.

   "We are trying to become the national leader in improving child health.
That's our vision," said hospital spokesman Jim Feuer. "Our mission is to do
that in three ways, through education, patient care and research. All three of
those goals are reflected in all this construction."

   The Children's Hospital project adds up to the biggest Tristate medical
construction job in years. It's about half the overall cost of the $288 million
Fort Washington Way project and more than one-third the cost of the $404 million
Bengals stadium.

   When the big parts were announced in early 1998, the hospital work was
projected to cost $128 million. However, in December 1998, the hospital board
added $27 million to include a sixth floor for the conference center and several
other changes.

   As a result, the estimated completion dates also were pushed back.

   Workers are attaching the brick exterior to the recently named Albert B.
Sabin Education and Convention Center, a six-story building along the front of
the hospital complex facing Burnet Avenue. Estimated completion date: Aug. 31,
2000. Original estimate: October 1999.

   A concrete and steel framework for the larger, eight-story clinical building
rises at the intersection of Burnet and Erkenbrecher. The building stands on top
of a multimillion-dollar parkinggarage extension and cooling facility. Estimated
completion date: August 2002. Original estimate: December 2001.

   With most exterior work complete, work has moved to the inside of a
nine-story research wing at the back of the hospital complex. This project is
nearly invisible from Burnet and Erkenbrecher, but is expected to house a
brain-tumor center, a genetic-therapy center and other projects. Estimated
completion date: August 2000. Original completion date: July 2000.

   Excavation work begins Monday for an 800-space parking garage to be located
along Burnet Avenue in front of the education and conference center. Estimated
completion date: November 2000. Original date: July 2000.

   Meanwhile, a groundbreaking ceremony is planned for 10 a.m. Monday for the
48-room Ronald McDonald House, which will replace a20-room facility about a
block away.

   Fund-raisers say they have collected about $6.5 million of their $10 million
goal from more than 150 gifts from corporations, individuals, foundations and
other sources.

   The project was proposed in early 1998, but work was delayed about a year
after objections from the Avondale Community Council that the project clashed
with other Burnet Avenue development plans. Those objections were dropped.

   Several abandoned houses at the intersection have been demolished to prepare
the site. The new Ronald McDonald House is expected to be complete in late 2000.

   Top spots

   How Children's Hospital ranks nationally:

   First in pediatric surgeries, emergency and outpatient visits.

   Third in inpatient admissions.

   Third in research funding from the National Institutes of Health.

   Jimmy Senters of Frank Messer & Sons Construction Co. loads panels in front
of the education center under construction at Children's Hospital Medical
Center.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2003


                             1194 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           November 12, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NORTH OF TAMPA; Out & about; Pg. 3

DISTRIBUTION: NORTH OF TAMPA

LENGTH: 305 words

BYLINE: RYAN MEANY

BODY:


   THE HISTORY OF HEALING -

   The Museum of Science and Industry is featuring Medicines: The Inside Story,
a six-gallery exhibition that takes you on a virtual tour of the history of
medicine. Enter a pharmacy constructed in the architectural style of the late
1920s, a time of major medical breakthroughs, and exit near displays
demonstrating the possible benefits of gene therapy. Somewhere in between you
discover what it felt like to stand in a 1920s laboratory, find out whether or
not chicken soup really is good for a cold, see an 1820s microscope that looks
more like a telescope, and learn about alternative forms of healing used in
different countries. Some of the information offered during the tour is as
intriguing as it is practical, like how the Federal Food and Drug Administration
obtains its standards for certifying a particular drug. MOSI exhibits Medicines;
The Inside Story until May 7. The museum is located at 4801 E. Fowler Ave. and
is open from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. Friday and Saturday and from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Sunday through Thursday. Admission is $ 13 for adults, $ 11 for seniors, and $ 9
for children between 2 and 14. For information, call (813) 987-6300.

   CUBAN ART EXHIBIT

   At 6 p.m. Saturday, the Linden Gallery will open its Cuban art exhibition
with a reception. Roughly a dozen paintings will be on display, with half coming
directly from Cuba. Niurka Rodriguez de la Cruz, popular among Cuban art circles
as the head of the Artists and Writers Union of Cuba, has traveled all the way
to Tampa to discuss the work. UNEAC co-sponsors the event with Nancy Rodriguez,
a local artist who will contribute landscape, figurative, and portrait
paintings. The exhibition runs through Dec. 11. Linden Galleries is located at
11716 N. Dale Mabry. For information, call (813) 264-1945.

   - RYAN MEANY


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1999


                             1195 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            November 12, 1999 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: A book takes the future on spec

BYLINE: Bill Glauber, BAL TIMORE SUN

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   Prince Harry will head into space, and humans will land on Mars.

    There will be sex purely for love and lust, while fertilization will be
achieved through repro-duction "banks."

    And the attention span could be in trouble.

    They sound like supermarket-tabloid headlines, but these speculations are
among the predictions offered by 30 intellectuals peering into the next century.

    The Oxford University Press anthology "Predictions" is a provocative,
playful and at times sobering look at the 21st century, as envisioned by
scientists, writers and philosophers. It's a small volume with big ideas,
published in Great Britain and set for release early next year in the United
States.

   "Nobody is predicting the end of the world," says Sian Griffiths, the
anthology editor.

    Through snappy profile pieces and sharp essays, the intellectuals dive into
the next 100 years in what amounts to the ultimate millennium parlor game.
Dealing in everything from birth to death, artificial intelligence to robotics,
and politics to medicine, they foresee a brave new world in the coming century.

    Changing decades and centuries provide people with opportunities to make
outlandish claims about the future. Most predictions turn out in retrospect to
be way off the mark.

    But some of the current material is magical. Take the predictions from
science-fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, author of "2001: A Space Odyssey."

    It's Clarke who forecasts the travel adventure of Prince Charles' younger
son, Harry, the first space-bound royal, who "may even stop off at the Hilton
Orbiter hotel."

    By 2021, humans will land on Mars, he adds, and in 2057, the centennial of
the Sputnik satellite launch will include celebrations on Earth, the moon, Mars,
Jupiter's moons Europa and Ganymede, and Saturn's largest moon, Titan.

    Clarke also predicts that after 2020 there will be two intelligent species
on Earth: humans and one evolving from artificial intelli-gence.

    Clarke's optimistic embrace of the future is countered by neuroscientist
Susan Greenfield's lament that, despite all the gains, biomedical advances could
be misused. She wonders if George Orwell's world of 1984 might arrive by 2084,
with humans monitored "from their genes and molecules through to their mental
worlds."

    As the young interact with virtual-reality products, Greenfield says, there
is a risk the attention span and imagination needed to read may no longer exist
and "we may end up a society of restless, unimaginative individuals."

    According to chemist Carl Djerassi, who helped bring the world the birth
control pill, human fertility is due for a change, perhaps in the next 30 years
"when sex and fertilization will be separate" and the 21st century becomes known
as the century of "A.R.T. - assisted reproductive technologies."

    Djerassi pictures young men and women opening "reproductive bank accounts
full of frozen sperm and eggs. And when they want a baby, they'll go to the bank
to check out what they need."

    W. French Anderson, sometimes called the father of gene therapy, boldly
predicts that gene-based therapy will revolutionize medical practice by 2030,
yet cautions that it may not be used responsibly.

    "I fear that the downside of this powerful technology might be that eugenics
will be practiced on a scale far larger than any "selective breeding' policy
could accomplish," Anderson writes.

    Telephones and faxes could be headed for the junk heap if Kevin Warwick is
proved right.

    The British cybernetics professor sees humans using implant technology to
link with computers. Through the power of the mind and the computer, people will
open doors and turn on lights.

    "In the future, we could have memories of events that we have not witnessed,
and mathematical abilities that far surpass anything of today," Warwick writes.

    There could be brain-to-brain communication via the Internet, he suggests,
and "we will simply be able to think to each other."

    Others list their hopes.

    American feminist and writer Andrea Dworkin describes what she wants for
women, including "a woman-dominated legal system in every country."

    Paul Nurse isn't promising a cure for cancer, but the head of Britain's
Imperial Cancer Research Fund envisions "a complete understanding of the
workings of a cell, which in turn will provide real insights into the nature of
life."

    Chinua Achebe writes of his optimism for Africa in the 21st century. The
author and Nigerian exile says, "There are signs that we are beginning to see
the end of the period of complete turmoil in Africa."

    Public policy professor Francis Fukuyama, who coined the phrase the "end of
history," explores the great changes produced by globalization, aging and the
increase of women in political life. He foresees a "very different kind of
politics," moving away from "military intervention, defense and power
competition."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1196 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 10, 1999 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 037

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: Biotech rediscovers Bay State

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   When Amgen Inc. executives thrust their shovels into the dirt for a
groundbreaking ceremony today in Cambridge, they will be confirming what many
giants in the industry already know.

   Greater Boston is the place to be for biotechnology.

   "It's become an attractive place to be and an exciting place to be because
you have all these great minds within walking distance,"said Janice Bourque,
chief of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council.

   Massachusetts has long been known as a home for biotech companies, but in
recent months, the biggest names in the world have begun moving in.

   Amgen is planning an eight-story, 285,000-square-foot research center in
Kendall Square that would accommodate several hundred workers. But like many of
the big names setting up Bay State shops, Amgen will do only part of its work
here and keep its headquarters in California.

   "I think they wanted to have an East Coast and a West Coast presence,"
Bourque said. "And like any company that's moving forward, they wanted to make
sure they have access to the best and the brightest."

   Other big names moving into the area include Merck and Co., which is looking
to build in the Longwood medical area. Bayer AG and Lion Bioscience AG recently
made public a deal for a new Cambridge-based subsidiary to focus on drug
development.

   Earlier this year, Pfizer Inc. set up the Pfizer Discovery Technology Center
in Cambridge.

   As big companies move in, more are expected to follow. Development officials
envision a biotechnology belt extending from Boston to Worcester.

   "Two big trends are going on," said Jim Klocke, government affairs director
at the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce. "Federal funding for medical research
is zooming upwards     and the effort to decode the human genome has reached
critical mass."

   Scientists, many working in Boston labs, are making major breakthroughs in
mapping human genes. Those discoveries are leading to advances in treatments.

   It's no surprise to those who started here, such as Harvard University
graduate Josh Boger. He worked out of state after school, but returned to start
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Cambridge.

   "I looked at a lot of alternatives     but this is a unique area," Boger
said. "It has a very strong academic environment both from the university and
the hospital side."

   At the same time, it has a quality of life other areas don't, he said.

   Separately yesterday, Amgen asked a federal judge in California to issue a
summary judgment in a pending lawsuit against another Cambridge company,
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Bloomberg News reported. Transkaryotic denies
violating Amgen patents on its popular Epogen drug.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1999


                             1197 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

              November 10, 1999, Wednesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
 AMGEN ALLEGES PATENT INFRINGEMENT;
 BIOTECHNOLOGY: THE COMPANY IS SEEKING A SUMMARY JUDGMENT AGAINST TRANSKARYOTIC
THERAPIES.

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Amgen Inc., the world's largest biotechnology company, has asked a U.S. judge
to forgo a trial and rule that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. violated Amgen's
patents on its best-selling Epogen drug.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen filed for summary judgment, asking that the judge
declare Transkaryotic's efforts to market its own version of erythropoietin
illegal. Erythropoietin, an anti-anemia drug for cancer patients, is sold by
Amgen as Epogen and by Johnson & Johnson as Procrit.

   Some analysts said the motion for summary judgment probably will not be
allowed, which would set the stage for an April 2000 trial to determine whether
Amgen's patent position is strong enough to keep products similar to Epogen,
which had $ 1.4 billion in 1998 sales, off the market.

   "It's part of standard legal maneuvering," Akhtar Samad, an analyst at Oscar
Gruss & Son with a "buy" rating on Transkaryotic, said of the motion for summary
judgment.

   Others said Amgen's case was strong enough for the judge to accept Amgen's
motion, which requires that the facts of the case wholly support Amgen's
position.

   "I think this is real. Transkaryotic is clearly infringing" Amgen patents,
said Meirav Chovav, an analyst at Salomon Smith Barney, who has a "buy" rating
on Amgen.

   Amgen claims that Transkaryotic's formulation of erythropoietin infringes on
Amgen's patent to make the drug, the best-selling biotechnology product.
Transkaryotic says the form of the drug it is producing and testing isn't
covered by Amgen's patents.

   Amgen spokesman David Kaye said the motion reflected Amgen's belief that its
patent rights to erythropoietin remain strong.

   "We've always been confident in our patent position," he said.

   A U.S. District judge has allowed Transkaryotic and its partner, No. 1 German
drug maker Hoechst AG, to test the drug, though the court has yet to decide
whether the companies may legally market the drug.

   Amgen shares rose 44 cents to close at $ 85.88 on Nasdaq. Cambridge,
Mass.-based Transkaryotic shares fell $ 1.13 to close at $ 50.13 on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1999


                             1198 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     November 8, 1999, Monday ,City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1954 words

HEADLINE: Cutting-edge drugs a must in treating rare cancer;
HEALTH SENSE / JUDY FOREMAN

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   With any serious disease, it's obviously a good idea to find the best doctor
- and the best hospital - you can.

    But with ovarian cancer, a rare disease that strikes 25,000 women a year,
kills nearly 15,000, and is almost impossible to detect early - it's absolutely
essential.

    That's because there are often no symptoms in the early stages. In
three-quarters of cases, by the time ovarian cancer is diagnosed, it's already
spread. Currently, only half of women diagnosed with it are alive five years
later.

    All of this means it's crucial to get state-of-the-art chemotherapy and
specialized surgery, not from a general surgeon or gynecologist, but from a
gynecological cancer surgeon who knows how to probe every inch of the abdominal
cavity for tiny tumors.

    In ovarian cancer, the primary tumor usually, though not always, begins in
the ovary itself. It then spreads quickly throughout the abdomen, scattering
mini-tumors all over - on the colon, the spleen, the gallbladder, the diaphragm.
Even the walls of the peritoneum - the Saran-wrap like tissue that covers all
the internal organs - are studded with sprouting tumors.

    "When we see inside the abdomen, it's like DOTS candies," says Dr. Linda
Duska, a gynecologic cancer surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital. "It's not
just a mass in the ovary, it's diffuse miliary cancer - little, teeny things
everywhere." Research shows that the more thorough this initial surgery - which
involves a long, vertical incision and can take several hours - the better a
woman's chances of survival.

    Historically, those odds have been grim. If the cancer is caught early,
while the tumor is confined to the ovary, the 5-year survival rate is more than
90 percent. But few cases are caught early because there's still no good
screening test. Researchers are working on new tests, including a blood test
called LPA.

    There is already a blood test for a protein called CA125 that can detect
some tumors, but it's notoriously unreliable. It misses some cases and suggests
cancer is present when it's not. Ultrasound can spot some cancers, but it, too,
raises many false alarms. Even when these two tests are combined with a standard
pelvic exam, ovarian cancer is so hard to differentiate from benign cysts on the
ovary that 30 women with suspicious findings may be sent to the operating room
for every cancer found.

    Barbara O'Brien, 54, an Arlington woman, is one of the lucky ones. She was
diagnosed three years ago when her cancer was in the earliest stage. But she
says she's "one of the few in my support group" whose cancers were caught this
early.

    If cancer isn't caught until after it has spread to the fallopian tubes, the
5-year survival rate drops from 90 percent to 80 percent. If it has spread to
the lymph nodes and abdomen, it drops to 30 percent. Even when symptoms -
abdominal swelling, bloating, vague abdominal and pelvic pain, gas - are
present, they are so non-specific, a doctor may not suspect ovarian cancer.

    Better chemotherapy drugs, however, and equally important, a much better
understanding of how best to combine and administer them, are beginning to make
a dent in those numbers.

    There's no data yet showing that bone marrow transplantion is more effective
than standard chemotherapy. But there are several studies showing that giving
chemotherapy intraperitoneally - through a tube into the abdomen, instead of
through intravenous injections into the bloodstream - may yield some improvement
in survival.

    The advantage is that the drugs get directly to the tumor, cause less nerve
and marrow damage, and trigger fewer side effects. The downside is this
treatment can cause severe abdominal pain and may not work against tiny tumors
that travel through the circulation to other areas of the body.

    Another emerging strategy is to try new drugs early, instead of waiting
until a relapse, as is traditionally done. "The hope is that by utilizing more
of the new, active agents in ovarian cancer right at the beginning, it may
result in more effective killing of tumors and potentially prolong survival,"
says Dr. Ross Berkowitz, co-director of the Gillette Center for Women's Cancers
at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.

    Doctors are also finding new ways to combine drugs so that they attack the
tumor through different biochemical pathways and don't exacerbate each other's
side effects. "The concept of chemotherapy that works in different ways is
critically important," says Dr. Stephen A. Cannistra, program director of
gynecological medical oncology at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in
Boston.

    For instance, platinum-based drugs - either cisplatin or carboplatin - have
long been the mainstay of treatment. The drugs insert themselves into DNA and
interfere with its replication. Seven out of 10 tumors can be shrunk this way,
but the drugs kill only tumor cells that are sensitive to them, and many aren't.

    Adding Taxol to platinum drugs yields significantly better survival, notes
Dr. Edward Trimble, a specialist at the National Cancer Institute. In part,
that's because Taxol works differently, by binding to a cellular structure
called tubulin. When it binds, the chromosomes can't pull apart and the cell
can't divide.

    Another relatively new drug called Hycamtin (topotecan) works in yet another
way, by blocking an enzyme called topoisomerase-1, without which DNA can't
unwind and the cell can't divide.

    Already approved for women whose ovarian cancer has recurred, Hycamtim is
now being studied as a first-line treatment. A drug called Doxil works
similarly, by inhibiting an enzyme called topoisomerase-2.

    Still another emerging strategy is to borrow chemotherapy drugs from other
types of cancer. A pancreatic cancer drug called Gemcitabine, for instance,
shows enough promise against ovarian tumors that doctors are now designing
studies to test it in newly-diagnosed women. Doctors are also trying a lung
cancer drug called Navelbine for women with recurrent tumors.

    An even more high-tech solution was reported recently by Tayyaba Hasan, a
biochemist at the Massachusetts General Hospital Laser Center, and others, in
the Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Hasan's team studied ovarian
cancer that was resistant to cisplatin.

    The researchers hooked together a drug called a monocloncal antibody
(designed to find its way to markers on ovarian cancer cells) with a
light-sensitive molecule called a chlorin.

    A laser light activates the chlorin, which then destroys the cancer cells -
but not normal cells - in the immediate area. "The exciting finding," says
Hasan, is that this approach was 13 times more effective than standard
chemotherapy alone. Other researchers, including a team at the University of
Pennsylvania, are pursuing a similar approach.

    And even that's just the beginning. In a collaborative effort, researchers
at the Dana-Farber, MGH, and Brigham and Women's Hospital are freezing bits of
ovarian cancer tissue in hopes of making individually-tailored vaccines. The
idea is to kill the cells, insert genes that make an immune-boosting protein
called GM-CSF, then re-inject the cells back into the patient.

    Other researchers are trying gene therapy to beef up production of
cancer-fighting proteins produced by a gene called p53. Still others are working
on SERMS, or selective estrogen receptor modulators, to block hormonally-driven
cancers. And others, including researchers at New England Medical Center, are
conducting trials of a monoclonal antibody called OvaRex to help the immune
system attack ovarian cancer cells.

    There is no question that ovarian cancer is still a horribly stubborn
disease. But the research is beginning to pay off.

    Carolyn Mostecki, 54, a professional gardener in Gloucester, appears to be
in remission after six years of treatment. She took an experimental drug called
Taxotere, a cousin of Taxol, but thinks Tibetan herbs have helped, too.

    Alice Rouff, 60, a restaurant hostess from Ashland who was diagnosed 10
years ago, is also optimistic. "I'm totally fine now," she says, though she's
scared to use the word "cure."

    "And every day, I make a good day."

   Figuring a woman's risk for cancer of the ovaries

    There are no definitive ways to prevent ovarian cancer, but some factors may
reduce or increase risk.

    Last week, for instance, Italian researchers reported in the Journal of the
National Cancer Institute that taking a drug related to vitamin A (fenretinide)
may protect against ovarian cancer, in part by triggering apoptosis, or cell
death.

    In general, scientists believe that the more ovulatory cycles a woman has in
her life, the greater the risk, and the fewer cycles she has - whether they are
interrupted by pregnancy, birth control pills or breastfeeding - the lower the
risk.

    Every time a woman ovulates, there is microscopic damage to the surface of
the ovary where the egg pops out. Usually, this damage is quickly healed, but
cells must work overtime to repair it. During this repair, researchers theorize,
there is an increased risk of genetic mutations, which may lead to cancer.

    Studies show that a full-term pregnancy, during which there is no ovulation,
reduces the ovarian cancer risk by 50 percent; subsequent pregancies offer
additional protection. Breast feeding, which can also inhibit ovulation, reduces
ovarian cancer risk, too, but this data is less convincing.

    There is good evidence, though, that oral contraceptives, which keep the
pituitary gland from triggering ovulation, decrease ovarian cancer risk by about
50 percent if they're taken for a total of five years, not necessarily
continuously.

    And what of the interplay between infertility and ovarian cancer? That's
dicey. If infertility means there's no full-term pregnancy, that increases risk
just as it would in a fertile woman who never had a baby. On the other hand, if
infertility is caused by lack of ovulation, as it can be, that could reduce
risk, though this hasn't been proved.

    Fertility drugs such as Clomid and Pergonal have been suspected in some
cases of ovarian cancer. Some evidence suggests that ovulation-inducing drugs
may increase risk, particularly if the drugs don't work and a woman never gets
the risk-reducing benefits of pregnancy. On the other hand, a recent California
study found no such association.

    Curiously, tubal ligation, in which a woman's fallopian tubes are tied to
prevent eggs from getting from the ovaries to the uterus, may reduce the risk of
ovarian cancer by 30 percent, for unclear reasons. One theory is that ligation
blocks potentially carcingenic substances from travelling from the vagina,
cervix or uterus up to the ovaries.

    In support of this, scientists point to several studies suggesting that
talcum powder, which some women put on diaphragms or on genital skin, can raise
ovarian cancer risk.

    Some women, including some Ashkenazi Jews, also have mutations in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes that increase risk of both breast and ovarian cancer. In general,
women have about a 1.4 percent chance of getting ovarian cancer over a lifetime;
in women with one close family member who has had the disease, the risk rises to
5 percent. If more close family members are affected, it rises more.

    Doctors suggest that women who test positive for the mutations or have a
strong family history of the disease consider having their ovaries removed
surgically in hopes of preventing ovarian cancer. Even after such surgery,
however, it may be possible to develop a related cancer in the peritoneum, the
tissue that lines the abdomen.

   Judy Foreman is a member of the Globe staff. Her e-mail address is:
foreman(AT SIGN SYMBOL)globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 08, 1999


                             1199 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      November 8, 1999 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: Medical researchers call gene therapy safe

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   ATLANTA - Medical researchers defended the safety and effectiveness of gene
therapy in presentations yesterday at the world's most prestigious heart
conference.

   Data on more than 100 patients indicates the therapy to grow new blood
vessels to supply the heart is safe, they said, and preliminary evidence shows
it is working, at least to some degree.

   Seventy-two patients at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston have
undergone a gene-therapy treatment known as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), a new trial in which the gene is administered via a catheter.

   Half of the participants in the first two trials were symptom-free after a
year, said Dr. Jeffrey Isner, lead investigator.

   Results of another study, using a VEGF protein rather than the gene itself,
were less conclusive, reported Dr. Timothy Henry of Hennepin County Medical
Center in Minneapolis.

   A study of 178 patients showed those who got a placebo did nearly as well as
those getting the protein. But Henry said the two-month follow up may not have
been long enough and that it may take longer for the gene therapy to work to its
optimal level.

   While the therapy appeared to be safe, he said, "clinical benefit remains
unproven."

   Yet another study, looking at gene therapy administered to vessels being used
to bypass clogged leg vessels, showed spectacular results, however.

   "To our knowledge, this is the first evidence of benefit from gene therapy in
a controlled study," said Dr. Michael Mann of Brigham and Women's Hospital.
"This is an important step."

   In the experiment, bypass vessels were bathed in a DNA solution prior to
being attached. In the year following their surgeries, the patients who got the
gene therapy had fewer than half the graft failures than those who got
traditional surgery.

   Isner and other gene therapy researchers also defended the safety of their
experiments in light of heightened scrutiny following reports that claimed six
deaths, including two at St. Elizabeth's, went unreported.

   Of his 72 patients who got the therapy, only 2.7 percent died, he said.

   "I don't want to trivialize any death, but that's a good track record," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: November 08, 1999


                             1200 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 08, 1999, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: Scientists grow complete heart valve in lab for first time

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   ATLANTA - From vessels to valves, doctors are engineering replacement parts
for ailing hearts as well as improving arteries for bypass surgery. And now -
for the first time - a complete heart valve has been grown in the lab using
cells from blood vessel walls in sheep, researchers reported Sunday at the
American Heart Association meeting here.

   The sheep cells were seeded into a biodegradable, synthetic form, or
scaffold. As they grew, they were subjected to increasing flows and pressures to
mimic the blood flow patterns in the heart, which made the growing valve
stronger. After 14 days, the cells had grown into the desired shape - including
flaplike structures that allow the blood to flow in only one direction.

   The valves were surgically implanted into the sheep, where they worked well
for more than five months.

   Scientists are interested in figuring out how to grow human valves from a
patient's own tissue because the current options are so limited. The pig valves
now used in humans stiffen and stop working after a time. Patients with
mechanical valves have to take blood-thinning drugs to prevent blood clots. A
patient's body wouldn't reject a valve made from his or her own cells.

   The next step in sheep-valve research, said Dr. Simon Hoerstrup of Harvard
Medical School, is to expand the experiment into a larger number of animals for
a longer time.

   Researchers across the country, including doctors at St. Luke's Episcopal
Hospital and Methodist Hospital in Houston, are exploring ways to increase blood
flow by helping the heart grow its own new blood vessels, a process known as
angiogenesis. The treatment would stimulate the growth of a mesh of capillaries
that could carry blood to parts of the heart usually nourished by coronary
arteries.

   The substance to promote that process, which could be delivered through
direct injection or minimally invasive surgery, might someday help patients who
have poor blood flow to the heart despite bypass operations or angioplasty, in
which a balloon-tipped catheter widens a narrowed blood vessel.

   "Angiogenesis therapy is making progress," said Dr. James Willerson, chief of
cardiology at the Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's, during one of the
meeting's main sessions. "We're not there yet, but we'll get there."

   In three studies discussed Sunday, the vessel-promoting protein called
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) appeared to be safe for humans. In the
largest of these trials, which included Houston as a test site, volunteers with
chest pain who were not candidates for heart surgery received five intravenous
infusions of VEGF. Patient improvement was measured by exercise treadmill time,
decrease in chest pain and other quality-of-life measures.

   After two months, patients felt better and lasted longer on the treadmill.
But initial results indicated a strong placebo effect - similarities between the
patients getting VEGF and those who believed they were getting VEGF but actually
got an inert substance. So the question remains, does it work?

   "I believe there was an improvement, in exercise time," said Minnesota
cardiologist Timothy Henry, who presented the study. "It's an emerging field.
It's brand new. We're still finding out what the best time points are."

   Henry said two months is too early to draw conclusions; the peak response
time probably comes later than that.

   Another strategy reported Sunday looked at reconditioning a patient's own
veins with a DNA "bath" to improve the success rate of leg bypass operations.

   Dr. Michael Mann, a surgical resident at Brigham and Women's Hospital in
Boston, said that up to 50 percent of all leg bypass surgeries fail 5 to 10
years after the operation because the vessels used to bypass the clogged
arteries thicken and become blocked themselves. Graft blockages are treated with
another operation or angioplasty.

   In the experimental procedure, the vein to be grafted was bathed in a fluid
containing small pieces of artificial DNA before surgeons implanted it in the
patient. The DNA "turned off" the genes responsible for the growth of an
abnormal layer in the wall of the engrafted vein, which eventually leads to
blockage.

   In the year following their bypass surgery, the patients who received gene
therapy had fewer than half of the reblockages of the patients who received
surgery alone.

   Although the study was small, the results were statistically significant,
Mann said, showing promise for a treatment that is fast and relatively cheap.
"This procedure could end up having a major impact," Mann said, "not only on
long term success of all types of bypass surgery, but also on the cost of
treating graft blockages."


LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1999
