
                             1401 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     August 23, 1999, Monday ,City Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 811 words

HEADLINE: Helping children's teaching hospitals;
PHILIP A. PIZZO;
Philip A. Pizzo is physician-in-chief at Children's Hospital and Thomas Morgan
Rotch Professor of Pediatrics at Harvard Medical School.

BYLINE: By Philip A. Pizzo

BODY:

   During 25 years as a pediatrician I have witnessed dramatic improvements in
the health of children.

    In my specialties of pediatric oncology and infectious diseases, cancer has
gone from a nearly incurable disease to one in which nearly 75 percent of the
children diagnosed are likely to survive and even be cured. Equally important,
just in the past 10 years, therapies have commuted the "death sentence" for
children with HIV infection and AIDS to the possibility of long-term survival.
We are also able to virtually prevent the transmission of HIV from mother to
child with antiviral drug therapy.

    Such dramatic accomplishments do not happen by accident. They are born out
of teaching hospitals where senior clinicians and scientists work with young
doctors undergoing graduate medical education in pediatrics and pediatric
specialties.

    It is these interns and residents who become the pediatricians, specialists,
and scientists of tomorrow and who will bring us the miracles of the 21st
century. A cure for cancer, new vaccines, gene therapy, tissue engineering are
all possibilities.

    The path to leadership in children's health care is neither easy nor cheap.
Pediatricians must train three to eight years beyond medical school.
Fortunately, during this period, these young men and women are not only learning
but also contributing to improving the lives of children at the bedside and in
the research laboratory. Unfortunately, these contributions are in peril as a
result of a funding gap unique to independent children's hospitals.

    In recent weeks the media have reported on the devastating impact of the
current and planned reductions in Medicare on teaching hospitals as a
consequence of the 1997 Balanced Budget Act. Due to market changes, Medicare has
become the remaining stable and significant source of support for physician
training at teaching hospitals. Missing from this dialogue, however, is the fact
that independent children's teaching hospitals, including Boston's Children's
Hospital, receive virtually no federal support for their teaching programs
because they treat children, not the elderly.

    The federal government invests on average per resident nearly 200 times as
much through Medicare to train doctors in all teaching hospitals as it does to
train them in free-standing children's hospitals. If Boston's Children's
Hospital were supported for its mission in graduate medical education at the
same level as adult teaching hospitals, it would receive approximately $30
million a year. Instead, it receives $2 million to $3 million from Medicaid and
virtually nothing from Medicare or private insurers.

    The independent children's hospitals in this country train nearly 30 percent
of the nation's pediatricians and nearly half of its pediatric specialists and
researchers. The lack of adequate educational funding jeopardizes this future
pool of pediatricians and research breakthroughs.


    Focused solely on children, Boston's Children's Hospital has had the
commitment to remain at the forefront of pediatric health care. When treatments
are not available, physicians and research scientists at Children's Hospital
create them.

    For example, when I began training at the hospital in 1970, my colleagues
and I witnessed numerous cases of deadly meningitis caused by Hemophilus
influenza. Because of the pioneering work of Children's researchers, whose team
included a number of pediatric trainees, a vaccine for this infection was
developed. So in the mid-1990s, when my own daughter began her pediatric
internship, neither she nor her classmates saw a case of H. flu meningitis.

    Similar discoveries have led to new operations and less invasive ways to
correct or repair damaged hearts, limbs, and other organs as well as novel ways
to diagnose and treat disorders such as epilepsy and cystic fibrosis. Many
discoveries have happened because treating and curing children is our only
priority.

    With all that has been achieved, there is much more to be done. Too many
children still suffer and die. Fortunately, President Clinton has introduced a
proposal for interim support in his budget this year, but this critical
assistance will come only if the bills before the House and Senate are passed.
In addition, both Republicans and Democratic leaders, including the entire
Massachusetts delegation, are sponsoring legislation called the Children's
Hospitals Education and Research Act to fund pediatric graduate medical
education. We hope that members of Congress throughout New England will be as
supportive so that critical financial relief is provided to children's
hospitals. This assistance will come only if the bipartisan bills before the
House and Senate are passed.

    As the plea to help our teaching hospitals echoes nationwide, the quieter
voices of our children must not go unheard.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1999


                             1402 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           August 23, 1999 Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science Pg. 5

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: Research looks to speed healing of fractures
 Blend of gene therapy and tissue engineering headed to human trial

BYLINE: RANDOLPH E. SCHMID

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Sponge-like devices with genes implanted that are crucial to bone growth
helped speed healing of broken bones in dogs. Researches said the procedure
could help the thousands of elderly Americans who suffer fractures every year.

   The combination of gene therapy and tissue engineering was developed at the
University of Michigan Medical School and was reported in the journal Nature
Medicine.

   Clinical trials in humans could come as early as next year, said Jeffrey
Bonadio, the lead researcher.

   In their experiments, team members used the gene for parathyroid hormone,
which regulates the amount of calcium in the blood by affecting the kidneys,
intestines and bones, Bonadio said in a telephone interview.

   Too much of the hormone coursing through the body can cause damage, he said.
But, present in the proper amount in an area of damaged bone, it encourages bone
growth and repair.

   The researchers took a structure in cells called a plasmid, which can
reproduce and carry genetic instructions. They implanted it in a sponge-like
material made of collagen, said Bonadio, now associated with Selective Genetics
Inc., in San Diego. The plasmid they used codes cells to produce parathyroid
hormone.

   In tests on dogs with fractures, the scientists inserted the sponges into the
damaged area, and bone cells began to grow into it, Bonadio said.

   Those cells then took up the gene for parathyroid hormone "and became growth
factories, . . . turning repair cells into local bioreactors," he said. The
result was that bone increased at the fracture sites.

   The process could prove particularly helpful for the many elderly who suffer
fractures each year, most involving the hip, wrist or spine, Bonadio said. He
estimated that 300,000 elderly suffer broken hips annually, particularly people
suffering from the bone-thinning process called osteoporosis.

   "We're not trying to prevent. . . fractures; we're trying to heal them," he
said. "We are hoping to initiate a clinical trial next year in which the elderly
are the primary target population."

   And, he added, there is a secondary target: young people who suffer
high-impact fractures of various types. These people include skiers,
motorcyclists, bikers and others.


LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1999


                             1403 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        August 23, 1999, Monday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: METRO BRIEFS




SOURCE: Compiled from staff reports

BODY: New York Voices opens Trinity series

    The New York Voices, a quartet that has received critical acclaimfor its
tight and intricate vocal jazz performances, will kick offTrinity University's
Stieren Arts Enrichment Series this fall.

    The quartet will present a concert at 8 p.m. Sept. 11 at LaurieAuditorium.
The event is free.

    The New York Voices recently recorded an album of songs written byPaul
Simon. The ensemble won a Grammy award in 1997 for an albumrecorded with the
Count Basie Orchestra.

    Each year the Stieren Arts Enrichment Series at Trinity brings
adistinguished array of leaders in the fields of arts, music, drama,literature,
communication, art history and aesthetics.

    Stieren events planned for the coming academic year include areading by
author Joyce Carol Oates, presentations by film andtelevision critics and a
production of the musical "Cabaret."

    The series is made possible through an endowment created by Janeand Arthur
Stieren of San Antonio.

    Business professor named to UTSA post

    Rudy Sandoval, an associate professor in the College of Business,has been
promoted to associate vice president for administration atthe University of
Texas at San Antonio by school President RicardoRomo.

    Sandoval will serve as a liaison with the faculty for the presidentand work
closely with UTSA's provost on faculty recruiting andhiring practices.

    "I feel very fortunate to have someone of Dr. Sandoval's expertisejoining my
administration," Romo said. "Not only does he possess athorough understanding of
the legal system and administration ofhigher education, he has a long and
valuable record of service tothis institution,''

    Sandoval teaches business law and has served as the coordinator
forinternational programs. He joined UTSA in 1981.

    He's the former president and chief executive officer of EximIndustries
Corp. and a former president and director of the SanAntonio Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce.

    Sandoval has a bachelor's degree in business administration fromTexas A&I
University and a master's degree in economics from theUniversity of Notre Dame.
He also has two law degrees including onefrom Harvard University's School of
Law. He has taught at theUniversity of San Diego School of Law and Notre Dame
Law School.

    SAC, McDonald's launch internship

    San Antonio College is launching a new McDonald's ManagementInternship
program this fall semester which includes a $500renewable scholarship for
selected students majoring in businessadministration or business management.

    "This will be a great opportunity for our students to get valuableexperience
as paid interns, working 20 hours a week, whilecompleting their associate of
arts degree in business," saidMargaret Hyde, dean of arts and sciences.

    Students selected for the program will receive extensive trainingby the
McDonald's restaurant chain, including a two-week course atHamburger University
at McDonald's headquarters in Chicago.

    There are openings for students with training in accounting,business
management, operations and human relations.

    Students chosen to participate in the two-year program must havecompleted at
least 18 hours in specified courses with a "C" orbetter.

    They also must have an overall 3.0 grade-point average, carry aminimum of
nine semester hours in the fall and spring semesters andwork no more than 20
hours a week while enrolled in college.

    Funds raised for muscular dystrophy

    Jim's Restaurants and a national muscular dystrophy group haveteamed up to
raise awareness and money for scientific research.

    The Parent Project, a national organization of parents,grandparents and
patients dedicated to raising money for musculardystrophy research, is working
with San Antonio-based FrontierEnterprises to raise money for scientific
research.

    During August, all Jim's Restaurants in the San Antonio area haveplaced
Parent Project canisters near cash registers with a bookthat explains what the
disease is and where the money raised willgo.

    Portions of funds raised by the Parent Project in the past havegone to
establish two Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Research Centersof Excellence.

    One of those centers, at the University of Pittsburgh, is focusingon gene
therapy research. The second center, at the University ofCalifornia at Los
Angeles, is concentrating on the role of theimmune system in Duchenne and Becker
muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD).

    Funds raised at Jim's Restaurants will go toward scientificresearch at the
two centers.

    For more information on the Parent Project, visit the web site
athttp://www.parentdmd.org.

    Literacy coalition needs tutors, mentors

    The San Antonio Coalition for Literacy wants to sign up 200 tutorsand
mentors by the year 2000 to help public school students improvetheir reading
skills.

    The first training session and orientation program for the fallsemester will
be held 1-2:30 p.m. Tuesday at the new Jewish Campusin the 12500 block of N.W.
Military Highway.

    The coalition, now in its 11th year, is sponsored by the CommunityRelations
Council of the Jewish Federation of San Antonio, localJewish congregations and
groups, and the Hispanic Republican Womenof San Antonio.

    Tutors will work primarily with students in grades 1-5 and spend 45minutes a
week with them. About 90 tutors currently volunteer withthe coalition but more
are needed.

    "We want to help more children," said Michele Leverant,co-chairwoman of the
coalition, who added that reservations arerequested. To sign up for the program,
call 302-6960.

    Water district to appeal conviction

    After its conviction for holding an illegal board meeting wasupheld three
times on appeals, the board of the agency thatcontrols water releases from
Medina Lake has voted to appeal to theTexas Supreme Court.

    The divided seven-member board of the Bexar-Medina-AtascosaCounties Water
Control and Improvement District No. 1 voted 4-3during a special board meeting
to advance the appeal.

    "They've already spent $70,000 on this case, and this appeal isexpected to
add another $10,000 to $15,000 to the cost,'' said BillHope, president of the
BMA Landowners' Association, which filed thecivil suit alleging violation of the
Texas Open Meetings Act.

    Several board members last year met at a farmer's barn with ownersof land
irrigated by lake water to explain what direction thedistrict was taking. There
was no public notice for the meeting,and even some board members weren't
informed.

    State District Judge Mickey Pennington of Hondo ruled the meetingwas illegal
and denied an appeal.

    A majority of the board, all of whom attended the meeting last yearat which
the district's engineers and attorneys were paid to makepresentations, voted to
appeal the case to the 4th Court of Appealsin San Antonio, which agreed the
meeting was illegal.

    The appeals court last month also denied a rehearing of the appeal.

    "They're spending money on a losing cause even with the district indebt by
at least $723,000,'' Hope said.

    The board was characterized as a mismanaged runaway train in anunusual grand
jury report issued without indictments four monthsago.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: KIN MAN HUI / Staff: Royce Groff, who says he makes the best
beans in Bexar and Medina counties, stirs up a batch Sunday during the St. Louis
Festival in Castroville. Groff helped make about 650 pounds of beans to go with
the sausage and brisket at the festival.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1999


                             1404 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     August 20, 1999, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: Thinking Right

BYLINE: Staff

SOURCE: Journal

BODY:
Gene therapy going too far

   THERE'S SOMETHING Orwellian about a genetic research project under way at
Emory University. Scientists have found that inserting a gene from the sociable
and monogamous prairie vole into an ordinary lab mouse creates a more sociable
breed of lab mouse.

   The researchers hope that research in humans will help them understand and
treat autism and other psychiatric disorders characterized by antisocial
behavior. "It brings up the passibility of altering behavior in animals in a
predictable way," says lead researcher Larry Young.

   What next? Gene therapy instead of Ritalin to avoid disruptive schoolchildren
and turn them into agreeable adults?

Outside jurisdiction

   YOU COULD almost, if you wanted to be astonishingly generous, make a case
that a school district in Mississippi was acting in good faith when it barred a
Jewish student from wearing a Star of David necklace. A gang along the Gulf
Coast of the state uses the six-pointed star as a symbol, so school officials
say they must ban it for safety reasons. That's wrong, it's stupid, it's
illegal, but it isn't necessarily evil.

   What's truly scary, however, is the argument by a sheriff's department
spokesman that it's OK to ban the emblem in this case, because officials think
the student in question isn't Jewish enough: "He's never been bar mitzvahed and
he's never been a practicing Jew."

   Whatever America needs in its quest to ensure the protection of religious
rights, it doesn't need Mississippi sheriffs --- or public officials anywhere
--- deciding who's a "real Jew" and who's not. We trust that the courts will
tell the powers that be in Harrison County that they can't ban necklaces with
the Star of David if they don't ban cross pendants (or, better yet, that they
can't ban either).

   We hope that some judge will also remind them that they are not the high
priests of any religion, and don't have any business deciding what folks have to
be to "qualify" in their eyes as Jew, Christian or Muslim.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1999


                             1405 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 20, 1999 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 025

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find gene tied to heart disease

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers in Boston have identified a gene that controls the production of
artery-clogging plaque and have found that an enzyme that occurs naturally in
the lining of the blood vessels can prevent plaque from developing.

   "People have been looking for this gene for 10 or 15 years," said Dr. James
Liao of Brigham and Women's Hospital, who headed the study that reported the
findings.

   The gene, CYP2J2, appears to play a key role in the buildup of
artery-clogging plaque that leads to coronary heart disease.

   Its discovery could lead to gene therapy to target those who may be most
susceptible to coronary artery disease, Liao said.

   But Liao's paper, published in today's issue of the journal Science, goes
beyond just the gene discovery. It also reports the discovery of a naturally
occurring enzyme, epoxyelcosatrienoic acid or EEC, that controls the buildup of
plaque in the arteries to the heart.

   The enzyme occurs in the endothelial cells that line the inner surface of the
blood vessels, Liao said. The enzyme produces a substance that prevents the
buildup of white blood cells on the vessel walls, a first step in the
development of atherosclerosis or clogged arteries that lead to heart attack.

   Without the buildup of the white blood cells, "there is no blockage, no
cholesterol buildup," he said.

   The researchers gave the enzyme to mice and found it was able to suppress the
inflammation in arteries that can lead to atherosclerosis.

   Inflammatory cells are the causes not only of atherosclerosis, but also of
cancer and certain autoimmune diseases.

   Giving the enzyme basically supplies the body with its own defense system
against atherosclerosis which may have been damaged by smoking, cholesterol
buildup or a faulty gene, according to Liao.

   "We are replacing it," he said.

   The idea is to give the enzyme, either by injection or in pill form, to
prevent atherosclerosis in the first place in people who may be at high risk or
as a treatment to reduce buildup in those who are already suffering from the
illness.

   "This would be a new class of drugs," he said.

   Although the enzyme has only been tried in mice, studies are being planned
for humans, Liao said.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1999


                             1406 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    August 19, 1999, Thursday, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Emory research: Mice play nice after getting gene transplant

BYLINE: Lillian Lee Kim, Staff

SOURCE: Constitution

BODY:
A snuggling pile of furry brown rodents, no larger than a kiwi, has provided
Emory University scientists with a clue to why some people play well with others
--- and some don't.

   The rodents are prairie voles, a species known for being sociable and
monogamous. By inserting one of their genes into ordinary lab mice, Emory
researchers have created a more sociable breed of mouse.

   It's the first time a single gene has been linked to complex social
behaviors.

   No, the gene therapy isn't available for use on cranky co-workers, neighbors
or relatives. But scientists hope the research, reported today in the journal
Nature, will bring them closer to understanding and better treating autism, a
neurological disorder that afflicts more than 500,000 people in the United
States.

   "It brings up the possibility of altering behavior in animals in a
predictable way," said lead researcher Larry Young, an associate professor of
psychiatry at Emory.

   Young and his research team bred the transgenic mice by incorporating a
prairie vole gene that causes the development of brain-cell receptors that
respond to a naturally occurring hormone, vasopressin. Vasopressin affects
social behavior such as communication and aggression, and plays a role in the
formation of pair bonds, as between mates.

   Emory researchers noted the genetically altered mice developed vasopressin
receptors in the same parts of the brain as in prairie voles. Also, after being
given vasopressin, the transgenic mice became more sociable than normal mice.

   Israel I. Lederhendler, a neuroscientist at the National Institute of Mental
Health, called it "a remarkable finding." NIMH grants funded the Emory study.

   The study may provide new clues to autism and other psychiatric disorders all
characterized by antisocial behavior.

   Autistic people often have problems communicating and may show little
interest in making friends. Autism gained increased public awareness via the
1988 movie "Rain Man," starring Dustin Hoffman as an autistic savant who was
severely withdrawn but a near-genius at math.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1999


                             1407 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    August 19, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 676 words

HEADLINE: Mice play nice after transplant;
 Emory study: Insertion of a gene from prairie vole to lab rodent boosts the
latter's sociability.

BYLINE: Lillian Lee Kim, Staff

SOURCE: Constitution

BODY:
A snuggling pile of furry brown rodents, no larger than a kiwi, has provided
Emory University scientists with a clue to why some people play well with others
--- and some don't.

   The rodents are prairie voles, a species known for being sociable and
monogamous. By inserting one of their genes into ordinary lab mice, Emory
researchers have created a more sociable breed of mouse.

   It's the first time a single gene has been linked to complex social
behaviors.

   No, the gene therapy isn't available for use on cranky co-workers, neighbors
or relatives. But scientists hope the research, reported today in the journal
Nature, will bring them closer to understanding and better treating autism, a
neurological disorder that afflicts more than 500,000 people in the United
States.

   "It brings up the possibility of altering behavior in animals in a
predictable way," said lead researcher Larry Young, an associate professor of
psychiatry at Emory.

   Young and his research team bred the transgenic mice by incorporating a
prairie vole gene that causes the development of brain-cell receptors that
respond to a naturally occurring hormone, vasopressin. Vasopressin affects
social behavior such as communication and aggression, and plays a role in the
formation of pair bonds, as between mates.

   Emory researchers noted the genetically altered mice developed vasopressin
receptors in the same parts of the brain as in prairie voles. Also, after being
given vasopressin, the transgenic mice became more sociable than normal mice.

   Israel I. Lederhendler, a neuroscientist at the National Institute of Mental
Health, called it "a remarkable finding." NIMH grants funded the Emory study.
"We were very surprised that these mice showed so much similarity to the voles,"
Young said.

   Researchers identified the key gene by comparing the brains of the prairie
vole and its close relative, the montane vole. Both vole species are small,
brown and generally indistinguishable in appearance, yet behave quite
differently.  Put two montane voles together in a cage, and they will move to
opposite sides, like siblings after a fight. Place two prairie voles in a cage
and they will huddle together.

   Prairie voles, which spend more than half their time touching another vole,
mate for life, and both parents actively rear their children. Montane voles,
while solitary, are promiscuous. The male takes no interest in his offspring;
the mother abandons the litter after only a couple of weeks.

   As Emory researchers discovered several years ago that vasopressin receptors
are in different places in the brains of prairie and montane voles. Young and
his team found a genetic explanation for this phenomenon: a long section of DNA,
or genetic code, that appears in the vasopressin receptor gene of prairie voles
but is missing in montane voles. This DNA sequence is believed to help determine
when and where the receptor gene is turned on. Incorporating the piece of DNA
into the genes of mice proved its importance.

   The study may provide new clues to autism and other psychiatric disorders all
characterized by antisocial behavior.

   Autistic people often have problems communicating and may show little
interest in making friends. Autism gained increased public awareness via the
1988 movie "Rain Man," starring Dustin Hoffman as an autistic savant who was
severely withdrawn but a near-genius at math.

   Yet the disorder remains poorly understood. Autism typically appears in early
childhood, and is four times more prevalent in boys than in girls, according to
the Autism Society of America.

   "Autism is a really odd disorder, with no real medical treatment," said Dr.
Thomas Insel, director of Emory's Center for Behavioral Neuroscience. "If this
provides us with a target to go after, that would help tremen- dously."

   Researchers say the next step is to investigate receptor variation among
human brains.

   "No one has looked carefully at receptors in the human brain," Insel said. "
We'd love to know what this gene looks like in autistic kids."

GRAPHIC: Photo
Emory University researcher Larry Young examining the brain scans of mice and
other rodents used in his genetic experiment. / PHIL SKINNER / Staff

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1999


                             1408 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 19, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 443 words

HEADLINE: An altered gene gives male mice social skills

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   With a single genetic manipulation, a typical loner male laboratory
mouse has been transformed into a more social fellow with a preference
for the company of females, scientists reported Wednesday.

   The rather dramatic change in behavior has implications for understanding
mechanisms in the brain that underlie sociability in mammals,
including humans, says Larry Young of Emory University in Atlanta.

   The groundbreaking experiment, led by Tom Insel, director of Emory's
Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, and reported in today's Nature,
evolved from the study of mouselike rodents called voles.


   One type, the prairie vole, is highly social, is monogamous, lives
in multigenerational families and shares child-rearing between
males and females. A second type, the montane vole, shuns company,
lives alone and is polygamous.

   The two types share 99% of their genes. But subtle differences
in the remaining 1% appear to account for their very different
social behaviors. One subtlety lies in a gene for cells in the
brain called vasopressin receptors. Vasopressin is a hormone that
regulates a lot of behavior, including sociability and monogamy,
in all male mammals.

   The gene in male prairie voles contains a segment that causes
these receptors to be distributed in a specific pattern that is
not found in the montane vole. The montane vole does not have
that segment in its vasopressin receptor gene.

   To learn how important this segment and the resulting pattern
of receptors are, Young created a strain of male laboratory mice
with the prairie vole's version of the gene and the subsequent
receptor pattern.

   After a small injection of the vasopressin hormone, which was
taken up by this new pattern of receptors, the mice began behaving
like prairie vole companions, so to speak.

   "They began sitting side by side with females and grooming them,"
Insel says.

   Mice that were not engineered with the prairie vole gene ignored
the females, Young says.

   The next step is to get the prairie vole gene into montane voles
and see whether they will go a step further and become monogamous.

   "The ultimate goal is to understand the neural networks that
govern complex social behaviors like monogamy," Insel says.

   The scientists also want to learn whether distribution patterns
of vasopressin receptors in humans vary and whether differences
in social behavior are related.

   Young says the research could have implications for autism and
other disorders of social behavior. Scientists potentially could
test gene therapies for altering vasopressin receptor distribution
in those disorders.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1999


                             1409 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       August 18, 1999, Wednesday ,FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS ,2C Business Digest

LENGTH: 1271 words

SOURCE: FROM STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

BODY:

   In the region

    Applebee's is selling 11 Pa. restaurants to Rose Casual Dining

    Applebee's International Inc., which operates the Applebee's Neighborhood
Grill and Bar chain, agreed yesterday to sell its Philadelphia restaurants to
Rose Casual Dining LP, an Applebee's franchisee that owns 14 Applebee's in
Baltimore and Wilkes-Barre, Pa.

    Closely held Rose Casual, based in Philadelphia, will pay about $22.8
million in cash for the 11 restaurants, will pay Applebee's for construction of
a 12th store and plans to open at least 15 more Applebee's restaurants in the
Philadelphia area over the next five years.

    The sale is part of Applebee's goal to keep its ownership to 20 percent to
30 percent of the restaurants under its brand name.  After the sale, the company
will own 253 restaurants, about 23 percent of the 1,121 Applebee's in 48 states
and seven countries.

    Unidentified bidder tops Ahold offer for chain

    Royal Ahold NV, parent of Giant Food Inc., and an unidentified party each
bid for Hannaford Bros. Co., a grocery chain in the Northeast, with the second
offer topping Ahold's price, according to a source familiar with the
transaction.

    The amounts of the bids weren't disclosed, and Hannaford and Dutch-based
Ahold declined to comment.

    Scarborough, Maine-based Hannaford has about 150 supermarkets, mostly in New
England and New York under the Shop 'n Save banner, with sales last year of
$3.32 billion. Ahold, based in Zaandam, Netherlands, has been buying chains such
as Maryland-based Giant Food and New Jersey's Pathmark Stores to become the
biggest grocer along the East Coast.

    EntreMed, Cell Genesys collaborate on research

    EntreMed Inc. of Rockville said yesterday that it has entered into a
research agreement with Cell Genesys Inc. of Foster City, Calif., to develop an
experimental gene therapy for treating cancer.

    EntreMed will provide genes which prompt production of two human proteins,
angiostatin and endostatin, that have shown promise in blocking tumor growth.
The genes will be loaded into viruses that Cell Genesys has been experimenting
with to get genes inside the body.

    The companies said they plan to conduct studies to see whether the resulting
gene therapies can treat tumors. Terms were not disclosed.

    Anido to head sales, marketing at MedImmune

    MedImmune Inc. said yesterday that it has hired Armando Anido as senior vice
president for sales and marketing. He will report directly to Melvin D. Booth,
president and chief operating officer.

    Anido most recently was vice president of a marketing unit at Glaxo Wellcome
Inc. He replaces David P. Wright, who retired as executive vice president of
sales and marketing at the Gaithersburg biotechnology company.

    Elsewhere

    Merrill Lynch plans to spend millions to staff index fund unit

    Merrill Lynch & Co. is spending about $10 million to staff a new index fund
unit, Merrill Lynch Quantitative Advisors, in an attempt to rival the top three
companies in managing funds that use computers to mimic or outperform market
benchmarks.

    The largest U.S. brokerage plans to manage $100 billion to $200 billion in a
couple of years, putting itself in the neighborhood of Deutsche Bank AG, the No.
3 index fund manager -- from whom it hired five former Bankers Trust Corp.
executives who will run its new unit.

    Dean D'Onofrio, who heads the group, said the former Deutsche Bank-Bankers
Trust executives -- Frank Salerno, former head of index investments at Deutsche
Asset Management, and former Bankers Trust managing directors Anthony Conroy,
Philip Green, Sidney Hoots and Richard Vella, who joined Merrill last month --
were the keys to building Merrill's business.

    Dell profit climbs 47% on 42% sales gain in quarter

    Dell Computer Corp., the world's biggest direct seller of personal
computers, said its fiscal second-quarter profit rose 47 percent on a 42 percent
increase in sales.

    Net income climbed to $507 million, or 19 cents a share in the quarter that
ended July 30, up from $346 million, or 12 cents, a year earlier.

    Sales rose to $6.14 billion from $4.33 billion, the third quarter in which
growth trailed the 50 percent pace of the previous two years. Still, the
increase exceeds those of rivals such as No. 2 direct seller Gateway Inc., where
sales rose 18 percent, and Hewlett-Packard Co., which reported an 11 percent
rise Monday.

    Ford's UAW members vote on strike authorization

    United Auto Workers members at Ford Motor Co. cast ballots nationwide
yesterday over whether to authorize their bargainers to call a strike should
they be unable to reach agreement on a new national contract.

    The contracts expire Sept. 14. Members usually vote overwhelmingly to grant
their representatives the right to call a strike. Results of the vote are to be
released today, UAW spokesman Paul Krell said. About 101,000 members at 43
locals are eligible to vote.

    E-Stamp files with SEC for stock offering E-Stamp Corp., which recently got
U.S. Postal Service approval to sell postage online, filed yesterday for an
initial public offering of common stock.

    In a preliminary prospectus with the Securities and Exchange Commission, San
Mateo, Calif.-based E-Stamp did not disclose how many shares will be in the
offering or the estimated price range for the stock. The $85 million figure
cited in its initial filing was merely to calculate the SEC registration fee,
E-Stamp said.

    Qualcomm executives file to sell $39 million in shares

    Senior executives at digital wireless communications company Qualcomm Inc.
have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 250,000 shares
valued at almost $40 million.

    Irwin Jacobs, chief executive officer and board chairman, filed to sell 20,
000 shares worth an estimated $3.1 million. Jacobs last year earned $660,467 in
salary and a $555,000 bonus. He was exercising a stock option.

    Vice Chairman Andrew Viterbi filed to sell 200,000 shares worth $31.4
million and Chief Financial Officer Anthony Thornley filed to sell 30,000 shares
worth an estimated $4.7 million.

    CalPERS posts a return of 12.5% on investments

    The California Public Employees' Retirement System earned a 12.5 percent
return on its investments in the year that ended June 30, down from 19.5 percent
the previous year.

    While this was the fifth straight year of double-digit returns for CalPERS,
the performance compared unfavorably with a growth of 16.5 percent by the S&P
500 stock index in the same period.

    Honda to export Accords made in Mexico to U.S.

    Japanese automaker Honda Motor Co. Ltd. says it will begin exporting
Mexican-made Accords to the United States in October.

    Honda currently produces the Accord in Mexico for the domestic market and
imports the Civic to Mexico from its U.S. plants in Ohio.

    Ford Motor Co., General Motors Corp., DaimlerChrysler AG, Volkswagen AG and
Nissan Motor Co. Ltd. all produce cars in Mexico for the domestic and export
markets. Most export sales are in the United States.

    Excite@Home, Cox to invest $85 million in Tickets.com

    Tickets.com Inc., which sells sports and entertainment tickets, will receive
an $85 million investment from Excite@Home Corp. and Cox Interactive Media as it
prepares to sell shares.

    Excite@Home, a high-speed Internet access provider, said it invested $15
million in closely held Tickets.com and will provide another $40 million after
it gets regulatory approval, expected in about 30 days. Cox Interactive will
double its $15 million investment upon regulatory approval.


LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1999


                             1410 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 1999 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   August 18, 1999 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. D11

LENGTH: 3027 words

HEADLINE: TAKEN HOSTAGE BY HER OWN BONES ;
A SALEM WOMAN SUFFERING FROM A RARE DISEASE RECEIVES A HOUSE CALL FROM A
WORLDEXPERT WHO'S WORKING ON POSSIBLE TREATMENTS

SOURCE: RUTH BENNETT - The Oregonian

DATELINE: SALEM --

BODY:

   A bright blue umbrella shades the wheelchair that holds Elaine Klebe
Everhart's body in a standing position, slightly reclined. It gives relief from
the cloudless sky and complements the cornflower blue of her dress. Her wispy
brown hair is neatly combed back, and the 52-year-old Salem woman's face glows
with anticipation.

   In the plush interior of a borrowed Cadillac, Dr. Frederick Kaplan chats
amiably with Everhart's cousin as they pull away from the Portland Hilton toward
Elaine's home. Everhart has never met another person with the rare disease
slowly unfolding within her. Until a few months ago, she did not even know
Kaplan -- a wiry man with cavorting skeletons on his tie -- existed, one of the
few world authorities on her condition.

   It's an unusual house call by any measure. The doctor is leaving a four-day
conference at which he's speaking to spend five hours with someone he has never
met, and to whom, he knows already, he can offer no medical assistance.

   The patient, permanently bent slightly to the left, her arms locked slightly
inward, is slowly being taken hostage by her own bones. Following deranged
genetic instructions, they proliferate, displacing muscle, tendons and
ligaments, and gradually locking her inside a rigid skeletal encasement.

   Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva, or FOP, Everhart's disorder, afflicts
one in 2 million births. Kaplan estimates 3,000 cases exist worldwide, but only
300 are documented, with about half the patients living in the United States.
Kaplan has personally met 225 of the patients.

   His laboratory, the FOP Molecular Biology Laboratory at the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, the U.S. center of research, is tracking the
origin of the disorder, which has been known since 1740 but is slow to yield its
secrets.

   The promises therapies that might benefit not only the few hundred children
and adults for whom there is currently no cure but also advances that shed light
on more common conditions as well.

   Like others, Everhart was born without symptoms, except for a malformed big
toe, the signature of the disease. Like others, signs of FOP began a few years
after birth with large, warm tumorlike swellings on the neck and back that
appeared overnight and, when they retreated, left bone.

   Everhart first got sick when she was 3. Her Oregon City pediatrician couldn't
tell what was wrong. Nor could a succession of doctors during the next six
years. Finally referred to Oregon Health Sciences University when she was 9, she
learned the name of her condition.

   FOP has an 80 percent rate of misdiagnosis, Kaplan had told a roomful of
doctors and researchers the day before at the Portland Bone Symposium, organized
by the Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery at OHSU and Northwest
Wound Healing Center. Most frequently, growths are mistaken for a form of
aggressive juvenile cancer, and children without a correct diagnosis have been
subjected to chemotherapy, even amputations.

   For doctors, the most fascinating aspect of this disease is that fully
formed, specialized, differentiated tissue -- muscle -- becomes an entirely
different specialized tissue -- bone. No other diseases do that, and it's as
remarkable as if an eye were to become a kidney.

   The new bone eerily recapitulates embryonic development, growing dorsal
before ventral, cranial before caudal -- affecting neck, spine and shoulders
before moving to the elbows, hips, and knees. The disease fuses joints as it
progresses and lashes erstwhile muscle to trunk with cords of bone. The
orderliness of the progression causes researchers to characterize the growth as
the body's attempt to grow a second, postnatal skeleton.

   The rate at which FOP advances differs among individuals. Like multiple
sclerosis, the disease can lie quiescent for long periods of time. Injuries,
even minor, can prompt swelling and bone growth at the site. This is
particularly difficult for children, Kaplan told the symposium, relating the
case of a little girl who received a school immunization in her thigh and never
moved her knee again.

   FOP is not fatal in itself, and patients can live a normal lifespan. But
because of respiratory complications of extra bone in the chest cavity and
starvation after jaws fuse and because of suicides, average lifespan is 45.

   Extra bone in FOP can be removed. Doing so, however, causes a reaction in
which bone growth is redoubled, often catastrophically. The bone, Kaplan told
the symposium, is normal in almost every way: It contains marrow, it thickens if
it bears weight, it attenuates without it. It has only a single abnormality: It
shouldn't be there.

   Several people crowd the porch outside the house that Everhart hasn't left
for 21/2 years. Caregivers Frances and Kathryn -- "my girls" -- hover nearby.
Everhart's husband, Gary, 68, with short white hair and neatly pressed pants,
hangs back and watches his wife ardently.

   Everhart's social services case manager is on vacation, a fact that irritates
her, but she's eager for Kaplan to talk with her doctor, nurse, social worker
and caregivers. "People don't understand my specific needs," she says. "I'm
hoping Dr. Kaplan can stress . . . I'm going to get worse. I'm going to need
more help."

   The actual moment of meeting between patient and doctor is anticlimactic.
What do you say to someone you've waited from age 9 to meet?

   "How's your general health?" Kaplan asks.

   "She's in excellent health," Gary Everhart replies proudly. "Better than me."

   "You smoke," his wife retorts.

   Kaplan reviews blood work printouts Everhart supplies and announces that
she's a little dehydrated. Getting enough fluids and food can be a problem in
FOP, both because of clenched jaw -- Everhart's fused in 1975 -- and because
bone crowds internal organs, making it difficult for the stomach to expand.

   Her real problems began seven years ago, when, getting out of her car, she
hit her stomach on the steering wheel. Such a minor injury, coupled with stress
at the time from the death of a friend, meant nine months of severe abdominal
pain.

   The amount of pain involved with swellings and bone growth varies from person
to person and episode to episode. Kaplan likens it to pain from a pressure cuff:
Blood gets into the swelling and can't get out. In one patient, he recounts, it
looked like the tissue had exploded out the bottom of the foot. In Everhart's
case, the growth of extra bone in her hips meant the end of walking.

   Then, in January 1997, after the death of her mother, who had lived with the
couple and helped care for her, Everhart was admitted to the hospital with
cellulitis. Resulting stress, plus burns from a topical cream accidentally
applied to her legs during her stay, led to further deterioration.

   Before those incidents, Everhart says, she had an active life. She avoided
immunizations. Extra bone on her neck and back during her years at Seaside High
School made it difficult to bend, but, she says, she was always on her feet,
baby-sitting, working, participating in a 4-H group her father organized -- the
first to incorporate horses. "I rode horses," she says, adding ruefully, "I fell
off horses."

   "I knew I was handicapped," she says. "I knew I was different. But I didn't
feel handicapped."

   After high school, she attended a year at Clatsop Community College and
married. She and Gary celebrated their 29th anniversary in July. Secretarial and
bookkeeping businesses followed, including one she ran from her home in Salem
with her mother. She served as volunteer office coordinator for her church,
putting in as many as 60 hours a week. With her husband, as recently as the
early '90s, she hunted and fished.

   Answers for what stills such healthy, active people are slow to emerge.
Patients with FOP can't be biopsied; to do so would spur more bone growth. The
only animal model with naturally occurring FOP is the domestic house cat, and
cases are rare in that species, too.

   In a paper in The New England Journal of Medicine in 1996, Kaplan and his
colleagues published evidence that a particular bone morphogenetic protein --
BMP4 -- is over-produced in FOP patients.

   While BMPs are known to assist skeleton formation, their molecular circuitry
is complex -- at least 25 different genes regulate BMP4 activity alone.
Researchers theorize that when injury occurs in FOP, immune-system lymphocytes
converge at the lesion, as they do in a healthy person, but, because of a
damaged gene, they secrete bone-forming BMP4 in addition to tissue-repairing
substances.

   The question is, which gene is damaged? If the 100,000 genes in a cell were a
100-mile stretch between Philadelphia and New York City, Kaplan says, we've
narrowed the search down to a one-mile neighborhood. At his Portland talk, he
identified four of five likely candidates. But, he noted wryly, "nature has no
obligation to fulfill our theories."

   From a lab standpoint, the techniques used for the gene hunt are simple,
standard. What's missing are the subjects. In multigenerational families --
parents with FOP and children -- researchers can essentially look within the
lineage, subtracting out the non-affected genetic line from the afflicted one,
generating more information about where the genetic markers lie.

   Comparisons between multigenerational families also are useful, allowing
researchers to look for the place in the genome that, when transmitted, results
in the disease.

   Only five multigenerational families are known to exist: two in the United
States, one in the United Kingdom and two in France. Families are rare, not only
because of the low incidence of the disease but also because women with FOP
frequently do not have children. Although the disease does not cause
infertility, extra bone in the pelvis compromises a woman's ability to adapt to
the presence of a fetus, and childbirth could be life-threatening to both mother
and child.

   Fibrodysplasia is an autosomal dominant condition, which means that a person
cannot be a silent "carrier"; if the mutation is present, it is expressed.
People with the disorder have a 50 percent chance of passing it on to their
children. There is no predisposing information that makes the search for
additional patients and families easier: the one in 2 million rate is not
influenced by geography, social class or health factors.

   As a child, Everhart knew none of this. She was erroneously told that this
was a disease that only girls got, and she should stay still and quiet -- her
parents kept her home all of second grade -- and eat lots of vegetables. Fifty
years later, she's surprised to learn that FOP strikes irrespective of gender,
but her main questions are overwhelmingly practical.

   She tells Kaplan that her nurse is concerned about her edema, though she's
had it for 25 years. Such swelling is common in FOP, Kaplan tells her, and
doesn't mean heart malfunction. Rather, extra bone in the hip region prevents
tissue fluid from draining out of the legs. Everhart is delighted. "Please tell
my nurse!" she says with a laugh.

   Kaplan is concerned about pressure on Everhart's feet while she's in her
chair. The footplate will have to be hinged, he declares.

   Everhart's nurse Jeannie Richardson, arrives, followed by social worker
Dennis Heath. The conversation turns toward whether Everhart's bed is adequate
to prevent skin problems.

   Everhart spends about 15 hours a day in bed, in part because she has help
only 10 hours a day. Her husband is on call 24 hours -- he wears a beeper --
since retiring three years ago to help care for his increasingly infirm wife.
But with bypass surgery a year ago, he clearly can't do it all by himself.

   The couple is trying to get increased caregiving hours but keeps encountering
red tape. "The agencies want her in a care home," Gary says. "Why, when she's
happy here and we're taking care of her?"

   "The question," Kaplan says, "is what practical and feasible things can we do
to improve the quality of Elaine's life?" He prescribes the Internet. Connecting
on-line with other FOP patients, he tells her, can help find solutions to
practical problems and overcome some of the isolation of the disease.

   "Dr. Kaplan wants me to get a computer," Everhart tells her husband. He
shakes his head and rubs his fingers together. "You can dream," he says.

   "What do we have but our dreams?" Heath asks.

   Science is on the brink of offering more. Although a "cure" will depend on
identifying the damaged gene, several potential treatments are on the horizon.

   Powerful new anti-inflammatory drugs such as COX-2 that can be taken safely
for long periods might be used to prevent the swelling that brings in
lymphocytes, with their disastrous cargo of BMP4.

   Thalidomide, an immunomodulator, can be used to prevent lymphocyte response,
as can the steroid prednisone. Squalamine, a drug produced from shark livers and
now in human safety trials, inhibits the formation of small blood vessels and
might be administered after an injury, in effect to starve the new bone, which
needs blood to grow.

   Most compellingly, Kaplan's team has found that when the body produces BMP,
it also produces a protein called noggin that acts like a sponge, soaking up BMP
and eventually shutting down its bone-forming capabilities. People with FOP
aren't deficient in noggin, but evidence suggests extra noggin will be helpful
to them.

   The path to noggin therapy won't be easy. To avoid digestive breakdown, the
protein must be delivered in an inactivated virus, which is costly to develop
safely. The insertion of a gene to produce noggin is a possibility, but also
requires viral delivery and needs some way to be controlled once placed.

   The treatment's potential may be enhanced by other gene-therapy techniques in
development. Within the next few years, researchers hope to be able to insert
genes that are complete except for a protein "switch" necessary for activation.
The missing protein could be administered separately, bringing the gene on-line
on an "as-needed" basis.

   Because it comes the closest to being a cure, Kaplan says, researchers are
putting their energy into noggin, even though animal safety studies -- the first
step in the long journey to FDA approval -- are only beginning.

   Human clinical trials will probably be done in older populations first, to
avoid unknown developmental consequences of the drug. Patients would undergo
bone removal and then take noggin in hopes of keeping the regrowth at bay.
"Which joint would you choose to free up?" Kaplan asks Everhart.

   "My legs," the former equestrienne answers immediately. "No, my hips. Hips.
My hips. I miss them the most."

   Even if the feasibility of noggin is demonstrated, cost will remain a
problem. FOP is a so-called "orphan disease," meaning that it affects fewer than
200,000 people in the United States. Because of that, it is extremely difficult
for pharmaceutical companies to produce drugs on a scale that justifies the cost
of their research and manufacture.

   The "orphan" designation is misleading, Kaplan believes. The nature of basic
research is that the scope of the eventual benefit is unknown at the outset. In
the 1960s, he says, doctors Michael Brown and Joseph Goldstein encountered a
little girl who was dying of heart disease and experiencing heart attacks. Her
cholesterol level, no matter what her diet, hovered around 1,000.

   In identifying the rare disease of familial hypercholesterolemia, Brown and
Goldstein began 20 years of collaborative work. Although the girl died, the pair
identified the mechanism by which cholesterol made in the liver is taken out of
circulation and metabolized appropriately in other cells.

   The Nobel-prize-winning work would have been impossible without the ability
to study children in whom that mechanism was lacking. A direct consequence of
this research was the "statin" drugs and the multimillion-dollar
cholesterol-control industry.

   Such possibilities are not far-fetched in FOP research. Understanding the
disease may provide a literal skeleton key to learning about a range of bone
disorders, including those in which it was only recently learned that bone
played a role.

   Since the 1800s, it's been known that end-stage heart disease almost always
involves calcification, Kaplan says. Recently, he and cardiologist Emile R.
Mohler speculated about the environment of that calcification. The heart valve
is a thin membrane, with vascular, perivascular and mononuclear cells,
lymphocytes -- all the ingredients for bone.

   Could some of the calcification actually be new bone growth? The two analyzed
228 valves removed from patients who underwent valve-replacement surgery at the
University of Pennsylvania between 1994 and 1997 and found, in fact, that close
to 20 percent had endochondral bone, the type produced in FOP.

   Although cardiac and other smooth muscle is spared in FOP -- the disease
would be fatal if it weren't --the heart valve cells of patients in the study,
like cells in FOP patients, overproduced BMP. If the type of BMP overexpression
turns out to be the same, noggin could be valuable in combating heart valve
disease as well, a finding that should be of interest to the 70,000 to 80,000
Americans who undergo heart-valve replacement surgery each year.

   The day draws to a close.

   "It's so mindboggling," Everhart tells Kaplan. "I've had this all my life.
Finally -- finally! -- to have someone doing something. Just knowing that you're
doing something. I know it will take 10 years or longer. But just knowing."

   "I'm not going to stop," he reassures her. "And I don't want to work on this
my whole life. I want something to come of it sooner rather than later."

   The day after the visit, Everhart declares, "I feel really good right now. I
just don't feel that I'm really that sick." She talks at length about problems
with her care agencies. "I'm going to write a letter to my case manager and say,
'It's time for you guys to wake up,' " she decides. "Somebody's head is going to
be flying. I'm going on the warpath." She pauses. "It's absolutely thrilling."

   You can reach Ruth Bennett at 503-294-4065 or by e-mail at
ruthbennett@news.oregonian.com


GRAPHIC: 2 Photos by Kevin Sullivan - The Oregonian; 2 photos provided by
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center; Sidebar - International FOP
Association Internet Telephone Address

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                             1411 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 17, 1999, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 1342 words

HEADLINE: Earlier glaucoma detection leads to prevention Gene therapy, imaging
could focus attack

BYLINE: Aimee Phan

BODY:

   For years, the fight against glaucoma, a major cause of blindness,
has been undermined by late detection and treatment.

   Now, because of scientific advances, researchers are gaining confidence
that they will win the battle against the disease, which is second
only to cataracts as the leading cause of blindness worldwide.

   Glaucoma is the abnormal buildup of drainage fluid in the eye.
It damages the optic nerve, initially causing peripheral blindness
and gradually reducing the ability to see.

   If caught early, it can be treated with medicated eye drops, pills,
laser treatments or corrective surgery.


   Three million Americans are affected by the disease, but half
don't know it because glaucoma progresses so subtly, according
to the Glaucoma Research Foundation (GRF), a San Francisco-based
organization focused on research.

   Because early detection is so difficult, doctors are turning to
genetics and technology to help treat patients and preserve their
vision.

   Individual treatments

   The definition of glaucoma has evolved through the years as scientists
have learned about its cause.

   Robert Ritch, medical director and chairman of the scientific
advisory board at the Glaucoma Foundation in New York City, which
supports research and screening programs, says glaucoma has long
been considered a condition caused by increased pressure within
the eye, called intraocular pressure. Most treatment calls for
reducing the pressure through eye drops that increase the fluid
flowing out of the eye, then, if the condition becomes more severe,
laser treatment or surgery.

   But recently scientists have recognized other risk factors, such
as heredity, exfoliation syndrome (the buildup of whitish material
on the lens of the eye) and poor blood flow to the optic nerve,
which could be caused by low blood pressure.

   "We're changing our whole concept of what glaucoma is and what
causes it," Ritch says. "We're just starting to see that each
glaucoma should have its own specific treatment."

   Individualized therapies for the future could involve the research
and technology that scientists are working on today. From employing
technology and drugs to studying patients' attitudes, doctors
are discovering more ways to improve and complement the standard
treatment of lowering the intraocular pressure, which many say
remains the most effective treatment.

   Carl Kupfer, director of the National Eye Institute at the National
Institutes of Health, reports that the Human Genome Institute
at NIH is only a few years away from mapping the human genome.
That will kick open the door to finding genetic cures and treatment
in all fields of medical research.

   "There will be a tremendous boost, and progress will be made
very rapidly," Kupfer says.

   Researchers also are working on imaging the optic nerve to develop
a sensitive test that can detect glaucoma in its earliest stages.

   "We'll be able to see and measure precisely the size of the optic
nerve and thickness of the retina," Kupfer says.

   That will allow doctors to catch the disease before it has done
significant damage.

   Because glaucoma can only be treated, not cured, researchers have
looked to genetics for ways to prevent the disease from developing.

   Prevention efforts

   Mansoor Sarfarazi and his colleagues in the molecular ophthalmic
genetics laboratory at the University of Connecticut Health Center
are conducting research on a gene they discovered two years ago
that causes primary congenital glaucoma. Now Sarfarazi says they
are intent on developing a prenatal test that would detect the
disease in infants, during its earliest stages.

   "Through a sample of the amniotic fluid or a simple blood test
after birth, we could be able to see if the baby has the gene
for this disease or not," Sarfarazi says.

   Recently, Ritch and other scientists gathered in New York for
the first international think tank on exfoliative glaucoma, which
Ritch says might be curable soon. He says that other forms of
glaucoma, if discovered to be genetic, also could be cured.

   "It's giving us the chance to come up with cures," Ritch says.
"If we figure out what the genes are, then we can interfere with
the activity of those enzymes."

   Neuroprotection is another approach that has become important
in glaucoma research. It is the use of drugs to protect optic
nerve cells from taking in too much calcium, thus strengthening
them against growing intraocular pressure. Ritch says doctors
can prescribe calcium-channel blockers or suggest gingko biloba,
an herbal supplement available in most health food stores, for
neuroprotection.

   But stronger drugs to protect those precious cells are needed.
A clinical trial has begun on the drug memantine to determine
its effectiveness in strengthening the nerves. Memantine has been
used in Europe for neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's.

   While neuroprotection can only maintain the amount of nerve cells
already present, Ritch is optimistic that the development of nerve
regeneration and transplantation is not far behind.

   "In another generation, we're going to be able to reverse blindness,"
Ritch predicts.

   But while initial research results are encouraging, some scientists
warn that they are preliminary.

   Kupfer of the National Eye Institute says it will take geneticists
another 20 to 30 years to isolate and analyze the genes responsible
for glaucoma.

   "Neuroprotection still has a lot of lab research to clarify what's
going on," Kupfer says. "Genetics is moving rapidly, but it's
a very difficult field, since glaucoma is caused by multiple genes
rather than other diseases with just one gene."

   "They're future promise rather than present reality," says Douglas
Anderson, an ophthalmology professor at the Bascom Palmer Eye
Institute at the University of Miami School of Medicine. "They're
very fascinating things that could be coming along, but the truth
is that it's not been proven yet."

   Anderson was one of the two principal investigators for the GRF's
Normal Tension Glaucoma Study, published last year.

   The study concluded that treating intraocular pressure makes a
difference in a glaucoma patient's vision maintenance.

   "While it's not high-tech, it is a fairly major step for everyday
practice and medicine," Anderson says. "This is a disease where
the level of pressure makes a difference, and treating it is effective
in changing the course of the disease."

   Following the regimen

   Paul Lee, an ophthalmology professor at Duke University, agrees
that lowering intraocular pressure is still the best treatment.

   "Pressure is still one of the leading risk factors for glaucoma,"
Lee says. "All the major means of treatment today are to lower
the pressure."

   Despite advances in science, some doctors are concerned that the
progress won't matter because some patients aren't taking advantage
of the medication available now.

   "The main cause for failure to control glaucoma is that patients
do not take their medicine," Kupfer says. He blames the disease's
deceptive early stages, which have no symptoms, and the side effects
of the drugs used to treat glaucoma, such as elevated blood pressure,
allergic reactions and dizziness.

   "It's difficult to ask a patient who has no complaints to take
a drug that will give him complaints," he says.

   Lee is doing research to determine why some patients aren't following
their regimens. Through interviews with patients, eye care providers,
family and friends, Lee and his colleagues hope to use their results
to improve doctor-patient communication for better glaucoma treatment.

   "We're trying to find a better way of doing things," Lee says.
"A lot of people aren't aware of glaucoma and the potential treatments
for it. If they don't know they exist, then what is the point
of developing them?"

   FOR TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC "How glaucoma does
its damage" PLEASE SEE MICROFICHE

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Bob Laird, USA TODAY, Source: National Eye Institutes of
Health; PHOTO, B/W; PHOTO, B/W

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1999


                             1412 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                            August 16, 1999, Monday

SECTION: Health & Fitness; Pg.  34

LENGTH: 1764 words

HEADLINE: CONTINUING BATTLE AGAINST OSTEOARTHRITIS  THIS DEGENERATION OF THE
JOINTS DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFLICTS WOMEN, THE ELDERLY AND THE OVERWEIGHT

BYLINE: BY SHEILA ANNE FEENEY

BODY:


   Osteoarthritis is a progressive, humbling disease that takes an unpredictable
but inexorable toll on the body's joints. A woman with osteoarthritis of the
hands may find herself gradually unable to button her blouse, or to sign her
name with a flourish. A man with the disease in his hips, knees or back may feel
achy in the morning and have explosions of pain after running. One day, he may
find it all but impossible to tie his shoes.

   It's a frustrating condition because it's so unpredictable, says Susan Louer,
56, a retired Brooklyn teacher with osteoarthritis of the knee: "You never know
when it's going to bother you or for how long," she says.

   By the age of 65, nearly half of the U.S. population suffers from some form
of arthritis. Osteoarthritis - a degeneration of the joints that
disproportionately afflicts women, the elderly and the overweight - accounts for
nearly 21 million cases of the disease. It is the leading cause of activity
limitation in adult women, second only to heart disease as a cause of work
disability. But new research, better drug treatments, joint replacements and an
explosion of scientific advances provide plenty of reasons for hope.

   Dr. Dorothy Estes, a rheumatologist and clinical professor of medicine at
Columbia University's college of Physicians and Surgeons, praises the COX-2
inhibitors, such as Celebrex and Vioxx, which inhibit the prostaglandins
associated with pain and inflammation in the joints while ignoring the "good"
prostaglandins that protect the stomach from upset and ulcers. Until the
development of these new medications, physicians often hesitated to prescribe
drugs to relieve pain in the elderly, who might suffer from multiple illnesses
and risk bleeding ulcers when given a typical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (aspirin and NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen) for arthritis. So far, Estes says,
the new drugs' only major side effect "is poverty," should the patient have to
pay for the medication. The drugs cost between $ 1 and $ 2 apiece, depending on
which one is used. For those who have exhausted drug treatments and find
themselves incapacitated, new joint prosthesis and replacement techniques are
safer and more sophisticated than those in the past, says Dr. Kenneth Brandt, an
arthritis researcher who chairs the rheumatology division of Indiana University.
Ninety-five per cent of "hip and knee replacements have an excellent result," he
says.

   But what really excites leaders in the field are potential discoveries
percolating in laboratory pipelines. "This is really where the hope is," says
Dr. Steven Abramson, chair of rheumatology at the Hospital for Joint Diseases,
and chairman of the Arthritis Advisory Committee for the Food and Drug
Administration.

   "In the past five to 10 years we've come to understand what accounts for the
progression of the disease. It's not simply a wearing-out, like a linoleum
tile," Abramson says. "It's an abnormal metabolism of the chondrosytes
[cartilage cells]. They're making too little normal collagen and too much of the
enzymes that destroy cartilage."

   The puzzle that researchers are trying to unravel now is not just how to
manage the bone-grinding pain of OA but how to restore poorly performing joints
without resorting to surgery.

   Abramson is experimenting with gene therapy, in which cartilage is
impregnated with protein-making genes that block destructive molecules and are
switched on only when abnormal enzymes are activated - and turned off when they
have completed their task of restoring healthy collagen. "Right now we're just
trying to find the right gene," he says.

   His hope is that in five years, "injecting genes into people will be the
therapy of choice" for certain patients. Also in the pipeline, says Abramson,
are new drugs that will actually arrest the destruction of cartilage and give it
a chance to regenerate.

   Along those lines, Brandt is experimenting with doxycycline, an antibiotic
that binds to metalloproteinases - ions like zinc and calcium that allow the
mischief-making enzymes to function - and stops them in their tracks. It will be
several years, he says, before results are in.

   Another treatment is being investigated by Dr. Victor Goldberg, the Charles
H. Herndon professor of orthopedics and chairman of orthopedics at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland. He's looking at the harvesting of stem cells
from the patient's pelvis and their eventual implantation in troubled joints to
enhance the manufacture of healthy cartilage.

   Osteoarthritis occurs when cartilage - which cushions the ends of bones -
breaks down. The joint loses its shape and alignment, bone ends thicken and form
growths called spurs, and bits of cartilage float in the joint space. The result
- pain and loss of movement.

   The onset of the disease is often caused by an overloaded joint, says Dr.
Kenneth Brandt, chairman of the rheumatology department of Indiana University.
That's why dancers and athletes often encounter problems earlier than age 50.
But, Brandt says, "even normal loads can lead to joint damage if the
biomaterials are flawed" - say, by an imperfectly formed joint.

   Course helps you

   help yourself

   A study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine found patients who
took the Arthritis Foundation's "Arthritis Self-Help Course" had 30% less pain
and made 40% fewer visits to the doctor. The six-week series of classes offers
education and information on arthritis, relaxation techniques to help in pain
and stress control, an overview of medication options, and exercise
recommendations.

   Cost for the Self-Help Course is usually about $ 30. Contact The Arthritis
Foundation at 1-800-283-7800 or www.arthritis.org for more information.

   MANAGING CHRONIC PAIN

   Great advances in OA may lay right around the corner, but in the meantime,
patients must find a way to manage chronic pain and slow down the disease.

   Joint replacements, while increasingly safe and successful, are not an
all-purpose panacea. Younger patients, for instance, are encouraged to delay the
surgery as long as possible, as even the best new joints have a life span of
only 10 to 20 years.

   So, what, short of surgery, works to treat OA?

   Weight management and exercise: A decade ago, the National Health Interview
Study revealed that overweight women were nearly twice as likely to report
arthritis-related activity limitations as women who were not. Anyone with OA
should make weight management and good overall health a top priority.

   Exercise: "Every exercise study ever conducted for knee OA has shown a
benefit," says Brandt. Exercise is critical, says Abramson, because muscles tend
to atrophy around defective joints. And "once the muscles get weak, they make
the arthritis worse by increasing the instability."

   While certain pounding sports like basketball or jogging are not recommended
for people with OA of the hip or knee, low-impact activities such as swimming
and bicycling are ideal cardiovascular workouts. They can help peel off pounds
and firm up muscles. In addition, a physician or physical therapist can
prescribe specific exercises to strengthen muscles and tissues around a joint
without damaging it.

   Footwear: Orthotics - custom-crafted shoe inserts that reposition feet -
sometimes help people with osteoarthritis. The distribution of weight can affect
the wear on joints far up the body. Also, female OA sufferers need to kiss off
what can politely be referred to as "kiss me" shoes. High heels increase the
stress not just on ankles but on knees, hips and the spine, says Estes.

   Rubbery-soled shoes with good support - such as high-top sneakers - absorb
impact, prevent trauma and ease pain for many sufferers. Light-weight knee
braces and knee-taping are also helpful for some people, as is the proper use of
a cane.

   Acupuncture, electrical stimulation, massage, ultrasound, heat treatments:
While there is little data showing that these treatments actually heal damaged
joints, many people report that they feel better following such therapies, "and
if you feel better, you function better," says Goldberg. Electrical stimulation
and ultrasound can increase the blood supply to a joint, reducing inflammation,
and massage can release muscle spasms.

   Drugs: Cox-2 Inhibitors such as Celebrex and Vioxx may provide pain relief.

   Injections: Doctors are divided on the usefulness of new hyaluronic
injections of a cartilage-like substance usually distilled from rooster combs
directly into joints. "The studies show very modest benefits over six months,
and not in all people," says Abramson.

   Goldberg, on the other hand, says certain patients who still have some good
cartilage left do "extremely well," with hyaluronic injections. However, it does
not work on all patients, and "if it doesn't work the first time, it's not going
to work the second."

   SOME TURN TO CONTROVERSIAL SUPPLEMENTS

   The National Institutes of Health recently requested proposals from
researchers interested in studying the effectiveness of glucosamine and
chondroitin sulfate - supplements that are extremely controversial.

   Some patients hail the costly capsules sold in health food and vitamin
stores, but physicians disagree as to what patients can expect from them. One of
the big questions is whether a pill taken orally can actually affect the
composition of the joint.

   While small studies in Canada and Europe show that patients report
improvement after several months on the products, there are also questions about
the composition of the supplements, and the potential for harm either from the
substances themselves, or additives. "A lack of regulation means a lack of
quality control. Half the formulations on the shelves of the health-food stores
contain very little of the substance indicated on the label," notes Brandt, who
discourages patients from taking them.

   The Arthritis Foundation counsels patients to consult a physician to
determine the cause of their pain, and to receive feedback about potential
allergies, and reactions to such treatments. A policy statement on the
glucosamine and chondroitin stresses that "Above all, the Arthritis Foundation
recommends that the use of proven treatments and disease management techniques
not be stopped in favor of the supplements."

   Diabetics, it continued, need to consult their physician as to whether
glucosamine can affect their blood sugar levels. Also, chondroitin, which is
similar molecularly to the blood thinner heparin, could potentially cause
problems for people already on blood thinners.


GRAPHIC: EVY MAGES DAILY NEWS PEDAL PUSHER: Susan Louer bicycling near her
Brooklyn home. The exercise helps ease the pain caused by arthritis FEELING
BETTER: Those who suffer from osteoarthritis may turn to acupuncture (left) for
help with the disease; others may try drugs such as Celebrex (right).

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1999


                             1413 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     AUGUST 16, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1064 words

HEADLINE: Genentech's Stock Coattails May Not Be Big Enough for Biotech to Ride;


Also, investor thinks holders getting short end of Sibia-merger stick

BYLINE: TOM ABATE

BODY:
Genentech's performance since its return to Wall Street has been nothing short
of remarkable, but industry watchers aren't sure whether its meteoric rise will
be enough to lift the entire biotech sector.

    Shares in the South San Francisco biotech giant began trading at $97 last
month, after Roche Holdings of Switzerland acquired full control of Genentech,
then quickly reissued a 17 percent stake in the company.

    Since then, Genentech has rocketed to $167, gaining 72 percent in a month.
Its rise has boosted various biotech stock indexes, which are heavily weighted
to reflect the performance of the largest firms.

    But San Francisco investment banker Steve Burrill said Genentech's good
fortune, and the strong showing of big biotech in general, hasn't changed the
bleak fact that most investors continue to steer clear of early stage startups.

    "Nothing has happened to cause John Q. Public to jump in and buy early stage
biotech," Burrill said. "Investors who've been around know these are the sorts
of companies whose stocks won't double in the next year, and it might actually
halve in value."

    Even so, Mark Simon, a banker with BancBoston Robertson Stephens, told
BioCentury newsletter he sees signs that institutional investors and day traders
are tiring of tech stocks and taking a fresh look at biotech.

    If there is a Genentech effect, it's hard to measure from the performance of
midsize biotech firms on the "bellwether list" of BioSpace.com, a San Francisco
Web site that tracks the industry.

    Gilead Sciences of Foster City, Protein Design Labs of Fremont and
Affymetrix of Santa Clara are three bellwethers that have trended up in recent
months. But their movements began before Genentech's run and can be traced to
news developments at all three firms.

    Sangstat Medical Corp., another bellwether in Fremont, has bounced up and
down, driven by patent disputes clouding the future of its newest drug.

    Finally, there's Chiron Corp. of Emeryville, the Bay Area's other biotech
giant. Its stock began a modest rise coincident with Genentech's reappearance on
Wall Street. But the uptick probably had more to do with its own positive
second-quarter results. Even so, Chiron shares barely have climbed back to where
they began the year -- hardly evidence that Genentech has begun the tide to lift
all ships.

    Still, biotech optimists think that a broad biotech revival could be near.
In addition to Genentech's momentum, pharmaceutical firms recently have embarked
on a spate of acquisitions of small to midsized biotech firms.

    "That sort of M&A activity makes investors start wondering whether they
aren't missing something," said Mark Edwards, a merger adviser with Recombinant
Capital in San Francisco.

    Edwards said the real test of the Genentech effect will come in the fall and
winter, when the biotech industry starts its big round of conferences. These
shows give investment bankers the chance to introduce new companies to
institutional investors who make or break initial public offerings.

    "Genentech's momentum, and the M&A activity, are the sort of things that
give the bankers something to talk about," Edwards said.

   M&A COMPLAINTS: San Francisco investor Mark Lampert is irate over one pending
merger.

    Merck & Co., the pharmaceutical giant in New Jersey, recently proposed to
acquire Sibia Neurosciences of San Diego for $87 million. That worked out to
$8.50 a share, a 62 percent premium over Sibia's $5.25 share price when the deal
was announced.

    But Lampert, whose Biotechnology Value Fund owns about 15 percent of Sibia,
thinks that premium doesn't compensate shareholders for Sibia's most important
assets. Sibia has developed potential remedies for Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimer's disease and epilepsy. Lacking cash to put these drugs through costly
human trials, it licensed its inventions to drug companies -- but stands to
collect royalties if the drugs win approval.

    "Those royalties are either worth nothing or a fortune," said Lampert, who
would like any sale to park future revenues in a trust fund for early
shareholders.

    Complicating the Sibia story, a second, as yet unnamed firm has a bid on the
San Diego company. All this attention has helped raise its price above Merck's
$8.50 bid, making some adjustment seem inevitable.

    However this saga plays out, it contains a warning for early investors in
biotech startups. After all the fuss, Sibia still is selling below the $11 it
fetched when the firm went public in May 1996 -- the last time the window was
wide open for biotech IPOs.

   LUCKY GENE? Industry watchers can hardly wait for the results of several
experiments aimed at using genetic therapy to cure hemophilia. During the past
decade, more than 200 experiments have tried to turn on or off the genes that
cause a variety of diseases. None have succeeded.

    That's why all hopes are pinned on Chiron and Avigen, two East Bay biotech
firms which are testing different "cures" for this inherited bleeding disease. A
Chronicle article on April 12 outlined why new techniques may yet prove
effective for hemophilia, a relatively simple disease with a single genetic
cause.

    In recent weeks, Chiron and Avigen have run neck and neck, giving a handful
of hemophiliacs shots of their different gene therapies. Charles Engelberg, with
Americal Securities in San Francisco, recently said these experiments soon
should reveal whether either therapy helps blood to clot.

    But Stanford researcher Mark Kay, who works with Avigen, said it's a bit too
early for results. Avigen's third patient will only receive his treatment later
this month (hemophiliacs are all men), and at a dosage so low that he'd be
pleasantly surprised if clotting resulted.

    Kay said it likely would be fall or winter, after a second round of patients
get higher doses of the therapy, before the experiments yield answers. And then
it's not a foregone conclusion that the company immediately would publish data.

    So the decade-long wait for a successful gene therapy continues. A recent
article in the online magazine Signals (www. signalsmag.com) provides a longer
look at the significance of these trials.

   ------------------

   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.



LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1999


                             1414 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 16, 1999, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Fears multiply in clone thriller The science of immortality spawns
double trouble in 'The Experiment'

BYLINE: Michael Jacobs

BODY:

   The Experiment

   By John Darnton

   Dutton, 421 pp., $ 24.95

   What would you do to double your life, giving you 140 or 150 years
in this vale of tears?

   The scientific visionaries in The Experiment give up promising
medical careers and retreat to a mountaintop in Arizona in the
1960s to pursue that dream for themselves and, more important
to the plot of John Darnton's novel, for their children.

   Thirty years later, 24 of the nation's most powerful people are
willing to pay $ 10 million and promote a criminal conspiracy stretching
from mail fraud to murder for the same dream.

   Jude Harley, a reporter for the New York tabloid The Mirror,
thinks he's just doing his job when he checks out a mutilation
murder in upstate Tylerville and, a few days later, interviews
a researcher about twins for a story on a separate murder. When
he falls into bed and into love with that researcher, Tizzie Tierney,
he thinks life's luck is turning his way, just as it did when
his debut novel became a hot seller after being repeatedly rejected
by publishers.


   Reality crashes the party when Jude comes face to face with a
double, Skyler, and discovers that the younger-looking man is
not a separated-at-birth twin or some long-lost identical cousin.
He's a clone raised on an isolated Atlantic island, and he fled
after the death of his girlfriend, a dead ringer for Tizzie.

   And speaking of clones, the faceless corpse in upstate New York
turns out to have the same DNA as a local judge who is about the
same age as Jude and Tizzie and is very spooked at the sight of
Jude in his courtroom. The judge looks just like Skyler's best
friend, who supposedly drowned a decade earlier in an effort to
escape the island.

   The coincidences are just beginning and, of course, aren't coincidences
at all. Powerful people are pulling a lot of strings, and, like
Mulder and Scully on The X-Files, Jude and his friends
know the truth is out there.

   The Experiment could be the script for the next X-Files
movie. It lacks aliens, but it features an evil FBI faction, a
high-level agent offering help and a well-funded conspiracy reaching
into the highest levels of government. There are scenes in and
around the nation's capital and in places far off the beaten track.
And there's an end-justifies-the-means scientific mentality that
involves clones and genetic therapy and produces some medical
maneuvers that make an alien autopsy look routine.

   It's natural for Darnton, a Pulitzer-winning reporter who's now
culture editor of The New York Times, to make a reporter
his hero in this, his second novel. Anyone who has worked for
a newspaper will recognize the stereotypical personalities and
jealousies of the Mirror newsroom during Jude's infrequent
visits.

   But Darnton's matter-of-fact writing style stretches out the story
too much, slowing the pace to a crawl amid a succession of 80-mph
drives. Like a good reporter, he's best at letting his characters
tell the story with direct quotes. And like many reporters, he
has an eye for detail but falls into the trap of cluttering the
story with useless information. In one scene, Tizzie strips and
climbs into bed with Skyler, thinking he's Jude. Darnton spends
five sentences undressing Tizzie, all with the drama of "She
stood up and unzipped her dress, letting it fall to the floor."

   Still, that style pays off in two ways: It makes scientific concepts
about cloning, organ transplants, twins and chromosomes clear,
and it helps build tension in a climax that solves the complex
puzzles with a shock.



   Excerpt

   She looked at her fellow passengers. There were teenagers stalking
the opposite sex, gray-haired couples engrossed in books, and
families out for a barbecue, the men guarding heaps of utensils
and grocery bags, the women chasing after children. Not a suspicious-looking
person among them.

   She felt a tug at her heart. The sight of the families filled
her with an unsettling loneliness. Time was speeding along --
almost like those cells in the lab -- and passing her by.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W; PHOTO, B/W, Chris Bierlein; John Darnton: His background as
a newspaper reporter comes into play.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1999


                             1415 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                     August 15, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Book Review; Page 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

HEADLINE: PROMETHEUS UNBOUND;
 THE EXPERIMENT BY JOHN DARNTON; DUTTON: 428 PP., $24.95

BYLINE: EUGEN WEBER, Eugen Weber writes the monthly column, "L.A. Confidential."



BODY:


   With their clear boundaries and implied isolation, islands have attracted
science fiction writers from Plato to Jules Verne. Scientific and political
experiments can be tried (and may go awry) in their seclusion; nefarious schemes
can be hatched or perfection pursued in their shelter. But islands are prisons
too. It was while escaping from an island, Crete, that Icarus flew too close to
the sun and plunged to his death for having aimed too high. In "The Experiment,"
John Darnton's protagonists, or at least his villains, conduct their experiments
on an island and, because the author knows his sources, will pay for their
presumption.

   A little more than 100 years ago, H.G. Wells' "Island of Dr. Moreau"
(mentioned by Darnton) featured a hubristic scientist filling a remote island
with beasts surgically "humanized." Now, following in the footsteps of Brian
Aldiss' "Moreau's Other Island," Darnton--the author of the science thriller
"Neanderthal"--offers one more anti-utopia that exists on and off an island
where bioengineering runs amok. Only here the beasts that are tinkered with are
human.

   Despite the doubts some folk might entertain about hanging around this world
too long, the scientific experiment this time deals with longevity. At least,
that's how it starts. Scientific researchers, various conspirators and their
cat's-paws are tinkering with the clock that controls the pace of aging. But
candidates for their experiments risk an organ crash or may simply wither into
accelerated dotage.

   Prometheus created humans by fashioning them from potter's clay. Darnton's
experimenters create their subjects out of embryo cells. Ideally, they seek the
secret of life, but they settle for cloning humans who can then be mined for
spare parts when their prototypes are in medical need.

   In actual practice, cloning technology is changing so rapidly that "The
Experiment's" island scientists and their paymasters could more economically
focus on clone tissue creation, which would allow those in need to benefit from
regeneration of their own tissues with no recourse to alien donors, let alone
victims. But that would cheat us of stark moral choices and even starker
thrills. So forget possibilities and stick to implausibilities.

   The bioengineered children reared on the secluded island are known as
"Jimminies"--actually Geminies: monozygotic twins, identical in outward and
inward nature, in looks, blood and general makeup. That means that the clone's
organs perfectly match the original and that the clones can be used for
speculative experiments and madcap biological cocktails--until, that is, one
clone escapes.

   Unlike Wells and Aldiss, Darnton expands the scope of the yarn he spins from
a secluded isle to the North American continent, over which the Institute for
Research into Human Longevity and its minions spread their evil tentacles,
corrupting even the courts, Congress, the media, the medical profession and
(gasp!) the FBI. Confronting these reckless, ruthless schemers, a couple of
reunited twins and one resolute lady shorn of her own clone stand (almost)
alone. Through Georgia, New York, Wisconsin and Arizona, heroes and heroine pry,
snoop, spy and are spied upon, pursue and are pursued by the institute's
gorillas; they are trailed, aggressed, sequestered, battered and eventually
enlightened.

   The efforts of the trio in its attempt to document and reveal heinous
shenanigans recall old-fashioned vaudeville, as characters rush around, wander
off and reappear while chasing after evidence and each other. Their travels and
travails are matched only by the scientific education they receive, as victims
are slap-happily injected, dissected or defaced to prevent recognition. Readers,
meanwhile, are subjected to extended discussions of the moral and practical
possibilities and implications of these arrogant activities. Everything you
never wanted to know about mutant genes, mutant enzymes, gene therapy, cells,
DNA, polymerase, telomerase, virus proteins and viral proteins proliferates.


   *

   So, if you enjoy lectures on -ologies and -isms, if medical terminology
impresses and autopsies excite, "The Experiment" is the book for you. And if you
enjoy morality plays in which insolent presumption against the order of nature
gets its comeuppance, you'll close the book content. Others may simply feel
content to close a book that is less noir than drab.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1999


                             1416 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1445 words

HEADLINE: Beyond Viagra

BYLINE: By John Horgan;  John Horgan is the author of "The End of Science." His
new book, "The Undiscovered Mind," will be published in September.

BODY:


   TIME OF OUR LIVES
The Science of Human Aging.
By Tom Kirkwood.
277 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $27.50.

A MEANS TO AN END
The Biological Basis of Aging and Death.
By William R. Clark.
228 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $27.50.

    Almost four years ago a political scientist, Harvey Sapolsky, fretted in the
journal Technology Review over the fate of American science in the post-Soviet
era. The end of the cold war, he argued, had eliminated a major justification
for American research and development; to keep their funding levels high,
scientists needed to find another bogeyman to replace the Evil Empire.
Sapolsky's candidate? Mortality. Most taxpayers, he pointed out, want to live
longer or even forever; moreover, scientists will almost certainly never defeat
mortality, so they can remain on the public dole forever.

   Sapolsky must be pleased with his prescience. Over the past few years Federal
funding has subsided for physics -- the primary beneficiary of the cold war --
and soared for biomedical research. Senescence in particular has become one of
science's most glamorous topics. Virtually every week, it seems, researchers
announce the discovery of a new gene or protein or something related to aging.
Given the frenzy of media speculation unleashed by these findings, one would
think that we are on the verge of becoming a race of Methuselahs. "Can You Live
Forever?" Esquire asked on the front of its May issue. "Probably. Do You Want
To? See Inside."

   Those who want a clearer-eyed appraisal of aging research can now choose
between two solid books on the topic (issued by the same publisher). Both convey
the excitement of the science of senescence, but both also emphasize how far
investigators are from discovering the fountain of eternal youth.

   "Time of Our Lives," by Tom Kirkwood, a prominent British gerontologist, is
the livelier. Kirkwood is a charming, chatty guide, who leavens his text with
vivid metaphors and fun facts. Discussing the limits of the human life span, he
tells the story of Jeanne Louise Calment, a Frenchwoman who was the
longest-lived person known to science. In 1965, when she was 90, she made a deal
with her lawyer: he would pay her a monthly stipend until her death, when he
would take ownership of her apartment. The deal seemed like a no-brainer for the
lawyer, except that Calment lived for another 32 years, accumulating payments
that vastly exceeded her apartment's value. She even outlived the hapless lawyer
by two years.

   Her record will almost certainly be broken someday, Kirkwood says, but by how
much? His pursuit of such questions in the 1970's led him to propose his now
influential "disposable soma" theory. As he explains it, natural selection has
placed a premium on preserving our germ cells -- ovaries and sperm. But natural
selection takes a more casual view of our somatic cells -- our bodies -- which
serve merely as vehicles for propelling germ cells into future generations. Our
bodies are designed to live long enough to reproduce and insure the survival of
offspring; after that, we gradually fall apart.

   The disposable soma theory "tells us that aging is unlikely to be caused by
only a single mechanism, because it applies equally to all the different
maintenance and repair systems of the soma," Kirkwood says. He views cancer,
heart disease, arthritis, dementia and other afflictions of the elderly as
byproducts of the inexorable decay of the body's basic cell-maintenance systems.
He compares the elderly body to an automobile repair shop run by aging
mechanics: "Their ability to keep pace with a constant stream of breakdowns and
accidents will slowly be impaired. Now if the accident rate were to increase
because the drivers are aging too, the situation would eventually become
unworkable."

   Kirkwood is no fatalist. We can live longer, healthier lives, he says, by
adhering to the sensible old standbys: eating lots of vegetables, fruit and
fish; exercising, copulating, drinking a little red wine; and avoiding red meat,
fatty foods and tobacco. (He neglects to mention that Calment smoked until she
was 120.) But Kirkwood looks askance at more exotic antiaging elixirs, whether
wrinkle creams containing retinoic acid or injections of fetal cells of sheep.
He calls them Wonka-Vites, after the pills that make Grandma Georgina younger in
the Roald Dahl story "Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator." None of these
Wonka-Vites lives up to its advertising, Kirkwood contends, and some may even
foreshorten life by causing cancer or other side effects. "Rocket fuel may make
an old banger of a car go," he says of human growth hormone, which is reportedly
all the rage among the rich and vain, "but for how long?"

   Kirkwood challenges the increasingly popular belief that we can significantly
stretch our life spans by tinkering with our genes. "Geneticists who tout their
advances as heralding 200-year human life spans coming soon, or who condone
journalists who hint at this, are contemptible," he harrumphs. He points out
that gene therapies have failed thus far to counter even diseases caused by a
single mutant gene. It will be vastly more difficult to find gene therapies for
age-related ailments like cancer and heart disease, which spring from many
genetic and environmental factors interacting in complex ways.

   An obvious difference between Kirkwood's book and "A Means to an End," by
William R. Clark, is stylistic. A professor emeritus of immunology at the
University of California, Los Angeles, Clark serves up his facts and theories
more or less straight. His view of aging also diverges from Kirkwood's in
interesting ways. Clark portrays senescence as an unfortunate side effect of
oxygen-based metabolism. Oxygen provides cells with a powerful energy source,
but it is also a volatile, corrosive mutagen that can wreak havoc on DNA and
other vital cellular components. Natural selection provided us with mechanisms
for minimizing the damage from oxygen, but all are imperfect. Even vigorous
exercise, in spite of its obvious benefits, might accelerate senescence in
subtle ways by increasing our oxygen consumption, Clark warns.

   He cautiously concludes that certain foods and dietary supplements called
antioxidants might reduce the risk of cancer, heart disease and other
afflictions of age by countering oxygen damage. He has a sensible take on
so-called caloric restriction experiments, in which researchers, by sharply
curtailing the diets of mice and other animals, have boosted their life span by
more than 50 percent. Although many of us could benefit from eating less, Clark
says, caloric restriction is unlikely to let us live 150 years or more, as some
enthusiasts claim. The research suggests that "excess caloric intake shortens
maximal life span, not that caloric restriction extends it," he asserts.

   He has a more sanguine view than Kirkwood of the genetics of senescence.
After all, researchers have discovered genes that, when manipulated, can stretch
the life span of fruit flies, worms and other simple organisms; genes with
similar structures have been identified in humans. Moreover, human diseases like
Werner's syndrome, which mimics the symptoms of advanced aging, are caused by a
single mutant gene. These findings persuade Clark that human senescence may stem
not from innumerable genetic factors -- as Kirkwood thinks -- but from as few as
seven genes. Clark is thus more optimistic about the prospects for boosting
longevity through gene therapies.

   But he deflates the hype about telomeres, bundles of DNA that cap the ends of
chromosomes. Telomeres apparently play a crucial role in limiting cells' ability
to replicate; every time cells divide, telomeres get a little shorter, until
finally cells stop dividing altogether after 50 or so divisions. Researchers
hope that if they can prevent telomeres from shortening, they might make
individual cells and even entire organisms immortal. Clark points out two
problems: First, making cells immortal also makes them more likely to become
cancerous. Second, some rather important cells -- like those in our brains --
stop dividing long before adulthood; so telomere therapy would have no impact on
them.

   Many recent articles on aging tease us with the thought that telomere therapy
and other breakthroughs might let us live longer than Mme. Calment. "The first
immortal man," Esquire proclaimed last spring, is "about 40. Nothing special. .
. . Like you." So far, these prophecies are wishful thinking. But remember,
mortality has a silver lining -- at least for scientists. As long as we keep
growing old and dying, science lives!


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Illustration (Alec Stevens)

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1999


                             1417 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 13, 1999 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA FDA clears LXN's new product LXN said it received
Food and Drug Administration approval for a new home-use version of its
monitoring system for diabetics.

   The San Diego company said its new product, the In Charge system, measures
both glucose and glycated protein levels to allow patients to better manage
glucose levels.

   Previously glycated protein tests, which reveal average glucose levels for an
extended period, were normally done only in a lab.

   The company has marketed a version of the product for physicians since last
year. Collateral Therapeutics raises funds Collateral Therapeutics said it
completed a $33.9 million private placement, covering the sale of 2.2 million
shares of unregistered common stock to investors.

   The San Diego biotech said proceeds of the sale will be used in the
development of its nonsurgical gene therapy product. Towanda targets Molecular
Bio Molecular Biosystems of San Diego said some shareholders had received an
unsolicited "mini-tender" offer from Towanda Partners to purchase shares below
their current market value.

   Towanda seeks to buy shares for $2 a share.

   Molecular shares closed at $2.18 3/4 , down 6 1/4 cents. Comps.Com, RE/MAX
team up San Diego's Comps.Com, a real-estate information service, has inked a
deal with the RE/MAX commercial-property company deal to provide Internet access
to its database of comparative property values, commercial listings and buyer
match-ups. The company did not reveal the monetary value of the deal. WORLD AND
NATION Average 30-year rate hits 8.15% The average nationwide interest rate on
30-year fixed-rate mortgages soared to 8.15 percent this week, reaching its
highest level in more than two years.

   That was up from 7.89 percent last week.

   Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 7.70 percent, up from 7.45 percent.

   On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial
rate of 6.24 percent, up from 6.09 percent. AltaVista offers free Net access
AltaVista Co., the Web search and media network, said it is now offering free
Internet access, becoming the first brand-name Web company to do so. But the
service, called AltaVista FreeAccess, still comes with a price: sharing personal
information and accepting a barrage of ads.

   To sign up, potential users must provide AltaVista with demographic
information, such as their age, sex and ZIP code, and reveal their shopping
preferences, such as whether they have bought alcohol, books or flowers online,
and which Web sites they frequent.

   AltaVista said it will use this information to send advertisements to its
customers.

   A constant stream of ads, as well as news and other content, will appear in a
small screen that is always visible when FreeAccess users are online. Report
helps boost Merrill shares Merrill Lynch & Co. shares rose as much as 7 percent
after the Wall Street Journal reported speculation that the biggest U.S.
brokerage may seek a merger with Chase Manhattan Corp. or another financial
services company. Merrill stock rose $4.43 3/4 to close at $71.43 3/4 . Earlier,
it had risen to $72.18 3/4 , its highest in two weeks.

   Along with shares of other financial services firms, the stock had fallen
more than 13 percent since July 13 because of concern rising interest rates will
eat into underwriting and trading profits later this year. Liberty Mutual to cut
1,500 jobs Liberty Mutual Group plans to cut 1,500 jobs and reduce expenses by
more than $150 million by the first quarter in 2000 as it realigns its
commercial insurance operation.

   Boston-based Liberty Mutual sells workers' compensation insurance and
international financial services.

   The company employs 37,000 people in more than 900 offices worldwide,
including 2,963 people in Massachusetts.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1418 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       August 10, 1999 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1057 words

HEADLINE: THE GOOD COMA;
DOCTORS INDUCE A DEEP SLEEP TO TREAT SEVERE BRAIN INJURIES

BYLINE: FRANCES GRANDY TAYLOR; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Laura Gagliardi awoke from a coma on her 17th birthday, three months after
she suffered traumatic brain injury in a car accident. It was an event her
family and doctors had hoped for but did not expect.

   Gagliardi had arrived at the hospital unconscious and unresponsive. But
rather than battling to keep the teenager out of a coma, Dr. Hilary Onyiuke, a
neurosurgeon who directs the brain injury unit at Hartford Hospital, put her
into a deeper one -- an increasingly common, though still experimental,
treatment.

       The idea of putting a patient into a coma to help heal injury sounds like

science fiction, but the technique, known as medically induced coma, has been
around since the 1970s. It was, and still is, a treatment of last resort, a
desperate Hail Mary attempt to save the life of a critically injured person.
   "Her prognosis was terribly poor," Gagliardi's mother, Linda Cromer of
Plainville, said of the near-fatal September 1994 accident.
    The technique is somewhat controversial, however, because, despite its use
in critical-care units, no controlled studies have been conducted to
scientifically determine its effectiveness.
    "I think there are questions. For one thing, does it work?" said Dr.
Leslie Wolfson, chairman of the neurology department at the University of
Connecticut School of Medicine. "I'm not sure the study that would prove its
effectiveness has ever been done."
   The treatment is not standard care for people with brain injury, said Dr.
Anthony Morgan, who heads the trauma unit at Hartford's St. Francis Hospital
and Medical Center, "because, while we do know that with a select population
it does seem to work, no one to date has been able to select in advance who is
going to respond."
   Morgan, who has written a book on brain-injury treatment and recovery, said
that the trend is toward gene therapy and techniques such a hypothermia,
which, like medically induced coma, slows the brain's metabolic rate.
   The research "is using gene therapy to regenerate cells, to induce growth
to replace brain cells that have been damaged," he said.
   But other neurologists working with critical-care patients have used the
induced-coma technique over the years and have come to believe it can save
lives.
    At Yale-New Haven Hospital's neural-intensive-care unit, an occasion to
use the treatment arises several times a month, said Dr. Issam Awad, who heads
the unit. Victims who experience traumatic brain injury in car accidents,
near-drowning or severe falls are the usual candidates.
   In the mid-1980s, the technique started to be used in cases where there was
hope of recovery, not just nearly hopeless cases, Awad said.
   "By the '90s, it has now become almost routine for complex neurological
cases at technologically sophisticated medical centers," he said.
    The theory behind the technique is that decreased brain-wave activity can
help to dramatically reduce internal pressure in the brain when it has been
severely injured. The absence of brain activity lessens the metabolic demands
on the brain, allowing it to rest and heal. The patient lies in the deepest
realm of unconsciousness possible for a living person.
    "It's electro-cerebral silence, with no brain-wave activity. The patient
is flat-line," said Onyiuke, who is also interim chief of neurosurgery at the
UConn Health Center.
    When the brain experiences injury, swelling occurs. With no room to expand
inside the skull, pressure builds, decreasing the oxygen that is carried to
the brain by the blood flow. Using an intra-cranial fiberoptic monitor
inserted into the brain, and a fast-acting barbiturate such as pentobarbitone,
the patient rapidly descends into a deep coma. All bodily functions, including
breathing and blood pressure, are maintained by life-support machines.
Involuntary movements are suppressed by another drug that acts as a paralyzing
agent.
    Gagliardi's mother remembers those anxious days. "We weren't allowed to
touch her," she said. "They did not want her to be stimulated in any way."
    The patient can be maintained in that state for days or, in some cases
weeks. Then, over three to five days, the patient is gradually brought out of
the deep coma. In about 10 percent of cases, Onyiuke said, pressure in the
brain continues to rise, unaffected by the treatment.
    "If you have 100 patients, about 30 percent of them will benefit, though
you cannot predict in advance who that will be," Onyiuke said, although it
appears to be less effective in patients over age 60.
   "It's not a panacea, but I know from my own practice that it works. I've
seen people we almost gave up on who are now walking around, living
miracles."  Onyiuke counts Gagliardi as one of those miracles. Days after the
treatment, Gagliardi began to show small signs of improvement. "Her eyes were
open, and she turned her head when her father called her name," Cromer said.
Then came the call on Dec. 10, her daughter's birthday. "A social worker
called to say she had responded to commands. She told her to squeeze her hand
and let go, and she did."
   While patients may experience paralysis and require extensive
rehabilitation, those effects are the result of the injury that led to the
coma, not the coma itself, experts say.
    Gagliardi has no memory of the accident or her hospital treatment.
   "I just remember getting a new job about two weeks before the accident,"
she said.
   She has undergone months of rehabilitation, relearning to walk, dress
herself and perform everyday tasks. She graduated from Plainville High School
in June 1998.
    "I started out in a wheelchair, then I had a quad cane, then a single
cane and now nothing," said Gagliardi, who is now 21. "I can do most things
except drive." For that, she has her fiance. They plan to marry in November.
   Gagliardi continues to progress and still periodically visits Onyiuke.
   "They just look at her and smile, " her mother said. "They don't know
how she's doing what she's doing. She was very lucky."
    As she continues to rebuild her life, Gagliardi doesn't think much about
that these days. "I'm just glad they did it," she said. "It saved my
life."



GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (color), RICK HARTFORD / THE HARTFORD COURANT; LAURA GAGLIARDI
of Plainville was put into a medically
induced coma after she suffered a severe brain injury in a 1994 car
accident. The treatment, which reduces pressure in the brain, doesn't
help everyone, but Gagliardi is on her way to a near total recovery.


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1999


                             1419 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       AUGUST 10, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 1291 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   IN THE REGION US Interactive to offer shares at $10 apiece

   US Interactive Inc., King of Prussia, yesterday announced the initial public
offering of its stock at $10 per share, the low end of its previously announced
$10 to $12 range. The company, partially owned by Internet Capital Group, Wayne,
helps businesses build Web sites. Lehman Brothers is the lead underwriter on the
deal.

   DuPont's offer of Conoco stock proves too popular

   DuPont Co., the Wilmington chemical company, yesterday said its exchange
offer of Conoco Class B common stock for DuPont common stock was widely
oversubscribed, and only about 41 percent of the shares tendered would be
accepted for exchange. The Conoco spin-off was worth about $11 billion. In a
statement, DuPont said it had accepted for exchange about 148 million shares of
DuPont common stock in exchange for about 436.5 million shares of Conoco Class B
common stock, on the basis of 2.95 Conoco Class B shares for each share of
DuPont common stock tendered. More than 355 million shares were tendered for
exchange, according to DuPont.

   President resigns at Main Street Bancorp

   Main Street Bancorp Inc., Reading, said Allen E. Kiefer resigned as president
effective Aug. 4 for personal reasons and to pursue other opportunities. The
company said it expected to incur an extraordinary, one-time pretax charge of
about $1.4 million to $1.6 million in the third quarter for change in control
and severance payments it must pay to Kiefer under agreements he entered into
with the former Heritage Bancorp Inc. in 1997. Kiefer had been president since
May 1998, when the company was formed upon the consolidation of BCB Financial
Services Corp. and Heritage. Kiefer was chairman and chief executive officer of
Heritage before the consolidation. Main Street's chairman and CEO, Nelson R.
Oswald, will also assume the title of president.

   Merck drug wins nod for "good" cholesterol use

   Merck & Co. Inc., Whitehouse Station, N.J., said its cholesterol drug Zocor
became the first to win government clearance for use in raising the levels of
"good" cholesterol. The Food and Drug Administration approved the drug for the
additional use on the strength of studies that showed Zocor, the most popular
drug in its class worldwide, can raise levels of healthy high-density
cholesterol while lowering the amount of risky blood fats, or lipids, in the
blood. Zocor is already approved to lower bad cholesterol as well as to reduce
the risk of stroke and heart attack in people with high cholesterol.

   Sale of SmithKline Labs expected to close in two weeks

   Quest Diagnostics said it expected to complete its $1.3 billion purchase of
SmithKline Beecham Clinical Laboratories, Collegeville, within the next two
weeks. Quest provides medical diagnostic testing services to doctors, hospitals,
employers and government agencies.

   Rohm & Haas takes role in gene-therapy joint venture

   Rohm & Haas Co., Philadelphia, and Argonex Inc., Charlottesville, Va.,
announced the formation of RHeoGene L.L.C., a joint venture in gene therapy. The
venture will incorporate gene-switching technology of Rohm & Haas.

   GE Capital unit adds to its stock of trailers

   TIP Intermodal Services, Devon, a GE Capital company, said it had acquired
11,473 intermodal trailers from Redon Inc., Jacksonville, Fla. Terms of the
agreement were not disclosed.

   Bethlehem Steel opens an intermodal terminal

   Bethlehem Steel Corp. opened an intermodal terminal in Bethlehem, where cargo
can be transferred between trucks and Norfolk Southern trains. The terminal is
the first step in development of a 1,600-acre Bethlehem Commerce Center owned by
the steel company but no longer used for steelmaking.

   ELSEWHERE U.S. rejects "dumping" complaint about foreign oil

   The Commerce Department rejected a complaint alleging that major foreign oil
producers violated American trade laws and harmed U.S. producers. The department
found that an Oklahoma-based coalition of independent oil producers had
"insufficient industry support" to challenge the foreign imports under federal
anti-dumping laws. The large U.S. oil companies, supported by more than 100
organizations and major energy users, had opposed the independent producers'
petition, contending that the group did not represent one-quarter of domestic
oil production as required. If the petition had been accepted, the government
would have opened formal investigations into pricing of oil imports. Had it
found violations of anti-dumping laws, about 60 percent of imported oil would
have been subject to steep tariffs.

   Computer vandal ordered to pay "token" restitution to big firms

   Kevin Mitnick, a computer vandal once on the FBI's most-wanted list, was
ordered to pay "token" restitution of $4,125 to companies that suffered millions
of dollars in damage from his exploits. U.S. District Judge Mariana Pfaelzer, in
Los Angeles, said she doubted that Mitnick, 37, could earn more than minimum
wage. He has been prohibited for three years after his release from prison from
any access to computers, cellular telephones, televisions, or any equipment that
can be used for Internet access. His victims included such companies as
Motorola, Novell, Nokia and Sun Microsystems, and the University of Southern
California.

   Amazon.com, N.Y. Times settle a best-selling row

   Amazon.com Inc. can continue to cite the New York Times best-sellers list in
its sales promotions under a settlement that the online bookseller reached with
the newspaper. The New York Times Co. had objected to Amazon.com ads featuring
the Times list. Amazon.com agreed to publish the list in alphabetical order to
distinguish it from the Times' list, which ranks the 15 top-selling fiction and
nonfiction books by sales. Amazon.com also will include a disclaimer that the
Times is not affiliated with Amazon.com and does not endorse the company.

   GM files appeal of $4.9 billion accident award

   General Motors Corp., challenging a jury award of $4.9 billion to six people
badly burned when their Chevrolet Malibu exploded in a 1993 accident, asked a
California state judge for a new trial in the case. The automaker said the trial
was tainted by numerous errors by Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Ernest
Williams.

   UPS introduces document-exchange service

   United Parcel Service, Atlanta, introduced a new document-exchange service
that allows law firms and corporate legal departments to share confidential
invoice information over the Internet.

   GE Hydro buying Kvaerner hydroelectric turbine business

   GE Hydro, a division of General Electric Canada Inc., announced that it had
agreed to acquire the hydroelectric turbine business of the Kvaerner Group,
whose shipbuilding sites include the former Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.
Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.

   Interest rates rise in latest T-bill auction

   Interest rates on short-term Treasury securities rose in yesterday's auction.
The Treasury Department sold $8 billion in three-month bills at a discount rate
of 4.790 percent, up from 4.695 percent last week. An additional $8 billion was
sold in six-month bills at a rate of 4.915 percent, up from 4.750 percent. The
new discount rates understate the actual return to investors - 4.930 percent for
three-month bills, with a $10,000 bill selling for $9,877.60, and 5.125 percent
for a six-month bill selling for $9,751.50.

   Yield on one-year T-bill up in latest week

   The Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury bills in the
secondary market, the most popular index for making changes in adjustable-rate
mortgages, rose to 5.13 percent last week from 5.07 percent the previous week.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1420 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    August 10, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3003 words

HEADLINE: The Frontiers of Medicine; Science Races to Stem TB's Threat

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   Arnaldo Rolon fidgets with the pill box lying open on the kitchen table in
his apartment in Spanish Harlem. The box has three compartments for each day of
the week: two for the drugs that Rolon takes morning and evening to keep the
AIDS virus in check, and one for the tuberculosis medicines that he takes at
midday under the eye of public health worker Paul Norero.

   "I'm sick and tired of medication," says Rolon, whose elaborate tattoos don't
hide the scars on his arms left by past drug use. Norero smiles and listens.
Rolon sips a glass of water and begins to swallow the five pills one by one as
he talks about his TB.

   "I was, like, letting it go for a little while when I started coughing blood.
. . . They found it in my chest. I was in the hospital almost six months. They
had me locked up in a special room by myself."

   Locking someone in a hospital room is sometimes still deemed necessary in
1999 to make sure tuberculosis patients take their medicine. Despite all of
medical science's advances, this disease that killed Stone Age hunter-gatherers
and Egyptian pharaohs remains one of the world's two deadliest infections. TB
kills 1.5 million to 2 million people per year -- almost as many as AIDS.
Experts say that toll could increase in the coming years because TB bacteria are
evolving dangerous new strains that are increasingly drug-resistant --
especially in cases where doctors prescribe ineffective treatments or where
patients fail to take all of their pills.

   "If we sit back and allow drug resistance to grow unchecked, we may one day
be faced with incurable tuberculosis," said Kenneth Castro, director of the
division of tuberculosis elimination at the federal Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.

   This could, in effect, return the world to the pre-antibiotic era, setting
the stage for a global comeback of the disease.

   Smallpox is gone. Polio is going. Diphtheria, measles and cholera are shadows
of their former apocalyptic selves, preventable with vaccines or treatable with
drugs. It's the end of the 20th century, the moment when the great infectious
diseases of the past were supposed to shuffle offstage, making way for the gene
therapies, designer drugs and off-the-shelf replacement organs that would
conquer heart disease, cancer and Alzheimer's disease during the coming decades,
prolonging and enhancing human life.

   After all, antibiotics and vaccines -- potent weapons against infections --
have been the crowning achievements of medicine in this century, just as genetic
and technological fixes for inherited and chronic illnesses seem likely to be
the triumphs of the next. Even AIDS, the new viral plague first recognized less
than two decades ago, seems less like a death sentence to many Americans since
new drugs widely available in wealthy countries have made long-term survival
possible for many patients.

   But the microbes that cause AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other infectious
diseases are not cooperative, stationary targets. They are living organisms,
forever evolving to meet new threats to their existence and to exploit changes
in their environment. And that environment is us. As we multiply and migrate,
cough and take medicines, we are human culture flasks full of bacteria and
viruses that are constantly shifting their genetic defenses to survive the
weapons we use to fight them.

   Survive they have. Despite all of the past century's medical advances,
infectious diseases still cause one-fifth of all deaths worldwide, with AIDS and
tuberculosis being the biggest killers. The stubborn persistence of TB, a
disease that has been curable with drugs for the past half-century, is a
testament to the vast distance that lies between finding an effective treatment
and delivering it to the people who need it most.

   While rich countries pursue ever more costly drugs and medical technologies,
people in poor ones continue to die prematurely of diseases that could be cured
or prevented with simple and relatively inexpensive treatments. In developing
countries, infections are still the major cause of death, and drugs for AIDS,
cancer and many other conditions are beyond the means of most citizens. New
vaccines such as the ones for hepatitis B and the meningitis-causing bacteria
Hemophilus influenzae, which could save millions of lives worldwide, are priced
too high for many of the populations that could benefit most. "More than a
billion fellow human beings have been left behind in the health revolution,"
says Gro Harlem Brundtland, director-general of the World Health Organization.

   In the case of TB, the yawning health gap between rich and poor could have
worldwide consequences. Lacking resources for clinics, laboratories and
medicines, governments of many developing countries -- and of some developed
ones, such as Russia -- either never established effective programs to treat the
disease or let them lapse. Treatment of TB was haphazard and often inadequate, a
situation that encourages the emergence of drug-resistant strains of bacteria
that can be difficult or impossible to kill. Such a strain can circle the planet
in a day and can spread to anyone who breathes the same air as a coughing,
infected person. In one recent incident, a woman with drug-resistant TB coughed
into the stuffy air of an airline cabin during a transcontinental flight and
infected four of her fellow passengers.

   The world is growing smaller, but the resurgence of TB could be the event
that teaches us just how small it is. "From the point of view of an infectious
disease," said Barry Bloom of the Harvard School of Public Health, "there is no
place on the planet from which we are removed and no one to whom we are
unconnected."


   The New York Outbreak

   In little more than 100 years, medicine has moved from the discovery in 1882
that tuberculosis was caused by a bacterium to the deciphering, in 1998, of the
entire genome for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the microbe that causes the
disease. Researchers discovered the first drugs that killed TB bacteria in the
1940s, and in the decades since, doctors have been able to cure most cases,
fueling hope that TB would soon be eradicated.

   In the United States, until recently, most people believed the war against
tuberculosis had been won. Starting in the 1970s, budget-cutters set about
dismantling the nation's TB control programs. But within less than two decades,
poverty, a tide of new immigrants, worsening urban crowding, relaxed vigilance
by health departments and the AIDS epidemic contributed to a resurgence of the
disease.

   During the early 1990s, New York City suffered a frightening outbreak of
tuberculosis caused by a new strain resistant to all of the standard treatments.
By 1992, TB had become more common in central Harlem than in many developing
countries -- and in some of the city's hospitals, more than 80 percent of
patients infected with the new strains were dying. The resistant microbes spread
rapidly in hospitals, homeless shelters, prisons and other places where people
lived and worked in close quarters.

   City and federal health officials, facing the grim possibility of a return to
the pre-antibiotic era, have spent more than $ 700 million in the last eight
years to bring the city's epidemic of drug-resistant tuberculosis under control.
They built a state-of-the-art isolation ward at the city jail on Rikers Island.
They closed down the biggest homeless shelters. They hired health workers like
Norero to track down new cases and to watch TB patients take their medicines,
making daily rounds that often included subway stations, bridges, parks and
crack houses. They improved city laboratories' capacity to test for antibiotic
resistance, and paid for the expensive multidrug regimens required to treat
resistant cases of the disease.

   The effort appears to have largely worked, and the immediate U.S. crisis has
subsided. Yet, even now, some physicians who treat the infection and some
scientists who study it wonder whether TB will ever be conquered. The pas de
deux danced by the microbe and its human host is more complex and subtle than
anyone realized.

   In many people, tuberculosis bacteria survive in the lungs for years -- often
for a lifetime -- without causing symptoms. But if the infection begins to
progress and damage the lungs, a TB sufferer starts to cough, spreading the
bacteria to an average of one new person a month. Because the bacteria are
particularly adept at evolving resistance to antibiotics, patients must take two
to four drugs daily for at least six months to halt the disease's progress.
Inadequate or incomplete drug treatment is more dangerous than none at all,
because it encourages the development of resistant strains.

   Throughout the world, health workers like Norero who watch patients take
their daily pills make up the vanguard of the campaign against TB. Such
"directly observed treatment, short-course," or DOTS, is highly effective in
curing the disease as long as the strain being treated isn't resistant. It is
the cornerstone of the WHO's plan for combating tuberculosis.

   But wherever TB treatment and control programs are poor, resistant strains
continue to appear and spread, including in Russia, Eastern Europe and many
other regions. In a study last year, WHO surveyed 35 countries for strains of
drug-resistant TB and found them present, to varying degrees, in every one.

   Many tuberculosis experts say a strategy that depends on DOTS alone will
never suffice to conquer the disease. Beating TB, they say, will require an
international effort to find and treat people with drug-resistant infections, as
well as the development of better diagnostic tests, new drugs and an improved
vaccine.

   "The message of WHO should not be that DOTS is the real answer to TB," said
Bloom. "It's the best we have . . . but what they haven't emphasized is that
what we have is not good enough."


   Slow but Steady Survival

   In a "hot zone" lab high above the Bronx, half a dozen young scientists
swathed in gowns, head covers, masks, rubber gloves and paper booties are
playing genetic tricks on TB bacteria. Tuberculosis is highly contagious, so the
lab is biosafety level 3 -- equipped with a germ-filtering ventilation system
and other safeguards to prevent the microbes from escaping into the outside
world.

   With their gloves securely taped to their paper sleeves, the researchers
dissect freshly killed mice and put the animals' tuberculosis-loaded lungs,
spleens and livers into sealed containers. The bacteria growing in the mice's
organs are mutants, made deliberately in the lab. The scientists are studying
how such mutant strains behave in animals to learn which genes tuberculosis
bacteria need to grow and to destroy lungs and other organs.

   "This is the first time in the history of the world that we have had
independent mutants" of TB, says William Jacobs, a professor of microbiology at
Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx. "We have every gene out there
and we don't know which ones are going to be important."

   Tuberculosis bacilli evolved from microbes that live in soil, and compared
with other disease-causing bacteria, they grow at a glacial pace. Slow, steady
growth is part of their survival strategy, but it makes the disease maddeningly
difficult to study, diagnose and monitor in the laboratory. It can take as long
as 10 weeks, starting with a sample of mucus coughed up by a sick person, to
find out whether the patient has TB and is infected with a strain resistant to
the most widely used drugs.

   At the beginning of New York City's TB outbreak, some patients who were put
on standard treatment died before their test results came back showing that they
were infected with drug-resistant strains.

   Jacobs, who heads the Bronx lab, has devoted much of his career to figuring
out what makes TB bacteria tick: which genes they need to infect a host, which
ones they need to become resistant to a drug, which ones make a strain more
likely to cause severe disease. Such work is key to developing new therapies and
a more effective vaccine.

   Tuberculosis research is likely to be one of the first fields to benefit from
the international effort to decode the human genome, which has spawned projects
to decipher the genetic sequences of many other organisms. A laboratory in
Cambridge, England, published the complete genetic sequence for one TB strain in
1998, and an American research group at the Institute for Genomic Research in
Rockville has almost finished the sequence of a second strain. Now, Jacobs says,
when his team isolates and studies a new genetic mutation, "we know exactly
where we are on the genome."

   Jacobs has developed what he hopes will be a simpler and cheaper way to test
TB strains for drug resistance. Dubbed the "Bronx Box," it's a kit holding an
array of tubes, each one containing a different antibiotic. The tubes also
contain a phage, a virus discovered and modified by Jacobs that can infect TB
bacteria and splice a gene for luciferase, the chemical that fireflies use to
produce light, into the microbes' DNA.

   A sample of the TB bacteria being tested is placed into each tube, and the
tubes are enclosed in a dark box containing a square of Polaroid film. If the
bacteria are resistant to a drug in one of the tubes, they will grow and make
that tube glow, creating a spot on the Polaroid film. The test yields results in
as little as 12 days.

   These days, Jacobs, who is gradually losing his vision because of an
inherited disease, can't always see that faint glow. But his invention may
someday make an impact on drug-resistant tuberculosis, both in the United States
and in developing countries.

   "At the end of the day," Jacobs said, "I'm interested in controlling and
eradicating TB. I don't care where that takes me."


   The Roles of AIDS and Immigration

   In the meantime, the world must depend on the efforts of people such as
Norero, who has spent the last two years making daily visits to about a dozen TB
patients in tough, drug-infested neighborhoods of Harlem and Washington Heights.
The patients on his rounds offer a snapshot of the city's recent history and of
the forces that have contributed to TB's comeback.

   There's an elderly Jewish man in a tiny apartment who has lived in the
Washington Heights neighborhood for decades, and a West African security guard
who came to this country 2 1/2 years ago. Several of Norero's patients also have
AIDS, which makes people particularly vulnerable to tuberculosis. Others say
they were never sick a day until a cough, fever or other symptoms led to the
unexpected diagnosis of TB.

   In a brick high-rise building with a sweeping view of the East River, Michael
Frasier sits dejectedly on a couch, his eyes on the carpet. Frasier, 47, is an
emaciated man who answers most questions in monosyllables. He once ran the mail
room for a large New York company, but became disabled by AIDS four years ago
and more recently developed TB. He spends days with his mother, Thelma Frasier,
72, a forthright woman who has her own perspective on tuberculosis.

   "I had TB 47 years ago," Thelma Frasier recalled. "He was only a baby. . . .
I stayed in the hospital for more than a year."

   Thelma Frasier said she was sent to Sea View Hospital on Staten Island, a
sanatorium. Her three small children weren't allowed to visit her. She used to
wave to them from the hospital window.

   "At that time people were really dying," she said. The first drugs effective
against TB had just been discovered; Frasier recalls that doctors gave her
streptomycin injections twice a day "for three whole years."

   Thelma Frasier's illness was arrested, but it's possible that she transmitted
tuberculosis to Michael when he was an infant. It may have lain dormant in his
lungs for most of his life, only becoming active when his immune system had been
weakened by AIDS. Alternatively, he may have acquired the infection sometime in
the last few years.

   When New Yorkers such as Frasier are diagnosed with TB, a sample of the
bacteria infecting their lungs is often sent downtown to a Manhattan laboratory,
where it's chemically processed to produce an image of the bacteria's DNA. The
new scientific technique of DNA fingerprinting, often used to track criminals,
is proving invaluable for tracking tuberculosis bacteria in communities.

   With DNA profiles of TB bacteria from more than 10,000 patients stored on
computers in his Manhattan laboratory, Barry Kreiswirth of the Public Health
Research Institute is helping health departments in New York City and New Jersey
trace patterns of the disease's spread.

   "When you look at a place like New York, which is a melting pot, you see
these remnants of migration of people," Kreiswirth said. When he investigated
recent TB cases in New Jersey, one strain showed up in elderly African American
men who had lived in Patterson all their lives, while a different strain
prevalent in the Far East was found in recent Asian immigrants.

   As people become more mobile, TB control programs can no longer stop at
national borders. In 1997, 40 percent of new tuberculosis cases in the United
States were in people born in other countries, compared with 22 percent a decade
earlier.

   Tuberculosis was supposed to have been vanquished in this century. Whether it
will be defeated in the next depends on a kind of medical arms race. On one side
are scientists, doctors and public health workers, hurrying to track down new
cases and to develop better tools for diagnosing and treating the disease; on
the other are the hardy TB bacteria with their penchant for evolving new
drug-resistant strains. Some observers are hedging their bets.

   "The bug has a very clever way of coexisting" with the human species, said
Kreiswirth. "It's infected one-third of the [world's] population, yet it still
hasn't wiped us out. It's always spy versus spy -- and unfortunately, my
perception is, the bug always wins."


CORRECTION-DATE: August 12, 1999

CORRECTION:
An article Tuesday on the battle against tuberculosis said the genetic sequence
for one strain of the tuberculosis bacterium was published by a laboratory in
Cambridge, England. The research that led to publication was a multinational
scientific effort led by researchers Stewart Cole of France's Institut Pasteur
and Bart Barrell of the Sanger Centre in Cambridge.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1999


                             1421 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        AUGUST 9, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 202 words

HEADLINE: A GLOWING WAY TO FINANCE RESEARCH

BYLINE: REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A Pittsburgh-based company working with naturally glowing chemicals for use
in scientific research plans to finance its work by selling squirt guns that
shoot glowing water, the Journal of the National Cancer Institute reported.

   The company, Prolume Ltd., was set up by cancer expert Gene Finley and other
doctors intrigued by the possibilities offered by bioluminescent, or naturally
glowing, chemicals produced by squid, plankton, shellfish and other creatures.

   The chemicals, and the genes that control their production, are used widely
in medical and scientific research. A gene that makes cells glow can be used to
make it easier to check whether a gene therapy attempt has worked in a plant or
an animal, for example.

   "We want to have a functional company and do research and development, but we
don't want to do it through traditional means," said Finley in the journal
article.

   "People are fascinated by bioluminescence, and we want to bring that
excitement to consumer products so everyone can enjoy it."

   The company now sells glow-in-the-dark "Alien Crystals" on its Web site and
hopes to start selling the squirt gun next year. It also plans to market cake
frosting that glows blue.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1422 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       August 4, 1999, Wednesday ,CARROLL

SECTION: LOCAL ,6B

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: Frontier of gene research moves to Amish country; A harvard-trained
doctor is helping Amish children

BYLINE: Denise Grady

SOURCE: New York Times News Service

BODY:

   STRASBURG, Pa. -- This was not the typical audience for a medical conference,
but then again, this was no typical conference. At an inn set in the lush
farmland of Lancaster County, doctors attending scientific lectures were joined
by young Mennonite and Amish couples, the women in bonnets and the men in
suspenders, babies fussing in their laps.

    The Amish and Mennonites may travel by horse and buggy and forgo most modern
conveniences, but there is one bit of progress that they are eager to embrace:
gene therapy.

    If all goes as planned, conference participants learned, three children from
these communities will become the first human beings ever to test a new method
of gene therapy. If it works, it will spare them the devastating effects of a
rare but deadly inherited disease.

    In the condition, Crigler- Najjar syndrome, a substance called bilirubin, a
waste product from the destruction of worn-out red blood cells, builds up in the
body. Bilirubin is produced constantly in the human body, and normally, it is
broken down by an enzyme in the liver and excreted through the intestines.

    But in people with the syndrome, the enzyme is either absent or scarce.
Bilirubin accumulates, causing jaundice, a yellowing of the skin and the whites
of the eyes. More important, bilirubin is toxic to the nervous system, and the
children live in constant danger of brain damage. The only way they can survive
is to spend 10 to 12 hours a day under special lights that break down the
bilirubin. But as they reach their teens, the light therapy becomes less
effective. Unless they can get a liver transplant, they will suffer brain damage
or die.

    If the gene therapy works, the children will have a chance to lead more
normal lives.  But previous attempts at gene therapy have been disappointing. If
the new approach, called chimeraplasty, works against Crigler-Najjar syndrome,
it would finally open the door to treatment of a host of other, more common
genetic disorders, according to Dr. Michael Blaese, a gene therapy expert who
left the National Institutes of Health in January to join a Philadelphia company
specializing in the new therapy. The other disorders that might be treated
include sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis and a failure of the immune system
known as ADA deficiency.

    "I left what I thought was the best job in the world to do this because I
believe so strongly in it and believe we'll be successful," Blaese said. "I
think it will really fundamentally change the way we practice medicine."

    Blaese and other researchers, leaders in genetics and disorders involving
bilirubin, were drawn to Lancaster County largely through the efforts of Dr.
Holmes Morton, a slight, graying man of 49 who still speaks with the twang of
his native West Virginia.

    A Harvard- trained pediatrician, Morton first encountered Amish youngsters
with genetic diseases while he was working at a Philadelphia hospital during the
1980s. He had trained in biochemical genetics, and he recognized that some of
the children had metabolic disorders, not previously diagnosed, that could be
managed with specific diets and careful treatment of minor illnesses. But
without proper therapy, the diseases could rapidly cause brain damage. Some
parents whose children had died or become handicapped sought his help for
younger siblings.

    "I knew I could take care of them," Morton said.

    In 1988, he began commuting to Lancaster County, driving from one house call
to another. A year later, he and his wife, Caroline, and their three children
moved to Strasburg. Morton was 39, and highly regarded by his colleagues,
including some who were dismayed to see him put aside a bright future in science
and academia to disappear into a small town and treat children with obscure
diseases that had resulted from inbreeding.

    But where others saw a backwater, Morton saw a need and an opportunity to
make a difference, to develop treatments for diseases that were taking a cruel
toll on children. In 1990, he opened his non-profit clinic.

    "I think of myself as a pediatrician who knows a little more than average
about biochemistry and genetics, and can use that in a primary care setting to
prevent problems," he said.

    His patients think of him in another way: "He is a gift to us," said Miriam
Martin, whose three young children are all under his care for Crigler-Najjar
syndrome.

    For generations, the Amish and Mennonites, descendants of Swiss and German
Anabaptists who settled in Pennsylvania during the 1700s, have suffered from
unusually high rates of dozens of genetic disorders. The diseases occur because
the communities arose from a small population of founders, and members, who are
forbidden to marry outside their religion, marry each other. As a result, many
people in the groups today are related, increasing the odds that both members of
a couple will unknowingly be carriers of a hereditary disease that does not
affect them but will show up in their children.

    Scientists have eagerly studied the Amish for decades, making discoveries
that filled at least one textbook on genetic disorders. But the experts who
gathered their data from Lancaster County did not stay to take care of the
diseases they identified.

    As children approach puberty, phototherapy becomes less effective and
bilirubin begins rising to dangerous levels. At that point, a liver transplant
is considered.

    But Morton tries to keep children well enough to put off transplants for as
long as possible.


LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1999


                             1423 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                August 4, 1999, Wednesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: EDUCATION / SMART RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS AND PARENTS;
 WHERE HOMEWORK AND THE INTERNET MEET: LAUNCH POINT;
 GENETICS

BODY:


   Just 50 years ago, nobody knew that DNA is the molecule of heredity for all
living things. Since then, DNA has taken the scientific world by storm and has
even managed to make its way into our courtrooms, grocery stores and movie
theaters. Journey into the world of DNA and genetics and discover how DNA works,
what it looks like and why it is so important in our lives through the direct
links on the Times Launch Point Web site: http://www.latimes.com/launchpoint/.

   Here are the best sites for getting your schoolwork done or for just having
fun.

   Level 1

   I Can Do That! The Fun Science Site: What do all living things have in
common? They all contain DNA. Take an animated tour of the wild world of DNA and
genetics. Learn why DNA is the code to all life, what it looks like, how it is
made in cells and how researchers are using it to create new frontiers in
science. http://www.eurekascience.com/ICanDoThat/

   Genetics (Kids Style!): What does a cell look like? How did you get your 46
chromosomes? Let Professor Gene take you on an entertaining tour of genetics
that will introduce you to such pioneers as Gregor Mendel, an Augustinian monk
considered the father of genetics because of his studies of pea plants.
http://tqjunior.advanced.org/3696/

   Make Clones of Your Own: Plants are easily cloned through drafting or
budding. Try this experiment in which you clone an African violet and compare
how different environments affect plants with the same genes.
http://tqjunior.advanced.org/6207/makecon.html

   Level 2

   DNA Is an Instructional Manual: Take a peek inside DNA, the sequence of
chemicals that tells your body everything from what color your hair and eyes
should be to how to build your brain. View animations illustrating how its four
chemicals, called bases, are arranged to create a sequence. Learn how scientists
are studying DNA sequences to help cure diseases.
http://www.thetech.org/exhibits_events/online/genome/

   Life: A Study of Genetics and Molecular Biology: In 1953, James Watson and
Francis Crick determined that the structure of a DNA molecule is a double helix.
Learn about chromosomes and cell division, the principles of heredity and the
work of important geneticists. Try some games and use an online forum to ask
questions and discuss issues regarding genetics.
http://hyperion.advanced.org/20465/info.html

   Find DNA in Your Kitchen: How do scientists separate DNA from other
components of a cell? Learn about the parts of a cell and find out how you can
extract DNA from an onion with basic kitchen ingredients and equipment.
http://raven.umnh.utah.edu/new/projects/kitchenDNA.html

   Level 3

   The Gene School: Genetics has important applications and implications in our
daily lives, ranging from genetically engineered plants that are more nutritious
and disease-resistant to DNA evidence used to solve crimes. Learn about the
basics of genetics as well as cloning, DNA fingerprinting and gene therapy. View
a timeline of genetics discoveries and try some experiments, quizzes and games
to test your knowledge. http://library.advanced.org/19037/

   Mission: Drosophila: In this interactive game, you are a secret agent who
must solve mysteries using your knowledge of genetics. Each mission is
progressively more difficult, beginning with a parakeet caper and ending with
your chance to engineer a new breed of flies. http://library.advanced.org/10231/

   Designer Genes: How can Punnett squares be used to predict offspring ratios?
What is so extraordinary about Dolly, the first mammal cloned from an adult
cell? Learn more about genetics and bioengineering at this award-winning site
created by high school students. http://library.advanced.org/18258/index2.htm

   Launch Point is produced by the UC Irvine Department of Education, which
reviews each site for appropriateness and quality. Even so, parents should
supervise their children's use of the Internet. This column was designed by
Randy Hudson, Frances Lopez, Christy Vollmer and Anna Manring.

   EXPLORER'S QUEST

   The answer to this Internet quiz can be found in the sites at right.

   If you were to stretch all your chromosomes in every cell end to end, how
many times could you travel to the moon and back?

   CLUE: See DNA Is an Instructional Manual

   Find What You Need to Know: Have a project on California history? Need help
doing a math problem? Launch Point now covers more than 100 topics for getting
your schoolwork done. Go to http://www.latimes.com/launchpoint/ for the full
list of subjects and direct links to the best Internet sites.

   Answer to last week's Quest: The ancient Hawaiian chieftains valued surfing
because it developed strength and stamina--two qualities that gave them status.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: She may look like an ordinary sheep, but Dolly is the world's
first close of an adult mammal. Prosecution expert Robin Cotton, below, gives
jurors a lesson in DNA during the O.J. Simpson trial.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated
Press PHOTO: She may look like an ordinary sheep, but Dolly is the world's first
close of an adult mammal. Prosecution expert Robin Cotton, below, gives jurors a
lesson in DNA during the O.J. Simpson trial.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Reuters

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1999


                             1424 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 3, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 003

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: Canadian scientist find gene for 'good' cholesterol

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Scientists today are reporting the discovery of the gene responsible for
regulating levels of HDL or "good" cholesterol, a development that could lead to
new treatments for heart disease.

   Currently, drug treatments for high cholesterol focus on lowering either LDL
or "bad" cholesterol or overall cholesterol levels. The discovery of the ABC1
gene may provide a target for drugs that could raise HDL cholesterol levels.

   The findings by Canadian researchers are published in today's issue of Nature
Genetics.

   "The most common lipid abnormality in patients with heart disease is not
increased LDL but lowered HDL. That is the strongest predicter of heart attack
or stroke," said Dr. Michael Hayden, chief scientific officer of Xenon
Bioresearch in Vancouver, B.C., a biotechnology company, and the paper's lead
author.

   "Until now we have not understood crucial mechanisms which elevate levels of
HDL cholesterol," he added.

   The team located mutations in the ABC1 gene in patients with two genetic
diseases that result in low levels of HDL cholesterol - familial HDL deficiency
and tangier disease.

   Working with families in the Netherlands and in Canada who have histories of
heart disease, the researchers found that a faulty ABC1 gene is linked to
defects involving the removal of cholesterol from cells, resulting in the
conditions that are characterized by low HDL levels.

   "For the first time, we have a handle on how cholesterol gets out of cells,"
Hayden said.

   "It will allow us to develop approaches to try and increase cholesterol
transportation, with increased HDL the result."

   Knowing the gene responsible will allow researchers to regulate or manipulate
it with drugs or gene therapy so that HDL activity can be increased, he said.

   "This is the hope," he said. "Now, with patients with low HDL, we can't do
much. All we can do is try to improve the balance by decreasing the LDL. Now, we
have a way to focus on the HDL."

   Even if patients don't have a mutant form of the gene, causing a severe
deficiency, doctors may be able to use the knowledge to find ways to adjust the
gene to boost production of HDL in borderline patients, he said.

   "It can be regulated or modulated, like the volume dial on a radio," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 03, 1999


                             1425 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                   AUGUST 3, 1999 Tuesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES YO!; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: GENE LINKED TO 'GOOD' CHOLESTEROL

BYLINE: Joseph B. Verrengia, Associated Press

BODY:

   After a four-decade search, scientists have identified a gene that regulates
the body's level of so-called good cholesterol, a breakthrough that could
someday lead to a new way to treat one of the most common causes of heart
disease.

   Flaws in the gene, known as ABC1, prevent the production of a protein that
the body needs to rinse excess "bad" cholesterol and other fats out of cells and
the bloodstream.

   The gene was discovered by researchers looking for the cause of Tangier
disease, an extremely rare inherited illness in which the body produces
virtually none of the "good" HDL cholesterol. Without it, the level of the bad
cholesterol, LDL, and other fats that contribute to heart attacks and clogged
arteries rises unchecked.

   Scientists not involved in the studies said the discovery was a significant
advance in heart disease research because millions of people with cardiovascular
problems have lower-than-normal HDL levels.

   "Patients can have a normal LDL level, but still have cardiovascular disease
because their HDL is so low," said Sonia Skarlatos, genetics research leader at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "We don't have any drugs right now that raise HDL significantly. Now we know
where to look for the gene and its mutations, and how we might enhance the
gene's expression to make more HDL."

   As many as 10 labs were looking for ABC1. It was isolated in separate studies
by two sets of scientists in Germany and one in Canada. Their results appear in
the August issue of Nature Genetics.

   Stephen G. Young of the University of California, San Francisco, who reviewed
the studies independently, noted they did not determine where the gene works
within cells, or the biochemical steps involved.

   But if the ABC1 discovery does lead to new cholesterol drugs, they may work
in opposite ways from a class of cholesterol busters that have revolutionized
heart care - the statins.

   Statins lower the level of LDLs in the bloodstream. For people at high risk,
the drugs can reduce the risk of a heart attack by half. Drugs that would boost
HDL might offer more protection, doctors said.

   HDL, or high-density lipoprotein, is called the good cholesterol because LDL,
low-density lipoproteins, and other fats attach themselves to HDL particles and
are eventually discarded together by the liver.

   Understanding ABC1 also may lead to treatments or gene therapies for Tangier
disease - which afflicts only about 40 people worldwide - and less severe
illnesses caused by other mutations of the gene.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1426 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       AUGUST 3, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS FIND CHOLESTEROL-REGULATING GENE RESEARCHERS HOPE TO
DEVELOP DRUGS TO FIGHT HEART DISEASE BY RAISING THE BODY'S LEVEL OF HDL, THE
"GOOD" CHOLESTEROL.

BYLINE: Joseph B. Verrengia, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   After a four-decade search, scientists have identified a gene that regulates
the body's level of so-called good cholesterol, a breakthrough that could
someday lead to a new way to treat one of the most common causes of heart
disease.

   Flaws in the gene, known as ABC1, prevent the production of a protein that
the body needs to rinse excess bad cholesterol and other fats out of cells and
the bloodstream.

   The gene was discovered by researchers looking for the cause of Tangier
disease, an extremely rare inherited illness in which the body produces
virtually none of the good cholesterol, HDL. Without it, the level of the bad
cholesterol, LDL, and other fats that contribute to heart attacks and clogged
arteries rises unchecked.

   Scientists not involved in the studies said the discovery was a significant
advance in heart disease research because millions of people with cardiovascular
problems have lower-than-normal HDL levels.

   "Patients can have a normal LDL level, but still have cardiovascular disease
because their HDL is so low," said Sonia Skarlatos, genetics research leader at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "We don't have any drugs right now that raise HDL significantly," she said.

   As many as 10 labs were looking for ABC1. It was isolated in separate studies
by two sets of scientists in Germany and one in Canada. Their results appear in
the August issue of Nature Genetics.

   A group headed by Michael Hayden of the University of British Columbia, lead
author of one of the studies, determined that ABC1 is responsible for making a
protein essential to both HDL formation and the process of unloading fats from
cells and the blood.

   Stephen G. Young of the University of California, San Francisco, who reviewed
the studies independently, noted that the studies did not determine where the
gene works within cells, or the precise biochemical steps involved.

   But if the ABC1 discovery does lead to new cholesterol drugs, they may work
in opposite ways from a class of cholesterol busters that have revolutionized
heart care - the statins.

   Statins lower the level of LDLs in the bloodstream. For people at high risk,
the drugs can halve the risk of a heart attack.

   Drugs that would boost HDL might offer more protection, doctors said.

   HDL, or high-density lipoprotein, is called the good cholesterol because LDL,
low-density lipoprotein, and other fats attach themselves to HDL particles and
are eventually discarded together by the liver.

   The new genetic discovery is "a significant piece of the puzzle," said Dr.
Dennis Sprecher of the Cleveland Clinic. "But we're not at the point where we
would start experimentation."

   Understanding the ABC1 gene also may lead to treatments or gene therapies for
Tangier disease - which afflicts only about 40 people worldwide - and less
severe illnesses caused by other mutations of the gene.

   Tangier disease is named after tiny Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay.
Discovered in 1608 by Capt. John Smith, today it is home to about 700 people.
Most are descendants of the island's original English settlers.

   Federal scientists identified Tangier disease in two island children - a
brother and sister - in 1963. Their tonsils were orange, a sign that their cells
were overloaded with cholesterol. Tests showed that they lacked HDL, and
researchers began the first of many hunts for the genetic culprit.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1427 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    August 3, 1999, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3, THE BUZZ

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: FREE SPEECH;
THREE YEARS AFTER A CONTRACT ARRESTED HIS DEVELOPMENT, HIP-HOP ARTIST RELEASES;
A NEW CD;
'GOOD' CHOLESTEROL GENE FOUND;
DISCOVERY MAY LEAD TO NEW TREATMENTS FOR MANY SUFFERERS WITH HEART AILMENTS

BYLINE: ED MASLEY, POST-GAZETTE POP MUSIC CRITIC; FROM WIRE REPORTS; JOSEPH B.
VERRENGIA, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   After a four-decade search, scientists have identified a gene that regulates
the body's level of so-called good cholesterol, a breakthrough that could
someday lead to a new way to treat one of the most common causes of heart
disease.

   Flaws in the gene, known as ABC1, prevent the production of a protein that
the body needs to rinse excess bad cholesterol and other fats out of cells and
the bloodstream.

   The gene was discovered by researchers looking for the cause of Tangier
disease, an extremely rare inherited illness in which the body produces
virtually none of the good cholesterol, HDL. Without it, the level of the bad
cholesterol, LDL, and other fats that contribute to heart attacks and clogged
arteries rise unchecked.

   Scientists not involved in the studies said the discovery was a significant
advance in heart disease research because millions of people with cardiovascular
problems had lower-than-normal HDL levels.

   "Patients can have a normal LDL level, but still have cardiovascular disease
because their HDL is so low," said Sonia Skarlatos, genetics research leader at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "We don't have any drugs right now that raise HDL significantly. Now we know
where to look for the gene and its mutations, and how we might enhance the
gene's expression to make more HDL."

   As many as 10 labs were looking for ABC1. It was isolated in separate studies
by two sets of scientists in Germany and one in Canada. Their results appear in
the August issue of Nature Genetics.

   A group headed by Michael Hayden of the University of British Columbia, lead
author of one of the studies, determined that ABC1 was responsible for making a
protein essential to both HDL formation and the process of unloading fats from
cells and the blood.

   Stephen G. Young of the University of California, San Francisco, who reviewed
the studies independently, noted that the studies did not determine where the
gene worked within cells, or the precise biochemical steps involved.

   But if the ABC1 discovery does lead to new cholesterol drugs, they may work
in opposite ways from a class of cholesterol busters that have revolutionized
heart care - the statins.

   Statins lower the level of LDLs in the bloodstream. For people at high risk,
the drugs can reduce the risk of a heart attack by half.

   Drugs that would boost HDL might offer more protection, doctors said.

   HDL, or high-density lipoprotein, is called the good cholesterol because LDL,
low-density lipoproteins and other fats attach themselves to HDL particles and
are eventually discarded together by the liver.

   "This genetic discovery allows us to ask the question of, ' How would you
impact vascular disease if you were to specifically change HDL?' " said Dr.
Dennis Sprecher of the Cleveland Clinic. "It's a significant piece of the
puzzle. But we're not at the point where we would start experimentation."

   Understanding ABC1 also may lead to treatments or gene therapies for Tangier
disease - which afflicts only about 40 people worldwide - and less severe
illnesses caused by other mutations of the gene.

   Tangier disease is named after tiny Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay.
Discovered in 1608 by Capt. John Smith, it's home to about 700 people. Most are
descendants of the island's original English settlers.

   Federal scientists identified Tangier disease in two island children - a
brother and sister - in 1963. Their tonsils were orange, a sign their cells were
overloaded with cholesterol. Tests showed that they lacked HDL, and researchers
launched the first of many hunts for the genetic culprit.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Associated Press: (Good
genes)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1999


                             1428 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                August 3, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      August 3, 1999 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS IDENTIFY GENE THAT REGULATES 'GOOD' CHOLESTROL

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. VERRENGIA; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   After a four-decade search, scientists have identified a gene that regulates
the body's level of so-called good cholesterol, a breakthrough that could
someday lead to a new way to treat one of the most common causes of heart
disease.

   Flaws in the gene, known as ABC1, prevent the production of a protein that
the body needs to rinse excess bad cholesterol and other fats out of cells and
the bloodstream.

   The gene was discovered by researchers looking for the cause of Tangier
disease, an extremely rare inherited illness in which the body produces
virtually none of the good cholesterol, HDL. Without it, the level of the bad
cholesterol, LDL, and other fats that contribute to heart attacks and clogged
arteries rise unchecked.

   Scientists not involved in the studies said the discovery was a significant
advance in heart disease research because millions of people with cardiovascular
problems have lower-than-normal HDL levels.

   "Patients can have a normal LDL level, but still have cardiovascular disease
because their HDL is so low," said Sonia Skarlatos, genetics research leader at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "We don't have any drugs right now that raise HDL significantly. Now we know
where to look for the gene and its mutations, and how we might enhance the
gene's expression to make more HDL."

   As many as 10 labs were looking for ABC1. It was isolated in separate studies
by two sets of scientists in Germany and one in Canada. Their results appear in
the August issue of Nature Genetics.

   A group headed by Michael Hayden of the University of British Columbia, lead
author of one of the studies, determined that ABC1 is responsible for making a
protein essential to both HDL formation and the process of unloading fats from
cells and the blood.

   Stephen G. Young of the University of California, San Francisco, who reviewed
the studies independently, noted that the studies did not determine where the
gene works within cells, or the precise biochemical steps involved.

   But if the ABC1 discovery does lead to new cholesterol drugs, they may work
in opposite ways from a class of cholesterol busters that have revolutionized
heart care - the statins.

   Statins lower the level of LDLs in the bloodstream. For people at high risk,
the drugs can reduce the risk of a heart attack by half.

   Drugs that would boost HDL might offer more protection, doctors said.

   HDL, or high-density lipoprotein, is called the good cholesterol because LDL,
low-density lipoproteins and other fats attach themselves to HDL particles and
are eventually discarded together by the liver.

   "This genetic discovery allows us to ask the question of, 'How would you
impact vascular disease if you were to specifically change HDL?' said Dr. Dennis
Sprecher of the Cleveland Clinic. "It's a significant piece of the puzzle. But
we're not at the point where we would start experimentation."

   Understanding ABC1 also may lead to treatments or gene therapies for Tangier
disease - which afflicts only about 40 people worldwide - and less severe
illnesses caused by other mutations of the gene.

   Tangier disease is named after tiny Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay.
Discovered in 1608 by Capt. John Smith, today it's home to about 700 people.
Most are descendants of the island's original English settlers.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1999


                             1429 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        August 3, 1999, Tuesday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find gene that governs 'good' cholesterol

BYLINE: Joseph B. Verrengia; Associated Press

BODY: After a four-decade search, scientists have identified a gene that
regulates the body's level of so- called good cholesterol, a breakthrough that
someday could lead to a new way to treat one of the most common causes of heart
disease.

   Flaws in the gene, known as ABC1, prevent the production of a protein the
body needs to rinse excess bad cholesterol and other fats out of cells and the
bloodstream.

   The gene was discovered by researchers looking for the cause of Tangier
disease, an extremely rare inherited illness in which the body produces
virtually none of the good cholesterol, HDL.

   Without it, the level of bad cholesterol, LDL, and other fats that contribute
to heart attacks and clogged arteries rise unchecked.

   Scientists not involved in the studies said the discovery was a significant
advance in heart disease research because millions of people with cardiovascular
problems have lower-than-normal HDL levels.

   "Patients can have a normal LDL level, but still have cardiovascular disease
because their HDL is so low," said Sonia Skarlatos, genetics research leader at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "We don't have any drugs right now that raise HDL significantly. Now we know
where to look for the gene and its mutations, and how we might enhance the
gene's expression to make more HDL."

   As many as 10 labs had been looking for ABC1. It was isolated in separate
studies by two sets of scientists in Germany and one in Canada. Their results
appear in the August issue of Nature Genetics.

   A group headed by Michael Hayden of the University of British Columbia, lead
author of one of the studies, determined ABC1 is responsible for making a
protein essential to both HDL formation and the process of unloading fats from
cells and the blood.

   Stephen Young of the University of California, San Francisco, who reviewed
the studies independently, noted the studies didn't determine where the gene
works within cells, or the precise biochemical steps involved.

   But if the ABC1 discovery does lead to new cholesterol drugs, they may work
in opposite ways from a class of cholesterol busters that have revolutionized
heart care - the statins.

   Statins lower the level of LDLs in the bloodstream. For people at high risk,
the drugs can reduce the risk of a heart attack by half.

   Drugs that would boost HDL might offer more protection, doctors said.

   HDL, or high-density lipoprotein, is called the good cholesterol because LDL,
low-density lipoproteins, and other fats attach themselves to HDL particles and
eventually are discarded together by the liver.

   "This genetic discovery allows us to ask the question of, 'How would you
impact vascular disease if you were to specifically change HDL?'" said Dr.
Dennis Sprecher of the Cleveland Clinic. "It's a significant piece of the
puzzle. But we're not at the point where we would start experimentation."

   Understanding ABC1 also may lead to treatments or gene therapies for Tangier
disease - which afflicts only about 40 people worldwide - and less severe
illnesses caused by other mutations of the gene.

   Tangier disease is named after tiny Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay.
Discovered in 1608 by Capt. John Smith, today it's home to about 700 people.
Most are descendants of the island's original English settlers.

   Federal scientists identified Tangier Disease in two island children - a
brother and sister - in 1963. Their tonsils were orange, a sign their cells were
overloaded with cholesterol. Tests showed they lacked HDL, and researchers
launched the first of many hunts for the genetic culprit.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1999


                             1430 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 3, 1999 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Finding of good cholesterol gene a big step in heart disease fight

BYLINE: Joseph B. Verrengia, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   After a four-decade search, scientists have identified a gene that regulates
the body's level of so- called good cholesterol, a breakthrough that could
someday lead to a new way to treat one of the most common causes of heart
disease.

    Flaws in the gene, known as ABC1, prevent the production of a protein that
the body needs to rinse excess bad cholesterol and other fats out of cells and
the bloodstream.

    The gene was discovered by researchers looking for the cause of Tangier
disease, an extremely rare inherited illness in which the body produces
virtually none of the good cholesterol, HDL. Without it, the level of bad
cholesterol, LDL, and other fats that contribute to heart attacks and clogged
arteries rise unchecked.

    Scientists not involved in the studies said the discovery was a significant
advance in heart disease research because millions of people with cardiovascular
problems have lower-than-normal HDL levels.

   "Patients can have a normal LDL level, but still have cardiovascular disease
because their HDL is so low," said Sonia Skarlatos, genetics research leader at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

    "We don't have any drugs right now that raise HDL significantly. Now we know
where to look for the gene and its mutations, and how we might enhance the
gene's expression to make more HDL."

   As many as 10 labs were looking for ABC1. It was isolated in separate studies
by two sets of scientists in Germany and one in Canada. Their results appear in
the August issue of Nature Genetics.

   A group headed by Michael Hayden of the University of British Columbia, lead
author of one of the studies, determined that ABC1 is responsible for making a
protein essential to both HDL formation and the process of unloading fats from
cells and the blood.

    Stephen G. Young of the University of California, San Francisco, who
reviewed the studies independently, noted that the studies did not determine
where the gene works within cells, or the precise biochemical steps involved.

    But if the ABC1 discovery does lead to new cholesterol drugs, they may work
in opposite ways from a class of cholesterol busters that have revolutionized
heart care - the statins.

    Statins lower the level of LDLs in the bloodstream. For people at high risk,
the drugs can reduce the risk of a heart attack by half.

    Drugs that would boost HDL might offer more protection, doctors said.

    HDL, or high-density lipoprotein, is called the good cholesterol because
LDL, low-density lipoprotein, and other fats attach themselves to HDL particles
and are eventually discarded together by the liver.

    "This genetic discovery allows us to ask the question, 'How would you impact
vascular disease if you were to specifically change HDL?'" said Dr. Dennis
Sprecher of the Cleveland Clinic. "It's a significant piece of the puzzle. But
we're not at the point where we would start experimentation."

    Understanding ABC1 also may lead to treatments or gene therapies for Tangier
disease - which afflicts only about 40 people worldwide - and less severe
illnesses caused by other mutations of the gene.

   Tangier disease is named after tiny Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay.
Discovered in 1608 by Capt. John Smith, today it's home to about 700 people.
Most are descendants of the island's original English settlers.

    Federal scientists identified Tangier disease in two island children - a
brother and sister - in 1963. Their tonsils were orange, a sign their cells were
overloaded with cholesterol. Tests showed they lacked HDL, and researchers
launched the first of many hunts for the genetic culprit.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1431 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     August 3, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z06

LENGTH: 809 words

HEADLINE: SECOND OPINION; Genetics Used to Be Simple

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford, BAR HARBOR, MAINE

BODY:



   You say to-MAY-to, I say to-MAH-to! You say genetics, I say genomics!

   Say what?

   Genomics is the hot new word in DNA circles, and it shows how much the field
of genetics has changed in a decade.

   It used to be simple: Genetics was about how traits--and diseases--are passed
down from one generation to the next. Every family has its own lore about how
you got your brown eyes from Mom--and your temper from Grandfather Harry. As the
saying goes, it's in the genes!

   But today, the story in the genes is much more complicated. Even the word
"genetics" has a whiff of Old Think, an image of an old man in a garden of peas.
Indeed, traditional genetics took a narrow, somewhat rigid view, looking at one
gene at a time. In medicine, genetics usually meant focusing on rare diseases
caused by a single defective gene.

   Genomics is New Think. The term was coined about 10 years ago at Bar Harbor's
Jackson Laboratory where scientists study mouse genetics as a window on human
genetics. The word, made up from GENe and chromosOME, refers to the whole
genetic blueprint that makes up a person--or a mouse or a worm or a fruit fly.

   In genomics, researchers look at all the genes at once. A gene is a
close-up--the genome is big picture. If genes were words, the genome would be a
book.

   "Genetics is the science of heredity. Genomics is the science of the heredity
apparatus itself," says Kenneth Paigen, director of Jackson Laboratory. "The
challenge is how to understand the enormous interaction [of genes] with respect
to health and to disease."

   Scientists not only have to identify genes (about 100,000 genes in a person)
and locate their chromosomal addresses, but they must also determine what genes
do at the molecular level and why they are significant. As physician Andrew
Feinberg of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine explains: "Most
geneticists today do genomics."

   At a conference here last week on the future of gene studies, researchers
expanded the lexicon with "physio-genomics," functional genomics, even
"prote-omics," meaning the study of proteins, the products of genes.

   Most important for the public, genomics widens the field of medical genetics
to include such common diseases as diabetes, heart disease and cancer. These
complex chronic illnesses result from interactions of a number of genes as well
as environmental factors.

   In one study of high blood pressure, for example, Gary Churchill of Jackson
Laboratory and his colleagues at Boston University have found about half a dozen
candidate genes that play a role in making people sensitive to salt, which puts
them at risk for hypertension. Researchers know that hundreds of genes are
involved in hypertension, but they speculate that only a few may be key to the
development of disease.

   "What we're doing that's new is looking at more than one gene at a time,"
explains Churchill. The hope is that once scientists unravel the interaction of
key genes and identify the steps in the cell that lead to disease, they can
design drugs that interfere with the process.

   "The medical goals are therapeutic," continues Churchill. "These pathways of
interactive genes give us targets for drug companies to intervene on the cell
surface."

   Genomics-based drug development has become the buzzword in drug company
laboratories. Much research has already gone into cancer to understand the steps
that turn a normal cell into malignant disease. Says physician Thomas Caskey of
Merck Research Laboratories: "We're getting our feet wet in cancer and we'll
move on probably to atherosclerosis [hardening of the arteries] next."

   Meanwhile, the whole concept of gene therapy has changed.

   In its early crude form, gene therapy involved replacing a defective gene
with a whole new normal gene in hopes of curing a person with a disorder caused
by a single gene. Initial efforts proved disappointing. Not only was it
difficult to get a whole gene into a person, but the body's immune system rose
up and destroyed the "foreign" invader.

   Now gene therapy is more subtle. Instead of replacing the whole gene, some
new therapies insert only the most critical part of a gene, using carriers or
"vectors" that are less likely to be attacked as foreign.

   Federal health officials predict that in 10 years, gene therapy will be
successful for a few inherited diseases such as hemophilia. In 20 years, they
say, cancer therapy will target precisely the molecular Achilles' heel of a
tumor, and gene-based designer drugs for diabetes and hypertension will be on
the market.

   Well, maybe.

   Excitement runs high here at this meeting of luminaries in the field of
genomics. But there's also a dose of Down East caution. Medicine moves much more
slowly than laboratory science and as they say in Maine--sometimes you can't get
"theah" from "heah."




GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: August 03, 1999


                             1432 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                            August 02, 1999, Monday

SECTION: Health & Fitness; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1911 words

HEADLINE: UNDERSTANDING HOW CANCER WORKS

BYLINE: By AMANDA GARDNER DAILY NEWS FEATURES WRITER

BODY:


   Last week's announcement that researchers have, for the first time,
transformed healthy human cells into malignant ones is a major breakthrough in
the long-running search for a cure for cancer. This deadly disease is the No. 2
killer in the U.S., and, with this discovery, scientists may have found the
basic building blocks of the disease.

   While the new findings do not add up to immediate cures, they do mean the
groundwork has been laid for important advances over the next few years. If,
after all, researchers can construct the bones of the disease in the lab, they
are likely to be closer to deconstructing it - through earlier detection and
more accurate drug treatment.

   "I think this definitely opens a new chapter in the understanding of cancer
biology and in unraveling what is a very complex disease involving gene
mutations and protein alterations," says Dr. Carlos Cordon-Cardo, director of
the division of molecular pathology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
"We can take this knowledge and bring it into clinical research, developing
tests and new treatment strategies."

   Susan Band Horwitz, co-chair of the department of Molecular Pharmacology at
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, agrees. "This may help us develop drugs
that have less side effects. We will know what the difference is between a
cancerous cell and a normal cell. We are interested in drugs that will not harm
normal cells but will affect malignant cells."

   In addition, Dr. Curtis Harris, chief of the laboratory of human
carcinogenesis at the National Cancer Institute, says, "We can use the
information in two important ways: early diagnosis of cancer and finding new
molecular targets for therapy."

   THE PRINCIPAL PLAYERS

   For years, scientists have been able to document hundreds of mutations in
existing human cancer cells, but until now they have been unable to determine
which were the main mechanisms that cause a cancer to develop. In replicating
the disease, the latest discovery illuminates how cells become malignant - at
least in some kinds of cancer, and possibly in many. "It appears that there may
be a common denominator for many cancers, though not all," says Cordon-Cardo.
"At least we are identifying the principal players."

   Those players are the three mutations that a cell must go through before
becoming cancerous, as reported in last week's issue of Nature. It has long been
known that two major "pathways" are involved in cancer: those dealing with cell
growth and those dealing with cell death. Within these two pathways are two
types of genes: those that spur growth (oncogenes) and those that act as tumor
suppressors. In order for a cell to become cancerous, it needs to go through
several mutations involving at least one oncogene and one tumor suppressor.

   Dr. Robert Weinberg and his colleagues at the Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass. - the authors of the recent study -
introduced those mutations into cells to see if they could upset the body's
normal balance between oncogenes and tumor suppressors to produce cancerous
cells.

   In all, there were three successive alterations. First, researchers
introduced an oncogene called ras, which commands cells to grow. Then they added
a gene that tells cells not to respond to signals to stop growing. This
combination had produced cancerous cells in rodents 15 years ago, but had failed
to do so in human cells. In the recent experiments, Weinberg and his group added
telomerase, an enzyme that "immortalizes" cells by allowing them to grow
forever. The formula worked; the human cancer cells had been created

   "For the first time, you can identify that there are three distinct features
that have to happen to create a cancer cell," says Dr. Harmon Eyre, chief
medical officer of the American Cancer Society. So, the scientists believe,
researchers could use any or all of the three either to prevent or treat cancer.

   Perhaps the most important target for intervention is the enzyme telomerase,
which appears to be present in most cancers. "It's one of the first indications
that confirms the suspicion we've had that telomerase is an important target to
design drugs to inhibit cancer," says Dr. William Hahn, a researcher at the
Whitehead Institute and one of the authors of the paper published in Nature.

   In fact, many biotech companies are already developing drugs that target
telomerase - the recent findings simply confirm that they're on the right track.
Such drugs will have broad implications for many kinds of cancer.

   NARROWING the abnormality

   The next challenge facing the medical community is to determine what other
mechanisms are at play in different types of cancer. In the future, as
researchers are able to categorize the exact abnormalities that occur in each
cancer site and in each cancer patient, they will have a far better ability to
define specific therapies.

   Right now, conventional cancer treatment consists primarily of drugs, surgery
and radiation, few of which differentiate between cancerous and normal cells;
they kill them all. Therapies targeted to a specific cancer would have the
advantage of being able to destroy malignant cells while leaving healthy ones
alone. Such a treatment would, no doubt, be much easier on the patient.

   In addition, cancer cells can develop resistance to drugs currently on the
market. According to Horwitz, the new research may help scientists overcome that
problem. "If the cell has a positive response to a drug and then becomes
resistant, we will now have a better chance of seeing what changes occurred to
cause that - why the cell became resistant."

   Knowing what molecular changes take place will also aid in early detection of
the disease. If we know, for example, that prostate cancer cells result from
four specific mutations, doctors can be on the lookout for those four changes.

   A BETTER MOUSE MODEL

   One additional contribution of the new research is to provide a new model
with which to study cancer. Weinberg, Hahn and their colleagues managed to
produce cancer in human cells - a giant leap for research, which has relied
mainly on mouse models. While mouse cells are similar to human cells in many
ways, they also differ in significant ways. The new research will enable
scientists to make better mouse models.

   "Designing and implementing novel treatments is not going to happen right
away," says Carlos Cordon-Cardo. "But at least we have now the tools to approach
these questions with human tumor cell models that are much closer to clinical
reality."

   Sidebar:

   Shrinking Cancerous Tumors

   In the science journal Nature last week, Dr. Robert Weinberg and his
colleagues showed that an oncogene called ras helped cause human cells to become
cancerous.

   In a separate article, another group of researchers attacked the problem from
the opposite point of view - shrinking existing tumors. The group, which
included Dr. Carlos Cordon-Cardo of Memorial Sloan-Kettering, showed that
removing the same cancer-causing gene from advanced tumors in mice caused the
cancer to shrink dramatically.

   "We found that you can remove the initiating cancer-causing event and the
tumors just melt away," says Dr. George Yancopoulos, chief scientific officer at
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and one of the authors of the study. "This just
further confirms the notion that ras is a good drug target because even in
advanced cancer settings, if you can block its action you get complete
regression of the cancer."

   The studies were conducted on mouse tumors, and, while nonhuman studies often
pave the way for breakthroughs in human pathologies, the initial results will
need years of further testing.

   Sidebar:

   Milestones in the Fight Against Cancer

   1943Pap Smear for cervical cancer introduced.

   1950Scientists confirm a link between smoking and cancer.

   1955National Chemotherapy Program begun.

   1964U.S. Surgeon General issues "Report on Smoking."

   Epstein-Barr virus linked to cancer.

   1973The Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Program is launched and
eventually proves that mammography - a low-dose X-ray of

   the breast - can help save the lives of women with breast cancer.

   1974Doxorubicin, an anti-tumor antobiotic, is approved by the

   Food and Drug Administration.

   1976The Cancer Information Service (1-800-4-CANCER) opens.

   1977Doctors develop limb-sparing surgical techniques for cancers

   of the extremities.

   The American Cancer Society launches the Great American Smokeout to create
awareness of the dangers of smoking.

   Within a decade the Coalition on Smoking and Health would

   successfully campaigns to ban smoking in restaurants,

   airplanes and the workplace.

   1978Tamoxifen is approved by the FDA as a treatment drug.

   1979Studies link cancer risk to hormonal drugs (such as DES

   taken during pregnancy) and hormonal replacement therapy.

   The most frequently mutated gene in human cancer - known

   as p53 - is discovered.

   1980The MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) is introduced.

   Sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy developed to help find

   and remove precancerous growths

   1981The first viral vaccine which can prevent cancer - the hepatitis B virus
vaccine for liver cancer - makes its debut.

   1982Cancer Prevention Study was launched with a survey

   of 1.2 million Americans in all 50 states. The study examined

   occupational exposure to chemicals, medical history and diet.

   1984Dietary guidelines aimed at reducing cancer are developed.

   1985The combination of lumpectomy and radiation is found to be

   effective in treating breast cancer.

   1986Scientists discover the first of what are now 20 known

   tumor-suppressing genes.

   Nerve-sparing prostatectomy developed.

   1988Standardized reporting of pap smear results developed.

   Adjuvant chemotherapy used in conjunction with surgery proven to increase
survival in early breast cancer.

   1989Human gene-mapping data base established.

   Adjuvant chemotherapy proven to increase survival

   in colon cancer.

   1990Breast cancer death rates begin to decline.

   Several common genetic variants are linked to

   the risk of lung and other cancers.

   1991The first human gene therapy for cancer is attempted.

   1992The FDA approves Taxol, a drug that acts to stabilize the microtubules
which play a key role in the life cycle of a cell.

   Mammography quality standards act passed.

   1993The prevalence of adult smoking in America declines to 24%.

   Doctors identify the genes linked to inherited forms of colon

   cancer. Study of these genes could lead to screening tests for

   colorectal cancer and improved treatment.

   1994BRCA1, an inherited breast cancer gene is cloned by

   scientists. BRCA2 is cloned a year later.

   1996Topotecan, a drug derived from the bark of a Chinese tree

   and which helps kill tumors, wins FDA approval.

   Two major studies of Beta Carotene show no

   cancer-prevention benefit.

   1997The Cancer Genome Anatomy Project - aimed at assembling the first index
of genes involved in cancer - is launched.

   1998The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial shows that women at risk of developing
the disease can reduce their risk by half by taking tamoxifen.

   The FDA approves Herceptin, an antibody that targets

   cancer cells which produce a protein called HER2. HER2

   occurs in high numbers in up to 30% of women with

   metastatic breast cancer.

   SOURCE: NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE.

   Notes: Graphic not available electronically


GRAPHIC: SOURCE: SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN AND NIH VINCENT JOVIC DAILY NEWS Dr. Robert
Weinberg of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research led the team that
created the first human cancer cell in a lab.  AP 1973 Mammography is shown to
help save lives.  1977 The Great American Smokeout increases awareness of the
dangers of smoking.  1980 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) gives doctors a
close-up look at tumors.

LOAD-DATE: August 03, 1999


                             1433 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                August 2, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       August 2, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 4F

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS RESPONSIBLE FOR PAIN THRESHOLD

BYLINE: By JONATHAN BOR; BALTIMORE SUN

BODY:

   Why does one patient howl when blood is drawn, and the next merely watch the
process with interest? Researchers at Johns Hopkins and the National Institute
on Drug Abuse have an answer. Variations in a single gene can determine how
intensely a person feels pain, they say, whether caused by a pin prick or a
dentist's drill. The study could help put to rest the long-held assumption that
pain sensitivity is a matter of mental toughness. People really do experience
pain differently, doctors say - and genetics largely is responsible.

   "Many assume the way people respond is voluntary; 'Just put up with it' has
been a common recommendation for years,' said Dr. George Uhl, a Hopkins
neuroscientist who also heads NIDA's molecular neurobiology branch. "But now
people can think of pain as a genetically regulated problem."

   The same genetic differences also determine how much relief people get from
morphine and other opiate painkillers. Many people who are highly sensitive to
pain respond poorly to standard doses of pain medication.

   "One of the things we hope to do with this information is try to predict who
is going to need more opiate," Uhl said. Scientists also may use this knowledge
to fashion drugs and gene therapies tailored to a person's pain sensitivity.

   The research, published in July's Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, builds upon a seminal discovery 27 years ago of opiate receptors in
the human nervous system. Dr. Solomon Snyder, a Hopkins neuroscientist,
discovered molecules on the surface of nerve cells that serve as docking points
for natural opiates, chemicals manufactured by the brain to dampen pain.

   Without these receptors, everyone would experience pain more intensely.
Opiate receptors also bind to opiate drugs such as morphine, codeine and heroin.

   The recent study focused on a type of opiate receptor known as the "mu
receptor." Scientists discovered that slight variations in a single gene
determine the number of mu receptors that appear on cells of the nervous system.
The study found that people who have lots of mu receptors feel less pain because
they are able to absorb more of the brain's natural pain-relieving chemicals.
For the same reason, they get faster relief from pain-fighting medications.

   People who have fewer mu receptors are not as lucky.

   "Things that are not painful to others are painful to them," Uhl said, "and
they're not going to have their pain as effectively relieved by opiates."

   Using an imaging device known as a PET scanner, a Hopkins scientist found
that humans differ by as much as 50 percent in the number of mu receptors they
have. This is the same variation that accounted for different pain thresholds in
mice.

   Collaborators in California are testing the pain thresholds of human
volunteers, asking them to do such things as place their hands in frigid water.
Scientists also are studying patients who have had different responses to pain
medications. In both groups, researchers are studying DNA samples to see which
genetic variations are linked to higher or lower levels of pain sensitivity.

   Other scientists involved in the Hopkins study were doctors Zaije Wang and
Ichio Sora of the National Institute on Drug Abuse who says the research could
affect pain therapy. Doctors, for instance, could use genetic information to
predict if a patient could experience great discomfort after surgery, and
prescribe higher doses of pain medication to prevent a miserable recovery, Sora,
a psychiatrist, said.

   A more sophisticated approach would be gene therapy: using viruses to deliver
mu receptor genes to the nervous system. Patients should then cope better with
surgery and painful illnesses such as cancer. In theory, they would respond
better to pain medication and feel less pain.

   Solomon Snyder, chief of neuroscience, said the study shows that pain
sensitivity and physical illness aren't that far apart.

   "People vary in genes that determine cholesterol levels and hardening of the
arteries," Snyder said. "This is really the first evidence of a specific
molecular variation that determines variations in pain sensitivity."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: PHOTODISC INC.; Variations on a single gene spell the
difference between stoic patients and crybabies.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1999


                             1434 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     August 1, 1999, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 251 words

HEADLINE: $ 832,575 IN GRANTS AWARDED BY HUNTER'S HOPE FOUNDATION

BODY:


   The Hunter's Hope Foundation has awarded its first grants, totaling $
832,575, for research into Krabbe's disease to scientists in the United States
and Australia.

   The grants reflect a range of study, including prenatal diagnosis of Krabbe's
disease and other leukodystrophies, and gene therapy, in which a patient is
given a new gene to compensate for the defective gene that causes Krabbe's.

   "The Western New York community and people from around the country have been
extremely generous and supportive in helping the Hunter's Hope Foundation raise
over $ 2.5 million in less than two years," said Jill Kelly, founder and chief
executive officer of the foundation.

   "We are so happy we can finally put that money into research so scientists
can get to work in finding a cure for this painful, fatal disease," she said.

   Mrs. Kelly and her husband, former Buffalo Bills quarterback Jim Kelly,
formed the foundation in 1997 to raise awareness about Krabbe's after the birth
of their son Hunter, who suffers from the inherited degenerative disorder that
affects the brain, spinal cord and nerves. No cure is known.

   The grants, which were selected by a 12-member scientific advisory board,
went to Tulane University, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Washington University, New York University School of Medicine, University of
Kansas Medical Center Research Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, the
Myelin Project and Women's & Children's Hospital of North Adelaide, Australia.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1999


                             1435 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             July 30, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: OSU ANTIBIOTIC TRIAL AIMED AT DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   Whether an antibiotic commonly prescribed for bacterial infections could help
some children fight off muscular dystrophy will be tested this year at Ohio
State University Medical Center.

   "It's a novel approach for a clinical trial,'' Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of
OSU's Department of Neurology, said yesterday. "Gentamicin (the antibiotic) has
been used before to treat infections but not for regulation of genetic
defects.''

   The gentamicin trial is one of two expected to start this year to test gene
therapies for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a form of the disease that affects
only boys.

   A genetic defect keeps the body from producing the protein dystrophin,
essential for muscle function. Without it, muscles deteriorate and death can
come by age 20.

   Animal tests at the University of Pennsylvania show that gentamicin might
stimulate the protein production in those Duchenne patients determined to have a
specific genetic flaw called a "premature stop codon.'' The flaw is found in
about 15 percent of cases, according to the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

   Protein production was increased, and disease symptoms reversed in mice with
the same flaw, according to the association.

   The antibiotic could help thousands of youngsters with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy and possibly prove effective in dealing with other neuromuscular
diseases, said Dr. Leon Charash, chairman of the Muscular Dystrophy
Association's medical advisory committee. The association supports the research.

   The mouse model was developed a decade ago, but this will be the first trial
of gentamicin in humans, Mendell said. He cautioned that therapies that work in
mice often don't work in humans.

   Gentamicin is a powerful antibiotic that can cause permanent deafness and
kidney damage. For that reason, researchers at the University of Pennsylvania
and OSU are warning that the drug not be prescribed for muscular dystrophy and
other genetic diseases until trials are completed, and the drug is approved for
this use.

   Gentamicin's approved use as an antibiotic could speed its review for use
with muscular dystrophy patients if results of the human trials are promising,
Mendell said.

   In a separate but related trial at OSU, Mendell said he wants to determine
the safety of a virus developed at the University of Michigan as a gene-delivery
system. The gene is either missing or flawed in boys who develop Duchenne or
Becker's muscular dystrophy.

   This form of gene therapy would be targeted at the majority of Duchenne cases
where the premature stop codon flaw is not a factor.

   The OSU trials, Mendell said, could benefit all those with the Duchenne form
of the disease. It strikes about one in 3,500 boys.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1999


                             1436 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 27, 1999, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 709 words

HEADLINE: Center to offer cell-and-gene therapy here;
New treatment option expected to become the future of medicine

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

   Three Houston medical institutions have created the world's first center for
cell-and-gene therapy, a treatment option that is expected to become the future
of medicine.

   The center - a partnership teaming Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children's Hospital and Methodist Hospital - will use new knowledge about the
molecular basis of disease to revolutionize therapy for illnesses from cancer
and AIDS to cardiovascular disease and diabetes. The start-up cost is estimated
at $ 30 million.

   "Centers like this will be at the forefront of a coming shift in the way
disease is treated," said Dr. Malcolm Brenner, director of the center. "Not
tomorrow, not 5 years from now, but 20 years from now, medicine won't be
something you take in a bottle. It will be like surgery was going to be 50 years
ago."

   The center was established in January 1998 but formally launched Monday, a
couple weeks before the opening of a state-of-the-art, 25,000-square-foot,
15-bed inpatient adult stem-cell transplant unit at Methodist. Texas Children's
Hospital is currently constructing a similar unit that will be another part of
the center.

   Cell-and-gene therapy, simply defined, is the placement of beneficial genes
or cells into patient cells. Much heralded in the early 1990s, then stalled by
scientific setbacks, it is finally starting to live up to its promise, thanks
mostly to the Human Genome Project, the mammoth effort to locate and sequence
all 100,000 genes on the 46 human chromosomes. Baylor is currently sharing an $
80 million grant to complete the genome project.

   Gene therapy is ultimately expected to be used on embryos, first to prevent
disease, later to enhance physical or mental characteristics. But Brenner said
that although such controversial work with embryos will happen, "at this stage"
he doesn't plan to pioneer such treatment.

   The center will combine basic science and clinical research with
comprehensive pediatric and adult cell-and-gene therapy transplant units. During
the first five years, said Brenner, the focus will be on cancer therapy - bone
marrow transplants - and AIDS protocols. In the next 10 years, added Brenner,
treatment will move on to central nervous system disorders like Parkinson's and
multiple sclerosis, where progress will likely come more slowly.

   Brenner said he envisions cell-and-gene therapy as treatment options to
complement, but not replace, surgery, pharmaceuticals and radiation. He said
these therapies might initially draw patients who have exhausted other forms of
treatment, but ultimately will be best used as preventive medicine.

   Brenner currently supervises a staff of 20 clinical and research faculty
members. Over the next five years, plans call for adding 30 more faculty and 300
support staff.

   Facilities housed at the International Center for Cell and Gene Therapy are
the Pediatric Bone Marrow and Stem Cell Transplant Unit, the Gene Vector
Laboratory, the Transitional Research Laboratory, the Cell and Molecular Therapy
Laboratories, the Flow Cytometry Core Laboratories and the Shell Center for Gene
Therapy.

   Examples of possible cell-and-gene therapy include research on the ability of
stem cells to regenerate and change function, said Dr. Helen Heslop, director of
the adult stem-cell program at Methodist. Given the right circumstances, she
said they may be used for brain or muscle cells, thus holding promise in the
treatment of muscular dystrophy or degenerative multiple sclerosis.

   Heslop said another promising treatment is the development of a gene that
would block HIV at an early stage. Aimed at stopping HIV patients from getting
AIDS symptoms, it will likely be brought into clinical practice in the next
couple years, she said.

   But Heslop, Brenner and other leaders stressed that the center, like all of
medicine, will advance by tiny steps, not giant breakthroughs. They also said
the flow of steady progress will justify the early 1990s hype.

   "I've been thinking of something like this for a long time," said Dr. Ralph
Feigin, president and chief executive officer of Baylor. "I hope in 20 years
it's known not only for treating patients in new ways, but also for training
people who export this knowledge, so patients around the world can benefit."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1999


                             1437 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                 July 27, 1999, Tuesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
 AMGEN SAYS COURT PROCEEDINGS OVER EPOGEN WILL RESUME IN APRIL

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Amgen Inc. said court proceedings will resume in April 2000 in a patent
dispute with fledgling biotech company Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. over Amgen's
top-selling anemia drug erythropoietin.

   The battle pits Amgen, the world's No. 1 biotechnology company based in
Thousand Oaks, against Transkaryotic, a money-losing biotech company based in
Cambridge, Mass., and its development partner, No. 1 German drugmaker Hoechst
AG.

   The trial is to decide whether Transkaryotic and Hoechst can sell an anemia
drug that would rival Amgen's erythropoietin, or EPO.

   The drug, which is sold by Amgen under the brand name Epogen and by Johnson &
Johnson as Procrit, has annual sales that analysts estimate to be about $ 4
billion, making it the world's best-selling bioengineered treatment.

   Both sides said they expect to prevail in the high-profile proceeding, which
has cast a cloud over Amgen's stock. Amgen shares fell 7% June 10 after
Transkaryotic last month said it would reopen the long-running dispute over
Amgen's top-selling product, whose sales accounted for more than half of the
company's 1998 revenue.

   Amgen also announced Monday that U.S. regulators could require it to conduct
large-scale tests on an experimental arthritis drug, correcting a July 12 press
release.

   The company said it corrected the release at the request of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration to make it clear that the FDA has the right to ask it to
conduct another round of tests before it accepts Amgen's application to market
its IL-1ra drug as a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis.

   Amgen shares soared 9.1% July 13 after the company reported
better-than-forecast second-quarter earnings and surprised investors by saying
it plans to file for approval of the arthritis drug by year-end, about two years
faster than expected.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1999


                             1438 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 26, 1999, Monday ,City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: Path of Zionist zeal leads to the top;
Pittsfield woman sees youth as key for Hadassah

BYLINE: By Jordana Hart, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Bonnie Lipton has been in Washington, D.C., all week preparing the speech she
will make tomorrow when she becomes the 22d president of Hadassah, the country's
largest women's organization and a leading Jewish and Zionist force globally.

    Modestly and with dedication, the Pittsfield woman long ago set upon a path
that would propel her into the ranks of Jewish leadership - always with an eye
toward her beloved Israel.

    Since her first visit to Israel in 1975 to witness Hadassah rededicate its
hospital on Jerusalem's Mount Scopus, "there was never any question that I was
going to direct all my energies to Hadassah. This is a way of life for me," she
said.

    As she prepares to guide the organization, founded in 1912 by a rabbi's
daughter to bring health care to Palestine, Lipton knows where her energies must
now lie: She wants to find ways to attract younger women, to modernize an
organization many young people associate with their mothers and grandmothers.

    And she must untie another knot: Given Israel's relative security and
prosperity now, many younger Jews may not feel the urgency of Zionism - her
group's fundamental mission - that older Jews recall from living through a
violent and tumultuous century. Zionism is a movement founded in 1879 to
establish and keep a Jewish homeland in what was Palestine, now Israel.

    Finally, Lipton wants to raise the image of volunteerism into something more
"respectable," vibrant, and gratifying.

    Hadassah has 306,000 members, up from 300,000 in 1995 but down from 350,000
in the 1980s, said spokeswoman Roberta Elliott. Comedian Sandra Bernhard is a
member, as are several congresswomen.

    But more than half the membership is older than 61, and 20 percent is over
75.

    "There is nothing wrong with being in your mother's or grandmother's
organization," Lipton said. "We have been around almost 88 years. There is
tradition, there is history. A path has been carved by members and great
leaders. It is very exciting."

    In Hadassah, young women join study groups to learn more about Zionism,
Judaism, US politics, and Israel. But the organization's greatest effort lies
with something Lipton says brings every Jewish woman back to her roots: seeing
Israel.

    "Israel is central to the Jewish people," said Susan Offit, 37, a member of
the Boston-area Hadassah chapter for 12 years. "This is for Jewish women my age.
They are smart, they care about Israel and the US, they care about each other.
Hadassah is not about older women; it's about Jewish women."

    Of the 5,000 Boston-area members, 2,000 are under age 45 and are active in
14 different groups. They include lawyers, mothers with toddlers, social
workers, and singles.

    In choosing a busy and public devotion to Judaism and Israel, Lipton did not
count on the recent personal tests of her character.

    On Jan. 11, 1998, Alan Lipton, whom she married almost 40 years ago, had a
serious skiing accident at Jiminy Peak in Western Massachusetts. Five months
earlier, Lipton had been told she had breast cancer.

    Alan Lipton, 59, survived but sustained severe brain damage. He lives in a
nursing home in his native Pittsfield, where the family still has a home, unable
to take care of himself or remember much.

    About her illness, she would only say that she was treated for it.

    Bonnie Lipton, also 59, travels four hours to Pittsfield from her Manhattan
office every weekend to be with her husband. The couple has two daughters, ages
30 and 35.

    "My husband's fate is in God's hands," she said simply, in a recent
interview from Washington. "He told me, 'My heart is with you,' and he said he
is proud of me. But I don't know how much he understands."

    Lipton was born and raised in a Jewish neighborhood of Chicago to liberal
parents and orthodox grandparents.

    As did many Jewish parents of that generation, her elders spoke Yiddish but
never passed it on to her. She met her husband at Purdue University in Indiana
in the late 1950s, where she studied English, Spanish, and history.

    Soul mates from the start, the couple were Jewish activists. She succeeded
him as president of three Jewish organizations, including the Hillel Foundation,
a university campus group. And together, they presided over the school's United
Jewish Appeal, which raises money for Jewish causes.

    They married in 1960. His mother gave her a $100 lifetime membership to
Hadassah - which costs $250 now. Lipton became active in the group when she
moved with her husband in 1971 to Pittsfield, where his family ran a steel and
used-machinery business. She became the Pittsfield chapter president in 1974.

    Lipton has been one of the group's leading fund-raisers - helping to bring
in more than $100 million last year. She had been chairman of the Hadassah
Medical Organization.

    As part of its four-day annual convention this week, Hadassah plans to give
Hillary Rodham Clinton an award for her work with children and families.

    Hadassah, Hebrew for Esther, was founded in New York by Henrietta Szold, the
daughter of a Baltimore rabbi. The group did its work in Palestine - founding
hospitals, bringing quinine to sick workers in the mosquito-ridden Huleh Valley,
and providing pasteurized milk as part of a program called called Tipat Halav
("a drop of milk" in Hebrew) for babies. Szold died in Palestine in 1948 just
before the state was founded that year.

    Szold wanted to name the group after a Jewish heroine who had done something
important for her people, so it was named after Queen Esther, who saved the Jews
in Persia.

    Hadassah's original work in health care has brought it a long way. It now
runs two hospitals, in Jerusalem and Ein Kerem, which include a two-year-old
pediatric and maternity pavilion, a new gene therapy center, and a burn center.

    The group also helped establish and now codirects a medical school at Hebrew
University.

    Lipton hopes these vivid signs of the group's work will persuade more
younger women to join.

    "Our projects are Zionism in action," she said. "We are still directly
responsible for having an impact on the quality of life in Israel.

    "This makes Zionism as relevant today as it was when Henrietta Szold started
out," she said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE PHOTO/STEVE RUBIN/Bonnie Lipton (left) is set to become
the 22d president of Hadassah.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1999


                             1439 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                July 26, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       July 26, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 2F

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: GENE-ASSIST DRUGS MAY HELP CONTROL CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Every day for a week, Dannon Baker swallowed a little white pill as part of
an experiment to see if a new type of therapy will finally attack the cause of
deadly cystic fibrosis rather than just treat its symptoms.

   Studies of three drugs called "gene-assist therapies" are in their early
stages, experts caution. But, if they work, Baker and other patients could
expect more normal lives by using a daily medicine to control a genetic defect
that causes cystic fibrosis.

   "This is a great time," says Dr. Pamela Zeitlin of Johns Hopkins University,
which is testing two of the gene-assist drugs. "None of these drugs are cures -
they would have to be continually taken. But it's a very good idea."

   That promise led the 24-year-old Baker to volunteer for the study of one drug
candidate, a relative of caffeine called CPX.

   "Obviously, taking a medicine for a week isn't going to change my life," said
the Atlanta woman, who, like the scientists, will not learn the study's results
until fall. "But down the road, it might."

   Cystic fibrosis afflicts about 30,000 American children and young adults. The
disease attacks patients' lungs with a thick mucus and most die from lung damage
or infection. Cystic fibrosis also harms digestion and vitamin absorption by
clogging other organs, and causes patients to excrete high levels of salt
through sweat.

   Treatments to fight lung infections and improve nutrition have improved care
dramatically. But they treat only symptoms.

   In the majority of patients, cystic fibrosis' damage stems from a single
genetic defect: It skews a protein called CFTR that is responsible for balancing
the salt content of cells lining the lungs and certain other organs.

   CFTR is supposed to travel to a cell's surface to create openings, or
channels, for chloride ions to exit the cell. But if CFTR is mutated, it dies
before ever reaching the surface, so chloride cannot escape. The chloride then
mixes with sodium inside cells and a resulting salt buildup prompts the
dangerous mucus formation.

   Gene-assist drugs would circumvent this, not by curing the genetic defect but
by helping the mutated protein work more normally.

   CPX, the candidate furthest in testing, "provides eyeglasses and a cane to
help [the mutated protein] find its way through the cell and do its work," said
Dr. Harvey Pollard, who discovered the drug while at the National Institutes of
Health. Although the drug is related to caffeine, caffeine itself does not help
cystic fibrosis, he said.

   Clinical trials are under way to find out whether the drug works in patients
the way it did in Pollard's laboratory. Test results are expected in several
months.

   There are two other possible gene-assist drugs in earlier clinical trials,
phenylbutyrate, a drug that also helps chaperone mutated CFTR to the cell
surface, and Duramycin, which also may help cystic fibrosis, allowing chloride
to escape cells by a different route so it does not need the mutated CFTR.
First-stage testing of an inhaled version is to begin this fall, Zeitlin said.

   Scientists hope gene therapy to correct the cystic fibrosis defect might
eventually cure the disease, but progress is slow. That is why doctors are
anxiously watching this new gene-assist therapy.

   "While we're waiting around for gene therapy ... we have got to do
something," Pollard said. "This is something that could actually work."

GRAPHIC: CHART: NEW HOPE FOR CYCTIC FIBROSIS TREATMENT; SOURCE: JOHN HOPKINS
UNIVERSITY; GRAPHICS BY: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1999


                             1440 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 25, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Los Angeles Times Magazine; Page 28; Times Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2052 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL MILLENNIUM ISSUE / SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY;
 CUTTING EDGE / FRONTIERS: FOUR FIELDSS THAT HAVE BEEN SHAPED BY, AND ARE
SHAPING, SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA;
 BIOTECHNOLOGY;
 DEVELOPMENTS IN GENETIC ENGINEERING CONTINUE AT A BLISTERING PACE. SOME CHEER
RESEARCHERS ON; OTHERS WOULD SLAM ON THE BRAKES.

BYLINE: PAUL JACOBS, Paul Jacobs is a Times staff writer who covers
biotechnology

BODY:


   We're almost 50 years into the biotechnology age and scientists still can't
keep a lid on their enthusiasm. Why should they? Why should anyone? The newfound
ability to decipher and manipulate genes, spurred by the promise of profits, has
already resulted in developments that startle: Bacteria produce human insulin
and other hormones; soybeans grow antibodies to the herpes virus; sheep produce
milk rich in blood-clotting proteins; crops contain their own pesticides.

   There are 79 biotech drugs on the market, and hundreds more in various stages
of testing--a fleet of battleships being readied to head off forces already
beginning to kill and maim an aging baby boom generation: cancer, heart disease,
and brain disorders such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. In the blooming field
of agricultural biotech, researchers are working on a second wave of genetically
engineered crops, enriched with vitamins, proteins and heart-friendly fats.
Moreover, it no longer seems farfetched to suggest that we'll soon test
routinely for hundreds of genetic defects and then fix the problem with the
genetic equivalent of duct tape: gene splicing. Researchers are injecting raw
genes into damaged heart muscle to reverse the effects of heart attacks and
transplanting rejuvenated brain cells to replace defective circuitry. There is
even talk of attacking aging itself, with enzymes to turn back that ever-ticking
biological clock.

   So why, as we tip over the edge of the next millennium, do some practitioners
of the new science apologize--cooling their zeal with a breath of caution? Why
do environmentalists talk of Frankencrops and Frankenfoods, and ethicists fret
over efforts to smooth away human variability?


   *

   Don't talk to Bryon Vouga, 30, about the importance of the biotech
revolution. The Anaheim Hills high school teacher found out that his kidneys
were failing at age 16, when he flunked a high school sports physical. Soon he
was one of 200,000 Americans who keep themselves alive by using dialysis to
remove impurities from their blood. Like most dialysis patients, Vouga also was
anemic because his kidneys did not produce enough of a hormone called
erythropoietin, which stimulates the growth of red blood cells. He was so
anemic, he recalls, that he'd drive his truck to Fullerton Community College,
then snooze under the camper shell and miss all of his classes.

   His life changed in 1989, when Amgen, the Thousand Oaks biotech company,
began mass-producing a genetically engineered hormone under the brand name
Epogen. Vouga's still on dialysis, after two unsuccessful kidney transplants and
while waiting for a third. But he's now also an avid bicyclist. Last month he
took off from Huntington Beach, heading for Jacksonville, Fla., on a 2,700-mile
journey sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation, with the backing of Amgen.
If all goes well, he'll be finishing about now, after stopping three times a
week for his regular dialysis.


   *

   The age of biotech was not born like the nuclear era, in a flash of light
followed by a mushroom cloud over a shaking desert. It began with a pair of
junior researchers working in a lab in England in the early 1950s. There, in a
brilliant flash of intellectual light, Englishman Francis Crick and American
James Watson figured out the structure of DNA, a long, thread-like molecule
already shown to be the chemical of heredity, the instruction manual for most
living things.

   "There's no question that the discovery set the stage for everything that has
happened over the next 50 years," says Caltech President David Baltimore, whose
own biotech research won a Nobel Prize. "That discovery came out of the blue. It
wasn't one of those things where there was lots of incremental progress."

   Watson and Crick discovered not just the architecture of a pretty
molecule--the spiraling staircase of the renowned double-helix--but that the
structure explained how heredity worked on a molecular level, how the DNA copies
itself over and over as cells multiply.

   It took from 1961 to 1965 to crack the genetic code, recalls Marshall
Nirenberg, chief of the laboratory of biochemical genetics at the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and one of dozens of scientists who owe their
Nobel prizes to work on genes. He and others figured out that the chemical
building blocks in DNA (adenosine, thymine, guanine and cytosine--identified as
the letters A, T, G and C) were arranged in three-letter "words" along the
length of the molecule, and that each word identified an amino acid to be moved
into place to form proteins, like adding so many beads to a string. "It became
really obvious to me that you could program cells," said Nirenberg. Place
fragments of DNA into them, "and the cells will follow the instructions," he
says.

   Over the next decade, scientists at Stanford University and UC San Francisco
found ways of doing just that: genetic engineering. It allowed production of
human hormones like Epogen in fast-growing animal or bacterial cells.
Deciphering the DNA of disease-causing microbes led to the discovery of new
targets for antibiotics and new sorts of vaccines. Decoding the DNA of tumor
cells revealed defective genes responsible for the uncontrolled growth that is
cancer. At least in theory, it seemed, damaged and mutated genes could be
replaced with healthy ones, a process called gene therapy.

   It sounded easy. USC's Dr. W. French Anderson knows better. He's spent a
distinguished career preparing for the day when he can pluck a healthy gene from
one individual and then slip millions of copies into the cells of someone
suffering from a hereditary disease. In 1990, while at the National Institutes
of Health in Maryland, Anderson was part of a team that made the first serious
attempt to do just that. The patients were girls, age 4 and 9, suffering from a
rare genetic disorder that left them helpless to fight off infection. The
researchers removed white cells from the children, then treated the cells with a
healthy gene that makes their missing enzyme, ADA.

   Nine years later both are still alive and living normal lives. But Anderson
cannot say to what extent that is due to the gene therapy or to drug treatments
to supply the enzyme.

   A year ago, in a thoughtful review of 300 gene therapy experiments in 3,000
patients, Anderson concluded: "Except for anecdotal reports of individual
patients being helped, there is still no conclusive evidence that a gene-therapy
protocol has been successful in the treatment of a human disease." Talk to him,
though, and he flashes the passionate certitude of a scientific evangelist:
"There's no doubt that gene therapy will revolutionize medicine over the next
quarter century."


   *

   About one in every 2,500 caucasian children will be born with cystic
fibrosis, making it one of the most common inherited diseases. Researchers
discovered the gene responsible for this disease just a decade ago. Those who
carry a single copy of it have no symptoms. It's only when each parent is a
carrier that there's a chance--one out of four--that a baby will be born with
the disorder. Dr. Wayne Grody, professor of medical genetics at UCLA, conducted
one of the first mass screenings to identify carriers. He and a colleague gently
brushed cells from the inside of the cheeks of 3,000 pregnant volunteers at UCLA
and Kaiser Permanente clinics. Using techniques for multiplying and checking the
women's DNA, the team identified 55 carriers among the women, but only one case
in which both expectant parents carried the genetic defect. For reasons not yet
understood, not all children born with defective cystic fibrosis genes develop
the full-blown symptoms. Yet when the couple learned that their fetus had two
defective genes, the woman terminated her pregnancy. Grody believes that test
and that option will soon be available to all women.

   Dr. Leroy Hood talks about the day when doctors will check their patients'
genetic makeup as routinely as they reach for a thermometer. The University of
Washington researcher's work is at the core of biotech's transformation of
medicine. In the 1980s, while at Caltech, he and colleagues developed a
high-speed method for determining the order of the letters that represent the
chemical building blocks of DNA. To read out the 3 billion letters contained in
a normal set of human chromosomes, even scanning at 10 letters a second, would
take 10 years. But machines developed by Applied Biosystems, a company that Hood
helped establish, zip through the job.

   By the year 2003, the federally sponsored Human Genome Project expects to
finish a careful reading out of human DNA, with information on up to 100,000
genes--all but a few totally unknown today. Private companies say they will do
it even sooner. "In 10, 15, 20 years, we'll know between 100 and 200 genes that
cause many of the common diseases," Hood says. DNA "fingerprints" will be used
to project a person's health.

   organic farmers for decades have sprayed their fields with a bacterium,
Bacillus thuringiensis, or Bt, a microbe that produces natural pesticides. After
identifying the genes that produce the toxins, scientists began splicing them
into the crops, giving the genetically engineered plants an internal pesticide
supply. Quietly, these and other genetically modified plants have displaced
conventional ones, accounting for 50% of all soybeans in the United States this
year and 30% of corn.

   One of the first companies to put Bt into a crop and market the seeds was
Mycogen, a San Diego firm now part of Dow Chemical. The former CEO and chairman
of Mycogen, Jerry Caulder, remembers reading environmentalist Rachel Carson's
classic warning on the hazards of pesticide pollution. He says his company's
early use of the Bt genes was an alternative to that scourge. Such efforts were
crude compared to a second wave of biotech plants under development. "We want to
use the plant's own natural defenses rather than an exotic gene like Bt," says
Caulder, who heads Akkadix, a new, privately held biotech company.

   Soon, he and others say, there will be crops that thrive on less fertilizer
and water. And plants that produce oils with more of the good lipids that
promote a healthy heart. And plants engineered to produce industrial chemicals,
fibers and pharmaceuticals. "Why not produce silk in soybeans?" asks Caulder.


   *

   Some worry about the accelerating pace of biotech discovery. Bacteria that
produce human insulin are fermented in carefully contained factories. But the
Sierra Club's executive director, Carl Pope, is among those who have sounded
alarms about genetically modified plants, which take root wherever their seeds
happen to land. Will they spread unchecked like weeds across the landscape, or
worse still, transfer pesticide resistance to create new breeds of superweeds
that will choke out desirable plants? And what about eating foods that contain
their own engineered pesticides? So far, U.S. consumers seem unperturbed, but
many Europeans are wary of eating genetically modified foods, and several large
supermarket chains have raced to get them off grocery shelves.

   Ethicists are repulsed by other possibilities for genetic manipulation. Two
years ago, Scottish scientists revealed they had cloned the first mammal--taking
the DNA from an adult sheep and creating "Dolly." Suddenly, human
cloning--picture those Hitler clones in "The Boys From Brazil"--seemed entirely
feasible. Also troublesome is the recent work using "stem cells" generated from
human embryos and fetuses to refurbish damaged hearts and brains.

   More modest applications of the new technology have ethical implications as
well. Human growth hormone is useful in treating children whose own bodies don't
produce enough. But what do you say to parents who see an advantage to their
child's being two or three inches taller? Epogen has already been used--misused,
many say--to boost the red blood cell count, and thus the energy, of competitive
cyclists. And what about new drugs that might help someone think more clearly?
Says Alexander M. Capron, co-director of USC's Pacific Center for Health Policy
and Ethics: "One person's correction is another person's enhancement."

   And the biotech revolution isn't giving us much time to weigh these issues.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No caption) / TOM WHITE

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1999


                             1441 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 25, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Los Angeles Times Magazine; Page 18; Times Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4864 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL MILLENNIUM ISSUE / SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY;
 HEAVY HITTERS;
 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S ALL STARS;
 SOME OF THE CENTURY'S MOST BRILLIANT INNOVATORS WERE AT THE TOP OF THEIR GAME
ON SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PLAYING FIELDS. HERE'S OUR LIST
OF THE TOP 20--AND SOME MAJOR CONTENDERS.

BYLINE: ROBERT LEE HOTZ, Times Science Writer

BODY:


   List-making by any measure is an imperfect art, not even remotely akin to
science. Times editors and science writers compiled the brain trust before you
from an initial tally of 100 key innovators who had done a substantial part of
their work in Southern California--and not even winning a Nobel prize guaranteed
making this A-list of 20 of the century's most influential scientists and
engineers.

   Freelance writer-researcher Joel Grossman diligently compiled these
mini-biographies of people who, by general consensus, had the greatest impact on
their fields and our world. No doubt the prominent omissions will evoke gasps.
Like science itself, this list is the product of an argument about the essence
of the world we inhabit, which is continually revised as new information leads
to new insights.

   It must be noted that we faced a dilemma in presenting this list--essentially
a dilemma of the century itself. It is one that also confronted planners at the
California Science Center, where you will not find any tribute to the state's 51
Nobel-winning scientists. If their portraits were on display, the faces--like
those that follow--would be almost exclusively male and overwhelmingly
white--not the most inclusive signal that a center seeking to inspire careers in
science should send to the diverse thousands of youngsters who throng its halls
every school day.

   The face of 21st century science will be dramatically different. It is a
transformation already well underway--to everyone's benefit. One measure of this
century's social journey is that today's concerns over race and gender have
largely set aside the divisions of nationality, religion, class and political
belief that formed such formidable barriers for many of these earlier
immigrants, refugees and outsiders.

   If California can be considered a state of mind, the pioneers before you
deserve the highest place of honor in its meritocracy. These researchers and
engineers have done as much as any group anywhere to create the world we will
inhabit in the 21st century.

   CHEMISTRY

   Donald Cram

   Born April 22, 1919, Chester, Vt.

   Grew up poor, swapping 50 hours of lawn mowing for an hour of dentistry after
his father died. Progressed from one-room schools to biscuit salesman making
rounds in Harlem and New York's tough East Side before pursuing chemical
research.

   Shortly after obtaining Harvard PhD in 1947, settled into current niche as
UCLA chemistry professor. After two decades studying carbon reactions important
to living organisms, got bored and started new field he called "host-guest
chemistry." Basically, he became a designer of new molecules that fit targets so
perfectly like lock-and-key fit of enzymes that they function as highly
sensitive sensors, electrodes and molecular traps. Called supermolecules by
some, Cram's crown-shaped ethers were singled out in 1987 Nobel award for being
sensitive enough to distinguish mirror-image amino acid molecules.

   Along with career came two marriages, lots of surfing and much
self-searching. When not at the lab bench, Crambo, as he is known to his surfing
buddies, is just another guitar-playing dude on San Onofre's Old Man's Beach.


   *

   George Olah

   Born May 22, 1927, Budapest, Hungary.

   After 1956 Hungarian revolt, he fled homeland with most of research group and
two cardboard boxes of worldly possessions. First stop London, where wife had
relatives. Then Canada, where mother-in-law lived. Found job improving Dow
Chemical's plastic-making processes.

   A 12-year professorial stint in Cleveland, Ohio, led him and 15 research
group members to USC in 1977. USC built the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute
so Olah could create stable carbocations positively charged hydrocarbons using
"superacids" zillions of times stronger than 100% sulfuric and hydrochloric
acids. Previously, carbocations existed only in theory as ephemeral transition
states, disappearing in micro- or nanoseconds without a trace.

   Olah won 1994 Nobel for creating the first carbocations stable enough to
study, a breakthrough leading to practical benefits like higher-octane gasoline
and a zero-emission methanol fuel cell. Has two sons and wife, Judy, who knew
him from childhood and studied chemistry to work alongside him. In his
autobiography, Olah admits that his wife sometimes laments his apparent belief
that "there is little in life outside chemistry."


   *

   Ahmed Zewail

   Born Feb. 26, 1946, Alexandria, Egypt.

   Graduated from Egypt's Alexandria University, earned PhD at University of
Pennsylvania, then two-year UC Berkeley fellowship before 1976 acceptance of
professorship at Caltech, where he currently is first occupant of the Linus
Pauling chemical physics chair. Pioneered field known as femtochemistry, using
lasers as strobes to see molecular behavior at super-fast femtosecond time scale
of atomic vibration. Femtochemistry is like having a camera film a million
frames every billionth of a second, or 100 trillion frames in the blink of an
eye.

   In 1987, Zewail's team was first to directly observe what are known as
transition states, the fleeting femtosecond conformations of molecules rotating
and vibrating as atomic bonds break and form. Besides helping understand basic
biological processes like photosynthesis, femtochemistry has the potential to
make the chemical industry more efficient by allowing precise control of product
yields. Zewail, a naturalized American citizen living in San Marino with his
wife, a UCLA physician, and four children, is perhaps better known in Egypt,
where presentation of the Order of Merit was a national television event.


   *

   LINUS PAULING

   Feb. 28 1901 - Aug. 19, 1994

   Married. Four children.

   Career highlights: The prolific Caltech professor's 25 years of electron
diffraction and X-raying of crystals unraveled the nature of chemical bonds and
molecular structure and earned him 1954 Nobel. His Tinker Toy-like paper models
revealed spiral-staircase shape of protein molecules, helping solve the
sickle-celled hemoglobin mystery.

   Turned down the Manhattan Project, but did work on explosives to defeat
Hitler. Later fought for world peace and an end to atmospheric nuclear testing.
Won 1963 Nobel Peace Prize. In 1964, moved to Santa Barbara's Center for the
Study of Democratic Institutions, then spent two years at UC San Diego before
going on to Stanford.

   DID YOU KNOW? Pauling, in last years, advocated Vitamin C for everything from
common cold and cancer.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   Paul Boyer: UCLA enzyme specialist who won Nobel for unraveling formation of
ATP, the universal cellular energy carrier.

   Walter Kohn: UC San Diego and UC Santa Barbara professor who won Nobel for
simplifying atomic bonding math for studying very large molecules.

   Richard Lerner: Pioneered using immune system to generate useful new
enzyme-like catalytic antibodies while at Scripps Research Institute in San
Diego.

   Rudolph Marcus: Caltech Nobelist for electron transfer theory.

   Stanley Miller: Pioneering work on primordial chemistry that led to early
life on Earth. Now at UC San Diego.

   K. C. Nicolaou: Scripps Research Institute organic chemist leads in
synthesizing "molecular mountains," complex natural molecules useful against
cancer, cholesterol and infections.

   Harold Urey: Nobelist discovered heavy hydrogen; later, at UC San Diego, he
studied origins of life.

   PHYSICS

   Murray Gell-Mann

   Born Sept. 15, 1929, New York City.

   Child prodigy. Learned to read at 3, entered Yale at 15, earned MIT PhD at
21. During three-year University of Chicago stint, formulated famous
"strangeness" concept, explained odd subatomic particle behavior and predicted
new subatomic particles.

   At 26, married and headed west to Caltech. Between birth of daughter and son
developed new algebraic methods to structure burgeoning subatomic "particle
zoo," and whimsically named system the "Eightfold Way," after Buddha's path.
Joyce's "Finnegans Wake" inspired his "quarks" moniker for ultimate building
blocks of matter. Quark-related quantum chromodynamics theory followed. Won
Nobel in 1969.

   Remarried in 1992 and moved to New Mexico's Santa Fe Institute. In a 1996
speech, he said he is "part of an ongoing effort by a number of theoretical
physicists to construct a modern interpretation of quantum mechanics, one that
is compatible with quantum cosmology and that explains, in a convincing way, how
the quasi-classical world of familiar experience emerges from the underlying
quantum universe."


   *

   J. Robert Oppenheimer

   Born April 22, 1904,

   New York City; died Feb. 18, 1967, Princeton, N.J.

   Graduated from New York's Ethical Culture School and Harvard University, then
co-developed "Born-Oppenheimer method" of molecular quantum mechanics and earned
PhD in Germany.

   In 1929 began 13-year professorship alternating semesters between UC Berkeley
and Caltech, where his theoretical physics classes attracted cultlike following.
Married in 1940 and had a son and daughter. Warm relationships with world's top
physicists and acclaimed high energy atomic research made him the man for top
government wartime bomb job.

   Assembled all-star cast of physicists for Manhattan Project, then headed new
Los Alamos lab near family ranch. On July 16, 1945, 21 days before Hiroshima,
first atomic bomb detonated at Alamogordo. When cheers of success stopped, amid
awesome silence and "radiance of a thousand suns," Bhagavad Gita line flashed
through Oppenheimer's mind: "I am become Death/The shatterer of worlds." In part
because of wife and brother's left-leaning interests, he was drummed out of
government work in 1953, at height of anti-Communist hysteria, for not
enthusiastically embracing the H-bomb.


   *

   Richard Feynman

   1918-1988

   3 marriages.  One son and one daughter.

   Career highlights: Co-published paper on cosmic rays as MIT undergrad. His
senior thesis on molecular forces became renowned as the "Feynman-Hellman
theorem." World War II led him to Los Alamos bomb project, where the boy wonder
bedeviled security forces by slipping through holes in the perimeter fence and
leaving mysterious notes in classified file cabinets.

   Headed to Caltech in 1950 and came up with theories of superfluidity and weak
interactions. Won a share of the 1965 Nobel Prize for expressing graphically the
theory of quantum electrodynamics, but ranked sketching beautiful women in the
buff right up there with solving tough physics equations.

   DID YOU KNOW?  He decorated his van, hippie-style, with physics graphics, and
eased tension playing the bongos.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   Carl Anderson: Caltech Nobelist discovered first antimatter and muon, an
unstable particle that exists in cosmic radiation in both negative and positive
forms.

   Maria Goeppert-Mayer: As a woman, she usually worked unpaid, but while at UC
San Diego won Nobel for nuclear shell structure theory.

   Theodore Maiman: L.A. resident best known for building first laser at Hughes.

   Robert Millikan: Physics Nobelist who, as Caltech president, helped create
JPL and turn school into world-class science institution.

   Frederick Reines: UC Irvine Nobelist who confirmed neutrino existence.

   Kip Thorne: Caltech theoretical physicist known for gravitational theory and
black holes.

   EARTH SCIENCES

   Jacob Bjerknes

   Born Nov. 2, 1897, Stockholm, Sweden; died July 7, 1975, Los Angeles.

   Son of Vilhelm Bjerknes, Norwegian theoretical physicist and meteorologist
with whom he collaborated as part of "Bergen School" studying weather in Norway
during World War I. Helped develop modern idea of air masses, the cold and warm
fronts and "squall lines" now a staple of newspaper and TV weather maps. Named
fronts after wartime battle lines, with clashing polar and tropical air masses
giving rise to instabilities and low pressure centers producing storms. Work was
mathematical and gave rise to modern storm theory and weather forecasting.

   Bjerknes was on 1939-40 U.S. lecture tour with wife during World War II when
Germans overran Norway. Accepted UCLA offer to stay and start meteorology
department, which helped aviators deal with upper air masses and trained
military weather forecasters. In 1944, finalized cyclone theory showing
relationship of upper and lower air masses, which in 1950s became basis for
first accurate computer-assisted weather forecast. Also among first to use
rocket data and space satellite photos to forecast weather. In 1960s, discovered
how Pacific Ocean temperatures along equator influence global winds and change
climate, what we now call El Nino.


   *

   Arie Haagen-Smit

   Born Dec. 22, 1900, Utrecht, Holland; died March 18, 1977, Pasadena.

   Grew up in Holland rowing the canals and playing hide-and-seek among gold and
silver bars at the Royal Mint, where father was chief chemist. Champion boxer,
excelled in natural products chemistry, isolated plant growth hormone auxin and
discovered synthetic growth regulators popular in agriculture.

   Lured to Caltech in 1937 as expert in then-new field of biochemistry to work
on traumatic acid, a plant wound hormone. Research on turpentine helped paint
industry, and studying desert plant oils provided excuse for camping trips with
wife and three daughters. Also liked long Sierra Club river trips, nature
photography and growing orchids.

   When postwar Los Angeles complained of burning eyes and difficult breathing
during haze, he used equipment developed to analyze pineapple flavors to liquefy
smog chemicals in air. Oil and automobile industries fought his conclusions
about smog origins, but eventually gave in to persistent scientific crusade and
began to clean up their act. In 1968, he left the lab to take up smog-busting
when Gov. Reagan appointed him the first chairman of state Air Resources Board.
Died of lung cancer.


   *

   F. Sherwood Rowland

   Born June 28, 1927, Delaware, Ohio.

   Upon 1946 Navy discharge, hitchhiked from San Pedro to Ohio via Yosemite and
Yellowstone to finish college and play semipro baseball. In 1952 married wife
Joan and earned PhD in chemistry by studying radioactive isotopes at University
of Chicago under Nobelist Willard Libby. Son and daughter born during four years
teaching at Princeton, then eight years of University of Kansas "hot atom"
tracer chemistry.

   Became chemistry department chairman at new UC Irvine campus in 1964.
Intrigued by atmospheric buildup of manmade chlorofluorocarbons CFCs on 1970s
scientific cruise to Antarctica, investigated atmospheric chemistry with
postgrad student Mario Molina, who shared 1995 Nobel. They quickly calculated
that the million annual tons of CFC production could destroy the stratospheric
ozone layer, allowing unhealthful ultraviolet light levels to reach Earth's
surface. With kids grown and wife Joan along, embarked on two-decade crusade of
heavy travel to get word out on ozone hole and remove CFCs from aerosol cans,
air conditioners and refrigerators. One result is U.N.'s Montreal Protocol
phaseouts, which should lead to 100-year ozone layer healing period.


   *

   Charles Ricther

   April 26, 1900 - Sept. 30, 1985

   Married. No children.

   career highlights: A theoretical physicist best known for working with Beno
Gutenberg in 1935 to develop the Richter scale, prior to which there was no
absolute measure for studying earthquake intensities.

   An obsessive student of earthquakes, he kept a seismograph in his living room
and learned Russian, Italian, Japanese and other languages to read about quakes.
He is credited with saving many lives in L.A. by suggesting building code
changes. He spurred the tracking of quake activity by helping create the
Southern California Seismic Array. His Caltech catalog of California earthquakes
is considered the most extensive history of the state's shakers ever completed.

   DID YOU KNOW? Richter was a nudist and a Trekkie who enjoyed solo hikes and
camping in the local mountains.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   Willard Libby: Nobelist developed carbon-14 method for dating relics, then
taught at UCLA.

   Martin Kamen: Libby's former student, he determined carbon-14's half-life;
now emeritus professor at USC.

   J. William Schopf: UCLA pioneer in study of early life, finding
3.5-billion-year-old fossilized microbes.

   AEROSPACE

   Kelly Johnson

   Born Feb. 27, 1910, Ishpeming, Mich.; died Dec. 21, 1990, Burbank.

   Lockheed career man began designing aviation tools in 1933, quickly becoming
chief research engineer. Solved Electra instability problem with signature
twin-tail arrangement. Created super-secret Skunk Works, a big-top tent that
trapped nearby plastics factory stink and turned out fastest, highest flying
planes in military history. Intuitively created total quality control, with
engineers, designers and machinists mingling on factory floor to solve problems,
coming in under budget, ahead of time and returning government contract money.

   A gruff man able to trouble-shoot almost any aeronautical problem. Widowed
twice and married three times, he turned out F-80 Shooting Star for Korean War,
Mach 2 twice the speed of sound F-104 Starfighter and Mach 3 Blackbird, to name
a few. Suffered stress headaches on difficult projects like high-flying U-2 spy
plane, but always knew whom to tap for solutions. A remarkable salesman, he
could sell Air Force on a plane before they knew they needed it.


   *

   Theodore von Karman

   Born May 11, 1881, Budapest, Hungary; died May 7, 1963, Aachen, Germany.

   Career launched in 1912 as director of new Aeronautical Institute at
Germany's University of Aachen. During World War I, helped Austro-Hungarian Air
Corps synchronize machine-gun fire with propeller rotation, but better known for
1911 discovery of Karman vortices, the forces later determined to have caused
the 1940 Tacoma Narrows bridge collapse.

   Lured to Caltech for first time in 1926 as wind tunnel consultant, but did
not leave Aachen permanently until 1930 to direct Caltech's Guggenheim
Aeronautical Laboratory. A bachelor who lived with mother and sister, he
introduced many new aeronautical concepts, including theories of structural
buckling and isotropic turbulence. Helped found JPL and was its first director.
Big in military consulting, particularly helping Air Force with long-term
planning, and in 1942 founded Aerojet-General Corp. to develop rocketry. Also
helped develop first supersonic airplane, the X-1. Besides role in making U.S.
world aerospace leader, was known for warmth, wit, easy approachability and
encouraging students, who were welcome in his home.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   Donald Douglas: Aircraft engineer and designer who founded company with his
name.

   Howard Hughes: Eccentric designer of Spruce Goose "flying boat" and other
one-of-a-kind aircraft who pioneered SoCal aircraft industry.

   Jack Northrop: Known for wing designs and company bearing his name.

   Simon Ramo: The R in TRW, he helped make U.S. a missile power.

   Burt Rutan: Talented designer's work found in aircraft and spacecraft large
and small.

   MEDICINE

   Jonas Salk

   Born Oct. 28, 1914, East Harlem, N.Y.; died June 23, 1995, La Jolla.

   Day after becoming MD in 1939, married first wife, with whom he had three
sons, then helped develop flu vaccine for U.S. Army. In 1947, headed to
University of Pittsburgh, where National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis
March of Dimes funded development of a vaccine reducing polio by a miraculous
95%. Scientific establishment, particularly lifelong vaccine rival Albert Sabin,
savaged Salk, even denying him membership in the National Academy of Sciences.

   Though a Rodney Dangerfield among scientists for doing applied work rather
than discovering new things, March of Dimes financial support and voters' land
gift led to 1963 opening of La Jolla's Salk Institute, which many call
foundation stone of San Diego's thriving biotech economy. Divorced in 1968, Salk
met artist and Picasso-companion Franoise Gilot in Paris in 1970, and was
remarried within days. Enjoyed private moments walking on the beach and
continued lab work, including research on an AIDS vaccine. Last idea was
combining 10 childhood disease vaccinations into one injection for use in Third
World countries.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   W. French Anderson: Gene therapy pioneer, now at USC.

   David Baltimore: Nobelist discovered how viruses cause cancer tumors; new
Caltech president.

   Gerald Edelman: Nobelist best known for immune system antibody work; at
Scripps Institute since 1992.

   Fred Gage: Neural regeneration research at UC San Diego and Salk Institute
aimed at spinal cord injuries, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's.

   Roger Guillemin: Pioneering Nobelist in brain hormone research; still active
at Salk Institute.

   Louis Ignarro: UCLA Nobelist uncovered role of nitric oxide in body, which
has many medical spinoffs.

   Roger Sperry: Caltech Nobelist for split-brain research emphasized importance
of nonverbal right brain thinking.

   Inder Verma: Salk Institute gene therapy leader.

   MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

   Francis Crick

   Born June 8, 1916, Northampton, England.

   World War II English weapons designer specializing in mines to destroy ships.
Postwar divorce with son, in 1949 married current wife, artist Odile Speed, with
whom he has two daughters. Met James Watson at Cambridge University in 1951. The
two shared what Crick termed "a certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness, and
an impatience with sloppy thinking." Collaborating, they discovered DNA double
helix structure--a seminal event in modern biology that won 1962 Nobel.
According to Watson's book on the breakthrough, Crick celebrated by loudly
announcing to a local pub that the two had just discovered "the secret of life."

   Other collaborations led to working out how DNA information is translated
into protein amino acid sequences. Proposed "Central Dogma" of molecular
biology: that information cannot flow backward from proteins into DNA.

   At La Jolla's Salk Institute since 1976, mostly working as theoretician to
unravel mysteries of human brain and consciousness, including dreams and vision,
but has said it will take another generation to solve the puzzle. Interest in
origins of life resulted in brief flirtation with idea that microbes drifting
through space seeded Earth.


   *

   Max Delbruck

   Born Sept. 4, 1906, Berlin, Germany; died March 10, 1981, Pasadena.

   A theoretical physicist, he began studying biology after lecture by quantum
mechanics guru Niels Bohr noted paradox that life exists at once as whole
organisms and collections of molecules. Left Germany in 1937 for Caltech and
study of bacteriophages--rapidly replicating bacteria-attacking viruses.
Fundamental life processes were revealed. But grant money ran out in 1940, and
seven-year sojourn at Tennessee's Vanderbilt University began, during which time
he married and had first of four children.

   Along with physician Salvador Luria and chemist Alfred Hershey, spent summers
at Long Island's Cold Spring Harbor as part of informal "phage group" that
coordinated research and shared 1969 Nobel for viral genetic insights. The
prize-givers said that their work "set the solid foundations on which modern
molecular biology rests."

   Back at Caltech in 1947, studied how light affects fungi, taking time out
only to set up a molecular genetics institution at the University of Cologne.
Known for brusque manner and tough critiques, yet had charm and won people over
by inviting them camping with his family.


   *

   Leroy Hood

   Oct. 10, 1938 --

   Married.  Two children.

   Career highlights: In a creative burst at Caltech in the 1970s, Hood helped
create revolutionary machines that decode protein amino acid sequences and build
customized protein and DNA segments.

   In the '80s Hood helped found Applied Biosystems Inc. to churn out machines
for fellow scientists leading the biotech revolution. He turned down offer to
head Human Genome project, then moved to University of Washington in 1992 to
head new interdisciplinary Department of Molecular Biotechnology, funded
partially by Bill Gates. Ultimate goals: Understanding biological complexity and
creating a more preventive medicine with DNA-based knowledge.

   DID YOU KNOW?  Hood is a devoted mountain climber who sometimes helicopters
to remote base camps to save time.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   George Beadle: Nobelist linked single genes to single enzymes, shifting
genetics into biochemical realm and DNA; worked at Caltech.

   Seymour Benzer: Created field of molecular neurogenetics at Caltech to study
how genes influence behavior.

   Theodosius Dobzhansky: Caltech pioneer in modern evolutionary genetics and
how species form in the wild.

   Renato Dulbecco: Nobelist's animal virus research led to vaccines and cancer
tumor mechanisms; he worked in Italy and at Caltech, then as president of Salk
Institute.

   Edward Lewis: Caltech Nobelist discovered embryonic genetic similarities in
fruit flies and humans.

   Thomas Hunt Morgan: Genetics Nobelist established world-renowned Caltech
biology department.

   Kary Mullis: La Jolla independent consultant, was Nobelist for widely used
DNA polymerase chain reaction PCR .

   Susumu Ohno: City of Hope's genetics researcher illuminated inactive female X
chromosome and evolution by gene duplication.

   ASTRONOMY

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   William Fowler: Caltech Nobelist described how stars and elements form from
nuclear reactions.

   George Hale: Noted solar scientist founded Mt. Wilson Observatory and helped
mastermind Caltech's rise to world fame.


   *

   Edwin Hubble

   Nov. 20, 1889 - Sept. 28, 1953

   Married. No children.

   Career highlights: After many freezing nights at the Mt. Wilson Observatory,
the tweedy, pipe-chomping astronomer set off controversy with evidence of
galaxies beyond our own Milky Way and developed an improved system of
classifying galaxies based on spiral and elliptical shapes.

   "Hubble's Law," formulated in 1929, states that the most distant galaxies are
moving away from us at the fastest speeds, and utilizes "Hubble's constant" to
calculate the size of the "knowable" universe.

   A former Rhodes Scholar who had once studied law, he provided the first
proof, in the 1930s, of an expanding universe.

   DID YOU KNOW?  Hubble was an amateur heavyweight boxer, collected science
history books and loved dry fly-fishing.


   *

   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

   Leonard Kleinrock

   Born June 13, 1934, New York City.

   Karate black belt who studied electrical engineering at City College of New
York night school. UCLA computer science professor since 1963. MIT graduate work
on data networks and 1961 packet switching theory breaking messages into small
pieces for best use of communication channels inspired Internet ARPANET , with
UCLA as first node in 1969. First Internet message typed to node 2 at Stanford
crashed system at 'g' of 'login.' But things have gotten better, and two
marriages and four children later the former marathon runner formed startup
Nomadix Inc., and is stumping for nomadic computing, a multiplicity of
communication devices keeping people connected wherever they wander.

   Between exotic nature trips published first book on how to make information
flow across large communication networks and classic "queueing theory" text for
analyzing Internet. Has said he does best creative thinking alone at home.
Perhaps his mind wanders back to engineering roots: a Bronx kid inspired by
comic books to build radios.


   *

   Carver Mead

   Born May 1, 1934,

   Bakersfield.

   Likened to a "silicon Salvador Dali" with his Fu Manchu mustache, he
pioneered silicon compilers to design microchips and Very Large Scale Integrated
(VLSI) circuits that squeeze millions of transistors onto the Pentium and other
chips, making low-cost computing a reality. At Caltech since an undergraduate,
metamorphosed from creating purely mathematical designs to sculpting silicon
into wire and transistor proxies for the neurons and synapses of nervous
systems, eyes and ears. His work is behind such devices as digital hearing aids
and "seeing devices," including artificial retinas.

   Commutes weekly between Caltech and hand-built Woodside home to be near Santa
Clara digital camera business venture, Foveon Inc. Likes wild animals and
hanging out in nature and refers to science as "a form of channeling . . .
where you also have to go work the equations." A restless soul, every 10 to 15
years he seeks out a new field to explore.


   *

   MAJOR CONTENDERS

   Leonard Adleman: USC researcher dabbles in DNA computing, mathematical AIDS
T-cell therapy and is the A in RSA computer security code.

   Solomon Golomb: Pioneered shift register sequence work used in radar,
cryptography, cell phones. Worked at JPL and is now at USC.

   Irwin Jacobs: Former UC San Diego professor who, with partner Viterbi, spun
equations into satellite decoding and Qualcomm cell phone systems.

   Jon Postel: Major Internet shaper at UCLA and USC.

   Irving Reed: Reed-Solomon error correcting codes used in CDs, computers; is
now at USC.

   Andrew Viterbi: Wireless pioneer noted for CDMA spread spectrum multiple
access communications technology; Qualcomm co-founder, former UCLA professor.


   *

   Card Illustrations by A.J. Garces

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Edwin Hubble PHOTO: Leroy Hood PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press
PHOTO: Donald Cram PHOTO: George Olah PHOTO: Ahmed Zewail PHOTO: Linus Pauling
PHOTO: Marray Gell-Mann PHOTO: J. Robert Oppenheimer PHOTO: Richard Feynman
PHOTO: Jacob Bjerknes PHOTO: Arie Haagen-Smith PHOTO: F. Sherwood Rowland PHOTO:
Kelly Johnson PHOTO: Theodore von Karman PHOTO: Charles Ricther PHOTO: Jonas
Salk PHOTO: Francis Crick PHOTO: Leonard Kleinrock PHOTO: Carver Mead

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1999


                             1442 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14WC; Page 1; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1628 words

HEADLINE: Medical Center Begins to Thrive on Its Own

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

DATELINE: VALHALLA

BODY:

   UNTETHERED from county life support less than two years ago, the Westchester
Medical Center, once a department of the county government, has been breathing
well on its own on most days, hospital officials report.

   "Our problems now are the problems of most hospitals," said Alfred B.
DelBello, chairman of the Westchester County Health Care Corporation, which now
runs the Medical Center.

    Without interference from the County Executive's office, the input of 17
sometimes balky members of the Board of Legislators and the tortuous ways of
government, the hospital, now officially a public benefit corporation, must
survive or fail on its own, Mr. DelBello said.

   Edward A. Stolzenberg, president of the Medical Center, described the
center's current association with the county as "a very arms-distance
relationship" and said that although the Medical Center now pays its own way, he
prefers it that way.

   It was a little like getting a gift but having to take the giver with the
gift, he said.

   It has been what both sides are calling a winning deal. From the county's
point of view, the release seven years hence from its annual stipend to the
public hospital is similarly welcome. Westchester's move to divest itself of the
hospital, with its policy of never turning away patients, is expected to save
taxpayers $185 million.

   For the hospital as well, the economics seem to make sense, and already, the
first full year of independent operation has been a success, Mr. Stolzenberg
reported.

   In addition to operating at 100 percent bed capacity, the the institution,
which has a $400 million annual budget, finished last year with a $5 million
surplus, compared with 1997, when it was still under the control of the county
and finished with a $7 million deficit. The largest source of income for the
hospital comes from insurance payments for in-patient services, said Carin
Grossman, a spokeswoman for the hospital. Mr. Stolzenberg attributed the gains
to the former county hospital's learning to perform like a sleek private
business rather than a government bureau.

   Part of the Pinnacle Healthcare, a network that includes Sound Shore Medical
Center in New Rochelle, Yonkers General Hospital and the Hudson Valley Hospital
in Peekskill, the Medical Center is now able to respond quickly in the highly
competitive managed-care industry, he said.

   In another sign of growth, the Medical Center -- which serves seven counties
in the Hudson Valley, northern New Jersey and parts of nearby Connecticut,
including Fairfield County -- ended last year with the highest number of organ
donations in the state. Besides performing bone marrow and cornea transplants,
it is one of only four hospitals in the state offering full abdominal
transplants (liver, kidney and pancreas).

   Aside from the country's busiest transplant hub in Pittsburgh, Westchester
Medical Center has the largest kidney transplant program in the Northeast and
the fifth-largest pediatric cornea transplant program in the United States. It
also performs the second-highest number of bone marrow transplants in the state.

   Continuing its drive toward economic independence, the hospital has obtained
a $150 million loan from the Federal Housing Authority to build a 120-bed
children's hospital and trauma center. Construction is to begin next month.

   Bruce K. Komisae, executive director of the Children's Hospital Foundation,
said all rooms in the 250,000-square-foot Children's Hospital would be designed
so that parents can stay with their children.

   In 1997, the most recent year for which figures are available, there were 743
newborns treated at the hospital, 2,610 pediatric surgeries, 2,100 pediatric
emergency room admissions, 54 pediatric burn cases and 26 multiple births
(including one set of quadruplets).

   Another sign that the institution is taking a new direction is Mr.
Stolzenberg's announcement that he is adding programs that will make the Medical
Center what hospitals refer to as a quartenary care institution, one that offers
more advanced medical procedures.

   Tertiary care centers perform open-heart surgery, for example, but not heart
transplants, which quartenary care centers do perform. As another example,
tertiary care centers perform bone marrow transplants but do not offer gene
therapy.

   The goal in upgrading, Mr. Stolzenberg explained, is to make the hospital
more specialized and less competitive with community hospitals.

   Dr. Tauseef Ahmed, director of the Medical Center's Zalmen A. Arlin Cancer
Institute, said that the hospital is already taking research it has completed in
the laboratory to the patient's bedside -- for example in the area of blood
technology. The cancer institute also hopes to establish an umbilical cord blood
center by harvesting what Dr. Ahmed said was "now a wasted resource." The idea
would be to use the umbilical cord blood, which is rich in basic cells, to treat
leukemia patients.

   Neither tertiary nor quartenary designations are given by the state, the
State Health Department must approve all programs offered by a hospital.

   One of the major disappointments for the Medical Center since its spin-off
from the county was the Health Department's initial refusal this winter to
approve the hospital's application to perform heart transplants.  The Medical
Center transfers about 10 pediatric heart cases a year to Boston Children's
Hospital.

   "In the long run, if we do not have heart transplants, we could be adversely
affected," Mr. Stolzenberg said, explaining that the hospital would resubmit its
application to the State Health Department. "In order to avoid competing with
community hospitals, we have to move to the next level."

   The Medical Center has state certification to perform cardiac catheterization
and open heart surgery, Kristine Smith, a spokeswoman for the Health Department,
said.

   The Health Department indicated that one reason the Medical Center was
refused certification for heart transplants was because it is geographically too
close to New York City, where two hospitals already provide those services.

   The other approved heart transplant programs in the state are at New York
Presbyterian and Mount Sinai Medical Centers in Manhattan, at Buffalo General
Hospital and Buffalo Children's Hospital, at Strong Memorial Hospital in
Rochester and at Albany Medical Center.

   But Mr. Stolzenberg observed that because the Hudson Valley population served
by the Medical Center was separate from the population served by metropolitan
hospitals, a regional hospital should be certified for heart transplants.

   That was not the only disappointment for the Westchester Medical Center.
Early in the spring, a kidney was misplaced in what Mr. Stolzenberg described as
a mistake.

   "It's not the first time there has been a mistake, although I hope it's the
last, but mistakes get made," he said.

   As a transplant patient waited for surgery on April 20, his new kidney was
mistakenly tossed into the garbage by a worker cleaning up between surgeries,
the hospital said. The worker apparently thought a corrugated box in the
operating room was empty, and more than an hour later, the missing organ was
found in a recycling bin.

   The Medical Center said it did not believe the delay affected the viability
of the organ.

   Looking ahead, Mr. Stolzenberg said that much of the hospital's energy in the
months to come would be spent on burnishing its image. He said the purpose would
not necessarily be to draw more patients, because beds in the Medical Center are
already well used. His concern was that the public not perceive of the Medical
Center as "the prototypical county hospital offering substandard care."

   Mr. Stolzenberg said: "People think that if they get sick, they'll go to New
York City, but if your car slams into a bridge on the Sprain Parkway, it's my
helicopter that's going to be there and my trauma center that will take care of
you. And it better be good."

   Also, hospital administrators will soon focus on solving continuing financial
problems. Mr. DelBello said that like all hospitals, Medicare and Medicaid
cutbacks continue to undermine the Medical Center's efforts to thrive. Mr.
DelBello, a lawyer and former Lieutenant Governor, Westchester County Executive
and Mayor of Yonkers, said that managed care companies were "in essence,
financing themselves on hospitals' backs" by delaying payment.

   Before the county spun off the hospital, the 650-bed medical and surgical
institution was fully subsidized and had been since the 1920's. County Executive
Andrew J. Spano, Mr. Stolzenberg and the governing board in January signed off
on the contract that progressively reduces the county's subsidy, from $31
million in 1998 to $26 million this year and to $20 million in 2000. By 2006,
the hospital will receive no money from the county.

   Because the Medical Center will need new sources of revenue as its subsidy
diminishes, the county is allowing it to build on 33 acres of nearby
county-owned land. Mr. Stolzenberg said the governing board was considering
building a hotel for people visiting patients and possibly an assisted living
residence and even a health club.

   The first step toward independence were taken under former County Executive
Andrew P. O'Rourke. But when Mr. Spano took over, he reworked the initial
separation agreement. At the time, Legislator Thomas J. Abinanti, who heads the
Health Committee of the Board of Legislators, said the previous administration
"had failed to cross its t's and dot its i's" with the hospital. He explained
that too many issues had been unresolved, for example, how much the county would
pay for services it received from the Medical Center like the treatment of sick
and injured prisoners from the County Jail in Valhalla.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: As a private institution, the Westchester Medical Center,
below, showed a profit last year compared with a loss in 1997. Above: an
operation in progress in a new abulatory surgery suite. (Photographs by Richard
L. Harbus for The New York Times)(pg. 1); Lidia Mazur, research fellow, and Todd
Salomon, student, work on a cell sorter at Westchester Medical Center. (Richard
L. Harbus for The New York Times)(pg. 9)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1999


                             1443 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   July 25, 1999, Sunday, 37REGION 18 EDITION

SECTION: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT, Pg. G-10

LENGTH: 1413 words

HEADLINE: POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN

BODY:


   Post-Gazette Staff Writer

   Post-Gazette Staff Writer

   When he walks down the street, people stop and stare. When he rides in the
car, the windows are carefully shaded. When he goes camping, park rangers scout
out the grounds and find the perfect spot for him.

   No, he's not a rock star. But he's well-known in his hometown of Rossiter, in
part because of his eye-catching wardrobe.

   Ten-year-old Jonathan Pierce wears a jacket, pants, gloves and headdress with
goggles that turn his world yellow - created by those innovative designers at
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration whenever he goes outside.

   Without the suit, which blocks visible and ultraviolet light, even a brief
exposure to sunlight would make his skin swell, itch, redden, break open and
hurt like the blazes.

   No one keeps geographic information, but as far as his family knows, Jonathan
is the only person in Western Pennsylvania who has the condition, called
erythropoietic protoporphyria or EPP. It affects 10 to 20 people out of 100,000.

   The suit was the first item on Jonathan's letter to Santa Claus last year.
Purchased with donations from local and international Kiwanis Club chapters and
a national foundation for EPP sufferers, the $ 2,000 suit was presented to him
by his friends and neighbors at a sur prise ceremony just before Christmas at
the Canoe Ridge Church of God in Rossiter, in Indiana County, about five miles
south of Punxsutawney.

   "Do you know when you get something you really need and you get it without
knowing about it? You're really excited. That's how I was," Jonathan explained.

   The drab green-gray outfit is made of a clingy, lightweight synthetic
material that is worn over his regular clothes and still allows him room to
grow. It can get hot, so the designers provided a cooling vest to wear under the
jacket.

   Jonathan confessed that he was a little disappointed with NASA's fashion
sense. Cool as it is to invoke B-movie images of a scientist searching for
plague-ridden monkeys on town streets, he had been hoping the outfit "would be
like this big astronaut suit."

   Happy with his newfound freedom, Jonathan doesn't complain. The space-age
suit allows him to enjoy, among other things, a childhood ritual that was denied
to him for most of his school life: recess.

   David Lazorchak, who was his fourth-grade teacher at Smithport's Banks-Canoe
Elementary School, said that first recess was memorable, in more than one way.
"I think he got in trouble," Lazorchak said, laughing.

   "Socially, it's done a lot for him," he added. It was Lazorchak who heard
about the NASA suit on a news program and alerted the family.

   Jonathan must begin suiting up 5 minutes before he heads outside. At school,
his classmates are supportive and often help him get ready. On those rare
occasions when Jonathan is uncovered and threatened with sun exposure, the
children huddle around him until he gets his gear on.

   Unlike diseases that cause children to live in darkness, Jonathan's allows
him to expose his skin to room light without consequences. So at home and
school, he dresses like other kids. Before he got his suit, he'd watch from his
bedroom window while his sister, 12-year-old Jaimie, played in the backyard
pool, squirting her with a high-powered water rifle until dusk approached and
he, too, could go out to play.

   "We got special tinting for the windows, but he still doesn't like to have
direct sunlight when he's not protected," explained his mother, Penny Pierce.
"We travel with towels on the car window. When we go camping, I call and tell
them we need the shadiest part they have. The rangers will go look and call me
back."

   When Jonathan was a baby, his parents could not figure out why he often cried
and scratched his skin. His mother, a nurse, remembered taking him out to visit
a rabbit pen when he was 18 months old and later having to put cold compresses
on his red, hot and swollen skin.

   The Pierces went to Sea World when Jonathan was 2, to treat the children
before Jonathan had an operation to repair a small hole in his heart wall.
Again, his skin was badly burned.

   Dermatologists at Geisinger Medical Center in Danville, Montour County,
assessed the boy around the time of the operation and diagnosed the EPP. His
heart problem, which was treated successfully, is not believed to be linked to
the sun disorder.

   "It was nice to know what was wrong, but then you have to change everything,"
Pierce said. Instead of visits to the zoo and the park, "we stayed in the house
and played."

   According to Harvard Medical School's Dr. Micheline Mathews-Roth, who has
studied EPP for more than 30 years, the disease is caused by defect in an
enzyme, known as ferrochelatase. The enzyme's job is to combine iron with a
compound, called protoporphyrin, to make the "heme" part of hemoglobin. Because
the enzyme doesn't work properly in EPP patients, some protoporphyrin goes
unused, building up and eventually leaking out of the red blood cells where
hemoglobin is made. About 30 percent of patients become mildly anemic.

   As it happens, protoporphyrin doesn't mix well with light. So when sunlight
passes through the skin and hits the capillaries beneath it, the protoporphyrin
that has leaked out of the cells undergoes reactions that generate free
radicals, toxic chemicals that damage cells. In the worst cases, affecting less
than 5 percent of people with the disease, this can cause damage to the liver,
resulting in cirrhosis.

   Before the disease was identified in 1961, some EPP patients had a difficult
time convincing physicians that they had a problem, Mathews-Roth said. Their
skin hurt after sun exposure, but they did not always have redness and swelling.

   "Most of the patients were sent off to psychiatrists," she said. Even though
EPP is now recognized, "it can be underdiagnosed. People may have a mild case of
it and they think, ' I'm just sensitive to the sun.' "

   Children of EPP patients have a 50 percent chance of inheriting the defective
gene and getting the disease themselves. Spontaneous mutations can occur, too,
which is what appears to have happened to Jonathan because no one else in his
family has the faulty gene.

   Not all cases of EPP are the same. Some people can stay outdoors for more
than a hour before there's a problem, whereas others can bask in the sun for
only a minute or two.

   "It's probably related to the innate thickness of the skin, how much
pigmentation they have," Mathews-Roth explained. "Black people with EPP have
little photosensitivity."

   Jonathan's mother hasn't timed how much sun is safe for him, but they know it
isn't long. Their caution had kept his skin undamaged for nearly 2 1/ 2 years,
but a few weeks ago, a gape in the face mask left him with a sore, burned lesion
on his nose and cheek. It was a reminder that EPP does not get much better with
age. Fortunately, it usually doesn't get worse, either.

   Beta carotene, a pigment that helps protect plants from sun damage, offers a
measure of protection for many EPP patients. In experiments in the late 1960s,
Mathews-Roth showed that large doses of beta carotene could extend the time
period of patients could be in the sunshine. It is now routinely prescribed for
EPP, but about 20 percent of patients, including Jonathan, aren't helped.

   Unless researchers can find a better treatment, such as gene therapy,
Jonathan will have to rely on a sunsuit for the rest of his life.

   When he first got the outfit, he didn't completely trust that it would work.
And in the early days, his teacher, Lazorchak, recalled that Jonathan would
sometimes conveniently forget to bring it to school.

   Now the boy wears it comfortably, even though curious strangers sometimes
stare at him.

   Jonathan - with his parents, Penny and John, and Jaimie - made a second visit
to Sea World in Aurora, Ohio, in June, and this time Jonathan was armed with his
protective suit. The Pierces also plan a visit to the Pittsburgh Zoo next
weekend.

   His mother hoped that this upcoming first-of-a-lifetime experience will be a
little different than the trip to Sea World, which they enjoyed on the whole.
The Pierces would rather have the grown-ups behave like the few children who
strolled up to Jonathan to ask him about his unusual apparel.

   "The adults were staring like they were looking through rocks," Pierce said.

   Anita Srikameswaran writes about health for the Post-Gazette. John Beale is a
staff photographer.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1999


                             1444 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   July 25, 1999, Sunday, 37REGION 18 EDITION

SECTION: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT, Pg. G-10

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY HOLDS PROMISE TO CURE EPP

BODY:


   Gene therapy holds promise to cure EPP

   Someday, if gene therapy works as well in humans as it has in lab mice,
people like Jonathan Pierce could frolic in the sun wearing shorts and T-shirts.

   Pierce, a 10-year-old from the Indiana County town of Rossiter, must wear a
protective suit outdoors because of erythropoietic protoporphyria, or EPP.
Scientists from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard Medical
School gave a human gene to mice that have EPP, curing them of their bad
reactions to light exposure. Their findings are in this month's issue of the
scientific journal Nature Medicine.

   "We're going to work on it, and hopefully, we might be able to get it to
people," said study investigator Dr. Micheline Mathews-Roth of Harvard.

   Jonathan's parents, Penny and John Pierce, heard the news just last week and
planned to contact the researchers to learn more.

   The disease is caused by defects in a gene that makes an enzyme called
ferrochelatase. When the enzyme doesn't work, a compound called protoporphyrin
builds up in the bloodstream. Protoporphyrin reacts with light, producing
chemicals that cause skin damage.

   French researchers stumbled upon a mouse that had its own naturally occurring
version of EPP, caused by similar enzyme malfunctions. They bred the strain, and
the Massachusetts scientists used the mice for their gene therapy experiments.

   From the mouse bone marrow, Mathews-Roth and her colleagues isolated stem
cells, which are precursor cells that make all other blood cells. They attached
the normal human gene that produces the enzyme onto a harmless virus. In a lab
dish, the virus and its genetic passengers infected the mouse stem cells.

   A group of mice were irradiated so that their bone marrow was destroyed. The
genetically engineered stem cells were infused into their veins to replenish the
blood system, with the stem cells generating daughter cells that contained a
working enzyme.

   The mice who had the gene therapy no longer had any bad reaction to light
exposure. Because stem cells are essentially immortal, the mice should continue
to make ferrochelatase, curing them of EPP. Mice that received stem cells
without the needed gene still had severe light sensitivity.

   Indirect evidence that this approach might work surfaced at a scientific
conference several months ago, Mathews-Roth said. Doctors at the conference
discussed a patient who had EPP and developed an unrelated medical condition
that had to be treated with a bone marrow transplant. After the procedure, the
patient no longer had the symptoms of EPP, because the transplanted marrow cells
also carried normal copies of the crucial gene.

   While a bone marrow transplant could cure the disease, the risks of the
procedure are considered too high for the small numbers of people who have EPP,
a nonlethal disorder.

   Effective gene therapy could avoid those pitfalls.

   "Ideally, we'll want to get the kids as soon as they're developing symptoms,"
Mathews-Roth said. "Then you want to treat them so they don't have to go through
life being miserable."

   - By Anita Srikameswaran

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1999


                             1445 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        July 24, 1999 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: FORMER QB RAISES MONEY TO RESEARCH SON'S DISEASE;
FORMER QB SEEKS CURE FOR SON'S DISEASE

BYLINE: By John Pope Staff writer

BODY:

   When Jim Kelly, the Buffalo Bills' star quarterback, retired from football
after the 1996 season, he was looking forward to a lifetime of fishing, boating
and enjoying his growing family. On Valentine's Day in 1997, Kelly's 37th
birthday, his wife gave birth to a son. Everything seemed blessed.

   But, the veteran of four Super Bowls said Friday in New Orleans, "somebody
had a different plan for me."

   When Hunter Kelly was 2 months old, his parents took him to his pediatrician
because the child suffered from a suspicious stiffening. They thought it might
be colic, and the doctor suspected cerebral palsy. But further tests revealed
something much worse: Krabbe's disease, a rare inherited affliction that attacks
the nervous system and kills all of its tiny victims, generally before they're
old enough to start nursery school.

   Seizures, the Kellys learned, are characteristic of this affliction. But when
these spasms struck their son and the Kellys rushed to an emergency room for
help, they learned that doctors didn't know much more about Krabbe's disease
than they did.

   At that point, Kelly said, he realized that something had to be done to find
ways to research and eventually defeat this disease -- and that he might be the
person to do it. When he wavered, Kelly said, his wife, Jill, told him, "Jim if
there was ever a time for you to use your name, it's now."

   The result was Hunter's Hope Foundation, which has raised about $3 million
and has just awarded its first round of eight research grants. Kelly, 39, was in
New Orleans because the Tulane Regional Primate Research Center received
$199,000, which it will use to see if gene therapy might be a weapon against
this disease. The award is the first for a project of the Gene Therapy Research
Initiative, a joint venture by the Tulane and Louisiana State University medical
centers.

   In addition to the money from Hunter's Hope, an arm of the National
Institutes of Health gave the Krabbe's program nearly $1.6 million this week to
increase and support the population of monkeys the scientists will use.

   Even though Hunter Kelly is 29 months old, his father said he has never
reached any developmental milestones, such as sitting up or crawling.

   "He never held his head up on his own," Kelly said. "We think he smiled a
couple of times."

   In his short life, Hunter has suffered 15 bouts of pneumonia, his father
said, and he is on continuous oxygen because there are periods lasting as long
as a minute when, if he's on his own, he doesn't draw a breath. He is fed
through a tube in his stomach.

   About 40 babies are born with Krabbe's disease each year in the United
States. The research may also benefit people investigating other nervous-system
disorders such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, said Dr. Jay Kolls,
director of LSU's gene-therapy program.

   Krabbe's disease is the result of a gene defect. To introduce a correct gene,
scientists may encase it in a virus from which the disease-causing power has
been removed, said Krishna J. Fisher, pathology director at Tulane's
gene-therapy center.

   Why a virus?

   "Viruses do one thing really well: They infect your cells," Fisher said.
"Instead of reinventing the wheel, why not use what nature has provided us?"

    The focus of Krabbe's disease is myelin, the sheath that covers nerve cells
like insulation around an electrical wire.

   Like many other body substances, myelin is regularly manufactured and broken
down as part of the life cycle. But as a result of their genetic defect, people
with Krabbe's disease don't have enough of the enzyme that breaks down two
myelin components. This deficiency causes problems with the sheath, leading to
poor communication throughout the nervous system and, as a result, interference
with such functions as breathing, body temperature and digestion.

   Kelly, who stood in front of a large photograph of his son during a news
conference, was consistently upbeat in recounting his son's struggle.

   "They thought I was tough on the football field," he said. "There's nobody
tougher than my son. He's the real fighter in the family."

GRAPHIC: Former Buffalo Bills quarterback Jim Kelly signs a football Friday for
Daniel Simon, 10, of Harahan, as the boy's mother, Fran Simon, watches. Kelly
was going to a news conference announcing a gene-therapy research grant to
Tulane Regional Primate Research Center.  STAFF PHOTO BY JENNIFER ZDON

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1999


                             1446 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        July 24, 1999 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: FORMER QB SEEKS CURE FOR SON'S DISEASE;
FOUNDATION COLLECTS $3 MILLION FOR STUDY

BYLINE: By John Pope Staff writer

BODY:

   When Jim Kelly, the Buffalo Bills' star quarterback, retired from football
after the 1996 season, he was looking forward to a lifetime of fishing, boating
and enjoying his growing family. On Valentine's Day in 1997, Kelly's 37th
birthday, his wife gave birth to a son. Everything seemed blessed.

   But, the veteran of four Super Bowls said Friday in New Orleans, "somebody
had a different plan for me."

   When Hunter Kelly was 2 months old, his parents took him to his pediatrician
because the child suffered from a suspicious stiffening. They thought it might
be colic, and the doctor suspected cerebral palsy. But further tests revealed
something much worse: Krabbe's disease, a rare inherited affliction that attacks
the nervous system and kills all of its tiny victims, generally before they're
old enough to start nursery school.

   Seizures, the Kellys learned, are characteristic of this affliction. But when
these spasms struck their son and the Kellys rushed to an emergency room for
help, they learned that doctors didn't know much more about Krabbe's disease
than they did.

   At that point, Kelly said, he realized that something had to be done to find
ways to research and eventually defeat this disease -- and that he might be the
person to do it. When he wavered, Kelly said, his wife, Jill, told him, "Jim if
there was ever a time for you to use your name, it's now."

   The result was Hunter's Hope Foundation, which has raised about $3 million
and has just awarded its first round of eight research grants. Kelly, 39, was in
New Orleans because the Tulane Regional Primate Research Center received
$199,000, which it will use to see if gene therapy might be a weapon against
this disease. The award is the first for a project of the Gene Therapy Research
Initiative, a joint venture by the Tulane and Louisiana State University medical
centers.

   In addition to the money from Hunter's Hope, an arm of the National
Institutes of Health gave the Krabbe's program nearly $1.6 million this week to
increase and support the population of monkeys the scientists will use.

   Even though Hunter Kelly is 29 months old, his father said he has never
reached any developmental milestones, such as sitting up or crawling.

   "He never held his head up on his own," Kelly said. "We think he smiled a
couple of times."

   In his short life, Hunter has suffered 15 bouts of pneumonia, his father
said, and he is on continuous oxygen because there are periods lasting as long
as a minute when, if he's on his own, he doesn't draw a breath. He is fed
through a tube in his stomach.

   About 40 babies are born with Krabbe's disease each year in the United
States. The research may also benefit people investigating other nervous-system
disorders such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, said Dr. Jay Kolls,
director of LSU's gene-therapy program.

   Krabbe's disease is the result of a gene defect. To introduce a correct gene,
scientists may encase it in a virus from which the disease-causing power has
been removed, said Krishna J. Fisher, pathology director at Tulane's
gene-therapy center.

   Why a virus?

   "Viruses do one thing really well: They infect your cells," Fisher said.
"Instead of reinventing the wheel, why not use what nature has provided us?"

    The focus of Krabbe's disease is myelin, the sheath that covers nerve cells
like insulation around an electrical wire.

   Like many other body substances, myelin is regularly manufactured and broken
down as part of the life cycle. But as a result of their genetic defect, people
with Krabbe's disease don't have enough of the enzyme that breaks down two
myelin components. This deficiency causes problems with the sheath, leading to
poor communication throughout the nervous system and, as a result, interference
with such functions as breathing, body temperature and digestion.

   Kelly, who stood in front of a large photograph of his son during a news
conference, was consistently upbeat in recounting his son's struggle.

   "They thought I was tough on the football field," he said. "There's nobody
tougher than my son. He's the real fighter in the family."

GRAPHIC: SOMEONE TO LOOK UP TO Former Buffalo Bills quarterback Jim Kelly signs
a football Friday for Daniel Simon, 10, of Harahan, as the boy's mother, Fran
Simon, watches. Kelly was going to a news conference announcing a gene-therapy
research grant to Tulane Regional Primate Research Center.  STAFF PHOTO BY
JENNIFER ZDON

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1999


                             1447 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       July 21, 1999 Wednesday, WEST BANK

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 446 words

HEADLINE: CHAMBER GRADES LEGISLATURE A+;
LAWMAKERS FOCUS ON AIRPORT'S FATE

BYLINE: By Richard Sine West Bank bureau

BODY:

   Declaring this year's legislative session "a winner by a knockout" for
business, New Orleans Regional Chamber of Commerce officials and state
legislators from the seven-parish area trumpeted their successes Tuesday and
discussed their positions on issues ranging from the airport to a proposed
streetcar line.

   Seventeen of the area's 21 legislators attended the meeting at the John A.
Alario Sr. Events Center near Westwego to answer questions from chamber
officials and about 90 people.

   The chamber handed out a legislative wrap-up, citing such triumphs as:
approval of $49.5 million for West Bank hurricane protection; approval of $13
million for a Gene Therapy Task Force, which has envisioned a research center in
downtown New Orleans; passage of a bill that funnels surplus unemployment
compensation money into worker training; and passage of a bill designed to curb
abuses in teacher sick leave.

   The chamber also applauded the failure of bills that would have permitted
citizens to bypass the Legislature and put issues directly on the ballot and
would have increased the homestead exemption to keep pace with the rate of
inflation.

   Edie Drew, the chamber's chief lobbyist, said this was the first year the
chamber had called together parish presidents and council members for the entire
region to discuss their priorities for the state capital outlay budget. Chamber
chairman-elect Walter Leger pointed to increasing regional cooperation over the
past few years.

   Asked to summarize the best and worst results of the session, several
legislators praised the hurricane protection efforts, as well as financing for
the scholarship program known as TOPS, Tuition Opportunity Program for Students.
Several deplored use of federal tobacco settlement money to plug fiscal
shortfalls in the current budget.

   Several legislators said they were disappointed by the failure to provide a
state match for already designated federal money for a streetcar line on Canal
Street in New Orleans "To let (federal funds) go by the wayside is very very
sad," said Rep. Melinda Schwegmann, D-New Orleans.

   Rep. Kenneth Odinet, D-Arabi, who is on a capital outlay committee, said
urgently needed drainage projects for New Orleans took priority over the
streetcar.

   The fate of the New Orleans International Airport was the most-discussed
issue, though it was not a chamber priority during this year's legislative
session. Several legislators urged the chamber to support a state takeover of
the airport from New Orleans and to provide an air hub closer to Baton Rouge.
"The number one factor holding this state back is our airport," said Sen. Ken
Hollis, R-Metairie, to applause.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1999


                             1448 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         July 20, 1999, Tuesday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,1A

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: How much it hurts is connected to gene; Hopkins doctor leads research;
better use of drugs foreseen

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: Sun Staff

BODY:

   Variations in a single gene can determine how intensely a person feels pain,
whether caused by a pinprick or a dentist's drill, according to a study at Johns
Hopkins Hospital and the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

    The study could help put to rest the long-held assumption that pain
sensitivity is a matter of mental toughness. People really do experience pain
differently, doctors say -- and genetics is largely responsible.

    "Many assume the way people respond is voluntary; 'Just put up with it' has
been a common recommendation for years," said Dr. George Uhl, a Hopkins
neuroscientist who also heads NIDA's molecular neurobiology branch. "But now
people can think of pain as a genetically regulated problem."

    The same genetic differences also determine how much relief people get from
morphine and other opiate painkillers. Many people who are highly sensitive to
pain respond poorly to standard doses of pain medication.

    "One of the things we hope to do with this information is try to predict who
is going to need more opiate," Uhl said. Scientists might also use this
knowledge to fashion drugs and gene therapies that are tailored to a person's
pain sensitivity.

    The research, published in this month's Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, builds upon a seminal discovery 27 years ago of opiate receptors in
the human nervous system. Dr. Solomon Snyder, a Hopkins neuroscientist,
discovered molecules on the surface of nerve cells that serve as docking points
for natural opiates, chemicals manufactured by the brain to dampen pain.

    Without these receptors, everyone would experience pain more intensely than
they do. Opiate receptors also bind to opiate drugs such as morphine, codeine
and heroin.

    The recent study focused on a type of opiate receptor known as the mu
receptor. Scientists discovered that slight variations in a single gene
determine the number of mu receptors that appear on cells of nervous system.

    Put simply, people who have lots of mu receptors feel less pain because they
are able to absorb more of the brain's natural pain-relieving chemicals. For the
same reason, they get faster relief from pain-fighting medications although, one
could argue, they need them less.

    People who have fewer mu receptors are not as lucky.

    "Things that are not painful to others are painful to them," Uhl said, "and
they're not going to have their pain as effectively relieved by opiates."

    Using techniques of genetic engineering, scientists bred mice that had half
the normal complement of mu receptors and others that lacked them altogether.
Later, the researchers measured their responses when they were exposed to
gradually increasing amounts of temperature, pressure and other sources of pain.

    The mice most richly endowed with mu receptors were least sensitive to pain.
Those who lacked them struggled the most.

    Using an imaging device known as a PET scanner, a Hopkins scientist found
that humans differ by as much as 50 percent in the number of mu receptors they
have. This is the same variation that accounted for different pain thresholds in
mice.

    Collaborators in California are testing the pain thresholds of human
volunteers, asking them to do such things as place their hands in frigid water.
Scientists are also studying patients who have had diffeerent responses to pain
medications. In both groups, researchers are studying DNA samples to see which
genetic variations are linked to higher or lower pain sensitivity.

    Aside from Uhl, scientists in the Hopkins study were Dr. Ichio Sora and Dr.
Zaije Wang, both with the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

    "Differences in the gene might affect pain therapy," said Sora, a
psychiatrist.

    Doctors, for instance, could use genetic information to predict if a patient
will experience great pain after surgery, and prescribe higher doses of pain
medication to prevent a miserable recovery, he said.

    A more sophisticated approach would be gene therapy: using viruses to
deliver mu receptor genes to the nervous system. Patients should then cope
better with surgery and painful illnesses such as cancer. In theory, they would
respond better to pain medication and feel less pain.

    Solomon Snyder, chief of neuroscience, said the study shows that pain
sensitivity and physical illness aren't that far apart.

    "People vary in genes that determine cholesterol levels and hardening of the
arteries," Snyder said. "This is really the first evidence of a specific
molecular variation that determines variations in pain sensitivity."

    Scientists might someday find a similar basis for depression and other mood
disorders, he said.  It's possible, he said, that people who are chronically
depressed have comparatively few receptors for serotonin, a brain chemical
responsible for feelings of well-being.


LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1999


                             1449 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        JULY 20, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1365 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   IN THE REGION QVC to build distribution facility in North Carolina

   Television and Internet retailer QVC Inc., West Chester, said yesterday that
it planned to build a distribution center in Edgecombe County, N.C. The new
facility, projected to occupy one million square feet, with the potential to
occupy two million square feet, is on 293 acres in Rocky Mount, N.C. It is
anticipated to open next summer, and is expected to generate more than 800 jobs.

   BTG marketing treatment for cytokine disorders

   BTG International Inc., a Gulph Mills subsidiary of BTG P.L.C., a
technology-transfer company, said it had acquired for licensing a novel
gene-therapy approach to treat disorders associated with excess production of
specific cytokines. The disorders include asthma, allergic symptoms, septic
shock syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis. BTG said it was looking for companies
to develop and commercialize therapeutic products based on the technology.

   ELSEWHERE Elf makes a bid to acquire its would-be acquirer

   Elf Aquitaine SA, the target of a hostile takeover bid from Total Fina SA,
turned the tables with a $50.97 billion counter-bid to combine the French oil
companies. Elf said it would spin off the companies' chemical units to create
Europe's third-largest chemical company. Total's $49 billion all-stock offer
would retain those businesses.

   U.S. says subsidies cut steel prices in five countries

   Steel companies in five countries may have unlawfully received government
subsidies that allowed them to lower prices artificially, the Commerce
Department said. The preliminary ruling was the latest victory for the U.S.
steel industry, which earlier won punitive tariffs on Japanese shipments of
hot-rolled carbon steel, the industry's core product. The five countries
affected by yesterday's ruling are France, India, Indonesia, Italy and South
Korea. The Commerce Department proposed tariffs ranging from 1 percent to 23
percent.

   Pfizer to pay fine, plead guilty in price-fixing case

   Pfizer Inc. will pay a $20 million criminal fine and plead guilty to U.S.
antitrust charges involving its former Food Science Group, the company said.
Pfizer will admit in federal court in San Francisco to one count of price-fixing
of sodium erythorbate, a food additive, and one count of market allocation of
maltols, used as flavor enhancers. Pfizer said it "deeply regrets these actions,
which were contrary to the company's clear, long-standing values policies and
practices." Pfizer sold the Food Science Group in January 1996 and says it has
not been involved in the sale of food additives for almost four years.

   FCC staff opposes new regulations for the Internet

   The Internet should be kept free of regulation to ensure its continued
growth, says a new Federal Communications Commission staff report. The FCC's
30-year policy of "unregulation" of data services has allowed the Internet to
flourish, the staff report said. The agency should not automatically regulate
new services, such as high-speed Internet access, offered by telephone and
cable-TV companies as if they were traditional voice-telephone or cable-TV
service, the report said.

   Woman awarded $20 million in DaimlerChrysler sex case

   A jury said DaimlerChrysler AG should pay $20 million to machinist Linda
Gilbert, who accused the world's third-largest carmaker of ignoring her
sexual-harassment complaints for more than seven years. DaimlerChrysler
officials said they moved promptly to investigate reports that Gilbert was being
mistreated even though she refused to cooperate with the probe. The company will
appeal the award, officials added.

   Sprint offering cut rates on evening calls

   Long-distance company Sprint Corp. halved the prices for its evening
residential long-distance rates with a new interstate calling plan that charges
customers 5 cents a minute from 7 p.m. to midnight. During all other times, the
rate is 10 cents per minute. To join the plan, called Sprint Nickel Nights,
residential customers must pay $5.95 per month. The rate is good only for
state-to-state calls.

   Three airlines exceed analysts' profit estimates

   Delta Air Lines, Continental Airlines and Alaska Air reported quarterly
profits that surpassed Wall Street expectations, surprising analysts who had
focused on weak revenue trends early in the quarter. Delta and Alaska Air
earnings in the April-June quarter were up from a year earlier, while
Continental's declined, but all three carriers topped analysts' forecasts. Delta
Air Lines Inc. reported fiscal fourth-quarter profits of $364 million, or $2.40
per diluted share, on revenues of nearly $4 billion. Its profits were up 1
percent from the year-earlier $362 million, or $2.26 per diluted share, and
above analysts' consensus forecast of $2.31 a share. Continental Airlines Inc.
reported second-quarter profits of $137 million, or $1.80 per diluted share, on
revenues of nearly $2.2 billion. Its profits were 16 percent below the
year-earlier $163 million, or $2.06 per diluted share, but beat analysts'
consensus estimate of $1.73 per share. Alaska Air Group Inc. reported profits of
$42.1 million, or $1.59 per diluted share, up from $38.9 million, or $1.51 per
share, a year earlier. Wall Street had expected it to earn $1.35 per share.

   Vodafone makes a bid for cellular company

   Vodafone AirTouch P.L.C., the world's largest wireless company, plans to buy
CommNet Cellular Inc. for $1.36 billion in cash and debt. Vodafone AirTouch,
created from the $76.6 billion merger of Vodafone Group P.L.C. and AirTouch
Communications Inc. last month, said it will pay $764 million in cash, or $31 a
share, for CommNet. It also will take on about $600 million in debt.

   Blockbuster to offer 18 percent stake to the public

   Blockbuster Inc. will sell 18 percent of its shares when it completes an
initial sale next month, the video-store chain said in an amended filing with
the Securities and Exchange Commission. The unit of Viacom Inc. plans to sell 31
million Class A shares to the public at $16 to $18 each, raising $527 million if
the shares are priced at the midpoint of the range. Viacom will retain 144
million Class B shares, an 82 percent stake, according to the SEC filing.

   First Union plans to hire more than 2,000 bank tellers

   First Union Corp., after firing 5,850 employees to cut costs, said it would
hire more than 2,000 tellers, after the bank realized its branch staff was not
adequately serving customers. First Union spokeswoman Allison Rash said the bank
has been short by about 1,000 tellers for several months. The bank decided last
week that it needed to hire 1,000 more. Rash said the bank had not yet
determined where the new tellers would work. There is an extremely high turnover
rate among tellers, she said.

   Interest rates on T-bills decline at weekly auction

   Interest rates on short-term Treasury securities fell in yesterday's auction.
The Treasury Department sold $7.5 billion in three-month bills at a discount
rate of 4.520 percent, down from 4.600 percent last week. An additional $7.5
billion was sold in six-month bills at a rate of 4.490 percent, down from 4.540
percent. The new discount rates understate the actual return to investors -
4.650 percent for three-month bills, with a $10,000 bill selling for $9,885.70,
and 4.671 percent for a six-month bill selling for $9,773.00.

   Yield on one-year T-bill dips in latest week

   The Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury bills in the
secondary market, the most popular index for making changes in adjustable-rate
mortgages, fell to 5.01 percent last week from 5.06 percent the previous week.

   Microsoft selling city guides for Ticketmaster stock

   Microsoft Corp. will sell the city-guide part of its MSN Sidewalk
entertainment Web site to rival Ticketmaster Online-CitySearch Inc. for a 9
percent stake in the top Internet ticket-sales company. Microsoft will get a
combination of Ticketmaster stock and warrants and could buy as much as 13
percent of Ticketmaster by exercising the warrants.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1450 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     July 20, 1999, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: Virus delivers a vital gene to Lou Gehrig's disease cells

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   An experiment performed on mice suggests that Lou Gehrig's disease
is a good candidate for a gene-therapy approach to treating people.

   Many hurdles must be jumped before human studies can begin, but
a gene-therapy trial for people with Lou Gehrig's, or amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS), could be ready within five years, says
Martha Bohn of Northwestern University's medical campus in Chicago.

   ALS is a degenerative neurological disorder that destroys muscle
cells. Nerve endings of motor neurons in the spinal cord have
endings in muscle cells throughout the body.

   In the study, out today in the journal Human Gene Therapy,
Bohn and colleagues delivered to muscle cells in mice a gene that
has instructions for making a protein called glial cell-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF), which protects nerve cells.

   The gene was inserted into a virus that retains the machinery
for infecting cells but no longer packs disease-causing components.
The virus is the meloni leukemia virus, a commonly used delivery
vehicle for gene therapy.

   Researcher Hasan Mohajeri put mouse muscle cells in a petri dish,
infected the cells with the GDNF-gene-loaded virus and transplanted
the cells into the hind legs of mice. The mice were engineered
to have a human gene mutation that causes certain cases of ALS.

   Muscle cells that got the gene produced GDNF, which was soaked
up by the motor neuron nerve endings. Results: Motor neurons survived
longer and increased in number.

   Bohn says the challenge is to find a way to deliver genes throughout
the body and keep them turned on for years.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1999


                             1451 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                        July 18, 1999 Sunday All Edition

SECTION: NEW; Pg. 26A

LENGTH: 2404 words

HEADLINE: Landing's legacy is still being created

BYLINE: TIM BONFIELD and MARK CURNUTTE, The Cincinnati Enquirer

BODY:

   Where will mankind's next giant leap come from?

   By TIM BONFIELD and MARK CURNUTTE

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   On July 20, 1969, the world watched in awe as U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong
made his historic footprint on the gray, dusty surface of the moon.

   His famous words: "That's one small step for (a) man, one giant leap for
mankind."

   Some people consider the moon landing a defining moment in human evolution.
Some call it the signature achievement of the American century. Still others see
it more as a political victory in the Cold War than a great step for science.

   Thirty years later, debate continues over the significance of putting a man
on the moon. Now, at the dawn of a new millennium, lingering questions about the
future of space exploration take on a heightened sense of priority and urgency.
It's a point when people consider the past while looking into the future, all
the time wondering what mankind's next great leap might be.

   Some people say mankind's next great leap has already occurred and that NASA
was responsible for it. Probes to Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and Neptune have yielded
volumes of information and continue to satisfy the species' exploratory nature.

   Other people, historians and sociologists, say the moon landing has been
eclipsed by other leaps in medicine (organ transplantation, cloning) or
technology (the microchip, the Internet).

   Still others believe humanity is on the doorstep of astounding developments
in medicine (genetic therapy, anti-aging technology, disease eradication) and
transportation (electric cars).

   Then there are still those to whom nothing compares to Apollo's magnificence.

   "The first time humans set foot on another planet has to be one of the
all-time great achievements in human history," said Roger Launius, NASA's chief
historian who's based in Washington, D.C.

   "Watershed event'

   David Slavsky, dean of science and mathematics at Loyola University in
Chicago, is an astronomer and teaches space exploration in a course on planetary
and solar system astronomy.

   "It's a watershed event," he said of Apollo 11, "and watershed events can't
be duplicated."

   Science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, whose works include the classic
2001: A Space Odyssey, discussed the moon landing with Discover magazine this
month.

   "It's as significant as when the first fish crawled up on the beach," he
said. "We know now that comet and asteroid impacts have changed history. The
dinosaurs became extinct because they didn't have a space program."

   Five hundred million people watched Mr. Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walk on the
moon 30 years ago Tuesday. And they gazed upon the astronauts in wonder.
Hundreds of Poles jammed the U.S. Embassy in Warsaw to watch. Foreign nations
issued postage stamps in Apollo 11's honor. A Peruvian who gave birth during the
mission named her son Neil Armstrong.

   "When people look back 300, 400, 500 years from now, the Apollo program will
be the thing that stands out, the century in which humans first walked on
another planetary body," said Pat Dasch, executive director of the National
Space Society. "We've opened up a whole new horizon for humanity."

   Many Americans concur. America's single most-cited success of the past 100
years is the space program, selected by about 1 in 5 Americans surveyed in April
and May by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press.

   "Landing on the moon was more of a philosophical leap than a scientific one,"
said Tom Roberts, 41, who lives in Mariemont and responded to an Enquirer reader
participation coupon about the moon walk. "Instantly, almost everyone on the
planet realized how small and insignificant our world is. At the same time, it
was amazing that a species of primates had managed to cross to another world and
return safely."

   National pride

   After 30 years, the origin of the Apollo program is widely known and
accepted. It was politics.

   The United States had been stunned by the Soviet launch of the Sputnik
satellite in 1957 and again when cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited Earth in April
1961. The fledgling Kennedy administration feared Communists might win the
hearts and minds of uncommitted Third World nations if it showed superiority in
space.

   In May 1961, Alan Shepard's 15-minute flight aboard Freedom 7 made him the
first American in space. Three weeks after the flight, President Kennedy spoke
to Congress and challenged the country: "This nation should commit itself to
achieving the goal, before the decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and
returning him safely to Earth. No single space project will be more important to
mankind or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will
be so difficult or expensive to accomplish."

   He was right. By 1965, NASA's $5.2 billion budget accounted for about 4
percent of the national budget.

   In February 1962, John Glenn orbited Earth three times.

   In December 1968, Frank Borman piloted Apollo 8 around the moon.

   And, eight months later, Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Aldrin landed on the moon
while Michael Collins circled above.

   In an exclusive story he wrote in 1989 for the Enquirer, Mr. Armstrong
acknowledged the political importance of Apollo 11: "Americans felt threatened
by the world around them: the divisive war in Southeast Asia, a society cleft by
a counterculture movement and widespread drug misuse. We needed something to
rebuild our confidence in our country and ourselves."

   Race to space

   Michael Smith is an assistant professor of history at Purdue University in
West Lafayette, Ind., and teaches a course in the history of space exploration.

   "We study the Apollo program in a chapter on the Cold War," he said. "We play
it into the nuclear arms race. It was extremely important because after a decade
of finishing second to the Soviets, we came in first."

   NASA's Mr. Launius agrees that the race to the moon was driven by Cold War
politics. In fact, the Apollo project was a serious interruption of NASA's
original 1959 strategic plan, which named building a space station and
developing a re-usuable space plane as top priorities.

   But the 1960s were the days of the Cuban missile crisis, the time when Soviet
premier Nikita Khruschev was telling America, "We will bury you."

   "It's hard to appreciate in the post-Cold War era how truly serious all that
was," Mr. Launius said.

   "The moon race was, after all, a measured response to a real, significant and
deadly rivalry between two competing political and economic systems."

   Still, the national investment in NASA drew fire then and still does today.
Critics of hefty space spending continue to engage Congress in an updated
version of the "guns-vs.-butter" debate begun in the 1960s.

   Advocates of President Johnson's Great Society movement said the federal
government could not afford to pay for both space and social service programs.
Social welfare advocates such as Marian Wright Edelman, founder and president of
the Children's Defense Fund, carry on the argument today.

   Sometimes, a question rooted in the 1960s is still asked: If we can put a man
on the moon, why can't we cure the common cold? Cure poverty? Cure cancer?

   "I would say curing cancer is a much harder problem than going to the moon,"
said Mr. Slavsky, the Loyola University astronomer. "The common cold? Can we
cure a virus?

   "We reached an agreement rather quickly on the best way to reach the moon.
"You have a booster and a lunar module.' Have we converged that quickly on the
question of poverty? More than 30 years after LBJ we still don't have a
convergence on the best way to solve poverty."

   Time hasn't dimmed the accomplishment and national pride created by Apollo 11
for people who were alive when it happened, say sociologists and historians. But
some see a generation gap that reduces the meaning of the moon landing among
younger Americans.

   The passage of time has changed the tone of the "why can't we" question, said
Benjamin Britton, an electronic artist at the University of Cincinnati who has
spent the past four years designing a virtual reality re-creation of the moon
landing.

   In the 1970s, the question was asked with a sense of optimism. In the 1990s,
the question simply exposes failure, Mr. Britton said.

   Ms. Dasch of the National Space Agency notes that a third of Americans alive
today were not born yet when Apollo 11 reached the moon.

   "They wonder why we haven't kept on with the human exploration of space. They
ask when are we going to see the stupendous events of our lifetimes?" she said.

   Said Mr. Smith, the Purdue University historian: "College students today do
not think of Apollo when they think about the space program. They have a tragedy
(the 1986 Challenger explosion) in their minds. They are affected by space
exploration in a sad, melancholy way."

   Racial gaps

   Surveys also reveal racial and gender gaps in attitudes about the practical
value of the space program. Studies show that NASA's largest block of supporters
were -- and continue to be -- white males.

   "When blacks and women became part of the space program, you had a wave of
other people interested," said Rodney Coates, a Miami University sociologist and
director of its Black World Studies program. "But during the Cold War, you had
only young, white men in the space program."

   Still, he said, African-Americans -- like all Americans -- wanted to win the
Cold War and were thrilled when the United States won the race to the moon.

   "Blacks enjoyed that just as much as anybody," Mr. Coates said. "At the same
time, what a sight it would have been if it (the moon walk) would have reflected
America."

   The Challenger -- even in its tragic explosion -- may have touched a greater
cross-section of Americans, Mr. Coates said, because its crews included an
African-American (Ronald McNair), a female astronaut (Judith Resnik), an
Asian-American (Ellison Onizuka) and a civilian teacher (Christa McAuliffe).

   Still, the political overtones and other real or perceived shortcomings of
the Apollo project are no reasons to dismiss the significance of the
achievement.

   "Obtaining scientific data was not the primary purpose for Kennedy and other
political leaders who supported the project. But we did get really interesting
and useful science out of it," Mr. Launius said.

   Mr. Smith, the Purdue professor agrees.

   "I would rank Apollo as a spectacle, not solid achievement," he said. "A lot
of achievement went into it -- the miniaturization of electronics, rocket
technology."

   The achievements were both technological and personal.

   John Livingston is a former teaching assistant for Mr. Armstrong at UC who
now works on plans for a second-generation space shuttle as a senior design
engineer at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton.

   "The amount of aerospace development in those years was unprecedented. It was
absolutely phenomenal growth in technical know-how," Mr. Livingston said.

   Now, however, space propulsion based on chemical rocketry has reached a
plateau.

   "The systems I'm designing for the next generation (space shuttle) could have
been designed anytime in the past 20 years," Mr. Livingston said.

   New propulsion systems are needed to really go somewhere in space, be it
nuclear fission, fusion, or farther-out ideas like ion propulsion or antimatter
fuel, Mr. Livingston said.

   Money, plentiful for NASA during the 1960s, is a problem now.

   "The high water mark was 1965. It shrunk a little bit after that, then the
budget fell off the table in 1970," Mr. Launius said.

   The 1965 budget of $5.2 billion would be about $24 billion in today's
dollars. The 1999 NASA budget was $13.4 billion, less than 1 percent of the
entire federal budget, Mr. Launius said.

   The lack of money took the steam out of plans for the next great leap -- a
manned mission to Mars.

   But that doesn't mean there hasn't been great achievement, NASA supporters
say.

   NASA launched wildly successful satellites and interplanetary probes during
late 1970s and early 1980s. Mariner, Pioneer, Voyager and Magellan have visited
every planet in the solar system except Pluto, mapped Venus, landed on Mars and
looked at scores of asteroids and moons.

   Despite early problems, the Hubble Space Telescope -- placed beyond the
interference of the atmosphere -- established that black holes do exist and
spotted planets forming around distant stars.

   But NASA's signature project for the last two decades, the space shuttle, has
not delivered on optimistic promises to get payloads into space for $100 a pound
and is still haunted by the Challenger explosion.

   The shuttle has eaten $60 billion in 20 years because it is far more
expensive to maintain and prepare between flights, reducing its planned 50
journeys a year to about seven.

   Now, and for the next several years, NASA is committed to its leading role in
building the $30 billion-plus international space station. It also is working
with private companies to design a cheaper, better version of the shuttle.

   While these projects have many potential uses, many say NASA will never
recapture the imagination of humanity until it starts sending astronauts beyond
near-Earth orbit.

   Supporters of NASA and space exploration see brighter days ahead.

   Anthony Curtis, the author of several space-related books and dean of
academic information systems at the Cincinnati-based Union Institute, said he
sees interest in space returning to high levels.

   "Landing on the moon was one of the most magnificent human achievements of
all time," he said. "It has benefitted billions of people here on Earth."

   Mr. Curtis predicted the United States will send a crew of astronauts to Mars
by 2015. Humans will go back to the moon, and other planets too.

   "It won't just be Americans. There's growing interest in Japan, in Europe and
in China," Mr. Curtis said.

   Still, Loyola University's Mr. Slavsky says he doubts any mission could
generate the mass appeal of the manned mission to the moon.

   "Nothing's going to get us up in a lather like that again," he said. "Humans
on Mars might be the only thing to recapture that. But the moon has always been
familiar to us. It is a constant companion. It has been the stuff of folklore
and poetry and everyday life. And then, there we were, walking on it."

   Neil Armstrong participates in tests at the Lunar Landing Research Center.

   Neil Armstrong, left, and Buzz Aldrin train for their landing on the moon.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2003


                             1452 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             July 18, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: HIGH-TECH PUTS MINDS AT EASE

BYLINE: DAN KADISON

BODY:

   In the next millennium, anti-depressants such as Prozac will very likely go
the way of the lobotomy - and shrinks could wind up on the endangered-species
list.

   Psychology tomorrow will be a brave new world of computers, gene therapies
and virtual-reality machines, experts say.

   One advancement, predicted psychologist Dr. Joyce Brothers, will be the
development of gene therapies to cure bipolar disorders, schizophrenia and other
ailments.

   "There will be an injection of a functioning gene into an area where genes
are not functioning properly to produce the chemicals necessary to keep the
brain in balance," said Brothers.

   Though shrinks won't become altogether extinct, experts believe they'll face
stiff competition from psychotherapy software.

   Unlike the human variety - and the HMOs that regulate them - electronic
psychologists "won't say no after 10 sessions, won't summarize what you say and
send it to someone else and won't turn you in if you have weird fantasies," said
Dr. Robert Butterworth, a nationally recognized clinical psychologist.

   Virtual-reality machines, already used in some hospitals, will become big
business, too.

   Patients will step out on imaginary ledges or fly in artificial airplanes to
"desensitize" their phobias, said Dr. Albert R. Gilgen.


GRAPHIC: PSYCH LINE: 1773, 1890, 1907,1921, 1923, 1938, 1954, 1955, 1988.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1999


                             1453 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                     July 17, 1999 Saturday, 7 SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: A 19-YEAR-OLD PATENT

BODY:

   A 19-year-old patent

   U.S. Patent 4,296,100 was granted to Wayne P. Franco for his invention, a
method of treating the heart for myocardial infarction. The patent, which was
filed on June 30, 1980, and will expire on June 30, 2000, covers a number of
claims, including:

   * "A method of treating an area in the heart of a patient subjected to
ischemic heart disease, to maintain viability in that area for a sustained
period to salvage said area, said method comprising applying an effective dose
of FGF to the heart."

   * "A method of treating a coronary patient to affect the heart of the
patient, said method comprising applying an effective dose of FGF to the patient
so as to treat the heart of the patient."

   A natural bypass

   Scientists are developing ways to use special proteins that promote
angiogenesis, or blood vessel growth, to treat heart disease. By introducing
growth factors such as fibroblast growth factor (FGF) or vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) into the heart by methods such as gene therapy or direct
injection, scientists believe that they can promote growth of new vessels that
will act as a sort of natural bypass of damaged areas of the heart.

    Principles of patents

   What can be patented?

    Inventions that are new -- not "known or used by others."

   Who can get a patent?

   Any person who 'invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine,
manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement
thereof."

   Can an idea be patented?

   Ideas alone are not enough. Complete descriptions of the invention are
required.

   Can you sell a patent?

   Yes. It can even be willed to heirs.

   What rights does patent give the inventor?

   The patent grants "the right to exclude others" from making and selling the
invention for 20 years from the date the application was filed.

   How can I find out more?

   The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office's web address is www.uspto.gov.

   SOURCE: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office


GRAPHIC: Graphic: The Hartford Courant

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1999


                             1454 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                July 16, 1999, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 418 words

HEADLINE: Amish, Mennonites aid gene therapy trials

BYLINE: BY JENNIFER BROWN

DATELINE: STRASBURG, Pa.

BODY:

   Lancaster County's Amish and Mennonite people, who mostly live, work and
dress the way they did during the 19th century, are serving as test subjects in
one of the most advanced areas of medicine: gene therapy.

   Scientists hope to learn more about genetic diseases by studying members of
the insular community.

   "I can see how it could be confusing if you don't understand our beliefs,"
said Leon Newswanger, a Mennonite whose son will be one of the first
participants in human trials of a new gene therapy. "But if we don't do whatever
it takes -- if we know what could help -- then that is worse."

   The Amish and Mennonites, known as the Plain community for their simple, dark
clothes and rural way of life, have a higher rate of some inherited diseases
than other people.

   They have become instrumental in genetic research because the estimated
75,000 sect members are descended from just 47 families.

   The sects have been providing blood samples and family histories to
geneticists for years.

   Similarly, scientists have studied Ashkenazi Jews, Cajuns in Louisiana and
other groups with a high degree of genetic uniformity.

   "Amish people know the reality of genetic diseases, and so any advances are
welcomed," said Dr. Holmes Morton, who opened the Clinic for Special Children in
the heart of Pennsylvania's Amish country in 1990.

   It is one of the most advanced gene research clinics in the country, situated
in a timber-frame house surrounded by fields plowed by mules.

   Newswanger's son, Marlin, and two other children from Morton's clinic will be
the first subjects in a test of a process called chimeraplasty, which involves
tricking the body into correcting a gene mutation. If successful, the technique
could be used to treat up to 80 percent of all genetic diseases.

   All three children are stricken with Crigler-Najjar, a rare liver disease
that is more common among Amish and Mennonites. About 300 people worldwide have
Crigler-Najjar; 16 trace their roots to Lancaster's Plain sects and are being
treated by Morton.

   Crigler children suffer severe jaundice and must sleep under special
rehabilitating lights for up to 16 hours a day to prevent brain damage.

   Morton treats hundreds of children with more than 70 rare genetic diseases,
and many regularly undergo MRIs and complicated blood tests and may be
hospitalized for months at a time.

   Some children must be fed special formulas and vitamins -- another contrast
in a community where nearly all the food is homegrown.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1999


                             1455 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                July 16, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       July 16, 1999 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: PLAIN FOLK, PLAIN MISSION;
MENNONITE, AMISH SERVE AS TEST SUBJECTS FOR GENETIC RESEARCH THAT DOCTORS HOPE
WILL LEAD TO TREATMENT FOR HEREDITARY DISEASES

BYLINE: By JENNIFER BROWN; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: STRASBURG, PA.

BODY:

   Lancaster County's Amish and Mennonite people, the plain folk who mostly
live, work and dress the way they did during the 19th century, are nevertheless
serving as test subjects in one of the most advanced areas of medicine - gene
therapy.

   Scientists hope to learn more about genetic diseases by studying members of
the insular community, people who often ride in horse-drawn buggies and don't
have electricity but are willing to climb into an MRI machine.

   "I can see how it could be confusing if you don't understand our beliefs,"
said Leon Newswanger, a Mennonite whose son will be one of the first
participants in human trials of a new gene therapy. "But if we don't do whatever
it takes, if we know what could help - then that is worse."

   The Amish and Mennonites, known as the Plain community for their simple, dark
clothes and rural way of life, have a higher rate of certain inherited diseases
than other people.

   They have become instrumental in genetic research because the estimated
75,000 sect members are descended from just 47 families. The sects have been
providing blood samples and family histories to geneticists for years.

   Similarly, scientists have studied Ashkenazi Jews, Cajuns in Louisiana and
other groups with a high degree of genetic uniformity.

   "Amish people know the reality of genetic diseases and so any advances are
welcomed," said Dr. Holmes Morton, who opened the Clinic for Special Children in
the heart of Pennsylvania's Amish country in 1990.

   Newswanger's son, Marlin, and two other children from Morton's clinic will be
the first subjects in a test of a process called chimeraplasty, which involves
tricking the body into correcting a gene mutation. If successful, the technique
could be used to treat up to 80 percent of all genetic diseases.

   All three children are stricken with Crigler-Najjar, a rare liver disease
that is more common among Amish and Mennonites. About 300 people worldwide have
Crigler-Najjar; 16 trace their roots to Lancaster's Plain sects and are being
treated by Morton.

   Crigler children suffer severe jaundice and must sleep under special
rehabilitating lights for up to 16 hours a day to prevent deadly brain damage.

   Altogether, Morton treats hundreds of children with more than 70 rare genetic
diseases, and many regularly undergo MRIs and complicated blood tests and may be
hospitalized for months at a time. Some children must be fed special formulas
and vitamins - another contrast in a community where nearly all the food is
homegrown.

   "This is what it takes to keep him alive," said Glenda Groff, a Mennonite
whose 8-year-old son has a genetic disorder called maple syrup urine disease,
which is fatal without a proper diet.

   The disease - extremely rare in the general population but more common among
Mennonites - prevents the body from processing certain amino acids, which then
become toxic. One of the symptoms is urine that smells like maple sugar.

   With the opening of Morton's clinic, many Amish and Mennonite have shed their
traditional fatalism about disease.

   "There is a perception in the Plain community that some things are a fact of
life," said Rebecca Smoker, an Amish worker at Morton's clinic. "For years,
these children lived their short little lives and died without any medical
person seeing them because everybody knew they were going to die."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY ASSOCIATED PRESS; PHOTO 1; Dr. Holmes Morton runs the Clinic
for Special Children in Lancaster County, Pa.; PHOTO 2; Marlin Newswanger works
with his father, Leon Newswanger, in the family garden. Marlin will participate
in human trials for a new gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1999


                             1456 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 12, 1999, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: D; Pg. 6 Discovery

LENGTH: 2084 words

HEADLINE: Gene research makes way into Amish country;
Doctor devoted to treating kids with inherited liver disorder

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: DENISE GRADY

DATELINE: STRASBURG, Pa.

BODY:

   STRASBURG, Pa. - This was not the typical audience for a medical conference,
but then again, this was no typical conference. At an inn set in the lush
farmland of Lancaster County, doctors attending scientific lectures earlier this
month were joined by young Mennonite and Amish couples, the women in bonnets and
the men in suspenders, babies fussing in their laps.

   The Amish and Mennonites may travel by horse and buggy and forgo most modern
conveniences, but there is one bit of progress that they are eager to embrace:
gene therapy.

   If all goes as planned, conference participants learned, three children from
these communities will become the first human beings ever to test a new method
of gene therapy. If it works, it will spare them the devastating effects of a
rare but deadly inherited disease.

   In the condition, Crigler-Najjar syndrome, a substance called bilirubin, a
waste product from the destruction of worn-out red blood cells, builds up in the
body. Bilirubin is produced constantly in the human body, and normally, it is
broken down by an enzyme in the liver and excreted through the intestines.

   But in people with the syndrome, the enzyme is either absent or scarce.
Bilirubin accumulates, causing jaundice, a yellowing of the skin and the whites
of the eyes. More important, bilirubin is toxic to the nervous system, and the
children live in constant danger of brain damage. The only way they can survive
is to spend 10 to 12 hours a day under special lights that break down the
bilirubin. But as they reach their teens, the light therapy becomes less
effective. Unless they can get a liver transplant, they will suffer brain damage
or die.

   If the gene therapy works, the children will have a chance to lead more
normal lives. But previous attempts at gene therapy have been disappointing. If
the new approach, called chimeraplasty, works against Crigler-Najjar syndrome,
it would finally open the door to treatment of a host of other, more common
genetic disorders, said Dr. Michael Blaese, a gene therapy expert who left the
National Institutes of Health in January to join a Philadelphia company
specializing in the new therapy. The other disorders that might be treated
include sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis and a failure of the immune system
known as ADA deficiency.

   "I left what I thought was the best job in the world to do this because I
believe so strongly in it and believe we'll be successful," Blaese said. "I
think it will really fundamentally change the way we practice medicine."

   Blaese and other researchers, leaders in genetics and disorders involving
bilirubin, were drawn to Lancaster County largely through the efforts of Dr.
Holmes Morton.

   A Harvard-trained pediatrician, Morton first encountered Amish youngsters
with genetic diseases while he was working at a Philadelphia hospital during the
1980s. He had trained in biochemical genetics, and he recognized that some of
the children had metabolic disorders, not previously diagnosed, that could be
managed with specific diets and careful treatment of minor illnesses. But
without proper therapy, the diseases could rapidly cause brain damage. Some
parents whose children had died or become handicapped sought his help for
younger siblings.

   "I knew I could take care of them," Morton said.

   Morton was 39, and highly regarded by his colleagues, including some who were
dismayed to see him put aside a bright future in science and academia to
disappear into a small town and treat children with obscure diseases that had
resulted from inbreeding.

   But Morton saw a need and an opportunity to make a difference.In 1990, he
opened his nonprofit clinic.

   "I think of myself as a pediatrician who knows a little more than average
about biochemistry and genetics, and can use that in a primary care setting to
prevent problems," he said.

   His patients think of him in another way: "He is a gift to us," said Miriam
Martin, whose three young children are all under his care for Crigler-Najjar
syndrome.

   For generations, the Amish and Mennonites, descendants of Swiss and German
Anabaptists who settled in Pennsylvania during the 1700s, have suffered from
unusually high rates of dozens of genetic disorders. The diseases occur because
the communities arose from a small population of founders, and members, who are
forbidden to marry outside their religion, marry each other. As a result, many
people in the groups today are related, increasing the odds that both members of
a couple will unknowingly be carriers of a hereditary disease that does not
affect them but will show up in their children.

   Scientists have eagerly studied the Amish for decades, making discoveries
that filled at least one textbook on genetic disorders. But the experts who
gathered their data from Lancaster County did not stay to take care of the
diseases they identified.

   Morton said it now seemed only fair that the Amish, who have contributed so
much to the understanding of human genetics, should be given the first chance to
benefit from a promising new type of gene therapy.

   In 1989, the Mortons were about to take out a second mortgage on their home
to build a clinic, when the Wall Street Journal reported on their work. Within a
few months, a flood of donations made the loan unnecessary; and a year later, in
traditional barn-raising style, a team of Amish carpenters raised the Clinic for
Special Children.

   The Amish and Mennonites do not accept Medicare or Social Security, and they
do not buy health insurance. Although many earn good livings as farmers or
carpenters, few could afford what most medical centers would charge to treat the
complex diseases that afflict their children.

   Caroline Morton, also a Harvard graduate, acts as business manager of the
clinic. Patients are charged $ 25 or $ 30 for most visits, she said, and lab
tests cost a fraction of what most hospitals would charge. The clinic runs on $
400,000 a year, she said: from patient's fees, donations and a barbecue and
auction held the third Saturday of every September, to sell Amish and Mennonite
quilts, furniture, crafts and farm implements.

   When people ask Morton if he knows anything about Crigler-Najjar syndrome, he
tells them, "I know Crigler."

   Dr. John Crigler, a teacher of Morton's at Harvard Medical School, was also a
friend of many years. But 50 years ago he was a young pediatrician at Johns
Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, working with Dr. Victor Najjar. Together, they
treated several infants from Amish families, all of whom died from a mysterious
illness that left them with jaundice and severe damage to the nervous system.

   Crigler and Najjar knew that some of the babies they examined had siblings
who had died of the same condition. Studying family records, they found that the
different families were actually related, and that the illness followed the
pattern of a hereditary disease.

   In a paper published in 1952, they wrote: "The prognosis is extremely poor,
the patients generally dying in the first year of life. No therapeutic measures
have been found helpful." Eventually, the syndrome was discovered to occur all
over the world; in fact, representatives from New Mexico, Florida, Canada,
Kentucky, England and the Netherlands also attended the conference here.

   Children began living longer during the 1970s, when doctors realized that
phototherapy, treatment with bluish light of a certain wavelength, could break
down bilirubin. Morton now has 16 patients with the disease, ranging in age from
a few months to 15 years.

   But the disease is hard to control. Sleeping under the lamps, known as
bilirubin lights, can keep bilirubin in check, but just barely. Families live in
fear of routine childhood illnesses - earaches, sore throats, stomach viruses -
because they can make bilirubin surge out of control. When that happens, brain
damage can occur in a matter of hours or days.

   In 1994, an 8-year-old boy in Indiana who had the syndrome contracted a strep
infection and died two days later from extremely high bilirubin.

   "It was a message to the families and to me that we had to think harder about
how to take care of these children," Morton said. He has since written a
treatment plan that details ways to take care of acute illnesses and lists drugs
that must be avoided because they can raise bilirubin.

   Even when the families escape crises, the children still suffer from other
problems. They are prone to gallstones, and some must have their gall bladders
removed when they are only 3 or 4.

   Debilitating fatigue strikes some, especially the older children. No matter
how carefully they are treated, children with the syndrome often look jaundiced.
Sometimes people stare at the children, assume they have a contagious disease
and scold their parents for letting them outdoors.

   It is no fun having to sleep without pajamas or a blanket under bright lights
every night. Children complain of being too hot from the lights or too cold from
the lack of covers, and they find it disgusting that during spring and summer
the lights attract bugs. Sleep-overs may be impossible and vacations are hard
because the lights are difficult to transport.

   Four-year-old Dawn Martin, from Mifflinburg, Pa., complains that she hates
her bed because of the lights, and often sneaks out of it, said her mother,
Miriam, who must get up several times a night to return Dawn to the lights. Some
mornings, Miriam Martin wakes up to find Dawn sound asleep on the living room
couch - perilously yellow. Dawn's younger brother and sister also have the
syndrome.

   "You have all these dreams of having a healthy child," Martin said. Now, she
dreams of a cure.

   As children approach puberty, phototherapy becomes less effective and
bilirubin starts rising to dangerous levels. At that point, liver transplant is
considered.

   But Morton tries to keep children well enough to put off transplants for as
long as possible. "These are beautiful, healthy, active children," he said.
"They're a little bit yellow. You hate to put them through a transplant."

   Morton said he is hopeful that gene therapy works, and is trying to buy time
for his patients until it becomes available.

   Morton and other researchers see promise in the new approach, chimeraplasty.
It does not use viruses, and it does not attempt to replace an entire gene.
Instead, it stimulates the patient's own cells to repair just the defect in the
gene, using a molecule called a chimeraplast, a blend of DNA and the related
molecule RNA.

   Even the scientists are not sure precisely how the chimeraplasts bring about
genetic changes.

   "We know it works," said Dr. Clifford Steer, a researcher at the University
of Minnesota who was been studying the technique. "We can spend the rest of our
lives trying to figure out how."

   Successful experiments in dogs and rats have convinced researchers that it is
time to try the technique in people. Blaese said he and colleagues at Kimeragen,
the company that has developed the technology, will ask the Food and Drug
Administration for permission to proceed sometime this fall.

   They expect to test the therapy in three children, who will be treated at
Lancaster General Hospital under Morton's supervision. More than a trillion
chimeraplasts - enough to outnumber cells in the liver - will be dripped in as
an intravenous solution, on six separate days over the course of a month. With
each treatment, the dose will be increased. The chimeraplasts will be encased in
microscopic envelopes called liposomes, which will be studded with molecules
that will make them attach to liver cells, where the missing enzyme should be
produced.

   One reason that the researchers chose Crigler-Najjar syndrome as a test case
for the treatment is that if it works, the results will be easy to detect: the
children should become less jaundiced, and their bilirubin levels, measured by a
simple blood test, should fall.

   Scientists do not expect bilirubin to drop to zero, which is normal. But they
are hopeful it will drop enough to let the children live without lights or at
least with less time under the lights, and enough to free them and their parents
from the constant worry about brain damage and death.

   Crigler said he hoped he would see the syndrome he identified come full
circle in his lifetime. It has already gone from uniformly fatal to treatable,
and Crigler said he thought chimeraplasty might cure it.

   "This is the first time I've had a lot of enthusiasm about any form of gene
manipulation," he said.

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Children with Crigler-Najjar syndrome lack a liver enzyme
crucial for removing a toxic substance, bilirubin, from the blood. Children such
as 6-year-old Chris Platt, in a $ 30,000 mirrored bed, spend 10 to 12 hours a
day in light therapy, where a special light breaks down the bilirubin in their
bodies. Sleeping under the lamps can keep bilirubin in check, but just barely;
2.Amy Martin, 7, who has Crigler-Najjar syndrome, is monitored as she walks on a
treadmill; 3. Amish and Mennonite families listen to a disccussion about a new
approach that may help children with the inherited liver disorder Crigler-Najjar
syndrome; 1-3. New York Times photos

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                             1457 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                      July 12, 1999, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1021 words

HEADLINE: Coping ... while hoping for a cure;
The parents of a tot with a rare disease are trying to keep his life normal
while they seek;
answers.;

BYLINE: JIM TUNSTALL, of The Tampa Tribune;

BODY:


   CRYSTAL RIVER - Hunter Dandurand probably will never be a shortstop.

   He may never ride a bike or eat a crunchy potato chip, either.

   It will be years before he can say epidermolysis bullosa or know what it's
doing to his body.  That's because Hunter, at 2, doesn't know another life. He
was born with the rare disease. To him,  his world is normal.

   It's not for his parents.

   His mom is terrified if he runs.

   His dad gets suspicious stares when they go to the store.

   And both know too well what will happen if he gets an infection.

   EB is a usually fatal disease that causes blistering.

   But not just the ordinary kind. Hunter's skin and mucous membranes are so
fragile that what are  normal activities for most of us create risks for him.

   "He gets blisters in his mouth, his esophagus and his intestines," says his
mom, Denise, a  26-year-old Tampa native. "If we brush his hair, he gets them on
his scalp."

   If he ate a potato chip, his dad, John, adds, the sharp edges "would rip his
insides to shreds."

   His skin is slow to heal and the blisters are fast to return.

   Scars are a fact of life.

   John points to a red, partially healed strawberry on Hunter's chest.

   "That's from the adhesive tape on the monitor they put on his chest when he
was 3 months old. And  those under his arms are simply from us lifting

   him up."

   The worst of it: There is no cure.

   EB IS A genetic disease passed by both parents.

   As his body blisters and heals, constantly repeating the process, his skin
tightens. It's sort  of like what arthritis does to bones, contracting them.

   Over time, 20 or 30 years perhaps, it worsens. The hands and feet usually
curl into a ball, skin  grows over them, and fingers and toes often are fused
because they grow webs.

   Skin cancer is common. EB also affects the bone marrow and urinary tract.

   "If they don't find a cure, he won't live past 30," Denise says. "It's hard
to believe it looking  at him now - he's so active. But he'll be a cripple most
of his life."

   Some children die of the disease within a year of their births.

   For others, it's slower.

   Chicago's Karen Tummillo knows EB's path very well.

   Her 30-year-old son, Ricky, died a year ago.

   "I was 17 when he was born, and the doctors didn't know what it was - they
said he was going to  die," Tummillo says. "He survived by the grace of God and
his will to live, and he kept me going in  the process."

   Ricky was born with a few blisters, but they quickly multiplied.

   "By the time he was a month old, he was 81/2 pounds of raw meat," Tummillo
says. "They hardly knew  anything about it back then. We wrapped him in toilet
paper so that when we bathed him, it fell  off. If we used other dressings, his
skin fell off when we removed the dressings."

   Ricky had surgery six times.

   "He had surgery on his hands when (his fingers) became fused. He even had
surgery when they  pulled his teeth because his mouth kept getting smaller."

   Hunter is the sixth young EB patient treated by Tampa pediatrician Shirley
Borkowf, who also was  Denise's childhood physician.

   "He has the most severe (of the three kinds of EB), but there's always a
possibility to improve,"  says Borkowf, who works at Pediatric Healthcare
Alliance/Northside Pediatrics.

   "I had one 10 or 15 years ago that improved during puberty."

   HUNTER WAS BORN at University Community Hospital in Tampa and moved to All
Children's Hospital  in St. Petersburg two days later.

   "He didn't have skin on one leg from above the knee down," Denise says.

   "The other didn't have any skin from the shin down."

   The Dandurands estimate Hunter's medical bills already have reached several
hundred thousand  dollars. They had health insurance through Denise's previous
job, but that has lapsed and they only  recently got coverage again. Denise can
no longer work because Hunter needs daily care similar to  the kind given a burn
victim.

   He goes through four rolls of gauze, two tubes of antibiotic cream and half a
can of $ 20 formula  in a day. He also takes an antihistamine to ease the
itching. He spent his first month in hospitals  and has returned three times for
EB-related problems.

   The couple has lost track of the cost.

   But they haven't lost hope.

   For now, the brightest is a bioengineered skin that successfully grows on
people.

   Apligraf is a living material made from the foreskin of circumcised infants,
then fortified with  collagen from cows. It's designed for people with burns,
venous ulcers and rare skin diseases.

   Researchers hope a treated area will not blister again. While Apligraf is not
a cure, it may be  an effective treatment.

   "Apligraf gives us a glimmer of hope," Borkowf says.

   "It's like a permanent bandage. I think if we can cover his skin, then -
well, hopefully, it will  make Hunter's life and his care so much easier."

   He may receive Apligraf treatments beginning in September.

   Gene therapy is another hope.

   So is attitude.

   "He's lived every day of his life in pain," says John, 31, a Clearwater
native. "He copes with it.  It gives us strength."

   Hunter also gives them parental scares - magnified twofold or more.

   Aside from having EB, he's an ordinary 2-year-old.

   He loves watching "Blue's Clues" and "Rugrats" on TV. He squeals with joy and
does an impromptu  dance when John finds a family of armadillos living in their
back yard.

   He also likes going to town, and he's still too young to notice the stares
that follow wherever  he goes. Sometimes, there are comments, too, such as those
suggesting he has been abused or is  contagious - which he isn't.

   "We know sometimes he looks like he got hit by a truck," John says.

   "We didn't want him in the paper because we didn't want to turn him into a
freak show, but this  is the only way to help him. We have to make people aware
of it so there's money for research to  cure it."

   Also, a Hunter C. Dandurand account has been set up through most Suncoast
Schools Federal Credit  Union locations in the Tampa Bay area.  Jim Tunstall
writes features and can be reached at (352) 628-5558.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 5(4C),
 (2C) Hunter Dandurand, 2, shows his dad, John, that the gauze protecting his
blistered skin is coming loose. Above, he meets K.C. Forward at the
pediatrician's office, but at first K.C.'s mom pulls her son away for fear
Hunter is contagious. This happens all the time, says Hunter's mother.  FRED
BELLET, Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                             1458 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                    July 11, 1999 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: LIFE/STYLE; Pg. 07J

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: Roster of life-saving drugs is far longer than in 1900, whenaspirin
was a miracle

BYLINE: PATRICIA HAGEN

BODY:

   PATRICIA HAGEN

   At the turn of the century, doctors armed themselves with several potent new
drugs.

   Aspirin became a magic bullet for pain, inflamation and fever. New sedatives,
such as chloral hydrate and phenobarbital, helped people sleep.

   As research became more scientific, methods were developed for standardizing
the potency of medicines and eventually for mass- producing them.

   In the late 1930s, the "age of antibiotics" began. With the development of
penicillin - first used during World War II - and other antibiotics, doctors
could control the bacterial infections that killed so many in the 1920s.

   Then, after the mid-century mark, vaccines nearly eliminated other infectious
diseases - polio, small pox, measles and diptheria, to name a few.

   Eli Lilly and Co., established in the 1800s in Indianapolis, became an
increasingly important player in the century's pharmaceutical advances,
developing insulin for diabetes in the 1920s and Prozac for depression in the
1980s. Lilly also was a major producer of penicillin and other antibiotics and
the Salk polio vaccine, introduced in 1955.

   Of all the drugs produced in the 1900s, Charles O. Rutledge, dean of Purdue
University's School of Pharmacy and Pharmacological Sciences, rates these among
the most important:

   Anti-psychotic drugs to treat schizophrenia and other mental illnesses.

   Diuretics to treat high blood pressure.

   H2 blockers to treat ulcers.

   Chemotherapy drugs for treating cancer.

   Antihistimines to treat allergies.

   What to expect in the new century?

   Rutledge predicts new drug therapies for AIDS and arthritis will have great
impact in the future, as will gene therapy.

   Already, gene therapy has produced treatments for enzyme deficiencies and
cystic fibrosis, a fatal lung disease. As scientists complete the mapping of the
human genome - identifying genes associated with birth defects and certain
diseases - doctors of the future will be better able to diagnose, treat and
prevent genetic disorders and illnesses.  - By Patricia Hagen

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                             1459 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                July 11, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       July 11, 1999 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 10K

LENGTH: 832 words

HEADLINE: LIVING WELL IS BEST REVENGE AGAINST AGING

BYLINE: RON HAYBRON

BODY:

   Despite a lot of rhetoric about openness and freedom of speech, our society
has a long list of taboo subjects, things too likely to hurt someone's feelings
or too distasteful to mention. One such topic is getting old.

   For instance, when people my age describe themselves as old, younger folks
frequently chide us. "Oh, you're not old. You shouldn't say that. You're only as
old as you feel," as if admitting to feeling old is somehow in bad taste.
Perhaps it is an attempt at courtesy; more likely it is another way of trying to
deny that damage from accumulating years will have its way with all of us, face
lifts and liposuction notwithstanding.

   For the very young, it is possible to infer from research into the biology of
aging that the process may soon be slowed or even reversed through gene therapy,
or with proper diet. Researchers have discovered that a certain nematode worm
has a gene that, when mutated, can extend the life of the creature by two or
three times. There is evidence that very-low-calorie diets can considerably
extend life spans of mice and other animals. And foods rich in antioxidants may
help extend life. These chemicals neutralize the free radicals that are widely
viewed as causing cell damage, which contributes to aging.

   Evolutionary biologists believe that natural selection has not produced an
"aging clock," a genetic mandate that controls the onset of aging. In most
species, injury or disease ends life before signs of age are manifest. Death
does not need a program; it will happen to all organisms. Genes play a role in
aging and so does lifestyle. But once we have reached sexual maturity, plus a
few years to raise the next generation, living another 50 years or 150 is
irrelevant to the larger, natural scheme.

   Preserving your health

   Sooner or later, a person is forced to give up on the hope that medical
technology will come to the rescue, and eventually we tire of the assorted ruses
and denial strategies intended to obscure the reality of our situation. We are
aging, we will die and trying to preserve decent health is the only sensible
option in the life of the "not-quite-old" or "almost old," or whichever
euphemism is in vogue to label the latter-life condition.

   I find myself in that stage, and over recent months have been forced to
develop an exercise regime aimed at improving and preserving my cardiovascular
health. Since "maturity" has brought me a spectrum of physical problems, I
cannot indulge my preference for running. Aging hip joints and damage to the
lower back have reduced me to fast walking, with hand weights held high to help
keep my heart rate up.

   The objective is to elevate one's rate to a physician-set target for a
reasonable length of time on a regular basis. I strive to keep mine between 110
and 120 beats per minute for 45 minutes five or six times a week. If the weather
is bad, I use a treadmill, but I vastly prefer walking outside, for the
aesthetic benefits and to have a rapport with nature. Last month I was able to
do my walking on an ocean beach in the Bahamas, my favorite environment with
which to be in harmony with nature.

   To avoid the heat of the day, I walked just after daybreak. On some days,
this put me at odds with the tide. Walking or running on an ocean beach is best
done in the few hours around low tide, when the sand is damp and firm, yet
yielding enough to minimize pounding. Such constraints, though inconveniencing,
are an essential part of coming to grips with the natural world, which presents
a situation not controllable by buttons or switches, or human desires.

   Except for me, the beach was deserted, yet even in such a setting, it took
time to clear my mind of a jumble of thoughts and become open to the
surroundings. In that early, thinking phase, I identified and evaluated the many
influences relevant to maintaining my heart rate: the conditions underfoot
(whether I was on firm sand or above the tide mark in the soft stuff) the
varying strength of the trade winds, the air temperature, the height of the sun,
whether I was moving upwind or down.

   A 'being' state

   All these factors determined my pace, but after about 20 minutes I found
myself entering a thoughtless "being" state, when I no longer fretted about the
effort involved, no longer counted paces, no longer needed to monitor my pulse.
Then I was free to exist in the glory of the place, the colors of the sea and
sky, the sight of the palms along the bluffs lining the beach, the constant,
gentle surge and break of the waves, moderated by the reefs offshore but not
completely subdued. And above all, I was free of reminders of my mortality.

   Now I am back to treadmills and asphalt, to machinery in a cluttered basement
or sealed-up cars swishing by, to the bustle of striving, which limits and
defines modern life. I'd rather be by the morning ocean, and I'd prefer not
getting old, but I do my best to accept both conditions and I'm careful not to
mention either to the wrong parties.

COLUMN: SCIENCE NOTEBOOK

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                             1460 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          July 11, 1999 Sunday, GRETNA

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 18F2

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   *** DONATION AIDS SCHOLARS ***

   Impressed by Isidore Newman School's continuing commitment to diversity,
philanthropist Charlie Zucker has donated an additional $100,000 to the Charlie
Zucker Scholarship Fund, which enables talented African-American students to
achieve an outstanding education. The first four Zucker scholars have completed
their first year in Newman's high school.

   The scholars are selected on the basis of ability, achievement and financial
need. The four current Zucker students are enjoying academic success at Newman
and are taking advantage of the school's extracurricular offerings.

    *** PROFESSOR RECEIVES CHAIR ***

   Prescott L. Deininger recently received the first Marguerite Main Zimmerman
Chair in Basic Cancer Research at Tulane University.

   The chair was established in 1993 through a bequest of Rodger F. Zimmerman in
honor of his mother. It will support basic cancer research to further prevention
and treatment programs that translate basic discoveries to clinical
applications.

   Deininger, an internationally renowned expert in molecular genetics and
cancer research, is director for basic science programs and associate director
of the Tulane Cancer Center. In addition, he is a professor in the Department of
Environmental Health Sciences at the Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, and director of the laboratory of molecular genetics at the Alton
Ochsner Medical Foundation.

   In honor of the investiture, a lecture on "Development of Human Gene Therapy"
was given by Dr. Theodore Friedmann, under whom Deininger served as a
postdoctoral research associate. Friedmann is professor of pediatrics and
director of the gene therapy program at the University of California in San
Diego.

   *** SCHOLARSHIPS AWARDED ***

   The United Teachers of New Orleans awarded five scholarships to graduating
high school seniors at a recent luncheon ceremony.

   Three $2,000 scholarships, supported by contributions from UTNO members, were
awarded to students who plan to become teachers. The recipients were Shannon
Sherrye Ross of McDonogh No. 35 High School, who will attend the University of
New Orleans to study early childhood education; James Smith of Marion Abramson
High School, who will attend Dillard University to study history and music; and
Angelie Irene Davis of McDonogh No. 35, who will attend Louisiana State
University to study early childhood education.

   A $1,500 scholarship, given by Fringe Benefits Management Co. in honor of the
late businessman Jack Parker, was presented to Renee Rolland of Mount Carmel
Academy, who will major in accounting at LSU.

   A $2,000 scholarship contributed by the Rittenberg and Samuel law firm was
presented to Denitta Arnaud of Ben Franklin High School, who will attend Loyola
University and major in finance and international business.

   *** EDUCATORS RECOGNIZED ***

   Alpha Theta chapter of Phi Delta Kappa national sorority presented its
Outstanding Educator Awards at a recent luncheon.

   Awards were presented to Lynette D. Bates, assistant director of Upward Bound
at UNO; Mary Cartwright, dean of pupil services for special education and gifted
and talented students at West Jefferson High School; Trudi Hayne-Dyer, former
special education coordinator for Orleans Parish schools; Myra L. Harris, a
teacher of severely handicapped students at Estelle Elementary School in
Jefferson Parish; Martha A. Jones, a teacher at Lacoste Elementary School in St.
Bernard Parish; Leonard Parker, principal of Little Woods Elementary School and
Area II Elementary Principal of the Year for 1998-99 in Orleans Parish; Pinkie
R. Reddix, an adult education teacher in Orleans Parish; James E. Williams, a
teacher at Phoenix High School in Plaquemines Parish; and Linda Auzout-Young,
staff developer at Mary D. Coghill Elementary School in Orleans Parish and
coordinator of the Region IX Social Studies Fair.

   *** LAW LIBRARIAN CITED ***

   Catherine Lemann, electronic resources and reference librarian for the Law
Library of Louisiana, was presented the 1999 Margaret T. Lane Award by the
Government Documents Round Table. The award honors an individual or organization
that has made an especially significant contribution in advancing access to or
use of government information in Louisiana.

   Lemann was recognized for her work in constructing the Louisiana Supreme
Court's Web site, which gives the public access to the court's decisions and
opinions and other valuable information.

   A frequent speaker, Lemann has shared her knowledge about working with court
information with many court and library groups.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1999


                             1461 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                            July 10, 1999, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: LR hospital sees 3 departments listed among nation's best Magazine's
report pleases University Hospital chief

BYLINE: DOUG PETERS, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE

BODY:

   Three departments at Little Rocks University Hospital rank among the nations
best, according to U.S. News & World Reports annual Best Hospitals issue.
Otolaryngology, the ear, nose and throat department, made the magazines list for
the third straight year, ranking 33rd out of 188 hospitals. Last year, the
department ranked 38th out of 132.
The departments of orthopedics, the repair of damaged bones and joints, and
urology, which deals with maladies such as prostate cancer or sexual
dysfunction, made the rankings for the first time, at 30th and 35th,
respectively.
In addition, Dr. Milton Waner, an otolaryngologist who spends most of his time
at Arkansas Childrens Hospital, is the focus of the magazines cover story.
Dr. Charles Smith, medical director of University Hospital, said he was pleased
with the rankings, but not necessarily surprised.
Frankly, Id be surprised if we didnt have at least four or more [departments
ranked] next year, Smith said. Our reputation here is slowly trickling out,
because we have a lot of out-of-state and international patients coming in.
Such national and international recognition is important in attracting not only
patients, but medical experts to Little Rock. Smith also credited the stable
leadership of Dr. Harry Ward, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
chancellor, and Dr. I. Dodd Wilson, dean of the UAMS College of Medicine, for
continuing to build the hospitals staff and infrastructure.
If you ever stop building in this field, I think that kind of starts your
decline. Thats our philosophy, Smith said.
The magazines ranking is based on reputation, mortality rate and factors such as
technology and the ratio of registered nurses to hospital beds.
Hospitalwide, UAMS boasted nearly three registered nurses per hospital bed over
a 24-hour period, well ahead of any other hospital listed in the rankings. Its
ratio of 2.85 registered nurses per bed was up from 2.24 in 1998. The ratio
helps the hospital in ranking such as this one, but because of budget
constraints related to managed-care and Medicare compensation, the high staffing
level may have to change in the future. But Smith stressed that he did not know
of any immediate plans to do that.
I think our excellence in nursing care is one of the reasons that our reputation
has been so solid, he said. We certainly dont want to do anything but make that
better.
Dr. Ehab Hanna, associate professor of otolaryngology, said his department,
although casually known as ear, nose and throat, offers a broad array of medical
services, from combating sleep disorders, sinus problems and hearing and balance
problems to treating head and neck cancer and performing reconstructive surgery
on trauma and cancer patients.
With the addition last month of a microbiologist to conduct research into areas
such as gene therapy for head and neck cancers, the department should continue
to climb in the rankings, he said.
Waner, an otolaryngologist who specializes in removing vascular malformations,
bundles of blood vessels that become hard-to-remove growths, is featured on the
cover of the magazine and in a lengthy article. Patients come from all over the
world to see Waner, who describes his work as being on the cutting edge.
Work that were doing is really shaping the way these children are treated and
will be treated in the future, he said.
Although Waner is a professor of otolaryngology at UAMS, he spends most of his
time at Arkansas Childrens Hospital, which was not included in any of the
magazines top-hospital lists. The article on Waner was not available Friday.
Dr. Graham Greene, assistant professor of urology and head of genito-urinary
oncology, called his departments ranking awesome.
I think this is a huge plus, said Greene, who came to UAMS two years ago from
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. Its an affirmation of doing a good job.
In orthopedics, Dr. Richard Nicholas said services such as knee and hip
replacement, a strong orthopedic cancer program and the addition of a new hand
surgeon help secure the departments place among the nations best.
Im real pleased that were recognized as a quality orthopedic program, because I
believe that we are, Nicholas said. We have a good training program for our
residents. We have a comprehensive program thats excellent for our state.
Photo:
Milton Waner

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                             1462 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 10, 1999, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Volunteers sought for prostate cancer treatment

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   The Methodist Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine are seeking 100
prostate cancer patients to test a new treatment that combines radiation and
gene therapy.

   The joint clinical study uses a technique called Intensity Modulated
Radiation Therapy, or IMRT, in which a computer directs radiation over a
three-dimensional target area to destroy cancer cells with minimal damage to
nearby tissue.

   At the same time, a "killer gene" is injected into the prostate and interacts
with a drug taken orally, converting the drug into a substance that kills cancer
cells with no significant side effects, Methodist officials said.

   The therapy is conducted on an outpatient basis over seven to 16 weeks, with
follow-up visits at four-month intervals in the first year and longer intervals
in later years.

   The clinical trials are limited to patients whose cancer has not spread
beyond the prostate and who have had no previous surgical, hormonal or radiation
treatments for the disease.

   Second to lung cancer as a cause of cancer deaths in men, prostate cancer
strikes one in 10 men and kills more than 39,000 in the United States each year.
Prostate cancer accounts for 43 percent of all cancer in males.

   Symptoms include frequent urination, weak or interrupted urine flow, blood in
the urine and nagging pain in the back, hips or pelvis.

   The trials are sponsored by the two institutions and Advantagene Inc.
Patients or their insurers must pay standard costs, including the radiation
therapy, but there is no cost for the drug or gene therapy.

   Those interested may call 713-790-2700.


LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1999


                             1463 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          July 9, 1999 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: HIGHER EDUCATION GETS IMPRESSIVE BOOST IN FUNDING

BODY:

   Louisiana has increased its funding to higher education by an impressive 31.5
percent over the last three years. Though we are still below the Southern
average, this is among the most progressive increases in funding to higher
education in the nation.

   At its last meeting, the Board of Regents adopted a resolution, thanking Gov.
Foster and the Legislature for once again making postsecondary education a top
priority. Through their continued support, the board is designing strategic
investments to create greater postsecondary educational opportunities for the
people of Louisiana.

   This session showed that the administration and Legislature are continuing to
make those investments.

   In next year's budget, which began July 1, postsecondary education will
receive an approximate $48.7 million increase in recurring funds. Additional
one-time money also will be available in the operating budget for specific
projects.

   The budget increase includes funds for faculty salary raises, gene therapy
research, cancer and biomedical research, endowed chairs and professorships,
continued development of the statewide distance learning network, teacher
education reforms, new equipment purchases, restoration of earlier cuts in
campus library budgets and funds for emerging community and technical colleges.

   The board was especially pleased that the administration and Legislature
adopted our recommended capital outlay priorities for our colleges and
universities. In so doing, they have demonstrated their continued support and
confidence in the regents, the four management boards and the entire
postsecondary education system in Louisiana.

   That confidence is a direct result of their efforts in creating a historic
climate that has enabled the board to represent and speak for higher education
with a single and united voice.

   This administration, Legislature and postsecondary education have forged a
partnership with a common focus -- meeting the economic and social needs of the
people of Louisiana by providing flexible, relevant and better-funded
educational opportunities. To that end, the board measures every new academic
program and initiative by three standards -- relevance, performance and
accountability.

   Once again, the Regents thank the governor and Legislature for their support
in helping us create a postsecondary educational system for which the entire
state can be proud.

   Mary Ella Sanders

   Chair,

   Board of Regents

   Baton Rouge

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1999


                             1464 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 1999 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                     July 7, 1999 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B09, Research Notebook

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: COLORADO PLATEAU ASTEROID MELTED 50,000 YEARS AGO, NEW STUDY SAYS

SOURCE: Compiled by Richard L. Hill - of The Oregonian staff

BODY:

   Most of the asteroid that blasted Meteor Crater out of the Colorado Plateau
melted, according to a new study.

   The finding, reported in the July 2 issue of the journal Science, contradicts
a previously held theory that the asteroid vaporized and gives a glimpse of what
happens when similar objects slam into Earth every 6,000 years or so.

   Meteor Crater, near Winslow, Ariz., measures four-fifths of a mile wide and
570 feet deep. It was formed 50,000 years ago when an asteroid hit at about
45,000 mph with a force of a 20- to 40-megaton bomb.

   Elisabetta Pierazzo, a researcher at the University of Arizona's Lunar and
Planetary Laboratory, said that only about 15 percent of the rear, outer part of
the asteroid remained solid after impact and that the other 85 percent of the
projectile melted. Most of the asteroid, which was about 100 feet in diameter,
spread as an enormous plume produced by gases released from limestone. A
fraction of the material survived to form sand-grain-sized particles called
spheroids.

   DNA confirms new deer species in Southeast Asia, journal reports

   An adult deer measuring just 20 inches at the shoulder and weighing no more
than 25 pounds has been confirmed through DNA testing as a new species, making
it the world's smallest deer.

   A recent genetic study by the Wildlife Conservation Society confirmed the
"leaf deer" or "leaf muntjac" as unique. The results were published in the
journal Animal Conservation.

   The deer, which lives in remote mountain regions of Southeast Asia, was first
seen by society biologist Alan Rabinowitz in 1997 during field surveys in
northern Myanmar, formerly Burma. Rabinowitz obtained samples for the DNA work
from local hunters' specimens.

   New observatory takes close look at smallest parts of live organisms

   Researchers at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Wash.,
have established a new observatory designed to focus on the smallest components
of living organisms.

   With the Cellular Observatory, the researchers have been able to obtain
chemical information from a living cell without destroying or invading it. "And
for the first time, we have been able to do this also on the cell nucleus, the
internal control center of the cell," said Robert Wind, a researcher at the lab
operated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy.

   Wind and other team members achieved the result by placing a single frog
cell, a Xenopus oocyte, inside a nuclear magnetic resonance microscope imager.
This type of frog cell has been widely used by scientists for many decades
because it shares numerous traits with human cells. The microscope reveals
information about the cell's chemical composition and allows scientists to
monitor changes in both the shape and the chemical contents of the cell as they
occur.

   Studying cellular changes as they occur will help scientists learn how cells
fight off diseases and how to predict diseases.

   'Sponges' deliver healing genes to dogs' bones; human trials next

   Spongelike devices that helped repair broken bones in dogs by inserting
bone-building genes may one day benefit the thousands of elderly people who
suffer fractures every year.

   Trials using the new procedure on people could occur next year, said Dr.
Jeffrey Bonadio, who led the research team at the University of Michigan Medical
School. The journal Nature Medicine last week reported the combination of gene
therapy and tissue engineering.

   The researchers used the gene for parathyroid hormone, which regulates the
amount of calcium in the blood by affecting the kidneys, intestines and bones,
Bonadio said. The team used a structure in cells called a plasmid, which can
reproduce and carry genetic instructions. The plasmid they used codes cells to
produce the hormone. They implanted the plasmid in a spongelike material made of
collagen.

   In tests on dogs with fractures, the scientists inserted the sponges into the
damaged area, and bone cells began to grow into it. Those cells then took up the
gene "and became growth factories," Bonadio said. The bone increased at the
fracture sites.

   -- Compiled by Richard L. Hill


LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                             1465 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             July 7, 1999 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Hormone can multiply life-giving blood cells

BYLINE: Maggie Fox, REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   An extra hormone can help elusive blood stem cells multiply and thrive
outside the body, offering cancer patients and others a ready supply of the
life-giving cells, scientists said yesterday.

    Doctors have long been trying to find a way to grow large numbers of the
cells, which give rise to red blood cells and the white blood cells of the
immune system and are used to replace bone marrow after intense chemotherapy or
radiotherapy.

    The cells are very difficult to find and filter out of the blood, and
usually die after about a month in a laboratory dish.

    But Mayumi Yagi, Stephen Bartelmez and colleagues at the University of
Washington in Seattle and the Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System
said they had coaxed stem cells into living in the lab for up to four months.

    Writing in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, they said
they had transplanted their 4-month-old cells into mice whose bone marrow was
destroyed by radiation, and saved the lives of the mice.

    "It's now almost a year later, and these animals are walking around as
healthy as they can possibly be. We can't find anything wrong with them,"
Bartelmez said in a statement.

    "The implications of this are huge," he added. "It was the first
demonstration that stem cells could be substantially expanded outside of an
animal."

    One of the secrets was thrombopoietin, a hormone the team tested to try to
encourage the growth of platelet cells involved in blood clotting. Bartelmez,
who studies stem cells, found them flourishing in the cultures.

    "I looked at this culture and I just about fell over. It was totally unheard
of," he said.

    He said this might offer a new source of stem cells for patients whose bone
marrow has been destroyed by cancer treatments. The harsh treatments often kill
off the cancer, but they also leave a person without an immune system or a way
to produce new blood cells.

    Infusions of stem cells can replace their bone marrow in days. The problem
has been getting enough of the elusive cells.

    A company based in Ann Arbor, Mich., Aastrom Biosciences, has a patented
system for growing and multiplying such stem cells. The AastromReplicell system,
which attempts to replicate the bone marrow environment, is available in Europe
and being tested in patients in the United States.

    Bartelmez said the research also has implications for a more experimental
use of stem cells - delivering gene therapy. The idea would be to introduce
normal genes into the blood stem cells of patients suffering from genetic
diseases and try to recolonize the patient's bone marrow with these engineered
genes.

    "If we can insert a normal gene into these dividing stem cells, we may in
many cases cure the disease," Bartelmez said.

    "One reason nobody has been able to do this up until now is because no one
can get stem cells to divide outside the animal and just keep dividing." Blood
stem cells are just one of several types of stem cells. Researchers also have
isolated neural stem cells from the brain, and stem cells that form muscle,
cartilage, fat and other tissue.

    Then there are embryonic stem cells, which come from early embryos and which
have the potential to become any kind of cell at all. But their use is
controversial, and some scientists think techniques like that reported by the
University of Washington team might offer alternative sources.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1466 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                             July 06, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: Suburban; Pg.  1

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: NABE NEWS  A GROWTH IN HOURS AT GARDEN

BODY:


   BEDFORD PARK One of the borough's most popular destinations is offering
extended hours on Thursdays and Saturdays this summer.

   Starting this week, the grounds of the New York Botanical Garden will be open
until 8 p.m. on those days, giving visitors a chance to take advantage of the
longer daylight hours to check out "America's Trains and Trees."

   The 6,000-square-foot exhibit is an outdoor landscape with seven colorful
model trains traveling over 800 feet of track.

   It features landscapes depicting scenes from across the country.

   The garden is normally open Tuesday through Sunday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. The
extended Thursday and Sunday hours will be in effect until Sept. 12.

   Norwood

   Montefiore Medical Center is seeking patients to participate in the first
research trials in the Northeast to determine the effectiveness of a new
gene-therapy drug to treat liver tumors.

   The new drug is delivered directly to the liver using an implanted pump.

   "The purpose of the study is to evaluate whether the drug, in combination
with standard chemotherapy, is a better treatment than chemotherapy alone," said
T.S. Ravikumar, director of the hospital's liver tumor program.

   To apply to participate in the study, call toll-free, (877) 727-8887.

   Morris Park

   The North Bronx-Westchester Neighborhood Restoration Association kicks off
its free summer concert series tonight at 7:30 with "Tiempe Belle," featuring
Neapolitan singer Nancy Corvino.

   The concert will be held at Loreto Park on Morris Park Ave., a block away
from Williamsbridge Road.

   State Sen. Guy Velella (R-Bronx), who funds the association through a
legislative grant, said concerts will be held throughout the summer in the
Bronx, Yonkers and other parts of lower Westchester.

   To request a schedule or obtain directions to any of the concerts, call (718)
823-7706.

LOAD-DATE: July 06, 1999


                             1467 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 3; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

HEADLINE: A Disturbing Approach

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   It is disturbing that the Amish community, which forgoes modern technology,
now seems to embrace genetic experiments as a treatment for Crigler-Najjar
syndrome, a fatal genetic disease afflicting their children ("At Gene Therapy's
Frontier, the Amish Build a Clinic," June 29).

    This inherited genetic disorder could be prevented by prenatal diagnosis, or
avoided by relaxing the religious rule that encourages Amish members to marry
inside their small community, thereby increasing the odds of having children
with this disease.

   Seeking expensive, extreme, high-tech genetic interventions for preventable
diseases illustrates the fundamental wrongs of a community that puts its
religious practices ahead of the welfare of their children. Children should not
have to endure predictable suffering and premature death for the sake of their
parents' religious practices.

EVELYNE SHUSTER
Philadelphia




   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1999


                             1468 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             July 6, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 041

LENGTH: 1614 words

HEADLINE: ON THE NEWSSTAND

BODY:

   AH, summer. Warm sunshiny days, cold beer, exposed flesh. It's a time when we
find our fancy turning to, well, business. But, oddly enough, we don't seem to
be the only ones. All of this week's magazines are working a business angle.

   Once truly alternative, now increasingly mainstream, music mag Spin kicks it
off with a cover feature trumpeting rap-metal phenom Limp Bizkit and its
frontman, Fred Durst. Not only has the band been raking in coin since its second
album entered the charts at No. 1, but Jimmy Iovine has hired the versatile
Durst as a senior VP at Interscope. The issue also has a piece on why concert
tickets are more expensive than ever, accompanied by an excellent graphic
breaking down where the money from ticket sales actually goes. Together with its
usual offering of features, bios and record reviews, it's a strong post-Gucc
issue.

   Time Out New York has an economics twist to it this week - or, more
precisely, a how-to-keep-businesses-from-getting-your-money twist - with a cover
package on how to live cheaply in New York. The tips range from the eminently
sensible (use sugar water instead of hair gel) to the downright weird (something
about turning dryer lint into something called craft paste). Sidebars on the art
of Dumpster-diving, free things to do in NYC, and how to sell your body legally
are informative and moderately funny.

   Meanwhile, the traditional business mags turned in rather ho-hum efforts.
Business Week's cover story gets deep into the world of gene therapy by looking
at one family battling a rare genetic disorder. Informative, but a bit dull and
melodramatic. Robert J. Barro contributes a funny column on discussing
third-world debt relief over lunch with rock star Bono. The rest is predictable,
but one story on bondholders snapping up securitized insurance risk is admirably
ahead of the curve.

   Fortune's cover story on America's best companies for minorities is PC
bean-counting at its worst - and a snooze, to boot. But there's a timely
interview with Coke CEO Doug Ivester and a great piece on former Spy magazine
editors Graydon Carter and Kurt Andersen joining the glitterati they once
mocked. Note to editors: The story on "retail anthropologist" Paco Underhill has
already been done many times by many different magazines, newspapers and TV
shows. The New Yorker did it in 1996, for Pete's sake.

   Columnist Michael Wolff goes on the record in New York magazine as the first
person to predict that Disney's recent woes may lead to the ouster of Michael
Eisner. With no quotes supporting his assertion (and many seemingly
contradicting it), the piece comes off as little more than a cheap swipe. The
cover story on Bill Bradley and Al Gore battling for the support and money of
New York's liberal elite is good.

   Nina Munk - who had tongues wagging last week when she left her six-figure
job as enfant terrible at Fortune after a year and a half - pops up in this
week's New Yorker with a "Talk of the Town" bit on Playboy's disgruntled
shareholders. The comparison of Al Gore's basketball skills and political style
makes for the best piece in the section, and the "Back Page" cartoon riffing off
Larry Summers' infamous third-world memo is a hoot. There's also a strong cover
story on the still-present dangers of smallpox, making for an overall solid
issue.

   It has a well-researched story on the increasing rift between Al Gore and
Bill Clinton and a good wrap of the startlingly early fund-raising for Campaign
2000, but for some reason Time splashes with an overwrought (but
soccer-mom-friendly) package on "Sports-Crazed Kids." The story is well done,
but it's not exactly a new idea. A soldier offers insight into the latest
India-Pakistan tussle over Kashmir, and there's a good piece on the recent CIA
push to topple Milosevic.

   Newsweek has a good scoop that suspected nuclear spy Wen Ho Lee might be
charged with some lesser offenses, and a timely (if somewhat dull) cover package
on how young Latinos are changing the face of American culture and politics. The
issue also has good stories on the seedy life and death of Las Vegas casino
owner Ted Binion and South Africa's attempts to manufacture cheap AIDS drugs. A
memo from George Stephanopoulos to Hillary Clinton on how to win New York is an
admirable idea, but it falls flat.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1999


                             1469 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     July 6, 1999, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 1929 words

HEADLINE: YOUTH DENIES ROLE IN U.S. KILLING IN A SURPRISE PLEA TO ISRAELI COURT

BYLINE: MARK LAVIE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Israel

BODY:


   A Maryland teen-ager entered a surprise plea of innocent yesterday to charges
of murdering a classmate but admitted that he helped dismember the body and burn
it, setting the stage for a trans-Atlantic trial that could strain U.S.-Israeli
ties.

   The grisly 1997 killing in Maryland has pitted the Israeli justice system
against members of the House of Representatives and Attorney General Janet Reno,
who are angry at Israel for refusing to extradite Samuel Sheinbein, 19, for
trial at home

   Some legislators have threatened to cut the $ 3 billion package Israel
receives annually in U.S. economic and military assistance.

   Sheinbein, wearing a plaid shirt and black trousers, stared blankly straight
ahead as his lawyer, David Libai, told a Tel Aviv court he was not guilty of
killing fellow teen-ager Alfred Tello Jr.

   The plea means Sheinbein will face a full trial in Israel, where he fled for
shelter a few days after Tello's mutilated, dismembered body was found in an
empty garage near the suspect's home in Aspen Hill, Md.

   Israel's Supreme Court ruled in February that Sheinbein technically was an
Israeli citizen and therefore could not be extradited. His father was born here,
but left with his family in the 1950s. After the court decision, Israeli
prosecutors quickly pledged to try Sheinbein on murder charges.

   The extradition ban was passed in 1978 by the government of Menachem Begin.
The late prime minister, whose political vision was heavily defined by the
Holocaust, believed that handing a Jew over to non-Jews for trial would be
unconscionable.

   Prosecutors in Maryland joined Reno in expressing their disappointment over
the decision, but pledged to work with Israel should a trial be necessary.

   Libai, a former Israeli justice minister, told the court yesterday that
Sheinbein had "never made a confession, either here or in the United States."

   Libai conceded that Sheinbein was in a car with Tello before the killing and
said his client was guilty of dismembering and burning the body two days
afterward.

   But he challenged the state to prove Sheinbein took an active part in the
killing with his friend, Aaron Needle. Needle committed suicide in a Maryland
prison just before his trial was to start.

   At earlier court hearings, Libai had indicated Sheinbein would admit to the
charges, and he had told The Associated Press that "we will not contest the
facts of the case."

   In Maryland, Montgomery County State's Attorney Douglas Gansler expressed
anger at the turnaround yesterday.

   "Sheinbein, through his lawyer, has said he was going to plead guilty if he
wasn't extradited," Gansler said.

   ????? pg99 0030 990706 N S 9907060115 00006026? IT N

   Another landmark achievement in stem cell research has brought the primitive
cells even closer to fulfilling expectations that they can be used in everything
from cancer treatment to gene therapy.

   Stem cells are those that make mature, specialized cells, and scientists at
the University of Washington in Seattle have now managed to multiply mouse blood
stem cells in a lab dish - a feat that researchers have been attempting for
years.

   If scientists can duplicate the process in human blood stem cells, the
technique could simplify bone marrow transplantation and provide cells into
which genes could be inserted to treat a variety of illnesses.

   "The bottom line is it wasn't that difficult," said study investigator
Stephen Bartelmez, of the findings that were published in today's issue of the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The key was to keep the cells
in a lab growth culture for a long time.

   "The stem cells don't start increasing in numbers for more than one month,"
he explained. "Most labs, they're impatient. They would have thrown out the
culture" because, until his lab's work, stem cells died after a month outside
the body.

   Hematopoietic stem cells like those taken from the mice produce white and red
blood cells and other cellular components of blood.

   In the body, stem cells are able to replicate themselves. But until now, when
they were put in a lab dish, the cells rapidly differentiated into specialized
types and their stem cell qualities were lost.

   Scientists want to expand the numbers of stem cells for several reasons. For
some cancers, doctors prescribe chemotherapy, radiation therapy or both to kill
cancerous cells that are lurking in the patient's body. At high doses, the
treatments destroy the bone marrow, which contains blood-producing stem cells.
Without a marrow transplant, the patient will die.

   The transplant can come from a donor, but in some cases, the patient's own
stem cells are collected over several days before the cancer therapy and, once
the treatment is over, injected back into the patient to replenish the blood.
Many stem cells must be stored to make the transplant a success, and that
increases the risk of giving cancerous cells back to the patient.

   But if the new experimental technique works in humans, doctors could collect
a small tube of blood from a patient, take stem cells from it, multiply them a
hundred-fold or more in the lab and give those back to the patient after cancer
treatment. That reduces the chance of giving dangerous cells back to the patient
and is also more convenient for the patient.

   Another advantage of lab-based stem cell expansion is in the realm of gene
therapy.

   Genes can be inserted easily into a dividing cell, but stem cells in the past
couldn't be made to divide and create more stem cells. The new technique allows
stem cells to divide in the lab, which means genes could be inserted that would
be passed along to all the daughter cells that the stem cell creates once it's
back in the body, which would make it a powerful way to treat a myriad of
genetic and other diseases.

   Bartelmez said luck played a big role in the discovery. His colleague, who
was trying to grow blood-clotting platelets in the lab, asked him to help her
get rid of some pesky cells in a culture that had been "contaminating" her
experiments.

   "The first time I looked at the culture, I nearly fell off my chair," he
said. He saw thriving stem cells. "I was freaking out."

   The culture he was looking at was unusual because it had been sitting around
for nearly three months and because it contained a growth factor, called
thrombopoietin, that is known to stimulate platelet growth.

   Using that information, the researchers added thrombopoietin and a few more
ingredients to their samples of mouse bone marrow stem cells, and waited.

   "This system we've discovered here, the stem cells are turning over all the
time," Bartelmez said. "They're constantly making stem cells."

   They then took the experiment further. They took bone marrow samples from
mice before irradiating them to kill the remaining marrow. Then they
transplanted the marrow along with the cells they had created in the lab back
into the mice.

   A unique gene marker distinguished the lab-grown cells from those created by
the mouse's own stem cells. The ratio of those cells told them that not only had
the lab stem cells successfully been transplanted into the mouse, but were
multiplying inside the mouse's body.

   "This is a landmark study," said Albert Donnenberg, director of the bone
marrow processing laboratory at the UPMC Health System. He added that "there is
reason to be hopeful that these data will directly translate" into humans.

   It might not be practical, however, to spend four months waiting for
sufficient numbers of stem cells to grow for some clinical applications, he
noted.

   Other avenues of stem cell expansion could be proving successful, as well.

   Dr. Richard Shadduck, director of the Western Pennsylvania Cancer Institute,
said that his research has shown thrombopoietin and other growth factors can
stimulate multiplication of stem cells from another source: human umbilical cord
blood.

   Such blood is obtained during a baby's delivery and, if not used for research
or tests, is thrown away. But the umbilical cord blood one day might also be
used for bone marrow transplants.

   The growth factor combination used in his lab "leads to a striking expansion
over one to two months, so the stem cell population can increase 50to 100-fold,"
Shadduck said. "Any breakthroughs that would cause stem cells to proliferate
would be tremendous."

   ????? pg99 0031 990706 N S 9907060120 00003968? IT N

   NATO and Moscow reached an agreement yesterday opening the way for Russia to
deploy more troops into Kosovo, while Serbian leaders demanded that peacekeepers
investigate alleged prison camps holding Serbs in the province.

   The head of the U.N. refugee agency, on a visit to Kosovo, said she feared
for the safety of Serbs and Gypsies in the province as ethnic Albanians returned
home after being brutally driven out by Serb forces.

   NATO officials hope the deployment of Russian forces will reassure Kosovo
Serbs, who feel that their fellow Slavs and traditional allies will protect them
better than Western troops.

   In the southern Serbian city of Leskovac, up to 10,000 people demonstrated
last evening after a technician interrupted local television to demand the
ouster of a ruling party official.

   The protest 120 miles southeast of Belgrade was a further sign of growing
discontent with the government of President Slobodan Milosevic.

   "Thieves, thieves!" or "Changes, changes!" chanted the crowd as they marched
through Leskovac. Police made no attempt to stop the rally, which was not
organized by any opposition party.

   Last week, during a break in a basketball match, Ivan Novkovic, a technician
at Leskovac television, accused Gov. Zivojin Stefanovic of abusing his authority
by destroying the local economy and organizing the massive mobilization of local
army reservists during NATO airstrikes on Yugoslavia.

   Novkovic had urged people to rally yesterday and demand the resignation of
Stefanovic, a member of Milosevic's ruling Socialist Party member.

   Flights of Russian troops into Kosovo could begin as soon as today, following
the deal reached yesterday in Moscow. The agreement also eases the latest strain
on relations between Russia and the alliance.

   Russia had sought to change an agreement reached in Helsinki last month
defining where its troops would deploy in Kosovo, hoping to give its troops
wider freedom to operate.

   In response, NATO blocked Russian transport planes from flying more
paratroopers to Kosovo on Sunday by persuading Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria to
deny permission to fly through their airspace.

   NATO's supreme commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, told The Associated Press that
yesterday's agreement kept more or less the guidelines laid out in the Helsinki
deal. The Russians will patrol in parts of the American, German and French
sectors.

   NATO said yesterday that about 29,000 troops had so far arrived in the
province for the peacekeeping mission, which is due to reach 50,000 peacekeeping
troops overall.

   Russia is to send 3,600 troops. Around 750 Russian paratroopers have been
deployed at Slatina airport near Kosovo's capital Pristina.

   So far, around 589,600 of the more than 860,000 refugees, most of them ethnic
Albanians, have come home to Kosovo since NATO troops began deploying June 12,
the U.N. refugee agency said.

   Sadako Ogata, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, said the refugees'
return was going smoothly but that more needed to be done to prepare shelter for
the coming winter.

   She said the U.N. agency was trying to assure the security of the Serb
minority and Gypsies.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Ruth Fremson/Associated Press: A Gypsy woman wails as her
home; burns yesterday in the southern Kosovo city of Djakovica. Soliders who
were; helping to put out the fire said it was set by ethnic Albanians as
revenge.; Gypsies are accused of collaborating with Serbs as they committed
atrocities; against ethnic Albanians.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1999


                             1470 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  July 2, 1999, Friday, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. N66; STAMPS & COINS

LENGTH: 903 words

HEADLINE: Millennial Misstep?

BYLINE: Bill McAllister, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   WHEN IT comes to stamps, the United States and Canada usually follow the same
course. Shortly after the U.S. Postal Service came up with a set of movie
monster stamps, Canada Post followed with a set of horror stamps of its own.

   So when U.S. officials announced plans for their big "Celebrate the Century"
stamp series, it wasn't too surprising that Canada devised "The Millennium
Collection," a set of 68 stamps to capture the country's 20th century
achievements. But that's where the similarity with the United States ends and
the furor begins.

   While the U.S. Postal Service is doing everything it can to boost public
participation in its 150 Celebrate the Century stamps (spending $ 4 million
alone on a special train to promote the stamps), Canada Post stunned collectors
by announcing that it would sell only 200,000 sets of its Millennium stamps.

   They'll be available only in a book that will sell in Canada for $ 59.99,
well above the face value of the 68 stamps inside. A Canada Post spokeswoman
calls it a great concept and one that Canadians will welcome.

   But the announcement has drawn a sharp protest from John M. Hotchner of Falls
Church, president of the American Philatelic Society. Hotchner, who led the
recent, successful protest against regional sales of U.S. stamps, has complained
to Canadian officials that their action was "exploitative of stamp collectors."
It will drive many away from collecting Canadian stamps, he predicted.

   Hotchner told Canada Post Chairman Andre Ouellet his country is departing
from its "moderate" stamp issuing policies and joining the ranks of many
underdeveloped nations that issue stamps mostly for sale to collectors. "The
failure to release these stamps to [over-the-]counter sales raise serious
questions about their legitimacy as postal issues," said Hotchner, who is a
member of the Citizens Stamp Advisory Committee. That's the 13-member panel that
advises the postmaster general on U.S. stamp proposals.

   Meanwhile, U.S. postal officials, regaling in the public's participation in
their stamps, have announced the winners in its balloting for the final 15
"Celebrate the Century" stamps. Improbable though it may sound, the top spot in
the balloting for 1990s subjects went to cellular telephones, which captured
214,449 votes.

   The other winners and their vote totals: the movie "Titanic," 210,154;
recovering, but previously endangered species, 193,414; the Internet's World
Wide Web, 191,292; the movie "Jurassic Park," 184,370; computer art and
graphics, 170,449; sport utility vehicles, 164,058; the Gulf War, 160,687;
computerized virtual reality, 156,944; Special Olympics, 155,802; baseball
records, 151,511; extreme sports, 151,090; improving education efforts, 141,124;
television's "Seinfeld" comedy show, 140,710; and the return to space of former
Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio), 138,984.

   Women's sports narrowly failed to make the cut with 138,752 votes. Other
topics that lost and their vote totals: coffee drinking, 136,693; in-line
skating, 129,092; dinosaur fossil hunting, 125,760; cultural diversity, 99,985;
Broadway musicals, 97,609; active older Americans, 93,105; interplanetary
exploration, 92,305; community service programs, 91,318; museum attendance,
86,979; gene therapy, 85,647; home offices, 76,239; sustained economic growth,
68,247; contemporary architecture, 66,958; and junior golf, 58,114.

   The winning stamps will be issued next April, concluding the biggest stamp
series ever issued by the United States. "The Celebrate the Century program has
given the American public a voice in how many of us will remember the 20th
century in years to come," Postmaster General William J. Henderson said.

   There should be no shortage of the two latest U.S. stamps. On Tuesday, a
sheet of 15 stamps celebrating glassmaking went on sale in Corning, N.Y., home
of Corning Glass. Although these are the old-fashioned stamps that require
licking, the agency ordered 116 million of the 33-cent stamps. Ashton-Potter USA
printed them on offset presses in New York.

   They are the first stamps to use digital photography, featuring four images
of the four major types of glassmaking that have been used in the United States
-- freeblown, mold-blown, pressed and art glass.

   New for heavier, two-ounce letters is a self-adhesive 55-cent stamp honoring
Vermont lawmaker Justin Smith Morrill, who authored legislation creating land
grant colleges. The engraved stamp is the latest in the Great Americans series
and will be sold in sheets of 20.

   Banknote Corp. of America printed 100 million of the stamps at their plant in
North Carolina. They will go on sale July 17 at the Morrill homestead in
Strafford, Vt.

   INDIVIDUALS who wish first-day cancellations of the American Glass and Justin
Morrill stamps should purchase them at their local post office and place the
stamps on addressed envelopes. These should be mailed in a larger envelope to
either: American Glass Stamps, Postmaster, 129 Walnut St., Corning, NY
14830-9991 or Justin Morrill Stamps, Postmaster, P.O. Box 9998, Strafford, VT
05702-9991. Requests for the Glass stamps should be postmarked by July 29 and
the Morrill stamps by Aug. 16.

   Next week in this space: Photography columnist Frank Van Riper. The four
"American Glass" stamps -- illustrating freeblown, mold-blown, pressed and art
glassmaking -- are the first to use digital photography.


GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: July 02, 1999


                             1471 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                June 30, 1999, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A2

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS URGE TESTING OF STAINED LINCOLN ARTIFACTS;
ANALYSIS COULD SETTLE DEBATE OVER HIS MEDICAL CONDITION

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:


   For years, the blood-spattered velvet cloak that Mary Todd Lincoln is
believed to have worn on the night President Abraham Lincoln was shot has hung
mostly untouched.

   But with recent developments in DNA testing, researchers say the garment
could reveal some of the mysteries surrounding the health of the nation's 16th
president.

   History buffs at the Chicago Historical Society acknowledge, however, that
testing could destroy a valuable relic of history and prove false some of the
stories and myths about Lincoln.

   "The question at hand is what value would DNA testing have and would it be
worth the risks of losing a historical specimen," said Nancy Buenger, textile
conservator at the society. "We also have to ask: 'Do we want to know? Do we
really want all these wonderful mysteries solved?'"

   A group of scientists, conservators and historians met at the society Monday
to debate those issues and recommended that the institution hold off DNA
testing. The society said it would probably abide by the panel's recommendation.

   Testing could settle a long-running debate on whether Lincoln suffered from
Marfan syndrome, a genetic disease that makes people susceptible to blood clots.

   The syndrome could account for Lincoln's gangly appearance. It could also
have proved fatal if assassin John Wilkes Booth's bullets at the Ford Theater
had not.

   Testing on the cloak and about a dozen other items, including the sheet
thought to have come from Lincoln's death bed, could eventually help to
authenticate much of the society's collection.

   While existing documentation supports the specimens' origins, it is not
always reliable, Buenger said. Another suit suspected to be Lincoln's had been
found to be someone else's.

   Buenger said many of the objects came from the collection of Charles Gunther,
a turn-of-the-century Chicago candy maker who donated "a mixed bag" of
artifacts, including obvious hoaxes such as the skin of the snake from the
Garden of Eden.

   Even with DNA testing, she said, proving the blood was Lincoln's would be
difficult, since no samples have been taken from his remains and there are no
living descendants of Lincoln.

   Dr. Robert Gaensslen, director of forensic science at the University of
Illinois at Chicago, who took part in the conference, said the cons of testing
still outweigh the pros.

   Gaensslen said current methods to extract DNA include cutting specimens or
removing blood from them, while in 10 years time technological improvements
might mean a harmless scan could provide the same results.

"We have to be cautious before we cut," he said.

Not everyone agrees.

   Dr. Victor Mckusick, a medical geneticist at Johns Hopkins University who has
pushed for DNA testing of Lincoln artifacts, said medical techniques have come
so far that testing would only cause minimal damage.

   Dr. Darwin Prockop, a gene therapy researcher at Philadelphia's MCP Hahnemann
University, said testing "could ... go far in helping those struggling with the
disease today."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Nancy Buenger at the Chicago
Historical Society with artifacts stained by President Abe Lincoln's blood,
including a cloak worn by Mary Todd Lincoln.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                             1472 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 29, 1999, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: IMPLANTED GENES SHOWN TO AID IN BONE HEALING

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Spongelike devices implanted with genes that are crucial to bone growth have
helped speed healing of broken bones in dogs. Researchers said the procedure
could help the thousands of elderly Americans who suffer fractures every year.

   The combination of gene therapy and tissue engineering was developed at the
University of Michigan Medical School and is reported in today's issue of Nature
Medicine.

   Clinical trials in humans could come as early as next year, said Dr. Jeffrey
Bonadio, the lead researcher.

   Team members used in their experiments the gene for parathyroid hormone,
which regulates the amount of calcium in the blood by affecting the kidneys,
intestines and bones, Bonadio said in a telephone interview.

   The researchers took a structure in cells called a plasmid, which can
reproduce and carry genetic instructions. They implanted it in a spongelike
material made of collagen, said Bonadio, now with Selective Genetics in San
Diego. The plasmid codes cells to make parathyroid hormone.

   In tests on dogs with fractures, the scientists put the sponges in the
damaged area, and bone cells began to grow into it, Bonadio said.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1999


                             1473 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        June 29, 1999 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-05

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Gene aids healing of broken bones

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Spongelike devices with genes implanted that are crucial to bone
growth helped speed healing of broken bones in dogs. Researchers said the
procedure could help the thousands of elderly Americans who suffer fractures
every year.

   The combination of gene therapy and tissue engineering was developed at the
University of Michigan Medical School and is reported in today's issue of the
journal Nature Medicine.

   Clinical trials in humans could come as early as next year, said Dr. Jeffrey
Bonadio, the lead researcher.

   Team members used in their experiments the gene for parathyroid hormone,
which regulates the amount of calcium in the blood by affecting the kidneys,
intestines and bones, Bonadio said in a telephone interview.

   Too much of the hormone coursing through the body can cause damage, he said.
But, present in the proper amount in an area of damaged bone, it encourages bone
growth and repair.

   The researchers took a structure in cells called a plasmid, which can
reproduce and carry genetic instructions. They implanted it in a sponge-like
material made of collagen, said Bonadio, now associated with Selective Genetics
Inc., in San Diego. The plasmid they used codes cells to produce parathyroid
hormone.

   In tests on dogs with fractures, the scientists inserted the sponges into the
damaged area, and bone cells began to grow into it, Bonadio said.

   Those cells then took up the gene for parathyroid hormone "and became growth
factories,     turning repair cells into local bioreactors," he said. The result
was that bone increased at the fracture sites.

   The process could prove particularly helpful for the many elderly who suffer
fractures each year, most involving the hip, wrist or spine, Bonadio said. He
estimated that 300,000 elderly suffer broken hips annually, particularly people
suffering from the bone-thinning process called osteoporosis.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1999


                             1474 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                 June 29, 1999, Tuesday, Ventura County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: VENTURA COUNTY BUSINESS;
 VENTURA COUNTY DIGEST / BARBARA MURPHY;
 BIOSOURCE, INSTITUTE IN ACCORD ON RESEARCH TOOLS

BYLINE: BARBARA MURPHY

BODY:


   BioSource International in Camarillo has reached an agreement with Childrens
Hospital Los Angeles Research Institute for the commercial rights to all
research tools developed at the institute.

   The nonprofit institute is a research center specializing in AIDS,
immunology, cancer and gene therapy. It has more than 250 postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students, as well as 250 tenured faculty members.

   Under terms of the agreement, BioSource will have rights of first refusal for
all research tools developed at the institute. These tools will be used by
BioSource in development of its products.

   In addition, BioSource will become the preferred vendor to the institute of
all immunological, cellular biological and molecular biological products.
BioSource will provide the institute with an annual research grant of $ 100,000,
as well as royalties on the sale of any licensed products.

   A researcher from the institute will be appointed to BioSource's Scientific
Advisory Board.

   "I am very pleased that we are able to assist in the funding and provision of
research products to help diagnose, treat and prevent pediatric diseases and
promote child health," said James A. Chamberlain, BioSource president and chief
executive officer. "Through collaboration with this prestigious scientific
center, we have obtained an excellent resource enabling us to leverage our
immunological, cell biological and molecular biological product line."

   BioSource develops and manufactures test kits used in biomedical research.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1999


                             1475 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 29, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2975 words

HEADLINE: At Gene Therapy's Frontier, the Amish Build a Clinic

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY

DATELINE: STRASBURG, Pa.

BODY:

   This was not the typical audience for a medical conference, but then again,
this was no typical conference. At an inn set in the lush farmland of Lancaster
County, doctors attending scientific lectures earlier this month were joined by
young Mennonite and Amish couples, the women in bonnets and the men in
suspenders, babies fussing in their laps.

   The Amish and Mennonites may travel by horse and buggy and forgo most modern
conveniences, but there is one bit of progress that they are eager to embrace:
gene therapy.

    If all goes as planned, conference participants learned, three children from
these communities will become the first human beings to test a new method of
gene therapy. If it works, it will spare them the devastating effects of a rare
but deadly inherited disease.

   In the condition, Crigler-Najjar syndrome, a substance called bilirubin, a
waste product from the destruction of worn-out red blood cells, builds up in the
body.

   Bilirubin is produced constantly in the human body, and normally, it is
broken down by an enzyme in the liver and excreted through the intestines.

   But in people with the syndrome, the enzyme is either absent or scarce.
Bilirubin accumulates, causing jaundice, a yellowing of the skin and the whites
of the eyes. More important, bilirubin is toxic to the nervous system, and the
children live in constant danger of brain damage.

   The only way they can survive is to spend 10 to 12 hours a day under special
lights that break down the bilirubin. But as they reach their teens, the light
therapy becomes less effective. Unless they can get a liver transplant, they may
suffer brain damage or die.

   If gene therapy works, the children will have a chance to lead more normal
lives. But previous attempts at gene therapy for other diseases have been
disappointing. If the new approach, called chimeraplasty, succeeds against
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, it would finally open the door to treatment of a host
of other, more common genetic disorders, according to Dr. Michael Blaese, a gene
therapy expert who left the National Institutes of Health in January to join a
Philadelphia company specializing in the new therapy. The other disorders that
might be treated include sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis and a failure of
the immune system known as ADA deficiency.

   "I left what I thought was the best job in the world to do this because I
believe so strongly in it and believe we'll be successful," Dr. Blaese said. "I
think it will really fundamentally change the way we practice medicine."

A Mission
Doctor Draws Others To Help the Children

    Dr. Blaese and other researchers, leaders in genetics and disorders
involving bilirubin, were drawn to Lancaster County largely through the efforts
of Dr. Holmes Morton, a slight, graying man of 49 who still speaks with the
twang of his native West Virginia.

   A Harvard-trained pediatrician, Dr. Morton first encountered Amish youngsters
with genetic diseases while he was working at a Philadelphia hospital in the
1980's. He had trained in biochemical genetics, and he recognized that some of
the children had metabolic disorders, not previously diagnosed, that could be
managed with specific diets and careful treatment of minor illnesses. But
without proper therapy, the diseases could rapidly cause brain damage. Some
parents whose children had died or become handicapped sought his help for
younger siblings.

   "I knew I could take care of them," Dr. Morton said.

   In 1988, he began commuting to Lancaster County, driving from one house call
to another. A year later, he and his wife, Caroline, and their three children
moved to Strasburg. Dr. Morton was 39, and highly regarded by his colleagues,
including some who were dismayed to see him put aside a bright future in science
and academia to disappear into a small town and treat children with obscure
diseases.

   But where others saw a backwater, Dr. Morton saw a need and an opportunity to
make a difference, to develop treatments for diseases that were taking a cruel
toll on children. In 1990, he opened his nonprofit clinic. And rather than
disappearing from the research world, he brought it to Lancaster County. "I
think of myself as a pediatrician who knows a little more than average about
biochemistry and genetics, and can use that in a primary care setting to prevent
problems," he said.

   His patients think of him in another way: "He is a gift to us," said Miriam
Martin of Mifflinburg, Pa., whose three young children are all under his care
for Crigler-Najjar syndrome.

   For generations, the Amish and Mennonites, descendants of Swiss and German
Anabaptists who settled in Pennsylvania in the 1700's, have suffered from
unusually high rates of dozens of genetic disorders. The diseases occur because
the communities arose from a small population of founders, and members -- who
are forbidden to marry outside their religion -- marry each other. As a result,
many people in the groups today are related, increasing the odds that both
members of a couple will unknowingly be carriers of a hereditary disease that
does not affect them but will show up in their children.

   Scientists have eagerly studied the Amish for decades, making discoveries
that filled at least one textbook on genetic disorders. But the experts who
gathered their data from Lancaster County did not stay to take care of the
diseases they identified.

   Dr. Morton said it seemed only fair that the Amish, who have contributed so
much to the understanding of human genetics, should be given the first chance to
benefit from a promising new type of gene therapy.

   In 1989, the Mortons were getting ready to build a clinic in Strasburg, when
The Wall Street Journal reported on their work there, mentioning that they had
to take out a second mortgage on their own home to begin construction. Within a
few months a flood of donations made the loan unnecessary and a year later, in
traditional barn-raising style, a team of Amish carpenters raised the Clinic for
Special Children. A post-and-beam structure built in Amish style, joined with
pegs and no nails, it rests on a fieldstone foundation and is sided with cedar
clapboards and roofed with 100-year-old recycled slates. Its cupola looks out on
woods and the cornfields of the Amish farmer who donated the land. The parking
lot includes space for buggies and railings to tether horses.

   The Amish and Mennonites do not accept Medicare or Social Security and do not
buy health insurance. They prefer to pay bills themselves and help one another
as needed. But although many earn good livings as farmers or carpenters, few can
afford what most medical centers would charge to treat the complex diseases that
afflict their children.

   Caroline Morton, also a Harvard graduate, acts as business manager of the
clinic. Patients are charged $25 or $30 for most visits, she said, and lab tests
cost a fraction of what most hospitals would charge. The clinic runs on $400,000
a year, she said: from patient's fees, donations and a barbecue and auction held
the third Saturday of every September, to sell Amish and Mennonite quilts,
furniture, crafts and farm implements.

A Difficult Disease
Frustration For Patients

   Dr. Morton first encountered Amish children with Crigler-Najjar syndrome in
1991. But he knew that the disease had first been identified during the 1940's
by a professor of his at Harvard Medical School.

   Dr. John Crigler had remained a friend since Dr. Morton's medical school
days. But 50 years ago he was a young pediatrician at Johns Hopkins Hospital in
Baltimore, working with Dr. Victor Najjar. Together, they treated several
infants from Amish families, all of whom died from a mysterious illness that
caused jaundice and severe damage to the nervous system.

   Dr. Crigler and Dr. Najjar knew that some of the babies they examined had
siblings who had died of the same condition. Studying family records, they found
that the different families were actually related, and that the illness followed
the pattern of a hereditary disease caused by a recessive gene, meaning that the
parents would be healthy carriers, but that each of their children would have a
1 in 4 chance of inheriting the syndrome.

   In a paper published in 1952 they wrote: "The prognosis is extremely poor,
the patients generally dying in the first year of life. No therapeutic measures
have been found helpful." Eventually, researchers recognized that a milder form
of the syndrome also existed, and both forms were discovered to occur all over
the world although they are rare, with only about 60 cases known. Many of the
families are in touch with one another, and parents and children from New
Mexico, Florida, Canada, Kentucky, England and Holland also attended the
conference here hoping to hear that a cure might be at hand.

   Children began living longer in the 1970's, when doctors realized that
phototherapy, treatment with bluish light of a certain wavelength, could break
down bilirubin. In milder cases the drug phenobarbital also helps, by
stimulating the body to produce more of the needed enzyme. Dr. Morton now has 16
patients with the disease, ranging in age from a few months to 15 years.

   But the disease is hard to control. Sleeping under the lamps, known as
bilirubin lights, can keep bilirubin in check, but just barely. Families live in
fear of routine childhood illnesses -- earaches, sore throats, stomach viruses
-- because they can make bilirubin surge out of control. When that happens,
brain damage can occur in a matter of hours or days.

   In 1994, an 8-year-old boy in Indiana who had the syndrome contracted a strep
infection and died two days later from extremely high bilirubin.

   "It was a message to the families and to me that we had to think harder about
how to take care of these children," Dr. Morton said. He has since written a
treatment plan that details ways to take care of acute illnesses and lists drugs
that must be avoided because they can raise bilirubin.

   Even when the families escape crises, the children still suffer from other
problems. They are prone to gallstones, and some must have their gallbladders
removed when they are only 3 or 4 years old.

   Debilitating fatigue strikes some, especially the older children. It can
interfere with schooling and make exercise difficult or impossible. Dr. Morton
thinks it occurs because bilirubin poisons the energy processing structures,
mitochondria, in both nerve and muscle cells. No matter how carefully they are
treated, children with the syndrome often look jaundiced. They are sometimes
stared at and teased, families say, and some people assume they have a
contagious disease and scold the parents for letting them outdoors.

   It is no fun having to sleep without pajamas or a blanket under bright lights
every night. Children complain of being too hot from the lights or too cold from
the lack of covers, and they find it disgusting that during spring and summer
the lights attract bugs. Sleep-overs may be impossible and vacations are hard,
too, because the lights are difficult to transport.

   Four-year-old Dawn Martin, from Mifflinburg, Pa., complains that she hates
her bed because of the lights, and often sneaks out of it, said her mother,
Miriam, who must get up several times a night to return Dawn to the lights. Some
mornings, Mrs. Martin wakes up to find Dawn sound asleep on the living room
couch -- perilously yellow. Dawn's younger brother and sister also have the
syndrome, and Mrs. Martin and her husband, eager to learn about research,
brought all three children to the conference.

   "You have all these dreams of having a healthy child," Mrs. Martin said. Now,
she dreams of a cure.

New Hope
More Sophisticated Genetic Procedure

    As children approach puberty, phototherapy becomes less effective and
bilirubin starts rising to dangerous levels. Doctors are not sure why. At that
point, liver transplant is considered.

   But Dr. Morton tries to keep children well enough to put off transplants for
as long as possible. "These are beautiful, healthy, active children," he said.
"They're a little bit yellow. You hate to put them through a transplant."

   Doctors have tried transplanting partial livers or liver cells into children
with the syndrome, to avoid removing their own livers, which are normal except
for the missing enzyme. But those procedures have not worked well.

   Dr. Morton is hoping that gene therapy works, and is trying to buy time for
his patients until it becomes available.

   Earlier attempts at gene therapy for other diseases tried to compensate for
defective genes by giving patients normal versions of those genes. Scientists
would attach the replacement genes to viruses and deliver the viruses to the
body intravenously or by a nasal spray , hoping the viruses would invade cells
and the genes would insert themselves into their DNA and begin working, causing
the cells to function normally.

   But the viral approach has not worked well. Dr. Morton called it "messy" and
"biologically naive." There was no way to control where the virus would add the
new genes, and no way to make sure that the new genes would work.

   He and other researchers see far more promise in the new approach,
chimeraplasty. It does not use viruses, and it does not attempt to replace an
entire gene. Instead, it is intended to stimulate the patient's own cells to
repair just the defect in the gene, using a molecule called a chimeraplast, a
manufactured blend of DNA and the related molecule RNA.

   Chimeraplasts will be made to match the sequence of base pairs -- the
molecular building blocks of DNA -- in part of the gene that directs the body to
make the enzyme that normally breaks down hemoglobin. People with Crigler-Najjar
syndrome often have a genetic defect known as a point mutation: one base pair
that is either incorrect or missing. Different point mutations can cause the
disease, but the Amish and Mennonites all have the same mutation, and the first
chimeraplasts will be tailored to it. The chimeraplasts will be identical to the
patient's own DNA except for the point mutation: instead of the defect, they
will have the correct base pair.

   The chimeraplasts are expected to attach to the patient's DNA, and activate a
system that cells normally use to correct their mistakes in replicating DNA. But
in this case the repair system will be tricked into treating the chimeraplast as
the correct version of the DNA, and changing the patient's gene to match the
chimeraplast -- undoing the mutation.

   Even the scientists are not sure precisely how the chimeraplasts bring about
genetic changes.

   "We know it works," said Dr. Clifford Steer, a researcher at the University
of Minnesota who has been studying the technique. "We can spend the rest of our
lives trying to figure out how."

   Successful experiments in dogs and rats have convinced researchers that it is
time to try the technique in people. Dr. Blaese said he and colleagues at
Kimeragen, the company that has developed the technology, will ask the Food and
Drug Administration for permission to proceed sometime this fall.

   They expect to test the therapy in three children, who will be treated at
Lancaster General Hospital under Dr. Morton's supervision. A total of more than
a trillion chimeraplasts -- enough to outnumber cells in the liver -- will be
dripped in as an intravenous solution, on six separate days over the course of a
month. With each treatment, the dose will be increased. The chimeraplasts will
be encased in microscopic envelopes called liposomes, which will be studded with
molecules that will make them attach to liver cells, where the missing enzyme
should be produced.

   One reason the researchers chose Crigler-Najjar syndrome as a test case for
the treatment is that if it works, the results will be easy to detect: the
children should become less jaundiced, and their bilirubin levels, measured by a
simple blood test, should fall.

   Scientists do not expect bilirubin to drop to normal, which would be zero.
But they hope it will drop enough to let the children live without lights or at
least with less time under the lights, and enough to free them and their parents
from the constant worry about brain damage and death.

   Parents who listened to scientists' descriptions of the technology said that
even a partial success would be worthwhile, and they were eager to see the
research go ahead. They even burst into applause during an especially
enthusiastic lecture by Dr. Steer, who said he hoped to "ultimately make this
community famous."

   Dr. Crigler said he hoped he would see the syndrome he identified come full
circle in his lifetime. It has already gone from uniformly fatal to treatable,
and Dr. Crigler said he thought chimeraplasty might cure it.

   "This is the first time I've had a lot of enthusiasm about any form of gene
manipulation," he said.

   Dr. Morton invites families to conferences to inform them about advances that
may help their children. But he also invites them to remind scientists,
including some who have never met a patient with the disease, that time is short
and these children's hopes lie with their research.

   "The families and children are here to remind us of what this is all about,"
Dr. Morton said. "I think people will step a little faster to get things done,
having been at a meeting like this."

   For Dr. Blaese, the families' daily struggle became vivid one evening at the
conference, when he strolled outside the inn. A purplish-blue light in a window
caught his eye. And then another. And another and another and another. They were
bilirubin lights, he realized, and a sick child was sleeping under each of them.
Suddenly he knew how important his work was to those families.

   "I saw five rooms with that eerie blue glow, and it really hit me," he said.
"I'll never forget it."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Amish and Mennonite families, hearing about a new approach to
gene therapy that may help children with an inherited liver disorder. Fending
Off Death -- Children with Crigler-Najjar syndrome lack a liver enzyme crucial
for removing a toxic substance, bilirubin, from the blood. Special lights that
break down bilirubin can help, and children like 14-month-old Melanie Bryant,
right and 6-year-old Chris Platt, above in a $30,000 mirrored bed, spend 10 to
12 hours a day in light therapy. Seven-year-old, Amy Martin, far right, who has
the condition, is monitored as she walks on a treadmill. (Photographs by Sal
DiMarco Jr. for The New York Times)(pg. F1); Dr. Holmes Morton, left, and his
former teacher, Dr. John Crigler, attended a meeting on Crigler-Najjar syndrome
in Strasburg, Pa. The Clinic for Special Children treats patients with the
syndrome. (Photographs by Sal DiMarco Jr. for The New York Times)(pg. F4)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1999


                             1476 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 29, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1230 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

Some Drug Aid to Kosovo Is Criticized as Useless
The World Health Organization said about a third to half of all of shipments of
corporate drug aid were inappropriate and likely to gather dust in warehouses or
have to be destroyed at government expense. Items deemed to be of marginal use
included lip balm, hemorrhoid ointment and anti-smoking inhalers.   A1

About a quarter of the Serbs in Kosovo -- more than 75,000 -- have fled the
province in the 18 days since Serbian forces began pulling out, the Yugoslav Red
Cross said.   A8


   Patriarch Pavle, left, head of the Serbian Orthodox Church, and the senior
bishop of Kosovo joined in denouncing President Slobodan Milosevic, saying his
policies were criminal and the root of the evil done in Kosovo.   A9

Kosovo Liberation Army forces appeared to be obeying a major deadline for
handing over weapons and gathering in specified areas.   A9

Arafat Criticized in Study
An international study of the Palestinian Authority criticized Yasir Arafat's
concentration of executive power.   A3

Likud Leaves Coalition Talks
The rightist Likud Party withdrew from coalition talks with Prime Minister-elect
Ehud Barak of Israel, saying it would not join his government and was headed for
the opposition.   A3

Congo Peace Talks Progress
Negotiations to end the 11-month war in Congo inched forward as foreign and
defense ministers of all the nations involved in the conflict met in Zambia to
discuss a draft text for a cease-fire.   A6

New Light on Mexico Massacre
Newly published documents related to the massacre of peaceful protesters on the
eve of the 1968 Olympics show that the machine-gunners were plainclothes members
of the Presidential General Staff.   A6

Ulster Talks Stumble
Prime Ministers Tony Blair of Britain and Bertie Ahern of Ireland failed to
persuade Protestant and Roman Catholic leaders to end a dispute that threatened
to collapse the Northern Ireland peace effort.   A3

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A10-17

President Outlines Plan For Use of Growing Surplus
President Clinton laid out his proposal to use the fast-growing budget surplus
to eliminate the national debt while shoring up Social Security and Medicare,
and he left open the possibility of a deal with the Republican Congress over its
demand for big tax cuts. Republicans welcomed news of a growing surplus and said
they were heartened by some aspects of Mr. Clinton's proposal, though they
remained suspicious of Mr. Clinton.   A1

The President raised the possibility that the Government could pay off the
national debt by 2015.   A16

A Medicare beneficiary could eventually get up to $2,500 a year in Federal money
to help buy prescription drugs under President Clinton's proposal to expand the
health insurance program for the elderly and disabled, which is to be unveiled
today, Administration officials said.   A17

Clinton Friend to Plead Guilty
Kenneth W. Starr, the Whitewater prosecutor, was said to have reached a plea
agreement with Webster L. Hubbell in which Mr. Hubbell would plead guilty to a
felony charge of lying about the role that he and Hillary Rodham Clinton had
played in a questionable Arkansas land deal. But Mr. Hubbell is not expected to
cooperate with Mr. Starr in providing additional information about either
President Clinton or Mrs. Clinton.   A1

Panel Held Back Information
A Federal appeals court ruled that an advisory commission on aviation security
had denied one member -- the widow of a victim killed aboard Pan Am Flight 103
-- information available to the other members.   A17

Vote Favors Cell Research
Members of a White House ethics panel decided in a straw vote to recommend that
federally financed scientists be allowed to derive embryonic stem cells from
human embryos as well as to conduct research on stem cells derived by others.
A15

Mother Admits Killing Children
Marie Noe, 70, pleaded guilty in Philadelphia to smothering 8 of her 10 young
children in a series of crimes dating back to 1949. The children were once
believed to have been victims of sudden infant death syndrome, or SIDS.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Monumental Gridlock At Crossroads of the World
Traffic in and around Times Square came to a standstill amid a confluence of
events, celebrities and people who wanted to see them.   B1

President Clinton attended a political fund-raising performance of "The Iceman
Cometh," while Hillary Rodham Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea, looked for
housing in the city and Westchester County.   B6

Airport Projects Get Go-Ahead
The Port Authority approved nearly $2.5 billion in projects at Newark and
Kennedy Airports that are intended to ease congestion, shorten passenger waits
and create jobs.   B2

Adelphi Head Sought for CUNY
Herman Badillo, the CUNY chairman, said he was pursuing Matthew Goldstein,
president of Adelphi and a former president in the CUNY system, to be CUNY's
chancellor.   B3

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Gene Therapy Experiment
Three children from Amish and Mennonite communities may become the first human
subjects in a test of a new method of gene therapy, in hopes of sparing them the
effects of a rare but deadly inherited disease.   F1

Health & Fitness   F7

FASHION   B10

ARTS   E1-10

$10 Million Gift to the Morgan
The art dealer and collector Eugene V. Thaw and his wife, Clare, have given $10
million to the Morgan Library in Manhattan to build the Thaw Conservation
Center.   E3

OBITUARIES   B8

SPORTS   D1-8

Underdog Doesn't Give Up
Jelena Dokic, who is ranked 129th in the world, continued her winning ways at
Wimbledon, defeating the ninth-seeded Mary Pierce, 6-4, 6-3, to qualify for the
quarterfinals.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-28

Adviser Said He Was Fooled
Thomas J. Corbally, a business consultant, said he was duped into helping Martin
R. Frankel put a veneer of credibility on a scheme that investigators believe
siphoned $300 million from insurance companies.   A1

Early Incident for Belgian Coke
A Belgian health official said four people became sick after drinking Coke
nearly four weeks before 30 children fell ill after drinking the soft drink,
prompting a recall.   C1

Phone Company Still Pondering
The board of Frontier said it had made no decision on an unsolicited acquisition
bid from Qwest Communications International.   C1

Bear Stearns Settlement
Bear Stearns has agreed in principle to settle S.E.C. securities fraud charges
in connection with the firm's role as the clearing broker for A. R. Baron, a
failed brokerage firm.   C1

Deal on Digital Music Players
The music industry announced an agreement that would let electronics makers
begin mass production of portable digital music players while technology to
protect against piracy was still being developed.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: A windfall's promise; restraint on rebuilding Serbia; the Clinton
Library; Stonewall, then and now.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Anthony Lewis.

Crossword   E9

TV Listings   E10

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D5


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1999


                             1477 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                June 29, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       June 29, 1999 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: U.S.

BODY:

   Railroad killer operates under many aliases

   Houston - The name of Rafael Resendez-Ramirez will remain on wanted posters
for an alleged serial killer, even though the FBI yesterday confirmed several
media reports that the name is just one of more than 30 aliases. Don K. Clark,
special agent in charge of the Houston bureau and head of the task force
pursuing the man linked to eight slayings in three states, said authorities have
confirmed the suspect borrowed the Resendez-Ramirez name from his uncle. The
suspect's real name is Angel Leoncio Reyes Recendis, according to a birth
certificate. "We don't want the public to be concerned about names," Clark said,
"The picture is what's very important, because that is how he's going to be
recognized."

   Duet in Senate denied at White House

   Washington - Coming soon to the White House - his-and-hers Senate campaigns?
No way, White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said yesterday. He was responding to
a New Yorker magazine report that friends in Arkansas were encouraging President
Clinton to seek a Senate seat from that state after he leaves office. "I think
his [Clinton's] quote to me was, 'That story is crazy and I don't know where
they got it from,' Lockhart said. The political focus in the Clinton household
is on first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton's possible Senate bid in New York.

   Ex-pastor convicted of plot against wife

   Manassas, Va. - A former pastor was convicted yesterday of asking a
parishioner to join him in a plot to kill their wives. James Ogle, pastor of the
defunct Bull Run Bible Fellowship in Manassas, pleaded guilty to attempted
murder and solicitation of a felony. Although he did not admit to the plot, he
did acknowledge that prosecutors had enough evidence for a conviction. Ogle, 46,
indicated his relationship with his four children "would be better" with his
wife, Judy, out of the picture, police Detective Samuel Walker testified.

   Man held for killing son for revenge

   Franklin, Ind. - A man who police say told them he took revenge against his
wife by purposely fathering her child and then killing the boy was ordered held
without bond on a murder charge yesterday. Ronald Lee Shanabarger will go on
trial Nov. 30. Shanabarger told police he planned the crime to exact punishment
on his wife, who had refused to cut short a cruise vacation after his father
passed away in October 1996. On June 22, just hours after the funeral of his
7-month-old son, Tyler, Shanabarger confessed to his wife that he smothered
their son in his crib three nights earlier.

   NASA scratches comet landing

   Los Angeles - A $240 million NASA mission to land a probe on the surface of a
comet for the first time and drill beneath its surface was scrapped yesterday, a
victim of the space agency's tight budget. The mission was axed to make more
money available for other projects' cost overruns - a Hubble Space Telescope
repair mission and future Mars exploration, said Edward Weiler, head of NASA's
space science program.

   Gene therapy helps broken bones

   Washington - Sponge-like devices with genes implanted that are crucial to
bone growth helped speed healing of broken bones in dogs. Researchers said the
procedure could help the thousands of elderly Americans who suffer fractures
every year. The combination of gene therapy and tissue engineering was developed
at the University of Michigan Medical School and is reported in today's issue of
the journal Nature Medicine. Clinical trials in humans could come as early as
next year, said Dr. Jeffrey Bonadio, the lead researcher.

COLUMN: U.S.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1999


                             1478 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      June 27, 1999, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3410 words

HEADLINE: The New Millennium;
A brave new world of designer babies;
Genetic engineering to open Pandora's box of ethical questions

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

   The full-page advertisements, in the national pages of newspapers across the
country, portrayed the most 21st-century product - custom-made children.

   Alongside a picture of an adorable, perfect-looking baby was a shopping list
of traits readers could choose for the child they plan to have and a telephone
number to order them: 1-888-4-BEST-DNA.

   "What if you could choose exactly what your child was like?" read the ad.
"Male or female? Gay or straight? Athletic or intellectual? You decide."

   The advertisements caused such interest that when the number did not go
through, so many people called the American Society for Reproductive Medicine
that it issued a press release disavowing involvement. The ads turned out to be
for the 1997 film "Gattaca," a futuristic thriller about a society in which
people are designed in laboratories prior to conception.

   But in the next millennium, designer babies won't be just the stuff of sci-fi
movies or such dystopian novels as Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World."

   The possibility of human cloning may get all the attention, but genetic
engineering is the reproductive technology that scientists and bioethicists say
will most fundamentally change society in the next 10 to 50 years, and for
generations beyond. Parents will be able to engineer their offspring to,
initially, prevent disease; later, choose certain traits; and ultimately, even
enhance looks or intelligence.

   It may be the ultimate shopping experience, like ordering a sunroof or
leather seats from the car dealer. And in the fevered imagination of at least
one eminent biologist, the options won't be limited to human traits: He
describes a future in which parents engineer their children to possess, say, the
olfactory powers of dogs or the night vision of owls.

   But even the tamest alterations promise to open a Pandora's box of ethical
questions: Will they inadvertently inflict curses on future generations? Will
they violate principles of informed consent? Will they further stratify society
between those who can afford the new technology and those who cannot? Will they
create pressure to tailor reproductive decisions to the prevailing norms of what
is considered "desirable?" Will they breed less compassion for society's new
less fortunate - nondesigned children? In short, will they rob us of our
humanity?

   Gene screening and therapy raise the real possibility that we will be able to
re-engineer the genetic blueprints of our own species, seize control of our own
evolution. It's the ultimate form of preventive medicine - and the ultimate form
of "Brave New World" eugenics.

   "Historically, we've talked about having children," says Glenn McGee, a
University of Pennsylvania bioethicist and the author of "The Perfect Baby: A
Pragmatic Approach to Genetics." "Soon, we'll talk about "making" children."

   If designer babies conjure up the images of eugenics, it is because that was
once science's hope for a better future. Before Adolf Hitler gave it a bad name,
eugenics was championed as the cure-all for economic inequities and social ills
by leaders ranging from Charles Darwin and Theodore Roosevelt to George Bernard
Shaw and Winston Churchill. The burden will be on their successors to show it
won't go horribly wrong again and fulfill Huxley's disturbing vision.

   Scientists differ on how imminent the brave new world is. Some say the first
proposal may emerge in the next several years. Most say it is still a decade or
more away. Still others say the more exotic genetic engineering won't happen for
50 to 100 years.





   Brave new world exists today


   Of course, in one sense, the brave new world is here already. Prospective
parents take out ads looking for sperm or eggs based on the donor's athletic
skills, intellectual prowess, socioeconomic status or physical appearance; and
at some clinics, sperm is separated so parents may pick the sex of their
offspring. (They more often pick boys.)

   But that is just unaltered embryo selection. Genetic engineering involves the
insertion of new genes into human cells, as scientists first did in 1990 when
they successfully injected a healthy gene into the cells of an organ of a
4-year-old girl with a genetic disease. The procedure was allowed only after
doctors assured regulators the genetic change would not be passed on to any
children the girl might have.

   Designer babies promise something even more momentous: altering a fertilized
egg so that the genes in all of a person's cells, including eggs or sperm,
include one that scientists, not parents, bequeathed. It will be inheritably
transmitted to future generations, a legacy demanding a Solomonic collective
wisdom.

   "As opposed to every other decision made in medicine, this will involve more
than the patient, the family and the doctor," says French Anderson, director of
the University of Southern California's gene therapy laboratory. "The gene pool
is not owned by any one person. It is the joint property of society. And when
you manipulate the gene pool, you need the agreement of society."

   To that end, everyone from the U.S. Department of Energy to the American
Association for the Advancement of Science has staged soul-searching sessions.
So much grant money has been put into examining the ramifications of designer
babies that one academic calls the coming era of genetic engineering a
"full-employment act for bioethicists."

   They still have a bit of time to arrive at a consensus. Aside from gender,
the only traits that now can be identified at the earliest stage of development
are about a dozen or so of the most serious genetic diseases, such as cystic
fibrosis and breast cancer.

   But scientists claim that in time they expect to find genes for virtually
every trait imaginable - thrill-seeking, musical ability, anxiety, spirituality,
happiness, leadership, shyness, you name it - and cultural observers promise
that if the technology is available to instill or extract such traits, you can
bet some parents will avail themselves of it.





   Gene research on a mammoth scale


   The explosion of gene knowledge is coming as a result of the Human Genome
Project, the $ 3 billion federal effort to locate, identify and sequence the
roughly 100,000 genes on the 46 human chromosomes. Often compared to the
Manhattan Project or the mission to put a man on the moon, it is expected to be
finished in 2003.

   Just as the periodic table categorized the elements so chemists could predict
how they would react, so will the fully mapped human genome provide the medical
community with dramatic insights into how the body works.

   "Everyone talks about the science-fiction scenarios, but the real
breakthrough will be the greater understanding we will have of why disease
occurs," says Art Beaudet, chairman of the department of molecular and human
genetics at Houston's Baylor College of Medicine, a leading participant in the
Human Genome Project. "We will be able to create better drugs because we'll know
how a disease works."

   Beaudet envisions a future in which, say, hemophiliacs are treated with gene
therapy once a year or less, unlike today's sufferers, who typically must
receive multiple injections each week. He says better knowledge of diseases like
asthma or Alzheimer's will lead to better drugs, in much the same way
understanding the 26 steps of cholesterol metabolism led to effective
cholesterol-lowering drugs.

   Still, the treatment that most excites some people - and most concerns
bioethicists - will come when doctors use the new gene knowledge before birth,
at in vitro fertilization clinics. Doctors will fertilize a few of a woman's
eggs with her husband's sperm, as IVF clinics now do. But then they will inject
an artificial human chromosome, carrying made-to-order genes, into the
fertilized egg before placing the embryo in the woman's uterus.

   For example, doctors might inject a gene that would kill prostate cancer on
command. To control such a gene, scientists could hook it to another gene that
responds to an insect hormone, ecdysone, that normally has no effect on human
cells. If a man found he had prostate cancer, he'd simply take an ecdysone pill,
which would activate the gene to kill the cancerous prostate cells but leave
every other cell of his body untouched.

   And since the gene copied itself into every cell of his body, including his
sperm, not only would the man not die of the cancer, his sons would beat it,
too.

   According to numerous scientists, gene therapy will begin with the treatment
of childhood diseases, such as sickle cell anemia or cystic fibrosis, that have
a severe impact on quality of life. As society's trepidation eases, they say,
treatment will expand to problems whose impact hits hardest in adulthood, such
as obesity, diabetes, heart disease and various kinds of cancer. And, finally,
it will be extended to inoculate against infectious agents and addictions and to
improve various health characteristics.

   "It would be cruel not to use this technology to eliminate such problems,"
says James Watson, whose Nobel Prize-winning co-discovery of the structure of
DNA made the idea of gene therapy possible. "Waiting for conventional methods to
succeed would be like waiting for the sun to burn out."

   Proof that such gene therapy could work, at least in animals, dates to the
early 1980s, when scientist added curative genes to mouse embryos that had been
doomed to develop an inherited nervous system disorder. But scientists stress
that more animal research needs to be done before human genetic engineering
starts in earnest.

   Among the concerns is that we could remove something important in the very
act of removing something objectionable. Every gene pool has recessive traits
with important evolutionary functions, many of which haven't yet been
discovered. The genetic glitch that causes sickle cell disease, for example,
protects against malaria.





   A delicate genetic balance


   Or perhaps we would disrupt the delicate balance that evolution has brought
us to, in which each genetic trait has an effect on every other. In the 5
million years since hominids separated from great apes, our DNA has evolved less
than 2 percent, and the difference is still just 1 to 3 percent. Scientists say
that difference isn't in the genes themselves, but in how they're turned on and
off, which isn't yet well understood.

   And of course, gene therapy could lead to an increase in genetic diseases -
since the most popular genetic traits in an open market may not necessarily be
the healthiest. If everyone wants to be blond with blue eyes and if that is
associated with an increased susceptibility to skin cancer, note biologists,
there is going to be a problem.

   That last scenario, of course, involves genetic engineering for the more
controversial purpose of enhancement. Most bioethicists approve of genetic
engineering for therapeutic reasons, but draw the line at enhancement, saying
the latter would change the very things that make someone an individual. But
others argue the line is blurred.

   "That distinction won't stand the test of time," says Gregory Stock, director
of UCLA's Medicine, Technology and Society program. "Retarding the aging process
would be therapy and enhancement because it would mean defeating diseases and
because it would extend our life span. Growth hormones are therapy for short
children, enhancement for medium-size children. Heck, even cosmetic surgery is a
kind of therapy for some people."

   Some people argue that because future generations by definition cannot
consent to the genetic engineering chosen by their forebears, there is an
ethical barrier to the technology. Employing that logic, one European body
opposes gene therapy in the context of human rights.

   The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, an organization of
members of parliaments from 40 countries, has included language in a human
rights manifesto claiming "every human being has a right to a genetic heritage
that hasn't been artificially tampered with." It is not clear whether the
assembly would consider a genetic cure of a deadly disease to be tampering.

   Genetic engineering also has drawn objections from religious thinkers, who
argue that treating people like a collection of mechanical parts is
dehumanizing, and that making the reproductive process asexual too eerily
mirrors the emotionless future depicted in Brave New World.

   Some ethicists argue that any enhancement should be permissible only if it
can pass a simple test: Would it have value if it were given to everyone?
Improved memory or immune function, for instance, would confer intrinsic
benefits on everyone. But altered height, skin color or muscularity would bestow
only competitive social advantages - if everyone had them, no one would end up
better off.

   Of course, it is highly unlikely that everyone would receive enhancements.
Since they would almost certainly be available primarily to the well-to-do, even
designer babies' most rabid defenders acknowledge that they would invariably
lead to a kind of "biological reinforcement" of class distinctions.





   Genetic haves and have-nots


   "The downside with the least likelihood of a remedy being found is the fact
that society will be divided between genetic haves and genetic have-nots," says
Arthur Caplan, director of the University of Pennsylvania's Center for
Bioethics. "And it will test people's capacity for compassion: Will they still
have it when perfection seems attainable?"

   Before therapy is available, comprehensive genetic information will test our
decision-making. In an era when 90 percent of fetuses with Down syndrome are
aborted, what will couples do if, say, a homosexual gene is found? Consider the
tale bioethicists tell of the couple advised recently that their fetus had a
rare extra chromosome that would not cause a debilitating disease like Down, but
that "potentially" was linked to tall stature, severe acne and aggressive, even
criminally aggressive, behavior. The couple responded by aborting the child.

   Or consider a hypothetical case in which a couple have fertilized a number of
eggs in vitro, intending to implant the most genetically superior one. The
doctor calls with test results: Embryos 1 and 6 reveal a strong manic-depressive
tendency; 2 and 3 are likely to have attention-deficit disorder; 4 and 5 are
marked for average intelligence, early-onset eyesight loss and the likelihood of
aggressive colon cancer.

   Then add an economic variable. The couple's HMO subsequently tells them they
should know that if they choose to implant 1 and 6, the costs of the child's
manic depression will not be reimbursed. It is, after all, a pre-existing
condition.

   Yet for all the potential problems, most everyone thinks designer babies are
inevitable. In one survey, more than 40 percent of Americans said they think it
would be OK to use gene therapy to make their children either more attractive or
more intelligent than they were otherwise destined to be - and observers say
those numbers will go up as the technology becomes commonplace.

   After all, when the world first learned about IVF two decades ago, it was
horrifying to most people - "test-tube babies," they called them - and most
surveyed said they wouldn't use it even if they were infertile. But today, more
than 40,000 children owe their existence to in vitro fertilization and nearly
anyone who is infertile demands it.

   "That's why we don't need to invoke the Hitler analogy to understand how
troubling this technology will be," says Jeremy Rifkin, a frequent science
critic and author of "The Biotech Century." "There's no evil cabal here, no
government forcing us into brave new worlds. Instead it's just the banality of a
market-oriented, commercial eugenics in which parents simply want to give their
children what seems best for them."

   In countries with national health services, such as Canada or Britain, it
might be easier to dictate what sort of enhancements will be permitted and what
will be forbidden. But in the United States, there will always be people with
enough money to pay for what they want - and even countries like Canada or
Britain will know that forbidding a particular kind of enhancement might put
them at a competitive disadvantage with countries that permit it.





   Fertility clinics at the forefront


   The more exotic human genetic engineering is likely to occur first at
fertility clinics, which are among the country's most advanced and least
regulated biotech research centers. They are also the most logical candidates to
continue the time-honored medical trend of a treatment beginning as a therapy
and ending up in the more lucrative field of cosmetic enhancement.

   Plastic surgery, for example, was developed to correct the gross facial
deformities of war injuries, but was soon used to straighten asymmetrical noses
and tighten older, sagging skin. Breast implants were developed to reconstruct
women who lost theirs to mastectomy, but were soon inserted into healthy women
who wanted to upgrade their B cups to D cups.

   UCLA's Stock dismisses Rifkin's contention that society can turn its back on
genetic engineering as it did with, say, nuclear energy. Stock argues that
because the new technology will be done easily and cheaply at thousands of labs
around the world, be sought by an affluent minority that just wants what's best
for its children and poses no danger to innocent bystanders, it will be
impossible to stop, no matter how convincing a case ethicists make for or
against it.

   It is, after all, a culture in which people have gradually become accustomed
to "playing God," to maintaining their balance on the slippery slope that
divides the acceptable from the unacceptable.

   But will people ever be ready for the world envisioned by Princeton biologist
Lee Silver, in which humans are engineered with not just the olfactory powers of
dogs and night vision of owls but the electricity-generating capabilities of
eels, light-emitting organs of fireflies and fish, magnetic-detection systems of
birds and echo-locating powers of bats?

   "No matter what techniques are ultimately used, genetic engineering of human
embryos is sure to become feasible, safe and efficient by the middle of the 21st
century," says Silver, the author of "Remaking Eden: Cloning and Beyond in a
Brave New World." "When that happens, we will come face to face with the
ultimate frontier in medicine and philosophy - the power to change the nature of
humankind.

   "It'll mean all of science fiction is true."





   Genetic enhancement   or tampering?


   As scientific advances bring closer the reality of genetically altered
babies, Americans have become increasingly accepting of the idea.


   Do you think changing the genetic makeup of human cells is morally wrong?


   1986   Yes: 42%

   1996   Yes: 22%


   Do you approve of scientists changing the makeup of human cells

      to cure a fatal genetic disease?


   1986   Yes: 83%   1996   Yes: 85%


      to reduce the risk of developing a fatal disease later in life?


   1986   Yes: 77%

   1996   Yes: 84%





   Access to, uses of genetic information


   A recent poll assessed Americans' views on the evaluation and manipulation of
human genes.


   Do you think it is a good thing or bad thing for a healthy person to be able
to find out how likely they are to get a serious health condition in the future?


   Good thing   73%

   Bad thing   17%

   Both good and bad   5%

   Don't know   5%





   Who should have the right to obtain information about an individual's genetic
conditions, risks, predispositions?


   Spouse   75%

   Adult children   59%


   Who should be prohibited from obtaining such information?


   Employers   85%

   Insurers   69%

   Other relatives   65%


   How do you feel about scientists changing the makeup of human cells to
improve the physical characteristics children would inherit?


   Approve (respondents who went to college)   28%


   Approve (respondents with a high-school degree)   40%


   Approve (respondents with less than a high-school degree)   61%


   This 1996 poll of 1,039 randomly selected adults in the United States was
conducted by telephone between Aug. 23 and Sept.  30. The 1986 survey of 1,273
randomly selected adults was conducted by telephone between October 30 and Nov.
17.



GRAPHIC: Graph: 1. Genetic enhancement ... or tampering? (color, TEXT); Photo:
2. The 1997 film "Gattaca" depicted a future divided between the genetically
perfect "valids" and the naturally born "in-valids." The ad campaign was taken
at face value by some people (b/w, p. 14); Graph: 3. Access to, uses of genetic
information (b/w, p. 14, TEXT); Photo: 4. Baylor College of Medicine is a
leading participant in the federal government's Human Genome Project, whose
mapping of the human body's estimated 100,000 genes is expected to provide the
knowledge that one day will lead to designer babies. Baylor engineer Seth Paxton
operates the robotic arm that sets up trays of ingredients for DNA sequencing at
the medical school's Genome Sequencing Center (b/w, p. 14); 2. Edwin Louie /
Chronicle, Source: Opinion polls conducted for the National Center for Genome
Resources (1996) and the Office of Technology Assessment of the U.S. Congress
(1986), 3. Edwin Louie / Chronicle, 4. Smiley N. Pool / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1999


                             1479 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 27, 1999 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1605 words

HEADLINE: CURE-ALL? STEM-CELL RESEARCH IN DEBATE THE ETHICS OF USING FETAL CELLS
HAS BEEN SHARPLY QUESTIONED.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Biologist John Gearhart is happy to open the incubator in his Johns Hopkins
laboratory and bring out a tray of plastic dishes holding the colonies of human
cells that have catapulted him to scientific fame, fueled raging ethical debates
in the federal government, and angered the Catholic Church.

   The cells in question - human embryonic stem cells - have been hailed as a
potential universal repair material for the human body.

   This is the beginning of an era, many believe, that will bring waves of
breaking news about this type of research, much as there was a wave of news
about cloning only a few years ago. The reason for the interest? Some believe
that stem cells could allow doctors to grow cells that:

   Make the dopamine that's lacking in the brains of patients with Parkinson's
disease.

   Grow insulin for diabetics.

   Repair heart-attack damage.

   Create nerves to repair spinal-cord injuries or skin to treat severe burns.

   Even construct entire new organs.

   Right now, there isn't much to see - just a yellow fluid filling the
teacup-sized petri dishes in Gearhart's lab. But suspended there are the same
type of cells that make up a three-day-old embryo, with the almost magical power
to grow into all the hundreds of types of tissues that make up a human body.

   Gearhart shows some photographs that capture the way stem cells can
spontaneously metamorphose into tangles of nerves or clumps of muscle.
Sometimes, he said, they form heart tissue that starts rhythmically beating in
the dishes.

   The goal now, Gearhart said, is to learn to control this process so that one
day there might be large banks of stem cells, engineered to avoid rejection. In
the future, "any hospital anywhere can say, 'Give me some donor cells - liver
cells, or heart cells,' " he said.

   The study of stem cells is opening an area of medical research comparable to
genetics, said Ronald McKay, a stem-cell researcher at the National Institutes
of Health. "This is not just a sub-area of medicine," he said. "I think this is
the new biology."

   On the downside, these human embryonic stem cells have touched ethical and
religious hot buttons. Gearhart offended the Catholic Church because he used
tissue taken from aborted fetuses.

   Biologist James Thomson of the University of Wisconsin, who tied Gearhart
last November in the race to isolate human stem cells, also ran into rough
ethical terrain for using leftover embryos created in fertility clinics.

   As though there weren't enough controversy, within days of the announcement
of those two developments, a Massachusetts biotechnology company claimed to have
made stem cells using cloning.

   Embryonic stem cells are not the only kind of stem cell known, but they are
considered the most flexible, or "pluripotent" in the jargon. Any cell that can
give rise to more than one kind of cell is considered a stem cell. Best-known
are bone marrow cells that can manufacture all the various types of blood cells.

   Some animals, such as salamanders, seem to retain stem cells that allow them
to regrow a lost limb or tail.

   Some scientists think that stem cells exist in all human organs. Evan Snyder
of Harvard University and NIH's McKay have used fetal tissue to collect and grow
so-called neural stem cells, which they say can become different types of human
brain tissue, and which might work better than embryonic stem cells for treating
brain disorders.

   The ultimate stem cell, though, is the fertilized egg, which is considered
not just pluripotent but "totipotent" because it gives rise to everything. Even
after the first few divisions, the cells of early embryos retain that power.
Separate them, as happens with identical twins, and each forms a separate baby.
Eager to capture the potential of these cells, scientists such as Peter Donovan,
now at Thomas Jefferson University, worked earlier in the decade to isolate them
in mice.

   Since then, scientists have tried to use stem cells to treat various diseases
in mice. Earlier this month, Snyder announced a mouse experiment that showed
stem cells might help fight Alzheimer's disease.

   At Hahnemann University Hospital, Darwin Prockop has combined gene therapy
with stem cells to test a possible approach to Parkinson's disease. He started
with mouse stem cells that normally produced blood and genetically altered them
to make dopamine, which is needed for Parkinson's disease.

   * Gearhart's desire to solve the mystery of how an extra chromosome causes
Down syndrome is what got him interested in stem cells.

   "We still don't know how that extra chromosome leads to the physical and
neurological problems you see in Down syndrome," he said.

   He wanted to watch how stem cells with the extra chromosome grow into
different tissues. His first step was to get fetal tissue. Though President
Clinton lifted a Reagan-era ban on such research, "it took years to get the
appropriate protocols prepared," Gearhart said.

   He couldn't use just any fetal cell. Unlike an early embryo, a fetus is not
made of stem cells. Gearhart needed to separate the cells that later become
sperm and eggs, which remain true embryonic stem cells.

   Gearhart's challenge was to find such cells, isolate them and coax them to
start growing.

   Once he accomplished that, keeping them in their original, embryonic state
was difficult, he said, because the cells tend to clump into "embryoid bodies."

   The clumps look something like tumors called teratomas, which grow in the
ovaries or testes. Jumbles of all sorts of human tissues, even hair and teeth,
teratomas are thought to spring from stem cells that lose their way, Gearhart
said.

   Since November, when he and Thompson announced their success in growing human
stem cells, Gearhart has been on a circuit of lectures and interviews. He plans
to continue his investigation into Down syndrome, but with all the hopes for
curing diseases, "that doesn't mean you don't get swept up in some of the
delusions of grandeur."

   Gearhart said that the American Conference of Catholic Bishops objected that
his work could encourage women to seek abortions. Gearhart argues that he has no
connection to the women having abortions who agree to donate their fetal tissue
to research.

   Of the ethical questions surrounding stem cells, Gearhart says, "Absolutely
none of this is new." More than a decade ago scientists found that fetal tissue
implanted in the brain could alleviate the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

   Gearhart said he is frustrated that in all those years the government hadn't
developed a clear position on fetal-tissue research.

   Nor is there a clear guideline for working with the extra embryos created in
the in-vitro fertilization process.

   Currently, any researcher getting federal funding is banned from using human
embryos in research. Scientists could use fetal tissue, Gearhart said, until
late last year, when the NIH temporarily barred federally funded researchers
from using fetuses to make stem cells.

   But the NIH has also said that the ban on federal funding should not apply to
the study of stem cells already growing in labs.

   Congress is expected to debate stem-cell research legislation this fall.

   Cloning figures into the issue, too. In recent months, two companies
announced they will use cloning to make stem cells. One of them, Advanced Cell
Technology in Worcester, Mass., was the first to clone cattle by coaxing an
adult cow cell into becoming an embryo.

   Last fall, scientists at that company created stem cells using cloning, but
with a cross-species twist. They started with the DNA-containing nucleus of a
human cell taken from one of their employees, and inserted it into the egg cell
of a cow.

   Cloned stem cells would have a distinct advantage, said company biologist
Robert Lanza. They could be made from a patient's own DNA, thus eliminating the
risk that the body will reject them - a major problem with organ transplants.

   Cow eggs are much easier to get than human eggs, which must be extracted
through a complex and painful procedure, he said. And though some critics
suggested the company was creating a bizarre cow/human hybrid, Lanza says that
the stem cells in question are not capable of growing into a viable creature.

   The other company, Geron of Menlo Park, Calif., provided funding for
Thomson's and Gearhart's human stem-cell breakthroughs. Geron recently bought
the Scottish Roslin Institute, where a sheep named Dolly was cloned, in order to
acquire the technology for cloning animals and making stem cells.

   Some of the concerns over cloning go back to the embryo debates. When
scientists cloned Dolly, they created a blob of cells with the potential to
become a lamb - and proved it by implanting the mass in Dolly's surrogate
mother.

   If scientists used the same technique to make human stem cells, they would
have to create a group of cells that, if implanted into a uterus, could become a
baby. That might, under some definitions, qualify cloned human stem cells as
human embryos.

   To Gearhart, cloning fears have been exaggerated, but perhaps so have the
hopes for stem cells. In his travels, he's run up against the mistaken
perception that he can spin his stem cells into any organ, like spare parts of a
car. In France, he got several requests from men who wanted him to use stem
cells to build them bigger penises.

   At the same time, he said, he worries that when he addresses groups of
patients, he finds they've pinned all their hopes on him and his stem cells,
which are still far from finding their way into any therapy. "To those people,
you're a God," he said. "I wasn't prepared for that."

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1480 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                June 27, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       June 27, 1999 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 28A

LENGTH: 717 words

HEADLINE: PARENTS RAISE MONEY, GUIDE RESEARCH FOR TREATING RARE DISEASE

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   How much does it cost to find a cure for a disease?

   That's what Patricia Furlong wanted to know. Her two young sons were dying of
a rare disease that kills boys, usually before age 20. Her doctors, even the
National Institutes of Health, said there was nothing to help.

   The Middletown, Ohio, woman was aghast. Why, she asked, when scientists had
discovered the key gene in 1986, was there still no good treatment?

   Furlong decided parents, armed with little more than desperation and bake
sales, might speed research of treatments for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. She
illustrates a fledgling movement: parents fighting rare childhood killers by
personally seeking out scientists and paying for research that they - laymen,
not doctors - find exciting.

   Furlong's Parent Project has raised more than $1 million, helped fund
Duchenne research centers at two major universities, and prodded a New York
hospital to open a special clinic for Duchenne-stricken boys.

   "We were good at begging," says Furlong, whose sons, just teenagers, died
months after she started the Parent Project in 1995.

   With bake sales and local golf tournaments, parents' fund raising is tiny
compared with professional health-funding groups like the Muscular Dystrophy
Association, which is spending $6 million this year on Duchenne and a related
disease.

   But the Parent Project raises difficult questions. What does a cure cost? How
do scientists explain to distraught families when the government spends more
money on other illnesses than the one killing their loved ones? When
nonscientists buy research, how do they know their money goes where it is needed
most?

   The hard truth: While adequate funding is crucial, more money poured into one
disease doesn't mean a cure will come faster.

   "It's not a Manhattan project. It's not an engineering project where if we
just had a little more money, then we'd know the right path to take," said Dr.
Gerald Fischbach, head of the National Institute for Neurological Disorders and
Stroke. In science, "you never know when the crucial breakthrough will be made."

   Muscular dystrophies are genetic diseases that cause muscle weakness of
varying severity. Duchenne muscular dystrophy strikes about one in 3,500 boys.
First toddlers have trouble walking. By age 12, most victims are in wheelchairs.
Eventually they can't lift a fork or turn a page, and their respiratory muscles
finally give out. Only steroid drugs have proved significantly beneficial in
slowing muscle loss, but they don't help for long.

   The culprit gene is comparatively large, and working with muscle cells is so
difficult that only recently have scientists figured possible ways around
barriers to gene therapy. They're also newly optimistic because of work on
different proteins and stem cells that might one day help muscle regeneration.

   Much of that work results from basic research funding by NIH.

   But some scientists say the parents' money is vital, too. The NIH underfunds
Duchenne, contends University of California, Los Angeles, researcher James
Tidball.

   He counts four times more NIH grants for cystic fibrosis, a comparable
genetic killer, than for Duchenne. Parents just took that complaint to Congress,
prompting the House Commerce Committee to question NIH.

   And parents alone now are raising money for UCLA to begin testing a drug in
about 20 Duchenne boys in hopes of suppressing certain immune cells that seem to
help destroy their muscles.

   Fischbach insists no good work in Duchenne has gone unfunded, but says NIH is
discussing "new ways to stimulate research" and he would like parents' input.

   But for parents, research money is just one battle. They're frustrated at
everyday difficulties in care. Furlong bitterly recalls doctors balking when her
sons needed dentistry or other quality-of-life care. "They said, 'What
difference does it make?'

   How can parents get that help? The Muscular Dystrophy Association just
published a consumer-friendly parent's guide to each stage of Duchenne called
"Journey of Love." And the Parent Project, which this weekend brings
international Duchenne experts to UCLA for parents to question in person, runs
an Internet site full of information:

   http://www.parentdmd.org

   "We're just trying to give these little boys a voice," Furlong said.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1999


                             1481 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 25, 1999, Friday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: CELL PHONES, TITANIC GET STAMP OF APPROVAL IN POSTAL;
BALLOTING

BYLINE: RANDOLPH E. SCHMID; Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   People talk into their cell phones while walking the streets, while driving
their cars, while riding the bus, while eating in restaurants -- it seems like
cell phones are everywhere. Now, they'll even be on a postage stamp.

   Asked to pick 15 subjects for a set of stamps commemorating the 1990s,
Americans' No. 1 choice was cellular phones, which got 214,449 votes during
balloting in May, the Postal Service announced Thursday.

   Ballots were distributed through local post offices and on the Internet.

   A close second was another piece of popular culture that, at least for a
time, also seemed to be everywhere -- the movie "Titanic." It was the choice of
210,154 voters.

   The 1990s stamp set will be released next April.

   The voting was the last in a series of ballots in which the public was asked
to name the people or topics for sets of 15 stamps recalling each of the last
five decades of the century. Subjects for the first five decades were picked by
a postal advisory committee.

   "The Celebrate The Century program has given the American public a voice in
how many of us will remember the 20th century in years to come," said Postmaster
General William Henderson. "This one-of-a-kind collection brings together
postage stamps and 100 years of American history, celebrating a nation bound by
universal mail service and founded by great achievements and achievers."

   Besides cell phones and "Titanic," the winning subjects for the 1990s set
are: recovering species, 193,313 votes; World Wide Web, 191,292; movie "Jurassic
Park," 184,370; computer art and graphics, 170,449; sport utility vehicles,
164,058; Persian Gulf war, 160,687; virtual reality, 156,944;

   Also, Special Olympics, 155,802; baseball records, 151,511; extreme sports,
151,090; improving education, 141,124; television series "Seinfeld," 140,710 and
return to space, 138,984.

   In February, the public chose subjects to memorialize the 1980s. Video games
received the most votes, followed by the fall of the Berlin Wall and the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial. Subjects picked to commemorate the 1970s include the yellow
Smiley Face, "Sesame Street," disco music and Earth Day.

   For the 1960s, the public's selections included the first moon walk, the
integrated circuit and lasers. And the 1950s stamp subjects determined by
popular vote included drive-in movies, desegregating public schools and "I Love
Lucy."

   Subjects from the 1990s ballot that failed to collect enough votes to get on
a stamp were cultural diversity, active older Americans, sustained economic
growth, Broadway musicals, contemporary architecture, women's sports, in-line
skating, junior golf; dinosaur fossil discoveries, interplanetary exploration,
gene therapy, increased popularity of coffee, community service, museum
attendance and home offices.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1999


                             1482 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                       June 25, 1999 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Doctors at the University of Michigan Hospital are doing
pioneering research into the growth of blood vessels for use in heart bypass
surgery. The growth of new blood vessels for surgery is called angiogenesis.
Alan Lessig / The Detroit News; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: Blood vessel research is medicine's next frontier: Process may fight
cancer, heart disease

BODY:

   The University of Michigan, Beaumont Hospital and Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute are in a global race to control the growth of blood vessels -- an
effort that could prove life-saving.

   The growth of new blood vessels is called angiogenesis, and it is a vogue
area of medical research for good reason: Angiogenesis could offer a natural,
nonsurgical treatment for cancer and coronary artery disease.

   Two of every three Americans will develop cancer; 14 million Americans have
coronary artery disease.

   In cancer, drugs or treatments that inhibit angiogenesis may shut off the
blood source that feeds tumors, killing them. In coronary artery disease,
angiogenesis stimulation could help patients grow their own "biological
bypasses" around clogged or weak arteries.

   "There are a number of diseases where the body seems unable to turn on or
turn off the growth of blood vessels," said Dr. Peter Polverini, a University of
Michigan professor of dentistry and pathology.

   He has been studying angiogenesis, which lays the body's infrastructure for
delivery of blood and nutrients, for 25 years. His research on the subject was
published this year in the American Journal of Pathology.

   Lewis Mellinger, 59, of Milan, Mich., is one of the few patients in the state
who was eligible to participate in a U-M clinical trial of an angiogenesis-based
drug, many of which are still being tested in animals.

   "My doctor said this was the end of my rope," he said.

   The grandfather of 10 had eight bypasses during a 1996 surgery, in addition
to angioplasty, in which a balloon is inflated in an artery to unclog it. But so
many of his arteries are clogged that additional surgery won't help much.

   The trial in which Mellinger is participating is part of a nationwide test of
rFGF-2, an angiogenesis stimulator that will not be approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration for years, according to its manufacturer, Chiron Corp.

   Doctors have long known that some people grow their own bypasses, and it is
hoped that angiogenesis stimulators will help others, like Mellinger, do the
same, said Dr. Robert Lederman, who is supervising the U-M study.

   Lederman doesn't know whether rFGF-2 will do the trick, but added: "We are
confident that drugs in this category will work."

   Doctors caution against calling angiogenesis therapies a magic bullet. But
when used in conjunction with other existing treatments, doctors expect an
unknown number of people to essentially be cured.

   "Angiogenesis holds the promise of making some of the most difficult and
deadly diseases incredibly manageable," said Dr. William Li, president and
medical director of the Angiogenesis Foundation, a nonprofit organization in
Cambridge, Mass.

   Peter Corry and Michael Borrelli, two biophysicists at Beaumont Hospital,
Royal Oak, say that is not health hype. They recently received a grant from the
Army to develop a genetic therapy that inhibits angiogenesis and kills tumors.

   If angiogenesis can be controlled, Borrelli said, "it is a major event."

   Angiogenesis will likely prove crucial in understanding less debilitating
diseases, too.

   Excessive vessel growth can exacerbate, and possibly cause, not only cancer,
but rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, obesity and intravascular diseases of the
eye. Insufficient angiogenesis can aggravate heart disease, scleroderma and
infertility.

   Take infertility, for example. In order for a fetus to get nutrients and
grow, a woman must generate an army of new blood vessels inside her uterus,
Polverini said. If her angiogenesis abilities are deficient, her ability to
sustain a baby inside the womb might be harmed. It may even prevent her
fertilized egg from attaching to the uterine wall, he said.

   The key to developing an angiogenesis therapy that is deemed successful will
be controlling the area of the body where the blood vessel growth is inhibited
or stimulated and the degree of growth effected, said Dr. Anthony Shields, a
medical oncologist at Karmanos Cancer Institute.

   Shields is co-leader for new drug development, a department developing
angiogenesis inhibitors.

   There is concern that giving an angiogenesis stimulator to someone with
artery disease could fuel cancer or that an inhibitor might cause other
problems, he said.

   For example, the drug thalidomide, which was prescribed as a sedative in the
1950s, is now being tested as an angiogenesis inhibitor in cancer patients. It
is so powerful that some children born to women taking the drug decades ago were
born without limbs, an apparent result of not enough blood supply to tissue in
that area, Shields said.

   The most amazing aspect of angiogenesis therapies, those developing them
agree, is that they will help the body help itself. Getting the body to grow its
own bypass or kill its own tumor is amazing stuff.

   "It goes way beyond cancer and heart disease," Li said. "Angiogenesis has the
potential to revolutionize medicine."

   For information about angiogenesis, check out the Angiogenesis Foundation Web
site at www.angio.org or the Web site for the University of Michigan's
Therapeutic Angiogenesis Program at www.med.umich.edu/tap.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1483 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      June 24, 1999 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 044

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: There's a lot to like about biotech stocks

BYLINE: By Karin Price Mueller

BODY:

   Biotechnology companies and many of their products were once branded as
science fiction. Today, they're getting attention from Wall Street.

   "There are a number of companies with good, high-tech, state-of-the-art
products that are finally hitting home," says Standard & Poor's analyst Herman
Saftlas.

   PaineWebber's Elise Wang says the success of biotech products is validating
the technologies that the sector has been pursuing.

   But despite solid product offerings, many biotech stocks have been suffering.

   The group, says Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette analyst Craig Parker, has had
trouble breaking away from pharmaceutical stocks, which have had trouble in
recent weeks because of fears of cuts in Medicare reimbursements. Biotechs
shouldn't be affected by any cuts, he says, so investors should look more
carefully at the differences between the groups.

   "Biotech revenue growth is about three times that of pharmaceuticals," Parker
says. "Their earnings growth is good."

   Parker recommends Gilead Sciences, which will be launching two new products
by the end of the year. Its influenza drug, which will be marketed by Roche, and
its new drug to treat AIDS patients who are failing under today's treatments,
are expected to be big moneymakers for the company by the end of 2000. Parker
has a price target for the stock of $ 55 in the next 12 months.

   Parker also recommends Amgen, whose stock price fell recently because of a
legal dispute with Boston-based Transkaryotic Therapies over the patent for the
anemia drug Epogen. Epogen will be a $ 1.6 billion product for Amgen this year.

   He expects the company to reach $ 72 in the next 12 months.

   Saftlas also recommends Amgen and expects the company to see a more than 20
percent rise in sales for Epogen in the second quarter. Saftlas is also excited
about the company's new prostate cancer drug and other treatments.

   "It has such a wide research and development spectrum, and there are a number
of things that could hit," he says.

   Parker says Amgen rival Transkaryotic Therapies is on his buy list, also
because of its other products. In early 2000 it will launch a drug to treat the
rare genetic disorder Fabry's disease. Genzyme already offers a similar product,
but the Transkaryotic version will be substantially less expensive, he says.

   He has a 12-month price target of $ 46 for the stock.

   Cambridge-based Biogen, which has found profit with a multiple sclerosis
drug, is another of Saftlas' picks.

   "They're opening up a new platform with a new drug for cirrhosis which may
also have other indications," he says.

   Wang recommends Alkermes, a drug-delivery company that's also in Cambridge.
Its first product for a sustained release form of human growth hormone will hit
the market next year. She speculates that the company could be a good takeover
target.

   She also likes Genzyme, which focuses on treatments for rare genetic
diseases. Its first product, to treat Gaucher disease, became a $ 400 million
market.

   "They are now leveraging their expertise to go after other rare diseases,"
Wang says.


LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1999


                             1484 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        June 24, 1999 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   DONATION AIDS SCHOLARS

   Impressed by Isidore Newman School's continuing commitment to diversity,
philanthropist Charlie Zucker has donated an additional $100,000 to the Charlie
Zucker Scholarship Fund, which enables talented African-American students to
achieve an outstanding education. The first four Zucker scholars have completed
their first year in Newman's high school.

   The scholars are selected on the basis of ability, achievement and financial
need. The four current Zucker students are enjoying academic success at Newman
and are taking advantage of the school's extracurricular offerings.

   PROFESSOR RECEIVES CHAIR

   Prescott L. Deininger recently received the first Marguerite Main Zimmerman
Chair in Basic Cancer Research at Tulane University.

   The chair was established in 1993 through a bequest of Rodger F. Zimmerman in
honor of his mother. It will support basic cancer research to further prevention
and treatment programs that translate basic discoveries to clinical
applications.

   Deininger, an internationally renowned expert in molecular genetics and
cancer research, is director for basic science programs and associate director
of the Tulane Cancer Center. In addition, he is a professor in the Department of
Environmental Health Sciences at the Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, and director of the laboratory of molecular genetics at the Alton
Ochsner Medical Foundation.

   In honor of the investiture, a lecture on "Development of Human Gene Therapy"
was given by Dr. Theodore Friedmann, under whom Deininger served as a
postdoctoral research associate. Friedmann is professor of pediatrics and
director of the gene therapy program at the University of California in San
Diego.

   SCHOLARSHIPS AWARDED

   The United Teachers of New Orleans awarded five scholarships to graduating
high school seniors at a recent luncheon ceremony.

   Three $2,000 scholarships, supported by contributions from UTNO members, were
awarded to students who plan to become teachers. The recipients were Shannon
Sherrye Ross of McDonogh No. 35 High School, who will attend the University of
New Orleans to study early childhood education; James Smith of Marion Abramson
High School, who will attend Dillard University to study history and music; and
Angelie Irene Davis of McDonogh No. 35, who will attend Louisiana State
University to study early childhood education.

   A $1,500 scholarship, given by Fringe Benefits Management Co. in honor of the
late businessman Jack Parker, was presented to Renee Rolland of Mount Carmel
Academy, who will major in accounting at LSU.

   A $2,000 scholarship contributed by the Rittenberg and Samuel law firm was
presented to Denitta Arnaud of Ben Franklin High School, who will attend Loyola
University and major in finance and international business.

   EDUCATORS RECOGNIZED

   Alpha Theta chapter of Phi Delta Kappa national sorority presented its
Outstanding Educator Awards at a recent luncheon.

   Awards were presented to Lynette D. Bates, assistant director of Upward Bound
at UNO; Mary Cartwright, dean of pupil services for special education and gifted
and talented students at West Jefferson High School; Trudi Hayne-Dyer, former
special education coordinator for Orleans Parish schools; Myra L. Harris, a
teacher of severely handicapped students at Estelle Elementary School in
Jefferson Parish; Martha A. Jones, a teacher at Lacoste Elementary School in St.
Bernard Parish; Leonard Parker, principal of Little Woods Elementary School and
Area II Elementary Principal of the Year for 1998-99 in Orleans Parish; Pinkie
R. Reddix, an adult education teacher in Orleans Parish; James E. Williams, a
teacher at Phoenix High School in Plaquemines Parish; and Linda Auzout-Young,
staff developer at Mary D. Coghill Elementary School in Orleans Parish and
coordinator of the Region IX Social Studies Fair.

   LAW LIBRARIAN CITED

   Catherine Lemann, electronic resources and reference librarian for the Law
Library of Louisiana, was presented the 1999 Margaret T. Lane Award by the
Government Documents Round Table. The award honors an individual or organization
that has made an especially significant contribution in advancing access to or
use of government information in Louisiana.

   Lemann was recognized for her work in constructing the Louisiana Supreme
Court's Web site, which gives the public access to the court's decisions and
opinions and other valuable information.

   A frequent speaker, Lemann has shared her knowledge about working with court
information with many court and library groups.

   * * * * * * *

   If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to
Applause, The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70140. Items
must be received by Thursday to be included in the following Thursday's
editions.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1999


                             1485 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                            June 23, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: Suburban; Pg.  1

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: MED CENTER IS GETTING NEW CHIEF

BYLINE: By NANCIE L. KATZ

BODY:


   John LaRosa, chancellor of Tulane University Medical Center, has been named
head of the SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn, it was announced yesterday.

   The State University of New York's board of trustees chose LaRosa to replace
Acting President Eugene Feigelson, dean of the College of Medicine, according to
a SUNY statement.

   The facility on Clarkson Ave. in East Flatbush also is known as Downstate
Medical Center.

   LaRosa, 58, has headed the 300-bed Tulane Medical Center which includes its
schools of medicine, public health and tropical medicine since 1994 and is
internationally recognized for research on the relationship of heart disease,
cholesterol, diet and hormones.

   Along with winning research grants for the New Orleans-based medical center
during his tenure, LaRosa also helped create new research and clinical centers
on gene therapy, women's health and infectious diseases.

   "I am very happy," LaRosa said of his appointment. "There is a lot of work to
do. I think any academic medical center in the middle of a city of more than 2
million has got to work. It has all the ingredients for a great academic
center."

   LaRosa, who is also an accomplished jazz pianist, plans to start at his new
post in late fall. "I loved my time in New Orleans. But I love New York, so this
is a great opportunity," the Pittsburgh native said.

   Before joining Tulane, LaRosa was dean of research at George Washington
University Medical Center in Washington, where he worked for 20 years.


GRAPHIC: APPOINTED: John LaRosa

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1999


                             1486 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        June 23, 1999 Wednesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: TULANE LOSES TWO OFFICIALS TO N.Y.;
HUSBAND-WIFE TEAM OFF TO SUNY

BYLINE: By John Pope Staff writer

BODY:

   Dr. John C. LaRosa, Tulane University Medical Center's chancellor since 1994,
resigned Tuesday to become president of the State University of New York Health
Science Center at Brooklyn.

   His wife, Judith H. LaRosa, will leave with him Oct. 1. She is chairwoman of
the Department of Community Health Sciences in Tulane's School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine and director of the Tulane/Xavier National Center of
Excellence in Women's Health, which she helped establish.

   She does not have a job yet, and no interim successor for either LaRosa has
been named.

   John LaRosa, 58, was picked for the Brooklyn post Tuesday by the State
University of New York board of trustees. He was one of six applicants,
university spokesman Ken Goldfarb said.

   The campus, which also is known as the Downstate Health Science Center,
includes medical and nursing schools, a graduate school, a college of
health-related professions and a 376-bed hospital. It has about 1,500 students
and 800 full-time faculty members.

   "There's a lot to do at Downstate," LaRosa said in a telephone interview.
"It's a venerated institution that needs a lot of attention."

   Although the education programs are "pretty good," he said, "it needs a
broader appeal to students outside the New York area."

   And even though the center's research faculty includes last year's Nobel
laureate in medicine, "the program needs fixing," LaRosa said. "It's not as big
as it ought to be."

   "We'll miss him, but it's hard to feel sad or feel bad for someone who got a
good opportunity," Tulane President Scott Cowen said.

   In discussing his time at Tulane, LaRosa said he was proudest of these
accomplishments:

   * Ending the long, bitter rivalry with Louisiana State University, as shown
in the universities' cooperation on the administration of Charity and University
hospitals and in a gene-therapy research center.

   * Achieving a partnership with Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., which bought 80
percent of Tulane University Hospital in 1995.

   * Establishing the women's health center, the gene-therapy center and an
infectious-disease center.

   LaRosa, who received his medical degree from the University of Pittsburgh,
came to Tulane after spending nearly a quarter-century at the George Washington
University Medical Center in Washington, where he taught and was dean for
clinical affairs and dean for research.

   Known for his research on the relationships among heart disease, diet,
cholesterol and hormones, LaRosa was chairman of the first National Cholesterol
Conference in 1989 and, from 1989 to 1993, leader of the American Heart
Association's Task Force on Cholesterol Issues. He received the association's
Award of Merit.

   Before moving to New Orleans, Judith LaRosa, 58, who holds a doctorate in
health education, was deputy director of the National Institutes of Health's
Office of Research on Women's Health.

   She is a "very valuable faculty member," Cowen said. "She's done some very
wonderful things."

GRAPHIC: Dr. John C. LaRosa - Tulane Medical Center chancellor is resigning
Judith H. LaRosa - Chairwoman in Tulane's School of Public Health is following
her husband 2 PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1999


                             1487 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                June 22, 1999, Tuesday, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z07

LENGTH: 1261 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Aims to Cure Hemophilia; Patients in Trials Receive
Replacement Genes to Correct Blood Clotting Disorder

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   Earlier this month, Donald N. Miller rolled up his sleeve in a Pittsburgh
hospital and became the first person to receive a new, experimental gene therapy
treatment aimed at curing the most common kind of hemophilia.

   An inherited bleeding disorder, hemophilia affects about 20,000 male
Americans. Three different types of gene therapy for the disorder are now being
tested in humans, and researchers predict that hemophilia may soon become the
first inherited disease to be successfully treated by giving patients
replacement genes that would function for long periods of time.

   The experimental hemophilia treatments represent a new wave of gene therapy
approaches being developed for a number of diseases, said James M. Wilson,
professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy, which met in Washington this
month. Researchers are applying lessons learned from pioneering, largely
unsuccessful gene therapy trials that took place earlier in this decade.

   Most of those early tests used engineered viruses called "vectors," often
versions of the common cold virus, to put new genes into patients. But the
body's immune system viewed the viruses as invaders and mounted a reaction that
tended to inactivate the inserted genes. Since then, however, researchers have
developed new vectors that are less vulnerable to attack by the immune system.
Tests in animals suggest that gene therapy using the newer vectors may be able
to successfully treat hemophilia as well as some kinds of inherited high
cholesterol, eye disorders such as macular degeneration and retinitis
pigmentosa, and a number of other conditions.

   "I really believe that . . . we're sitting on vector technology that's going
to cure disease," Wilson said. "It's just going to take us a while to prove it."

   Hemophilia is a perfect test case for the new approaches, researchers say,
because if an inserted gene functions even a little, it may be enough to correct
the blood clotting disorder.

   People with hemophilia suffer spontaneous, often crippling bleeding into
their joints and are at risk for life-threatening hemorrhages in the brain,
digestive tract and other sites. Hemophilia A, which accounts for 80 percent of
cases, occurs in people who have a defective gene for Factor VIII, a protein
needed for the chemical reaction that makes blood clot. Hemophilia B, the other
form of the disease, is caused by a defective gene for Factor IX, another
clotting protein.

   Both proteins are normally made by the liver, and the symptoms of the two
types of hemophilia are virtually identical. People with severe hemophilia make
almost none of the clotting protein produced by the affected gene, said
Katherine High, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania
Medical School. High is leading a gene therapy trial for hemophilia B.

   At the first sign of hemorrhage into a joint, hemophilia patients must take
an intravenous injection of the protein they lack, usually about once a week.
Treatment costs between $ 50,000 and $ 100,000 per year, and even with weekly
injections, many people still develop disabling joint problems.

   If gene therapy can raise levels of the missing clotting protein to as little
as 2 percent of the amount found in a healthy person, it will prevent patients
from suffering spontaneous hemorrhages into the joints, brain or other organs,
said Margaret V. Ragni, a professor of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh
who is leading a gene therapy study for hemophilia A.

   The gene therapy products now being tested by High and Ragni have succeeded
in preventing such hemorrhages in hemophilic dogs, with the effect of a single
treatment lasting at least two years.

   "Let's suppose this gene therapy works," said Ragni. "The goal would be, you
take a young child. . . . You would just give a dose and avoid all of this
morbidity, all of these chronic joint problems and, lo and behold, you'd have a
much better quality of life."

   Miller, 50 years old, was the first hemophilia A patient treated in Ragni's
trial, which is testing the safety of a treatment manufactured by Chiron Corp.
of Emeryville, Calif. Miller said he suffered life-threatening bleeding in his
throat and intestines as a child.

   "Several times I was given hours to live," he said. During one protracted
hospitalization, he recalled, "I got 157 pints of blood in five weeks."

   Since better preparations of the clotting protein have been developed, Miller
said, he has had fewer hemorrhages, but he still suffers from chronic joint
problems. Miller and his wife live on a sheep farm in Mt. Pleasant, Pa. He
publishes large-print books and works as a computer consultant.

   He said he didn't hesitate to volunteer for the study. "Somebody had to be
the first one to do it," he said. If it works, "it means I won't have to be
sticking myself with needles."

   The Chiron product contains a nearly complete gene for Factor VIII that is
transported into cells by a vector made from a mouse retrovirus. Retroviruses
are a large family of viruses that includes the AIDS virus.

   The engineered vector has had all of its functional viral genes removed, said
Ragni. "The only thing left is its ability to gain entrance into the cell," she
said.

   Researchers believe the virus inserts the gene primarily into cells of the
liver and spleen, but it has also shown up in other organs, including the bone
marrow and the gonads. However, there is no evidence that it gets into
"germ-line" cells such as sperm or eggs, said Margaret Liu, vice president for
vaccines and gene therapy research at Chiron.

   Miller received the gene therapy starting June 1, in brief intravenous
injections every day for three days. Since then, he has been home working on his
sheep farm. Although the pilot study is not designed to test the product's
effectiveness, researchers hope to see some effect on his blood's ability to
clot within the next few weeks.

   Miller is optimistic. One day last week, he said, he had a nosebleed and
continued working outside instead of lying down for half an hour as he
ordinarily would. "It quit real fast," he said.

   High's study, which also began this month, is testing the safety of gene
therapy for hemophilia B, using a Factor IX gene carried by a vector called
adeno-associated virus (AAV). She injects the product, made by Avigen Inc. of
Alameda, Calif., into a thigh muscle. It is taken up by muscle cells, which then
begin to make the clotting protein.

   Another company, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, Mass., is
testing an outside-the-body form of gene therapy for hemophilia A at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. Each patient undergoes a skin biopsy to
obtain cells called fibroblasts, which are grown in the laboratory. Researchers
insert a Factor VIII gene into the cells, using a technique that doesn't require
a viral vector, then inject them back into the patient. Additional companies are
also developing products for hemophilia.

   Chiron's Liu said her company is working on a "stable" of vector viruses that
could be used to deliver genes for different purposes. The field's future, she
predicted, lies with the development of a variety of carefully engineered
viruses for ferrying genes into the body. "It's not just going to be that you
have one vector and this is the solution for gene therapy."

    Nurse Valerie Bond applies ice to the arm of Donald L. Miller, who is
receiving an experimental treatment for hemophilia.


GRAPHIC: Photo, PITTSBURGH POST/GAZETTE/ANDY STARNES

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1999


                             1488 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                          June 21, 1999, Monday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,2A SUN JOURNAL

LENGTH: 1230 words

HEADLINE: Evolution of eugenics movement; Science: A look at the theory that
aimed to improve the human race may provide lessons today as scientists grapple
with gene therapy.

BYLINE: Douglas Birch

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   It was a grotesque mixture of bigotry and pseudo-science that flourished in
America, inspiring biased immigration laws, limits on interracial marriage and
the sterilization of more than 60,000 people.

    And while the eugenics movement came to a very bad end a half-century ago,
it may still hold important lessons for us. Its echoes can be heard in the
theories linking race and intelligence. And advancing technology is bringing its
once far-fetched goals increasingly within our grasp.

    Eugenics was founded by a 19th-century British mathematician, Francis
Galton, whose enthusiasm for evolution and tendency to see the world in terms of
numbers led to pioneering work in the application of statistics to biology.

    Galton believed fervently that "like begets like" -- that people inherit
intelligence, talent and morality with eye color and stature. And he worried
that the industrious, intelligent and moral people were having too few children,
while the dull and shiftless were having too many.

    Nature, he thought, didn't let the unworthy live long enough to procreate,
but public-health measures interfered by lengthening lives. Now, evolution would
need help culling the unworthy. Fortunately, scientists were up to the task.
"What nature does blindly, slowly and ruthlessly, man may do providently,
quickly and kindly," wrote Galton, who envisaged consigning the defective to
monasteries.

    Eugenics appealed to different people for different reasons. Left-wing
utopians hoped to create a perfect man suitable for life in a perfect society.
Conservatives sought to check the growth of the volatile working class. At first
popular among intellectual elites, eugenics was filtering into mainstream
culture by the 1890s. By the eve of World War I, it had inspired what historian
Daniel J.  Kevles calls "a planetary revolution."

    In the United States, it was championed by white Anglo-Saxon Protestants --
perhaps because it offered scientific justification for their political
dominance. One early supporter was birth-control pioneer Margaret Sanger, who
adopted the slogan "To Breed a Race of Thoroughbreds."

    High-minded citizens in Battle Creek, Mich., founded the Race Betterment
Foundation. Forward-thinking New Yorkers established The Galton Society.
Celebrities such as horticulturist Luther Burbank launched the American Eugenics
Society.

    Twenty-eight state committees sprang up. State fairs opened "human stock"
sections and sponsored "Fitter Family" contests, honoring those who could prove
the mettle of their sperm and eggs, or "germ plasm," in tests of physical and
mental agility.

    In Philadelphia in 1926, the Eugenics Society set up a display featuring a
clock and flashing lights. Every 48 seconds, the display claimed, a mentally
deficient person was born. Only once every 7 1/2 minutes, it said, did American
couples produce "a high-grade person who will have ability to do creative work
and be fit for leadership."

    Critics of eugenics, including lawyer Clarence Darrow and journalist Walter
Lippmann, found few allies. When eminent biologist Herbert Spencer Jennings of
the Johns Hopkins University went to Washington to testify against a
eugenics-inspired immigration law, he was kept waiting for nine hours, then told
to go home. The committee had adjourned.

    The prejudice driving the movement had no subtlety. A leading eugenicist,
Charles B. Davenport, fretted that immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe
would turn Americans into a people "darker in pigmentation, smaller in stature,
more mercurial more given to crimes of larceny, kidnapping, assault, murder,
rape and sex-immorality."

    In Maryland, long a refuge for immigrants, eugenics campaigners avoided that
kind of talk. Instead, they attacked the poor and the handicapped. "The breeding
of paupers, the feeble-minded, the psychopathic and the criminal delinquent must
be eliminated so far as possible from the machinery of life," declared the
Baltimore City grand jury in a 1932 report. "It is certainly impossible to
produce normal citizens from such sources."

    More than 35 states adopted laws authorizing the sterilization of prisoners,
drug addicts, the mentally retarded and people suffering from epilepsy.
Upholding the constitutionality of such laws, Supreme Court Justice Oliver
Wendell Holmes equated compulsory sterilization with mandatory vaccinations.
"Three generations of imbeciles are enough," he wrote.

    Twice in the 1930s, Maryland legislators considered sterilization bills. The
measures were rejected, in part because of opposition from Catholic leaders.

    The Nazis adopted eugenics with a passion.  By 1937, they had sterilized
225,000 people, about half of them said to be " feeble-minded." Two years later,
they switched to killing the mentally diseased or disabled -- as well as Jews.
Authorities offered ethnically pure and biologically fit German families loans
and bounties for producing more children.

    After Germany's defeat, eugenics was crippled as a social movement.
Scientific research into genetics and heredity, though, was making tremendous
advances. The technology of reproduction improved, too, leading to the routine
use of artificial insemination and in-vitro fertilization. Scientists developed
tests for inherited diseases, giving people the option of terminating
pregnancies.

    Eugenics, once a top-down program of social control, became a bottom-up
consumer movement.

    By 1969, Robert L. Sinsheimer of the California Institute of Technology said
humans stood at the threshold of what he called a "new eugenics." Biologists, he
predicted, would one day repair malfunctioning human genes, even build genes
that never existed in nature. "For the first time in all time, a living creature
understands its origin and can undertake to design its future," he said.

    Today, science is preparing to take a big step in that direction. Dr. W.
French Anderson of the University of Southern California is pursuing "germ- line
therapy" for two disorders -- one that cripples the immune system, and another
that causes severe anemia.

    Standard gene therapy aims to fix faulty genes one person at a time.
Germ-line therapy would fix the genes in sperm and egg cells. Children born from
these cells would be free of the disorders their parents carry. If it works,
germ-line therapy could erase thousands of genetic disorders. Someday, it might
also be used to produce healthier, stronger and smarter children.

    Some scientists ask, in effect, why not. "If you could cure a very serious
disease, stupidity, that would be a great thing for the people who otherwise
would be born seriously disadvantaged," James Watson, co-discoverer of the
structure of DNA, told a reporter last year.

    Skeptics argue against tinkering with nature's designs, carefully wrought
through millions of years of evolution. Someday, some scientists say, we will
recognize that many apparent flaws in human genes serve a vital function. The
quest for perfection, they suggest, is driven by a dangerous hubris.

    "I can almost guarantee that any mutation that occurs at a statistically
higher level than you would expect by chance is there for a reason," says
biochemist Hamilton O. Smith, an emeritus professor at Hopkins and winner of the
Nobel Prize. "There's no way to tell what the effects of eliminating one gene
from the human population would be."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) 1. Test: A U.S. officer gives a female immigrant a mental
test. Immigrants who were determined to be mentally deficient were turned away.
 2.  Founder: Francis Galton envisioned consigning the defective to monasteries.


LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1999


                             1489 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JUNE 20, 1999, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY CHRONICLE; Pg. 1/Z1

LENGTH: 2812 words

HEADLINE: VISIONS OF TOMORROW;

Pros weigh in on looming problems raised by Chronicle readers as they
contemplate the coming century

BYLINE: Michael Taylor, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
One hundred years ago, the idea of global war was still 15 years off, and air
travel, let alone space travel, was a figment largely of Jules Verne's
imagination.

    Forecasting the scientific, political and social changes that shape the
future is still a challenge, but one that seems to be eagerly embraced as the
20th century comes to an end.

    How several key problems facing the world will evolve during the next
century was raised in a recent Chronicle Poll conducted by Baldassare
Associates, who questioned some 600 Bay Area residents.

    The questions focused on six subjects -- war, the gap between rich and poor,
the environment, overpopulation, curing cancer and space travel. After taking
the poll, The Chronicle asked a number of experts to discuss these issues.

   WAR

    Nearly half the Bay Area residents contacted by The Chronicle felt that a
world war was "not likely" in the coming century. Since World War II ended in
1945, armed conflicts have been confined to specific regions. Some experts on
global warfare think world wars are a thing of the past, while others say it is
always possible that a regional war might mushroom into a global conflict.

    "Wars in the 19th and 20th centuries were for territorial aggrandizement,
and after World War II, the Communist conquests of China and Vietnam were, in a
sense, ideological," said Bernard Trainor, a retired Marine Corps lieutenant
general and former director of the national security program at Harvard's
Kennedy School of Government.

    "What the future holds is the sort of thing we've seen in Rwanda and Somalia
-- the emergence of super-nationalism, of ethnic, racial, tribal and, in the
21st century, environmental disputes. And a good deal of it will be urban-based,
because populations are migrating to the cities, and that's where the source of
power is."

    Trainor worries, however, that the military strategy of the United States
and other major powers is "structured for a classical and traditional type of
warfare," and that current weapons and forces may have to be modified or changed
altogether to fight radically different 21st century wars.

    Alexander Haig, the retired Army general and former NATO commander, said
that he believes that war "is the same dirty old war it's always been. There are
nations that believe in the rule of law, and nations that believe in the rule of
the bayonet.

    "If we, as the most important military and economic power, mismanage
diplomacy," he said, the result "would have a global conflict potential. You can
list any combination -- Russia, China, India, and other nations -- that have not
shared our values."

    Haig conceded, however, that weapons "in the hands of irresponsible maverick
nations" can produce "new and very dangerous possibilities."

   RICH AND POOR

    More than 80 percent of the people questioned in The Chronicle Poll felt
that the gap between rich and poor will be a serious problem in the 21st
century. This, according to labor experts and economists, is a problem that will
not be easily solved.

    "The income gap has widened considerably over the past 25 years, and people
who are in the middle, the median workers, are just about where they were in
1989, before the last recession," said Robert Reich, who was secretary of labor
during President Clinton's first term.

    Reich noted that the gap between rich and poor has grown so wide that 85
percent of all the stock market gains in the 1990s have benefited the wealthiest
10 percent of the nation's population.

    In the future, he said, "Most people are going to remain fairly upbeat,
regardless of where they are on the income scale. It's when the economy slows
down that we'll see more attention paid to all this. Most working people don't
want to soak the rich. They want to be rich. As long as they think they have a
fair shot at making it, they don't feel resentment. It's when they feel they
don't have a fair shot that resentments begin to bubble over."

    Herbert Stein, who was chairman of President Richard Nixon's Council of
Economic Advisers, disagreed with Reich. "I'm not sure the gap is happening in
the first place," he said. "I think everything is going to get better and better
economically; we're already well-off economically.

    "Almost everybody will have a good life, and whether we have a good life
will depend on psychological, cultural and spiritual qualities. That's the great
area where we have to improve our lives. And the lives of a lot of the have-nots
will be improved. By the general rise of productivity in the U.S., we will
increase everyone's income. The rising tide will lift all those boats."

   THE ENVIRONMENT

    The Bay Area residents who responded to The Chronicle Poll indicated that
the most acute problem that faces the world over the next 100 years is the
environment. Nearly two-thirds of those polled said environmental problems in
the next century will be "very serious." Environmental experts tend to agree
with them but are optimistic that the human spirit will ultimately prevail.

    "Right now, the public is way ahead of our leaders on these problems," said
Carl Pope, executive director of the Sierra Club. "If the people say, We hold
your leaders accountable,' we could have a miraculous recovery."

    The future, however, is precarious, Pope said.

    "If we simply take the course we're on, we'll go over the edge with major
ecosystem collapses. We are still driving toward an unknown precipice in a fog,"
he said, "but we're driving considerably more slowly than 20 years ago. If we
keep changing our behavior at the same pace as over the last 20 years, we might
stop short of the precipice."

    That's still possible, agrees Huey Johnson, secretary of California's
Resources Agency when Jerry Brown was governor and now president of the Resource
Renewal Institute at Fort Mason. But, he added, there's a long way to go.

    Johnson says water, or the lack of it, is the Earth's most serious problem.
"There's only a fixed amount of water coming out of the skies each year, and
some countries -- China and India, particularly -- are in a desperately
difficult condition."

    Industry, Johnson points out, gobbles up tons of water to generate power and
"to process almost anything. There will be wars and tragedy and lots of human
suffering because of the lack of water."

    He also noted that the effects of toxic waste "are just beginning to be
realized."

   OVERPOPULATION

    The Chronicle Poll found that the problem of overpopulation is nearly as bad
as that of the environment. Fifty-nine percent considered this is a "very
serious" issue, and there was no argument on that account from the experts.

    "We're at 6 billion people on the Earth," said Paul Ehrlich, Bing Professor
of Population Studies at Stanford University, who was awarded the prestigious
Blue Planet Prize last week. "And that's roughly three times what the planet
should have. About 2 billion is optimal."

    The United Nations' population experts predict that by 2050, the Earth's
population will be nearly 9.4 billion.

    If we had fewer people -- about 66 percent fewer -- the Earth's inhabitants
would have a great deal more breathing room, Ehrlich said.

    "You'd have enough big cities so that city dwellers would have what they
want, and there would be enough other space for hermits," he said.

    Tim Wirth, the former Colorado senator who now heads the United Nations
Foundation, said that overpopulation and environmental breakdown "are the two
most severe global issues we face, assuming we don't blow each other off the
face of the Earth."

    "The environment by itself, and overpopulation by itself, each have severe
dangers," Wirth said. "Compound the two, and you can imagine an Armageddon
future, if we're not very careful and aware."

    Wirth says the real problem is that "there is no political leadership on
this front," and that any attempt at that kind of leadership is quickly blunted
by resistance from "economic forces, religious forces ... and sheer ignorance."

   CANCER

   Nearly half the people polled said they thought that it is "very likely" that
a cure for cancer will be discovered in the next 100 years, and experts in
cancer research said this may indeed happen.

    "For the most part, I do believe there will be a cure for cancer in the next
century," said Frank McCormick, director of the cancer center at the University
of California at San Francisco Medical Center.

    "We know so much now about the molecular basis of cancer cells and how they
interact with normal cells. There are already therapies that are in experimental
phases, and these will be at the front edge of a new wave. Hopefully, some of
these will be approved in the next few years, and we expect to build on those in
a five- to 10-year time frame."

    McCormick said that with recent innovations in gene therapy, "It's possible
to make viruses that will kill cancer cells with tremendous selectivity." But
the big problem is whether treatments can be developed to pinpoint and eliminate
tumors that cannot presently be detected.

    "We've already killed some local tumors without serious side effects,"
McCormick said. "So we need to get to the next stage of treating people for
tumors that have not been detected or for ones that have spread through the
body."

    One of the big hopes in treating cancer are anti-angiogenesis drugs, which
shut off the blood supply to tumors. McCormick said these "small-molecule drugs"
are "in the early stages of clinical development."

    "We're not there yet by any means, but drugs are being tested for cancer now
and will have a future in the next 20 to 30 years. When you combine all those
(strategies) together, you get a strong arsenal of different approaches," he
said.

   TRAVEL

    Almost half the Bay Area residents who participated in The Chronicle Poll
said they thought it is likely that space travel in the next century will become
routine for ordinary people, but experts say that while that may come about, it
will remain quite expensive.

    "Tourism will clearly drive commercial development, but until cost decreases
and reliability increases, we won't see a lot more use for humans in space,"
said Lori Garver, associate administrator in the office of policy and plans at
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

    "The next vehicle that replaces the space shuttle will probably have
high-end tourists who are paying upward of $100,000 a flight. It'll probably
happen by the year 2012."

    When they get up there and settle into orbit, the tourists will experience
zero gravity and what Garver calls the "euphoria of a weightless environment and
a view that's incredible."

    Some time in the next century, she added, space stations will have hotels,
and the more expensive rooms will be on the "Earth view" side. NASA also
projects trips to the moon, where duffers can watch their golf balls soar six
times farther than they do on Earth.

    It's also possible we will be traveling to Mars for the odd holiday weekend.

    "Certainly, people will go to Mars and come back, but the question is not
whether we go there, but whether we stay," said Norman Haynes, the former
director of the Mars Surveyor program at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in
Pasadena. "It's difficult to stay there long enough to build the infrastructure
to enable us to live there."

    Haynes also suggested that whoever is running the shuttle program 100 years
from now could redesign the interior of the shuttle's cargo bay to accommodate
paying passengers.

    "Instead of carrying the Hubble Space Telescope," he said, "you could put a.
Dad chats with his youngest son, Andy, while Katie (background) talks to a
friend through the screen door.

   ---------------------------------------------------------

   FUTURE GAZING

   Later this year, in a project called Bay Area 2020, The Chronicle will be
looking ahead to what the Bay Area will be like 20 years down the road. We want
to hear your thoughts, hopes and fears about the region's future. Here's how to
reach us:

   Join the discussion on The Gate's 2020 bulletin board:
http://www.sfgate.com/vent/2020

    -- By e-mail: bayarea2020sfgate.com

    -- By fax: 415-896-1107

   By mail: Bay Area 2020, San Francisco Chronicle, 901 Mission St., San
Francisco, CA 94103

   ---------------------------------------------------------


   CHART (1):

     FUTURE LIKELIHOOD
  Do you think the following are very
likely, somewhat likely or not too likely to occur in the next
century?
  The Chronicle Poll, conducted by telephone by
Baldassare Associates from April 29 to May 2, surveyed 600 Bay
Area adult residents. It has a margin of error of 4 percentage
points.
-----------------------
  --  A cure for cancer will be discovered
.
  Somewhat likely       37%
  Very likely           46%
  No opinion/Don't know  3%
  Not likely            14%
.
  Among those saying very likely:
  Men                   42%
  Women                 51%
  18-34                 42%
  35-54                 43%
  55+                   57%
-----------------------
  --  Space travel will become routine for ordinary people
.
  Somewhat likely       28%
  Very likely           19%
  No opinion/Don't know  3%
  Not likely            50%
.
  Among those saying very likely:
  Men                   17%
  Women                 22%
  18-34                 21%
  35-54                 21%
  55+                   15%
-----------------------
  --  There will be another world war
.
  Somewhat likely       29%
  Very likely           22%
  No opinion/Don't know  5%
  Not likely            44%
.
  Among those saying very likely:
  Men                   19%
  Women                 24%
  18-34                 25%
  35-54                 23%
  55+                   17%
-----------------------
  The Chronicle Poll, conducted by telephone by
Baldassare Associates from April 29 to May 2, surveyed 600 Bay
Area adult residents. It has a margin of error of 4 percentage
points.
  Chronicle Graphic
---------------------------------------------------------
CHART (2):

      CRISIS POINTS
  How serious do you think the following problems will be in
the next century?
-----------------------
   --  Environmental problems
.
   Somewhat serious       26%
   Very serious           63%
   No opinion/Don't know   1%
   Not serious            10%
.
   Those saying very serious problem:
   Men                    60%
   Women                  66%
   18-34                  73%
   35-54                  64%
   55+                    49%
-----------------------
   --  Overpopulation
.
   Somewhat serious       26%
   Very serious           59%
   No opinion/Don't know   1%
   Not serious            14%
.
   Those saying very serious problem:
   Men                    60%
   Women                  58%
   18-34                  59%
   35-54                  60%
   55+                    57%
-----------------------
   --  The gap between the  haves'' and the  have nots''
.
   Very serious           50%
   No opinion/Don't know   4%
   Not serious            13%
   Somewhat serious       33%
.
   Those saying very serious problem:
   Men                    47%
   Women                  53%
   18-34                  41%
   35-54                  59%
   55+                    45%
-----------------------
  The Chronicle Poll, conducted by telephone
by Baldassare Associates from April 29 to May 2, surveyed 600
Bay Area adult residents. It has a margin of error of 4 percentage
points.
  Chronicle Graphic


GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (2), CHART (2): SEE END OF TEXT, (1-2) Bill Russell/The
Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1999


                             1490 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         June 20, 1999 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COMPLEX ENVISIONED

BODY:

   A gene therapy research center encompassing everything from facilities
devoted to the study of genetic mutations to businesses that manufacture
medications could become a viable new enterprise for downtown New Orleans.

   That's the finding of a report presented Friday at the annual meeting of the
Downtown Development District at the Le Meridien Hotel. The study was
commissioned by the Gene Therapy Task Force, a consortium led by Louisiana State
University and Tulane medical schools. The findings were presented by Dr. Mervin
Trail, chancellor of the LSU Medical Center, and Dr. John LaRosa, chancellor of
the Tulane University Medical Center.

   Such a research center could capitalize on the medical industry
infrastructure and the work of 160 scientists in the state already investigating
gene therapy in the state.

   The type of genetic research that would be done at the center involves
correcting the defective genes that cause disease.

   The task force proposes the formation of a nonprofit public-private alliance
called the Louisiana Genetics Research Consortium to help get the project off
the ground.

   The task force believes the center could be launched with a state investment
of $44.5 million over five years, with the bulk of the money being used for
research facilities.

   The Downtown Development District also named officers for 1999-2000 on
Friday. They are: Roy Rodney, chairman; Valerie Marcus, vice chairman; and
Virgil Robinson, secretary/treasurer. Friday's annual meeting drew more than 500
people.

COLUMN: METRO BUSINESS

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1999


                             1491 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       June 19, 1999 Saturday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: PUT RIGHT STAMP ON THE '90S

BYLINE: Jim Shea

BODY:

   The Postal Service is currently determining which commemorative stamps it
will issue to represent the most significant people, places, events and trends
of the 1990s.

   Winners are being picked from a group of pre-selected candidates that include
such choices as Gene Therapy, Museum Attendance, Contemporary Architecture,
Junior Golf, Recovering Species, Computer Arts and Graphics, Home Offices and
Coffee.

   Talk about dark of night.

   I don't know what route the lettercrats who came up with this list have been
walking the past 10 years, but it hasn't been in my ZIP code.

   I mean, as you are sitting in your Y2K-proof fallout shelter this New Year's
Eve reflecting on what might very well have been your last decade on this
planet, what are the chances museum attendance is going to spring to mind?

   Call me out of touch, but isn't it a better bet that something like, oh, I
don't know, the impeachment of the president will come up?

   If the post office people are really serious about accurately capturing the
'90s, they need to do two things:

   Develop more than just a nodding relationship with reality.

   Start over.

   As a public service, the following 1990s commemorative-stamp nominees are
offered, along with suggestions on how each might be depicted.

   Marv Albert (large set of teeth)

   Tony Randall (making a muscle)

   Viagra (the first ever pop-up stamp?)

   Dr. Laura (preferably fully clothed)

   Driving (extended middle finger)

   Dennis Rodman (probably the purple hair)

   Cooking (microwave oven)

   Dining Out (large fries)

   Television (yada-yada-yada)

   Prozac (hummmmmmmmmmmm)

   Super Models (string bean)

   Managed Care (tangle of red tape)

   Credit Cards (sweating shopper on a hamster wheel)

   O.J. (sports collage: golf clubs, football, ski mask)

   Body Piercing (a studded goiter)

   Martha Stewart (glue gun)

   Mad Cow Disease (really p-o'd looking Guernsey)

   In regard to the White House sex scandal, this affair of state deserves to be
honored with its own series of stamps:

   President Clinton (smoking a cigar)

   The Blue Dress (just smoking)

   Monica (flashing thong undies)

   Linda Tripp (hiding under a bed)

   Ken Starr (Pillsbury Doughboy)

   As for the woman who started it all, Paula Jones, there is a real
public-relations opportunity here. Remember all the hoopla surrounding the
decision to go with the young Elvis or old Elvis stamp? Why not do the same sort
of thing with Paula. Voters could be given two choices:

   Old-nose Paula

   New-nose Paula


LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1999


                             1492 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                          June 18, 1999, Friday ,FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS ,2C Business Digest

LENGTH: 1247 words

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Park 'n' Walk lot near BWI being closed for rental car spaces

    The Park 'n' Walk lot near Baltimore-Washington International Airport will
be permanently closed to the public Monday to accommodate a growing fleet of
rental cars.

    State officials say passengers rented more than 840,000 cars at the airport
last year -- a 13 percent increase from 1997 -- and the rental companies need
more space.

    The shutdown leaves almost 6,800 spaces available in the BWI garage and
Express Service parking lot, and 9,400 spaces in the satellite parking lots.
This summer, 600 spaces will be added to the satellite green lot.

    Deutsche Bank denies tax-evasion system

    Deutsche Bank AG chief executive Rolf Breuer rejected claims that the
world's biggest bank had a system that helped customers evade taxes and said the
bank won't make a "deal" with prosecutors investigating the matter.

    Breuer and three board members are being investigated in a probe begun last
June into whether the bank helped clients anonymously switch money to tax
havens. The executives aren't personally accused of tax evasion and are being
investigated for their roles as managers.

    Deutsche Bank completed its $9 billion acquisition of Bankers Trust Corp.
this month and now is the parent of Baltimore-based investment brokerage Alex.
Brown Inc.

    United Therapeutics IPO raises $54 million

    United Therapeutics Corp., a Silver Spring company developing treatments for
vascular diseases, raised $54 million in an initial public offering yesterday.

    The company, one of very few biopharmaceutical companies to conduct IPOs
this year, said it would use the money to continue development of
pharmaceuticals to treat pulmonary hypertension, peripheral vascular disease and
other life-threatening ailments.  It has one vascular disease treatment in
late-stage clinical trials.

    The company issued 4.5 million shares, or a 30 percent stake, at $12 a
share. They closed yesterday at $12.25 on the Nasdaq stock market.

    Davis is honored as Realtor of the Year

    Herbert A. Davis, founder and president of Herbert Davis Associates, was
named Realtor of the Year by the Greater Baltimore Board of Realtors in a
ceremony yesterday at the Suburban Club of Baltimore County.

    The first GBBR Lifetime Achievement Award went to Mary Bell Grempler of
Coldwell Banker Grempler Realty Inc. Also honored were: Henry A. Strohminger III
of Long & Foster Real Estate Inc., the Distinguished Sales Associate of the
Year; Debra R. Attman, Long & Foster, Realtor Community Service Award; and James
F. X. Cosgrove of Sentinel Title Corp., Affiliate of the Year.

    VEGF-2 receiving second human trial

    Rockville- based Human Genome Sciences Inc. and its partially owned venture
Vascular Genetics Inc. said yesterday that doctors at several U.S. medical
centers have begun treating patients with the company's experimental gene
therapy for heart conditions, VEGF-2, in a second clinical trial to assess its
safety and effectiveness.

    Patients enrolled in the Phase I/II trial suffer from refractory myocardial
ischemia, but the companies hope to show that the treatment is beneficial in
treating a wide range of coronary diseases.

    In the latest trial, surgeons will try two approaches to treatment --
catheterization or direct injection through an incision in the chest -- to see
which works best.

    N.A. Vaccine in deal to save $546,000 a year

    North American Vaccine Inc. says it has reached an agreement to retire $8. 4
million in convertible notes in exchange for 550,000 shares of common stock.

    The company estimated that the deal would save it $546,000 in annual
interest charges, but said it expects to book a one-time, noncash expense of
$950,000. Interest payments are due semi-annually.

    The notes, issued in May 1996 and due to mature May 1, 2003, are held by a
single investor whose identity was not disclosed. The principal balance on
remaining notes is $75.3 million. Before the agreement, the balance was $83.7
million, the company said.

    Microsoft Web site urges letters about the antitrust case

    Microsoft Corp. has added a message to the Internet site visited by millions
of people who use its Windows software urging them to write to Congress about
the government's antitrust case.

    The move suggests an intensified public relations campaign by Microsoft as
trial testimony nears an end and pressure grows to resume settlement
negotiations with government lawyers. It comes days after Microsoft's
multibillionaire chairman, Bill Gates, testified before a sympathetic Senate
panel and met privately with key lawmakers.

    The affected Microsoft Web site draws millions of visitors each month to
update their copies of Windows, the operating system software that runs most of
the world's personal computers.

    News Corp. to buy Morrow and Avon from Hearst

    News Corp., the media company headed by Rupert Murdoch, agreed yesterday to
buy William Morrow & Co. and Avon Books from closely held Hearst Corp., adding
the businesses to News Corp.'s HarperCollins Publishers unit.

    Terms were not disclosed, but Credit Lyonnais Securities Inc. analyst
Richard Read estimated that News Corp. is paying up to $200 million. Morrow and
Avon together publish 1,000 titles annually and have a combined inventory of
almost 6,000 titles.

    The move suggests that News Corp. wants to stay in the book-publishing
business and compete against larger rivals such as Bertelsmann AG's Random House
unit.

    Qwest to buy Cisco gear to expand data network

    Qwest Communications International Inc., the No. 4 U.S. long-distance phone
company, agreed yesterday to buy up to $1 billion in equipment from Cisco
Systems Inc. to expand its nationwide data network.

    The five-year contract calls for Qwest to use gear from Cisco, the No. 1
networking company, to carry 80 percent of its Internet-based voice and data
communication services.

    The companies also plan to develop software for carrying Internet data,
phone and video services on Qwest's network.

    Sears to woo shoppers with new ad campaign

    Sears, Roebuck & Co., the largest U.S. department store company, says it
will begin a new advertising campaign in August aimed at boosting clothing sales
and winning back shoppers lost to chains such as Dayton Hudson Corp.'s Target
discount stores.

    The new ads will use trendier music and tell consumers about Sears' updated
fashions, its lower prices on apparel basics such as T-shirts, and its
home-services and appliance departments, investors and analysts said after
company presentations in New York and Boston.

    Starbucks to sell its products online

    Retail coffee giant Starbucks Corp. says it will sell its products online
through Oxygen Media, a well-heeled television and Internet venture geared
toward women.

    The agreement moves the world's largest specialty coffee retailer a step
closer to becoming a major Internet and media player, Starbucks Chief Executive
Officer Howard Schultz said.

    New Xerox parts factory going up in Ireland

    Xerox Corp., the No. 1 copier maker, said it is building a $325 million
parts factory in Ireland that will employ 1,000 for its growing inkjet printer
business.

    The factory will have two plants totaling 170,000 square feet in Dundalk,
where Xerox is completing a color- toner plant. The first, scheduled to open by
year's end, will make ink tanks. The second, to open in mid-2000, will make
print heads.


LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1999


                             1493 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 17, 1999, Thursday ,City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: In a first, cardiac gene therapy given without surgery

BYLINE: By Karen Hsu, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   Sam Hart, 81, of Rome, N.Y., couldn't even make it to the mailbox without
having an angina attack.

    One night last week, he had one almost every hour.

    "I almost thought I wasn't going to make it to the operation," Hart said.

    In 1986, he had bypass surgery. Last year, cardiologists tried to do an
artery-clearing angioplasty operation, but failed. Other cardiologists told
Hart, whose heart had trouble pumping, that there was nothing they could do.

    But on Tuesday, Hart, a retired electrical engineer, became the first person
to receive genetically engineered DNA into his oxygen-starved heart muscle via a
catheter to encourage growth of new coronary blood vessels. These help to
restore blood flow to hearts with clogged arteries.

    "I felt like someone who was waiting for the electric chair and just found
out I was going to be free," Hart said. He said now he feels fine and pain has
not been a problem since the procedure.

    Dr. Jeffrey Isner, chief of cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center, performed the procedure, which took 30 minutes and required no
surgery and no anesthesia.

    Until now, injecting the gene into the heart has required general
anesthesia, a two-hour surgery, and several days of recovery time. Despite the
drawbacks, about 100 patients have withstood the treatment by Isner since
February 1998.

    Once this new, minimally invasive technique is perfected, patients could go
home one hour after it is completed, making it an outpatient procedure, Isner
said.

    In the new method, a catheter is inserted through a small puncture in the
patient's groin and directed to the heart using X-ray imaging. A needle is
advanced out of the catheter and used to inject DNA into the inner wall of the
heart. This leads to production of a protein called vascular endothelial growth
factor, which stimulates the growth of new blood vessels.

    The biggest surprise was that there were no technical complications Tuesday.

    In the last few years, many specialists nationwide have experimented with
this type of gene therapy for heart patients whose only hope besides taking
pills might be a heart transplant. Some trials have involved injecting the genes
into the heart muscle or injecting the protein growth factors themselves.

    In the more than 100 patients of Isner's who have gotten the gene therapy
for angiogenesis, the term used for new blood vessel growth, he said the
response has been "outstanding."

    But the promise for the approach with a catheter is that the method could
potentially be a safer alternative to bypass surgery or angioplasty for
high-risk patients.

    Dr. Nicholas Kipshidze, an assistant professor at the Medical College of
Wisconsin who has performed therapeutic angiogenesis in patients with painfully
clogged leg arteries, said that it is too early to predict the wide use of the
catheter method.

    "Dr. Isner is one of the pioneers of the methods, but we still don't know
the overall success of this procedure," said Kipshidze.

    Because Hart had severe pumping function problems, he probably would not
have qualified for more traditional surgery, Isner said.

    Two concerns researchers have had about the gene therapy experiments are
that the blood vessel growth factors could nourish the blood supply of
undetected cancers and/or cause damaging overgrowth of vessels in tissues such
as the retina of the eye.

    Isner said that about 60 diabetic patients who have gone through the
surgical procedure were examined by retinal specialists, who found no changes in
their eyes after the operation.

    As for induced angiogenesis causing tumor growth, Isner said there has not
been long enough follow-up to determine the extent of the risk.

    "While we haven't seen any new tumors in our patients, and animal data
suggest that the therapy is not likely to develop new tumors, we nevertheless
have to be very vigilant about it," Isner said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/PAT GREENHOUSE/Dr. Jeffrey Isner talked
yesterday to Sam Hart, who received a DNA injection in his heart at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center on Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1999


                             1494 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       June 15, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 023

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Hypertension drug may help grow blood vessels

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Doctors at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center are reporting that a drug used to
treat hypertension is able to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels in
laboratory animals.

   The drug, quinaprilat, an ACE-inhibitor, had the same result in laboratory
rabbits as does a gene therapy that the same researchers have shown works in
humans to grow new blood vessels. "The mechanism is different, but the result is
the same," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner, who reported the gene therapy results in
humans last fall at the American Heart Association's meeting.

   In the gene therapy study, Isner reported injecting DNA material - vascular
endothelial growth factor or VEGF - directly into patients' hearts, with
astounding results.

   All 16 patients in the study, all of whom had previously had bypass surgery
but had seen the bypass grafts close up, were doing better as a result of the
growth of new blood vessels.

   In today's animal study, published in Circulation, the AHA's journal, Isner
reported that giving rabbits the ACE-inhibitor quinaprilat stimulated the growth
of new blood vessels.

   "It is the first time that a drug, particularly one available for oral
administration, has been shown to be potentially capable of inducing
angiogenesis in vivo," Isner said.

   He said it is possible the drug could do the same thing in humans.
Quinaprilat, used to lower high blood pressure and sometimes given to people who
have suffered heart attacks, could prove useful in treating people with severe
chest pain and others at risk for heart attack, he said.

   "This study demonstrates an unexpected function of a class of drugs that is
commercially available and already has been shown to be safe to use," Isner
said.

   Because quinaprilat is given orally, it could have a tremendous advantage
over VEGF or other gene therapies, which must be injected into the heart, he
said.

   More animal studies are planned before any studies on humans will be
conducted, however, Isner said.

   "We're not entirely clear how it works," he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1999


                             1495 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        JUNE 14, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C12

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY SHOWING PROMISE BUT THERE ARE UNEXPECTED SIDE EFFECTS AS
WELL, A PENN RESEARCHER TOLD A MEETING IN WASHINGTON.

BYLINE: Maggie Fox, REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   When Dr. Michael Lotze and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania
injected immune system genes into a patient with skin cancer, they literally saw
her tumor melt before their eyes, they said last week.

   They, and several other teams of researchers, hope they can use the
still-young science of gene therapy to rev up the immune system to fight off
cancer.

   But they are finding it tricky.

   Reporting to a meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy in Washington,
they said there are still unexpected side effects from the cancer treatments.
Michael Lotze and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania, Japan's Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine and Seoul National University tried using
interleukin 12 (IL-12), an immune system signaling chemical, or cytokine, which
calls in cells that then attack tumors.

   In one group of advanced cancer patients, who had agreed to test the
approach, they took out a few skin cells and introduced the genes for IL-12.
They grew these cells in a laboratory dish and later injected them into the
tumors. The response was immediate, as demonstrated in one woman with melanoma.

   "Her tumor literally died in front of our eyes within half an hour," Lotze
said. But there was a price to pay.

   "She said it was the worst pain she had ever felt."

   Although the approach seemed successful - not only the injected tumor but
other tumors in the woman's body shrank - it was ultimately ineffective in this
case.

   The patient's cancer had spread to her brain and she died.

   In about half of all patients with cancer, tiny cells have started to spread,
or metastasize, through the body by the time a tumor is removed surgically or
destroyed by chemicals or radiation. These can seed other tumors.

   Doctors hope gene therapy can get to these tumors, too. When they get to the
brain, however, the "blood-brain barrier," which protects the brain from the
inflammatory effects of the immune system, can block the proteins produced by
the new genes.

   So Lotze's team is working to overcome this barrier, searching for cytokines
that can get into the brain but will not cause potentially fatal swelling and
inflammation.

   Lotze said scientists have identified 30 different cytokines. Particularly
promising against tumors are interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-12, IL-18 and
interferon-alfa.

   They are getting ready to test IL-4 in patients with glioma, a kind of brain
tumor, and in children with tumors that have not responded to standard therapy.

   All are proving to be potent, and unpredictable.

   "These are molecules that we thought would be kinder and gentler than the
drugs we apply," Lotze said, but experience has shown otherwise. For instance,
IL-18 "makes all the tumors go away but all the animals die," he said ruefully.

   Dr. Savio Woo of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York and his
colleagues have tried a combined approach, using not only the cytokines but also
"co-factors" that help the T-cells called in by the cytokines live longer.

   Tumors seem to secrete something - scientists are not sure what yet - that
kills off the T-cells that come to attack them. The co-factors help the T-cells
survive and proliferate.

   "In mice we have completely eradicated tumors," Woo said.

   The co-factor they use is called 41BB, which Woo wants to try in combination
with IL-12 in breast cancer patients.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1496 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         June 14, 1999 Monday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3442 words

HEADLINE: THE ART OF THE ASK;
FUND RAISING A PROFESSION AS WELL AS AN ART

SERIES: THE POWER OF GIVING: Part 2 of 3

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Mullener Staff writer

BODY:

   The candles were flickering, the chandeliers were sparkling and the sounds of
high-spirited schmoozing filled the private room on the second floor of
Brennan's restaurant in the French Quarter.

   The buzz was loudest around the bar, where martinis and manhattans were the
order of the day. The tables were set for six, with eight pieces of silverware
at each place and rolled white linen napkins in the wine glasses. The room was
done up in gentle shades of green, and the menu included turtle soup, trout
Nancy and a white chocolate mousse pie.

   At the center of it all was Pat Mason, vice chancellor in charge of
development for Tulane Medical Center. In a dusty pink suit and patent pumps,
with a sheer scarf thrown over one shoulder, she fit in perfectly with the 50 or
so guests -- an effusive, middle-aged crowd of women wearing colorful silks and
carrying petite shoulder bags, and men in crisp shirts and well-cut suits.

   The occasion was billed as a dinner given by the medical school's alumni
association for its past presidents. But, in fact, it is an annual happening
dreamed up by Mason to bring together a group of substantial and long-term
donors to mingle with each other, share a sense of bonhomie and go home suffused
with warm feelings toward each other and toward the school. There was no sales
pitch that night; just good cheer. But everyone there was in on the secret.

   Soft fund raising, it is called.

   *** Giving is big business ***

   All over town, there are just such parties -- and lunches and dinners and
meetings and balls and house calls and office visits -- taking place any day of
the year. That's how fund-raisers do their business these days. In the past two
decades, the vocation of fund-raising has burgeoned in New Orleans, with the
ranks of professional fund-raisers in town swelling from eight to 150, as
measured by membership in the National Society of Fund Raising Executives.

   It is hardly a surprise that the stalwart Tulane University has for years had
a development officer, as they are known. But now Holy Name of Jesus grammar
school has one, too, as do Le Petit Theatre, Family Service of Greater New
Orleans, Isidore Newman School, the National D-Day Museum, the Eucharistic
Missionaries of St. Dominic and New Orleans Center for Creative Arts, as well as
scores of others.

   As the world of philanthropy has evolved into big business, the business of
fund raising has evolved along with it. What once was the bailiwick of the
old-boys network -- meaning one tycoon called on the others in his circle to
support his favorite charity -- is now a career. And it's a career that carries
some clout, requires some sophistication and commands an ample salary. Fund
raising, in short, has been professionalized.

   Those who are best at it are rewarded handsomely, not just in terms of job
satisfaction but in terms of money as well. At the upper echelon in New Orleans
(generally hospitals and universities), development officers are earning
six-figure salaries. In terms of flow charts, they tend to rank third or fourth
from the top, after the chief executive officer, the chief financial officer and
the chief program officer.

   At the same time, the discipline has also been feminized. About seven years
ago, the membership of the national fund-raising society crossed over from being
majority male to majority female, and the majority has grown larger since. In
New Orleans, membership in the local chapter is about 75 percent female. And
most of the substantial capital campaigns in town have been led by women in
recent years.

   Peggy Morrison Outon, a consultant to local nonprofit agencies, speculates
that women are particularly suited to work in philanthropy.

   "The central thing about development work is that it's relationship
building," she says. "Good development people are good at intimacy, at empathy,
they're keyed into how others feel. Those are things that women are good at."

   In fact, women are not only asking for the big bucks these days; they are
often giving the big bucks, too -- both their own money and family wealth, over
which they have more and more say. Tulane raised $250 million in its last
capital campaign; about $30 million of it was from women donors, and the most
popular recipient on campus, after the medical school, was Newcomb College, the
undergraduate women's liberal arts division of the university.

   The trends represent a significant change from the days when fund raising was
completely male and distinctly amateur.

   "You still don't have people saying, 'I want to grow up and be a
fund-raiser.' Then the profession will have arrived. It is an emerging
profession now," says Florence Andre, director of development at the University
of New Orleans, which has turned to fund raising, as have so many public
universities, because of uncertain state financing.

   "People are just realizing that this is a business that requires knowledge
about planning and strategy and finance," Andre said. "You've got to write well,
speak well, present yourself well. You have to plan well, manage well, execute
well. You have to have a sense of humor and some creativity.

   "You have to be up. You've got to see the positive. And most of all, you have
to be committed to what you're doing -- be able to articulate with real feeling
what you're promoting.

   "It's a wonderful profession. You're doing good work. Some would say God's
work."

   *** Assessing prospective donors ***

   One of the trickiest areas of the development business is assessing the
potential of a donor.

   "In any group, 10 percent of the people have 90 percent of the money," says
Joseph Mansfield, vice president for development at Loyola University.

   The task is to identify the 10 percent. And the ability to do that is what
separates run-of-the-mill development officers from the hot-shots.

   To this end, nonprofit institutions, at least the larger ones, have not just
development officers but development staffs. Tulane University has 90 in its
development division, Loyola has 45; the Audubon Institute has five; the Alton
Ochsner Medical Foundation has 21; Louisiana State University Medical Center
Foundation has 19; the Contemporary Arts Center has seven.

   Their mission, broadly speaking, is to find out who has the money and who has
the interests that match the needs of the institution.

   "The amount of public information available on any individual is shocking,"
Mansfield says. "If I have your name and address, I can go to the assessor's
office and determine how much your house is assessed for. I can check the real
estate section of The Times-Picayune for a complete listing of the sales that
week. I can go to the state department of motor vehicles and find out how many
cars you have and what kind they are."

   And that's just the beginning. Researchers also check the boards of other
nonprofit organizations to figure out who's giving the most. They check court
records to see if a will has been filed for probate so they can discover the
heirs. They buy the mailing lists of upscale magazines and look for connections.
They read corporate reports, which include salaries in the proxy statements.

   They check reference books such as Who's Who and professional directories.
They check the newspaper's society columns to see who's going to what events.
They check the Internal Revenue Service returns of foundations and corporations.
They check the membership lists of like-minded organizations. And most revealing
of all, they ask their own trustees about potential donors they might know
socially. They can even hire research companies to come up with profiles on an
entire population -- say, the alumni of a particular university.

   And almost all of the information is publicly available.

   Mansfield tells the story of a trustee who was at a meeting to review data on
prospective donors. The trustee, impressed with the information that had been
unearthed, asked what kind of intelligence was available on him. So Mansfield
reviewed the files, compiled the information and came up with an estimate of the
trustee's net worth. The trustee was astonished to find that the estimate was a
couple of million dollars off but definitely in the ballpark.

   "People don't like to know this, but you can find out a lot," says Laurie
Conkerton, development director at the Audubon Institute, who keeps a database
with names of prospective donors and elaborate tidbits about their likes and
dislikes, their giving records and their attendance at events, and a log of
their phone calls.

   Then there are the low-tech, old-fashioned clues to money, such as houses,
cars, jewelry, clothes, vacation condos and private club memberships. One
notorious college president (outside of New Orleans) routinely walks around the
student parking lot and makes note of every BMW and Mercedes-Benz.

   Of course, such clues can be profoundly misleading, what with lease cars and
diamonds that turn out to be cubic zirconium. And reliance on them can lead one
to overlook the frugal philanthropist.

   "I once closed a deal for a $1 million gift in a Wendy's restaurant, which
the donor took me to because they had senior citizen discounts on ice cream
sundaes that day," Mansfield says.

   For the most part, though, solid detective work pays off.

   Julie Walker, recently retired development director at Tulane University,
estimates that she can identify just about everybody in New Orleans with a net
worth that would pique her interest.

   "I'm interested in $20 million," she says. "If you have $20 million in
assets, you have the ability to give away $1 million. I have 30 or 40 on my
list. That's where the action is -- trying to get gifts in the $5 (million) to
$10 million range."

   But at the end of the day, there is the harsh truth that finding the money is
only the first step.

   "There's a difference between the ability to give and the propensity to
give," says Eugene Tempel, executive director of the Indiana University Center
on Philanthropy. "Fund raising is about the difficult work of engaging people
with your organization."

   *** Having 'the money talk' ***

   Mason, a venerable local fund-raiser, has a sign on her desk that says,
"Somebody has to ask someone for something."

   And therein lies the dilemma.

   "The ask," as it is known in development circles, is the crux of the matter.
It is what brings all the parties to the table. It is what pays the salaries.

   But it can be devilishly difficult.

   "To say, 'I'd like to have a million dollars for this project, please' --
that's hard to do," says Walker, who says she had to practice in front of a
mirror the first time. "People who are good at it can be very good fund-raisers.
People who are awkward at it can get all the way through describing why a
certain research project or building is critical to their efforts, but they find
it difficult to get out the words about what it costs -- to have the money
talk."

   Perhaps the hardest part of the ask is what happens after the money talk.
What is supposed to happen is nothing.

   "In fund-raising lore, after you make the ask, you sit back and you stay
quiet," Walker says. "There's an old joke that after you make the ask, the first
person who talks, loses."

   But the human instinct to fill the void is hard to tame.

   "I asked somebody to get involved in what eventually became a $2 million
gift," Walker says. "When I got the '2' out, there was a gasp of shock on the
other end. And I actually had to count to 10 so that I wouldn't say anything."

   Even at its best, fund raising is a dicey business, fraught with rejection.
The rule-of-thumb is that it takes three asks to get one gift. But every no is
not like every other no. There are subtle shades and variations. And the job of
the asker is to be resilient enough to decipher the message.

   "It might mean no, I'm not interested in that particular thing," Andre says.
"Or it might mean no, not now. Or no, and don't ever darken my doorway again.

   "A national foundation might say we don't give to your type of institution.
That's a no, never. But it's very unusual to get a no, never from an individual.
Most people will say they want to think about it. And if you keep going back to
them, you eventually find out if there's some program they will support or if
they're just trying to avoid you."

   Shooting high during an ask is always a risk, although it can be flattering
to a donor. Shooting low is worse. If a donor answers too quickly, it leaves a
lingering fear.

   "If you say 5 and they're thinking 50, you've both missed the mark," Andre
says. "The person who really wants to help is not giving enough money, and the
person who's asking is short-shrifting the program."

   Andre thinks that two are always better than one when it comes to making an
ask: frequently a development officer along with the CEO or a trustee or a
volunteer who knows the donor. She likes having faculty members involved because
they bring passion and expertise to the mission. She thinks askers can never be
too old, but they can be too young. Social circles matter in certain instances,
she says. And it's always best if volunteer fund-raisers have already given a
substantial gift of their own. She also likes to have a prospect who has been
cultivated before the ask is made.

   "To walk into somebody's office I had never seen before, to sit down and say
I'm here to talk to you about considering a $20,000 gift -- some people may be
able to do that successfully. I would feel uncomfortable.

   "People need to be visited, cultivated, before they're asked for large gifts.
Bring them to the university to see what's going on. Ask them to serve on a
board or a committee. Engage them in an activity in which they're interested."

   In the end, a lot of what makes a successful ask lies in the polish and
confidence of the asker.

   "Joe Mansfield, he never gives up," says Robert Monroe, one of the few
full-time philanthropists in New Orleans, who has dealt with virtually every
fund-raiser in town. "I feel like a sheep led to the slaughter.

   "You might be thinking $50,000, but somehow under his tutelage it comes out
$100,000. You don't mean to, but you can't deny it."

   *** Catering to the generous ***

   Professional fund-raisers have some pretty sophisticated tricks up their
sleeves to inspire donors to part with their disposable cash. They range from
the ephemeral, such as dinners and balls and golf tournaments, to the eternal,
such as buildings and endowments.

   Almost every fund-raiser will say that events are a lousy way to raise money
because they are labor-intensive and involve a high cost-per-dollar-raised.

   And yet there are scores of charity balls every year in New Orleans, enough
so that one smart group gave a no-ball ball a few years back that offered
automatic absolution to party-weary philanthropists.

   "It takes a tremendous amount of energy; it almost kills us every year," says
Clem Goldberger, development director at the Louisiana State University Eye
Center, who mounts the "Visionary Gala" every June. "But there is definitely a
certain joy in it."

   With a basic format that stays the same from year to year, this fancy-dress
gala features a cocktail reception, a silent auction, a dinner and a Broadway
revue of one composer's work with New York singers and dancers.

   Tickets range from $125 for a single to $10,000 for a corporate table, and
putting it on is a full-time job for two people for two months, Goldberger says.
The net take for the Eye Center, after all the debits and credits are toted up,
is about $100,000.

   "Men in particular seem to love our event," Goldberger says. "Every year
several men will tell me mine is the only fund-raiser they like going to because
they have a wonderful meal and see a great show, and they don't have to get up
and dance."

   For those who enjoy the ballroom aspects of philanthropy, the Odyssey Ball
sponsored by the New Orleans Museum of Art is considered by connoisseurs the
most elegant of the season. The Sweet Arts Ball, which benefits the Contemporary
Arts Center, is considered the hippest. And the annual Zoo-To-Do, put on by the
Audubon Institute, is the most profitable, this year's take having topped the $1
million mark for the first time.

   *** Most gifts come with strings ***

   If parties are a fund-raiser's nightmare, a fund-raiser's fantasy is a
no-strings-attached cash gift. But even as the ranks of givers are growing, such
gifts are harder and harder to come by.

   Instead, the new generation of givers is seeking ways to have more say,
rather than less, in how nonprofits handle their contributions. There are
challenge grants and matching gifts, both of which have the potential for
hijacking an institution's agenda. And there is restricted giving, with strings
very definitely attached, because it dictates the money be used in a particular
way -- for gene therapy or bioenvironmental sciences, for instance, which now
are hot research areas at Tulane.

   Bricks and mortar are not quite as popular as they once were.

   "Ten years ago, if someone gave a million or two, they wanted to name a
building," Walker says. "But I've noticed a tendency for the largest gifts to
come in for endowment now. There is a shift in perception among donors: They
want to put their money into the future. They want something that will be
lasting, have a permanent impact on an institution, assure that the institution
will be there a hundred years from now. A building ages. But an endowment -- if
you give to that, you're giving to the future."

   Nevertheless, there are still buildings all over town that offer naming
opportunities, as fund-raisers euphemistically call them. They tend to come with
a heavy price tag.

   "There are buildings at Tulane available for $1 million," Mason says. "They
are smaller buildings," she adds archly. "But you could begin looking at type
fonts for $1 million."

   At the University of New Orleans, it takes $3 million to name a school -- the
Lester Kabacoff School of Hotel, Restaurant and Tourism Administration, for
instance. It takes $6 million to name a college. There haven't been any takers
to date.

   For those not quite so flush, there are endowed chairs, which frequently
carry the donor's name as well. UNO has 24 of them, at $600,000 each.

   But the byword of the moment in philanthropic circles is planned giving --
annuities, life-income plans and a variety of trusts -- which offer tax
advantages to the giver and delayed gratification for the recipient.

   "If I make an outright gift, I get nothing but a tax break and a good
feeling," Loyola's Mansfield says.

   Planned gifts, on the other hand, offer all sorts of benefits. Some of them
let donors, after they have given away money, continue collecting earnings on
it. Although the principal is untouchable and the deal is irrevocable, donors
and their families still get some benefits.

   "It's a great way to have your cake and eat it too," Mansfield says.

   And it has advantages over leaving money by bequest because donors can
experience first-hand the satisfaction of seeing their assets put to good use.
"Smelling the flowers," fund-raisers call it, by which they mean the flowers on
the donor's grave.

   *** Setting the scene ***

   Florence Andre opens her eyes wide and locks onto the man who is talking to
her. She listens hard, utterly engaged. Then she laughs a light, gracious laugh
and moves on. During the course of the sultry summer evening, she greets guests
at the door, checks on drinks, passes chocolate-chip cookies and makes
introductions, guaranteeing that the money types get to meet the creative types,
and that they all get to meet UNO President Greg O'Brien.

   The scene is a weeknight party at O'Brien's home on the Lakefront. The
occasion is a pitch for a new UNO partnership: a feature movie called "Blue
Monkey," scripted by UNO faculty members, set to shoot in UNO's new film studio,
with a Hollywood producer and a director on the rise. There are drinks, there is
dinner, there is light chatter and urgent interruptions from two English sheep
dogs. And then things get down to business.

   O'Brien clinks a glass to get the crowd's attention.

   "Ladies and gentlemen, thank you all for coming tonight," he begins. "We want
to talk about a project we are all quite excited about."

   The producer speaks next, with extravagant praise for the director and the
scriptwriters. His pitch is unabashedly direct.

   "We have to put together $500,000," he says.

   Then comes the director, boyish and charming.

   "Feel free to break out your checkbooks anytime," he says.

   Andre stands on the sidelines, scanning the room discreetly, looking on with
a benign smile.


GRAPHIC: Pat Mason, vice chancellor in charge of development for Tulane Medical
Center, mingles with guests during a dinner bringing together a group of
long-term donors.  While no fund raising takes place at such parties, everyone
knows they are organized to encourage philanthropy.  Florence Andre, director of
development at the University of New Orlaens, talks with Steve Hank at a party
she organized to raise money for a new UNO partnership: a feature movie scripted
by UNO faculty members and set to shoot in UNO's new film studio.  'People need
to be visited, cultivated, before they're asked for larger gifts,' Andre says.
STAFF PHOTOS BY JENNIFER ZDON

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1999


                             1497 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      June 13, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. 4F

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: EDITORIAL;
 Physicians' training faces funding cuts

BYLINE: Staff

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
In the past three decades, U.S. medical advances have become the envy of the
world --- magnetic resonance images of the tissues inside our bodies, laser
surgery, organ transplants, gene therapy research that could make heart bypass
operations a thing of the past someday. Unfortunately, the system that brought
those treatments to the patient is now in jeopardy.

   Until now, the latest scientific advances in medicine have been translated
into clinical care for ordinary Americans at the nation's teaching hospitals,
facilities such as Massachusetts General in Boston, Stanford Medical Center in
San Francisco, Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta and the Medical College of
Georgia Hospital in Augusta.

   They are among the nation's 1,250 teaching hospitals, where young doctors
under the intense one-on-one supervision of more experienced physicians perform
the hundreds of procedures that prepare them to care for all of us, sometimes in
life-threatening situations. They are the institutions that train 75 percent of
the nation's surgeons and provide care for 44 percent of the nation's indigent
patients.

   Medical education is expensive. It has always cost more than hospitals or
medical schools could afford. "You can't teach surgery to 100 residents at
once," says Dr. Jordan Cohen, president of the American Association of Teaching
Hospitals.

   But the principle that medical education is a public good --- one Congress
confirmed in 1965 when Medicare was created --- was disregarded in the 1997
Budget Act Amendment. That law slashed dramatically the portion of Medicare
funding historically earmarked for graduate medical education. The cuts hurt
already strapped teaching hospitals such as Grady, which trains more than 400
resident physicians annually from Morehouse and Emory medical schools and serves
a disproportionate share of the indigent population. Hospitals such as Emory
University Hospital, which attracts a higher percentage of patients covered by
Medicare than public hospitals do, will also be hurt by the cutback.

   Nationally, teaching hospitals stand to lose an average of $ 45 million in
five years because of the medical education cuts. If Congress doesn't act to
limit the severity of the cutback, teaching hospitals will lose $ 16 billion
over a 10-year period, a financial blow that could force many to shrink their
vital training programs. Grady, for example, will lose $ 55.1 million by 2002.
Larger hospitals, such as Mass General, renowned for its clinical research,
could lose twice that much.

   U.S. Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.) has proposed a trio of bills to
restore half of the lost funds. Partisanship isn't much of a factor, though the
partial restoration has a $ 3 billion price tag. Sen. Jesse Helms (R-N.C) is a
co-sponsor, for example, as is Sen. Max Cleland (D-Ga.). In time, others in the
Georgia delegation may offer support as well.

   If successful, the legislation might stop the hospitals' hemorrhaging, but it
won't heal the underlying problem. Managed-care insurers don't usually contract
with the more expensive teaching hospitals, which means they contribute almost
nothing to the training of doctors they recruit. In fact, managed-care insurers
pocket Medicare funds they receive that were intended for teaching hospitals.
The Moynihan legislation will correct that windfall by carving out funds for
training and indigent care and sending them directly to the teaching hospitals.

   That raises a second issue central to the plight of teaching hospitals in the
new competitive climate. Moynihan and Rep. Bill Archer (R-Texas) have proposed
creating a Medical Education Trust Fund, which would require all participants in
the system, including managed-care insurers, to contribute to medical training,
probably by adding a surcharge on insurance premiums. Although a surcharge would
be politically controversial, a trust fund is a good idea, and there are many
alternatives for funding it.

   Training doctors in life-saving trauma procedures, the latest surgery and
technology, pays off in human lives saved, and it always will. The state's
second-largest teaching institution, the Medical College of Georgia Hospital,
treated Georgians from every county in the state but one last year. And Grady
provides the best trauma, burn and HIV care in the region.

   The nation's teaching hospitals are the underpinnings of American health
care. Congress must give immediate life support to these vital institutions and
then look carefully at options for a permanent cure.

GRAPHIC: Graphic
A picture of a group of doctors slashed by funding cuts. / VERNON CARNE / Staff
Graphic
Medicare cuts
Georgia's teaching hospitals will have lost millions of dollars in graduate
medical education by 2002.*
 Hospital............... Funds lost (in millions of dollars)
Grady Memorial Hospital............... $ 55
Emory University Hospital................47
 Medical College of Georgia Hospital......27
Crawford Long Hospital.......... ...... 42
Medical Center of Central Georgia........25

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1999


                             1498 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        June 12, 1999 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: BARMETT/MCMAHON

BODY:

   Mr. and Mrs. David John McMahon announce the engagement of their daughter,
Miss Margaret Rose McMahon, to Dr. Brian Gill Barnett of Jackson, Miss., son and
stepson of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Frazier Barnett and son of the late Mrs. Diane
Gill Barnett. The wedding will be solemnized in a candlelight ceremony July 10
at the National Shrine of Our Lady of Prompt Succor. The Rev. William O'Riordan
and the Rev. Albert Ernst will concelebrate the ceremony, which will be followed
by a reception at The Balcony.

   The bride-elect, whose mother is the former Miss Elizabeth Ann Abadie, was
graduated as valedictorian from Ursuline Academy and Loyola University, where
she received a bachelor of music degree in vocal performance, with a minor in
business. She was president of Phi Alpha Delta and a member of Alpha Chi Omega
sorority. She also received a master's degree in mass communication from the
Manship School of Mass Communication at Louisiana State University. She is
employed as the cantor at St. Elizabeth Ann Seton Church and as the choir
director at St. Edward the Confessor Church.

   Earlier, Miss McMahon was chosen to represent New Orleans in the Rose of
Tralee International Festival in Ireland.

   She is the granddaughter of Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Eugene Abadie Jr. and Mr.
Joseph Raymond McMahon and the late Mrs. McMahon.

   The prospective bridegroom was graduated summa cum laude from Pearl High
School and cum laude from Millsaps College, where he received a bachelor of
science degree in chemistry and was treasurer of Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity. He
also received a doctor of medicine degree from the University of Mississippi
School of Medicine, where he was class treasurer. He is completing his first
year of residency in internal medicine at the University Medical Center in
Jackson. Dr. Barnett has accepted a research fellowship at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham's Gene Therapy Center.

   He is the grandson of Mr. and Mrs. Gaston Emmett Gill and the late Mr. and
Mrs. Bob Frazier Barnett.

   Following a wedding trip to Niagara Falls and Canada, the couple will reside
in Birmingham.

GRAPHIC: Miss Margaret Rose McMahon PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1999


                             1499 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                       June 11, 1999 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: People on the Move

BODY:

   Awards

   Brett May was awarded diplomate of the American Board of Psychological
Specialties. May is director of Pine Rest Christian Mental Health, Grand Rapids.

   Robert Salisbury of Howell received an Outstanding Adviser Certificate of
Merit from the National Academic Advising Association's National Award Program
for 1999. Salisbury is associate director of the academic advising center at
Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti.

   St. John Health System, Madison Heights, awarded Marjorie Tupiak of Madison
Heights with the 1999 Community Service Award.

   Anders Segerdahl received the 1999 Automotive & Transportation Interiors
Achievement Award. Segerdahl is chairman of Eagle Ottwa Leather Co., Detroit.

   Big Brothers Big Sisters of Metropolitan Detroit, Southfield, named Michael
Dunlop of Bloomfield Hills and William Smith of Novi to its board of directors.
Dunlop is executive vice-president and general manager of WKBD-UPN 50 and Smith
is district manager of JCPenney in the Detroit market.

   AIDS Partnership Michigan, Detroit, named Lawrence R. Crane of Dearborn
medical director.

   Miller, Canfield, Paddock and Stone PLC, Detroit, named Kazuhiko Yoneto
director of Japanese business management.

   Dickinson Wright PLLC, Detroit, named David R. Haarz a member of the firm.
Haarz received his juris doctorate from the University of Michigan Law School.

   Arthur Andersen, Detroit, named Robert F. Fuchs national director of property
tax services. Fuchs received his master of science in taxation from Grand Valley
State University.

   Strategic Staffing Solutions, Detroit, named Netley Clay-Logan account
manager. Clay-Logan is a graduate of Central Missouri State University.

   CLAIMSPRO Health Claims Service Inc, Southfield, named Sharon
Benskey-Laliberte of Fair Haven as account manager.

   University of Michigan Helath System, Ann Arbor, named Jeffrey S. Chamberlain
interim director of the Center for Gene Therapy.

   University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, named Beth Triplett vice-president of
enrollment. Triplett was vice-president of enrollment at the University of
Charleston, W.Va.

   Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP, Detroit, named Paul Elie, Ramesh Telang, Kenneth
Coy and Michael Compton partners in the assurance and business advisory services
department.

   Lear Corp., Southfield, named Gerald S. Locke director of safety system
validation and Robert A. Stewart director of product life simulation.

   Send promotions and hirings to Karen Nussel, Assistant Business Editor, The
Detroit News, 615 W. Lafayette, Detroit, Mich. 48226; fax them to (313) 222-1461
or e-mail them to biz[#064]detnews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1500 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

HEADLINE: Amgen Shares Fall In a Patent Dispute

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

DATELINE: THOUSAND OAKS, Calif., June 10

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. shares fell 7 percent today after Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
said it was seeking to reopen a patent dispute over its potential rival to
Amgen's blockbuster Epogen.

   Amgen's patent infringement action against Transkaryotic and its development
partner, the German drug maker Hoechst A.G., has been on hold since last year. A
court said then the matter could be reopened at Transkaryotic's request, or when
development of the drug was completed. The competing drugs are used to treat
anemia.

    Transkaryotic is seeking to establish its patent rights as it nears
completion of its development of the rival drug. Transkaryotic also said it was
taking steps to resolve its patent rights in Britain.

   At stake is whether Transkaryotic and Hoechst will be allowed to market a
rival version of Epogen, which had first-quarter sales of $395 million and is
Amgen's biggest-selling drug. Amgen fell $4.0625, to $53.6875.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1999


                             1501 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                    JUNE 11, 1999 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 55

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS ON BRINK OF GENE BREAKTHROUGH?

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapy, which for years has produced disappointment after
disappointment, may be on the verge of yielding successes, scientists said
yesterday.

   The scientists said they finally were developing ways to get genes into the
body so they stay there and keep working - one of the biggest stumbling blocks
so far.

   And they also have tempered their expectations, with gene therapy being just
that - therapy - rather than a hoped-for cure for many genetic diseases.

   "We can use it in the treatment of cancer, inducing an immune response to
infection or cancer, the sprouting of blood vessels, all those sorts of things,"
Dr. Jim Wilson, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy, said in an
interview.

   "It's like a drug delivery vehicle where the drugs are therapeutic proteins,"
Wilson added.

   The society is holding its annual meeting in Washington.

   The original idea behind gene therapy was to replace faulty genes that cause
diseases such as cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease caused by mutations in
one gene.

   But attempts to replace this gene in patients did not work well. Sometimes
their cells did not take up the gene, or it worked for only a short time.

   This might have been due to the vectors, the methods used to carry the new
genes into the cells.

   Commonly used vectors include viruses known as adenoviruses, best known for
causing the common cold. But they caused inflammation and other immune responses
that attacked the genes and shortened their useful lives.

   Now, viruses known as adeno-associated viruses (AAV) are being tested. They
do not themselves cause infection but seem to be very good at injecting the
genes right where they need to be in a cell, so that they last.

   The genes keep expressing - directing the cells to produce the right proteins
- for as long as two years in dogs and rhesus monkeys, Wilson said.

   Clinical trials in human beings are just starting, and the first results will
be reported next year, Wilson said.

   With success, however, comes new problems.

   "You have to consider the power and the danger of a gene that's just sitting
there," Wilson added. "What if you get too much?"

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1502 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     June 11, 1999, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY HELP DIABETICS WITH INCONTINENCE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A type of urinary incontinence that commonly afflicts people with diabetes
might one day be treated with injections of genes that make a nerve-saving
protein.

   In rat studies, this form of gene therapy appears to salvage dying nerve
cells and reverse symptoms of incontinence, William Goins, professor of
molecular genetics and biochemistry at the University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, reported yesterday at a meeting of the American Society of Gene
Therapy in Washington, D.C.

   People with Type I, or juvenile-onset, diabetes usually develop problems with
bladder control 10 years after the diabetes is diagnosed. Those who have Type
II, or adult-onset, diabetes and don't closely regulate their blood sugar levels
also are at high risk for the bladder complication, Goins said.

   Incontinence has many causes, but in a diabetic the problem often can be
traced to sensory nerves of the bladder that slowly degenerate, impairing their
ability to signal the central nervous system when the bladder is full.
Eventually, the bladder overflows.

   "[Doctors] tell diabetics that they should to go to the bathroom every two to
four hours whether they think they have to or not," Goins said. Many patients,
though, find it difficult to follow this recommendation.

   Goins said the reasons for the sensory nerve degeneration are not well
understood. Elevated sugar levels could lead to reduced blood circulation in
small vessels, so the nerve cells could be losing essential nutrients.

   The high sugar content could also alter proteins within the cell that are
needed for survival.

   There is another possibility. Scientists have noted that in rats with
chemically induced diabetes, part of the nerve cell, called the axon, gradually
narrows in diameter. As a result, conduction of nerve impulses becomes impaired.

   In normal animals, the nerve cells secrete a protein called nerve growth
factor, which keeps the cells "alive and happy," as Goins put it. In diabetic
rats, levels of the growth factor were very low.

   In their experiments, Pitt scien tists attached a gene that makes nerve
growth factor to a herpes virus that had been engineered so it cannot replicate
and cause disease. They injected the virus into the rat bladder. The virus
naturally infects nerve cells, taking its gene passenger with it. The gene acts
like a factory inside the cell, continually producing the growth factor.

   Diabetic rats that had the gene therapy produced produced a smaller amount of
urine when they voided than did untreated rats. The researchers said that
finding suggests that the animals recognized the sensation of a filling bladder
and controlled urination. Further tests of the bladder tissue showed that the
injected genes did, in fact, actively make protein.

   Goins and other researchers are working on different applications of the
experimental therapy in animal models.

   Nerve growth factor might be useful in the treatment of other diabetic
complications, such as numbness in the feet and hands, called neuropathy.
Sensory nerve impairments also can arise from some drugs used to treat AIDS and
cancer.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1999


                             1503 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JUNE 10, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: AT VACCINE RESEARCH CENTER'S DEDICATION, HIV REMAINS A 'FORMIDABLE
ENEMY' ONE HOPE IS THAT THE $30 MILLION FACILITY WILL HELP TO DEVELOP A VACCINE
BY 2007 TO STOP THE SPREAD OF AIDS.

BYLINE: Usha Lee McFarling, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   President Clinton dedicated a $30 million vaccine research center yesterday
that he said would be the cornerstone in the national quest to develop an AIDS
vaccine by 2007.

   HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, infects 16,000 people around the world each
day. With no cure in sight, a vaccine is largely seen as the only way to stop
the spread of the epidemic.

   The ceremony, which was held under a sweltering tent on the National
Institutes of Health campus, was marked by references to medical triumphs and
tributes to the center's namesakes, former Arkansas Sen. Dale Bumpers and his
wife, Betty, longtime advocates of immunization.

   Absent was much of the bold enthusiasm that characterized a Clinton speech in
May 1997 that challenged scientists to produce an AIDS vaccine within the
decade.

   Instead, many speakers were cautious. "AIDS is different," NIH Director
Harold Varmus warned after extolling the progress his institutes have made in
creating vaccines for many other ruthless killers. "HIV is a formidable enemy."

   To the disappointment of advocates of Clinton's ambitious goal, many of the
speeches did not mention AIDS at all, but focused on diseases such as mumps,
polio and measles. Measles killed 123 American children from 1989 to 1991.

   "It's difficult hearing Mrs. Bumpers being inspired by 123 deaths when every
hour there are more deaths by HIV," said Steven F. Wakefield, a board member of
the AIDS Vaccine Advisory Coalition, a nonprofit watchdog group that has
criticized the government's vaccine effort.

   About 6,850 people die from AIDS around the world each day.

   Scientists have been repeatedly frustrated in their attempts to create a
vaccine against HIV. It can change its shape to remain unrecognizable; has an
armor made of a hard, sugary coating; and keeps its few weak points buried out
of sight.

   For years, AIDS vaccine research has received little money or interest from
the pharmaceutical industry. Only one vaccine candidate, AIDSVAX, is being
widely tested in people, but few scientists expect it to be fully effective in
its current form.

   Researchers and advocates have said that there is no way to meet Clinton's
deadline unless dozens of new candidate vaccines are quickly developed and
tested in people. Some fear that the National Institutes of Health, which is
known for basic, and not applied, research, is not up to the task of speeding
vaccine development.

   Gary Nabel, the research center's new director, said that he hoped to prove
critics wrong.

   Nabel is a widely respected researcher, formerly of the University of
Michigan. Although he has no experience in AIDS vaccine research, he is a leader
in the fields of gene therapy and high-tech vaccines based on DNA. He also has
had much experience doing what advocates want most: working with industry to
create medical products.

   "In my lab in Ann Arbor, we've taken concepts from the lab all the way to
testing them in patients," he said.

   Nabel said that because he is able to build and staff the center from the
ground up, he would be able to create the best structure, including links to
industry to quickly create a vaccine.

   On whether he could meet the President's mandate, Nabel was more cautious. "I
would have rather they started the clock after the building was finished," he
said.

   Dubbed "the Cape Canaveral of vaccine research" by Health and Human Services
Secretary Donna E. Shalala, the Dale and Betty Bumpers Vaccine Research Center
is expected to be completed in September 2000, and to be staffed by roughly 100
vaccine researchers.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1504 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     June 10, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 1167 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy closer to human solutions Muscular dystrophy, cystic
fibrosis trials on track

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Plans are under way to conduct the first gene therapy
for muscular dystrophy in the next couple of weeks.

   Doctors at Ohio State University hope to inject a young patient
with healthy genes in an effort to eventually correct his defective
ones.

   The treatment, pending federal regulatory review, marks a long-awaited
coming of age for gene therapy and is certain to create renewed
interest among patients and their families in this experimental
approach to curing a variety of diseases.

   But if patients are cautious, you can't blame them. They've had
high hopes before.


   Almost a decade ago, the promise of gene therapy was blown full
of hype by scientists who were certain they would be curing the
world of disease by now. The dream of using healthy genes to correct
genetic errors, either inherited or developed over time, seemed
within their reach.

   But gene therapy research has proved to be a frustrating and agonizingly
difficult field. Embarrassed by early failures, scientists retreated
quietly back to their labs to see where they went wrong.

   Many prominent researchers blamed the media and each other for
making promises too early and exaggerating gene therapy's potential
benefits.

   4 days of discussion

   But today, leaders of the field gather in Washington to discuss
their latest findings with a more solid base for optimism. More
than 2,000 scientists are expected to attend the four-day meeting
of the American Society of Gene Therapy. Nearly 1,000 studies,
mostly animal research, will be presented.

   "Gene therapy is maturing as a discipline," says James Wilson,
the society's president and director of the Institute for Human
Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
"We're developing a rather broad-based following representing
academia and the biotech and pharmaceutical industries."

   The long-awaited gene therapy trial for muscular dystrophy is
one of a growing number of studies finally moving from animals
to humans, Wilson says.

   Gene therapy safety trials also are being conducted for cystic
fibrosis (CF), another fatal childhood disease. CF was the focus
of a gene therapy conference earlier this week at Williamsburg,
Va.

   Just last week, a 50-year-old man at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center became the first person with hemophilia A to receive
gene therapy. Another trial involving 12 patients with hemophilia
A is beginning at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in
Boston.

   Wilson says human studies of a variety of cancers and cardiovascular
diseases also are under way, and many more are expected to begin
in the next several months.

   The first human gene therapy experiments were conducted in 1990
for a childhood immune deficiency. Findings were announced amid
a blaze of publicity, and while that trial was successful, the
field was hotly criticized for overstating its promise.

   "People thought this was a godsend technology and tried to move
forward very rapidly," says Savio Woo, professor and director
of the Institute for Gene Therapy and Molecular Medicine at Mount
Sinai School of Medicine in New York. "But the human body is
much more complex than we anticipated. The field was rightfully
criticized for putting the cart in front of the horse."

   The challenges of those early days of gene therapy were many.
Scientists had to find methods of delivering genes into the cells
of tissues they were trying to treat, getting enough of those
genes into the targets to have an effect, and keeping the genes
active long enough to correct the genetic defect.

   They did not meet those goals.

   Good delivery vehicles, known as vectors, proved to be a particularly
difficult problem. Scientists experimented with a variety of possibilities,
particularly a common cold virus, but results were disappointing.

   "The major limitations were that vectors did not have sufficient
efficiency, nor were they stable in the body," Wilson says. "In
addition, there were immunological responses, so they were not
sufficiently stealthlike.

   "There was a tremendous expectation for those clinical experiments
that was unmet."

   Useful criticism

   In 1995, Harold Varmus, director of the National Institutes of
Health, convened two committees to review progress in the field.
The report concluded that the vectors were not good enough to
continue in human trials. Varmus essentially told scientists to
go back to work on vectors in the lab and to wait to conduct human
studies until they were more prepared.

   Those extra years of basic science are now paying off. Varmus
will speak at the conference Saturday. He is expected to address
the rapid progress made by gene therapy scientists since he encouraged
them to get back to the basics before attempting to treat people.

   "That criticism was very useful to the field," Wilson says.
"It provided the incentive to focus on basic research that could
guarantee long-term success."

   Major topics of discussion at the meeting will be progress with
vectors, new ways of regulating genes so scientists can turn on
and off the genes that are delivered into animals, and new ways
of applying genes to the treatment of inherited and acquired diseases.

   "Gene therapy has clearly matured from the point of 'gee whiz'
to getting down to hard work," says Ronald Crystal, professor
of medicine at the Weill Medical College of Cornell Medical School
in New York. "Putting genes into people is no longer a worry.
We know there are no ill effects. Now we can think of genes as
drugs, and that is quite remarkable."

   Although gene therapy started out with inherited diseases, Crystal
says, "we also realize that we can apply this technology to acquired
diseases such as cancer and heart disease."

   His lab is presenting nearly 20 studies at the conference. His
group is conducting human trials for CF, which Crystal pioneered
in the early '90s, and for coronary artery disease, peripheral
vascular disease and several cancers.

   Gene therapy pioneer French Anderson, who conducted the first
human gene therapy 10 years ago, is breaking new ground with in-utero
gene therapy on living fetuses. He says human studies are still
four years away, but that the animal research he is presenting
at the conference shows great promise and safety.

   Anderson's group, collaborating with Esmail Zanjani at the University
of Nevada-Reno, is using retroviruses to deliver genes in utero
in sheep.

   Woo, who will be the society's next president, says hundreds of
patients are likely to become involved in gene therapy studies
in the next year. He says gene therapy will be a mainstream medical
science in less than five years.

   "Gene therapy is not witchcraft or something unexplainable,"
Woo says. "This is a biomedical field that will change the practice
of medicine in the next century.

   "It sounds like big talk, but that indeed is our goal."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W; Promising research: James Wilson, right, is director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy Research. His lab is presenting nearly 20
studies at the four-day meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1999


                             1505 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     June 10, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Detours stall gene delivery

BODY:

   Finding just the right vector, or delivery vehicle, for getting
genes into target cells has been a major challenge for scientists.

   One that showed early promise was the adenovirus, which causes
the common cold.

   Viruses have the perfect machinery for infecting cells and inserting
their own DNA. The strategy was to disarm the virus so it could
not cause illness, then insert the desired genes into the virus
and let it insert them into the cells.


   In concept, this was brilliant. But that delivery vehicle contains
some genes of its own that trigger immune responses in the patient.
The virus's outer coating also alerted the immune system and was
attacked before it could effectively do its gene therapy job.

   Now there are at least five ways of getting genes into target
cells.

   Among these are adenoviruses modified so they do not alert the
immune system; and adeno-associated viruses, which by themselves
do not trigger immune responses and have a particular affinity
for certain tissues, including muscle cells. Adeno-associated
virus is the vector chosen for delivering genes for a limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy patient.

   Other vectors include retroviruses, such as a disarmed version
of HIV, and so-called naked DNA, which is simply a packet of genes,
normally tucked into a fat molecule and injected. Each has attributes
that lend it better than others to specific diseases and purposes.

   Adenoviruses, for example, are short-lived and more useful for
one-time delivery of genes that need act only briefly. Studies
of these to be presented at the conference show they are ideal
for delivering genes to the hearts or legs where new blood vessel
growth is needed to circumvent blocked arteries. Wilson and others
have shown that adeno-associated viruses are much more longer
lived. Studies show these can live up to 400 days after being
injected into muscle tissue.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1999


                             1506 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                    June 09, 1999, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 29 Metfront

LENGTH: 549 words

HEADLINE: Baylor fund near goal of $ 500 million;
$ 359 million mark passed half way into 5-year drive

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Baylor College of Medicine announced on Tuesday that nearly three-fourths of
a $ 500 million fund-raising campaign - the largest ever launched in the Texas
Medical Center - has already been secured.

   Just halfway into its five-year "Investment in Discovery" initiative, more
than $ 359 million has been contributed or pledged to Baylor for key programs on
the cutting edge of medicine, and for recruiting and retaining star scientists
and educators.

   "Our goal is to advance medical cures," said Baylor trustee Corbin Robertson
Jr., chairman of the campaign. "Attracting the very best faculty and finest
students to Baylor, enhancing collaborative opportunities . . .  will generate
scientific advancements that significantly improve medical treatments and cures
and help prevent disease."

   Started in 1996, the campaign received several major contributions early on,
including $ 35 million from the Albert and Margaret Alkek Foundation for
improving medical research in a variety of areas, $ 25 million from the Brown
Foundation for brain and behavior disorders and $ 5 million from Shell Oil to
support a center for gene therapy.

   On Tuesday, five more large donations were announced. They include:


   $ 19 million from the Cullen family, the Cullen Trust for Health Care and the
Cullen Trust for Higher Education for medical education and other projects.


   $ 10 million from the DeBakey Medical Foundation for research.


   $ 6.25 million from the Robert and Janice McNair Foundation to support
graduate students in research and academic medicine.


   $ 5 million from Houston Endowment Inc. to support young investigators whose
work is related to neuroscience, brain and behavior studies, gene therapy and
infectious diseases.


   $ 4.7 million from the Robert J. Kleberg Jr. and Helen C. Kleberg Foundation
for a program that identifies genes specific to brain tumors in children.

   The rest came from more than 10,700 donations from corporations, foundations,
individuals, estates and associations like the American Heart Association, and
Baylor-affiliated teaching hospitals, including Texas Children's Hospital and
Methodist.

   The campaign will help support Baylor, which is one of three U.S. sites for
completion of the international Human Genome Project, as it pushes forward with
its groundbreaking research into the genetic causes of and cures for chronic and
hereditary diseases.

   Another specific aim of the initiative is to support the best and brightest
doctors-to-be through scholarships.

   "It is extremely important to recruit talented, young people," said Baylor
President Dr. Ralph Feigin. "The vigor of a medical school . . .  is entirely
dependent on the kind of students that you have, bring along, and keep within
the community."

   The campaign also is paying to bring breast cancer researcher Dr. Kent
Osborne - and 35 to 45 members of his team - to Houston from San Antonio to set
up a breast cancer program at Methodist Hospital. Osborne is former chief of the
Division of Medical Oncology at The University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio.

   Dr. Peter Scardino, Baylor's former chief of urology, has been lured back
from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. Scardino pioneered the
use of gene therapy for prostate cancer at Baylor.


LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1999


                             1507 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       June 7, 1999 Monday, 1S SHORELINE

SECTION: TOWN NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: A CENTURY-OLD ARTISTIC TRADITION INSPIRES TEMPORARY ART INSTALLATION

BYLINE: JANE E. DEE; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: BRANFORD --

BODY:

   Years ago, New York artists traveled to Connecticut in the summertime, drawn
to the light and landscape of Old Lyme.

   On Sunday, more than 100 years later, New York artists again trekked to
Connecticut, this time to Branford, and they left their easels at home.

   There were no artists sporting wide-brimmed straw hats and dabbing at
palettes, as the American Impressionists did in Old Lyme.  Sunday's artists came
dressed in shorts and hiking boots. They scampered over steep rocks, tramped
through a bog and squatted in a cave as they transformed the woods on Quarry
Road into a temporary art installation.

   By 2 p.m., photographs and poetry hanged from branches, pink-painted nautilus
shells sat in the nook of a tree, shoes made of moss and grass followed their
own path, and several small handmade trees glowed under glass inside a cave.

   About two-dozen artists, mostly from Brooklyn and the Connecticut shoreline,
came to Branford because of the vision of Cindy Tower, a Brooklyn artist who
discovered the Connecticut woods after her parents retired to Stony Creek. Last
summer, Tower and artist Stephen Bozler explored the trail that leads to a cave
off Quarry Road, and the idea for Sunday's installation was born.

   "I'm not the curator; this is inclusive. People heard about it by word of
mouth," Tower said Sunday as she designed a space inside the cave with pink
benches "inlaid" with eggs.

   Tower was the curator of a similar installation in 1996, when she invited 21
artists to an abandoned tenement in the Soho district of Manhattan where they
"gave something value that was valueless," she said.

   That exhibit lasted for five days.  Sunday's was up for only four hours.
Using recycled and natural material, the artists created their exhibits, then
packed them up at the end of the day.

   With a temporary installation, art is no longer a commodity, Tower said. In
the Branford woods, artists could literally return to the primordial cave, she
said, where community, not technology, is valued.

   "I think it's a really inspired idea and a tremendous amount of fun," said
artist Paul Villinski of Long Island City, Queens.

   Villinski collected Budweiser Beer cans that had been flattened by cars as
they littered his neighborhood. Out of the crushed cans came a swarm of
butterflies that Villinski cut out and attached to trees.

   "There's something about transforming this trash into art that's beautiful,"
he said.

   Nearby, Roberto Espejo, a photography teacher at the Yale School of
Architecture, hung, from trees, pictures of pigs penned outside a slaughterhouse
in Orange, and a photograph of a child receiving gene therapy at Yale-New Haven
Hospital.

   Everywhere on the trail, art was waiting to be discovered. Brooklyn artist
Andrew Moore, who is getting married in the fall, created a homage to couples,
in three parts.

   First, Moore floated a pair of orange ducks in a pond, then he placed two
plastic clams in the water. When he was done, Moore scaled the steepest rock
face he could find and placed a wedding cake bride and groom at the top.

   Elka Gould, who teaches in New York, leaned, against a tree, a baby made of
pink feathers.

   "I made it and I was happy with it because I think a baby is a good symbol
for how fragile nature is," Gould said.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1999


                             1508 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 7, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: HEARD ON THE BEAT;
 CHIRON'S HEMOPHILIA GENE THERAPY IN TRIALS

BYLINE: PAUL JACOBS

BODY:


   Hemophilia is a hereditary bleeding disorder that plagued the descendants of
Britain's Queen Victoria. One major form of the disease is caused by a defect in
a gene that normally produces a factor vital to forming blood clots. In the most
severe cases, any small cut or bruise can cause excessive bleeding. The
condition is treated now by using injections to supply the missing blood factor,
but the repeated bleeding takes its toll on patients, especially when it flows
into joints. More than 15,000 Americans suffer from this painful and crippling
disease.

   Fortunately, the gene responsible for hemophilia A has been isolated, and it
is an obvious target for gene therapy. The theory is simple: If you can somehow
get working copies of a healthy gene into patients, the new genes should begin
producing the missing clotting factor--eliminating the bleeding episodes and the
continual need for injections to stop them.

   However, gene therapy has proved difficult to accomplish in a variety of
hereditary disorders, with only a few partial successes to date.

   Chiron, an Emeryville, Calif., biotechnology company, has taken the plunge
with a new gene therapy for hemophilia A. The company attaches the healthy gene
to a disabled mouse virus, which can carry the gene into a patient's cells but
cannot itself cause disease.

   In studies of hemophilic animals, the virus successfully carried healthy
genes into cells, which were able to crank out the clotting factor for a year or
longer, according to Dr. Deborah Hulft, Chiron's director of clinical
development.

   Last week, at the University of Pittsburgh, a 50-year-old man became the
first patient to receive the new therapy. The first trial could include as many
as 20 patients with severe hemophilia at six medical centers, including UC
Davis. In the first phase, Chiron and its university collaborators will
determine the best dosage and check for safety. Results are expected in a year,
Hulft said.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1999


                             1509 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 7, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2471 words

HEADLINE: BATTLING TO STOP AREA'S 'BRAIN DRAIN';
 TRENDS: THE SOUTHLAND IS A MEDICAL RESEARCH POWERHOUSE, YET IT LACKS A
SIGNIFICANT BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY. LOCAL LEADERS WORKING TO CHANGE THIS FACE
SEVERAL HURDLES.

BYLINE: PAUL JACOBS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Few regions in the country can claim as much high-powered medical science as
greater Los Angeles, with its rich collection of research universities and
hospitals.

   Last year, medical investigators in Los Angeles County alone took in more
than $ 400 million in grants from the National Institutes of Health--that's more
than all but a handful of states.

   But the local economy hasn't reaped the full benefit of all that scientific
prowess. All too often, when discoveries are turned into biotechnology
businesses, they leave the area, taking root in the state's more established
biotech centers in San Diego or San Francisco, or leaving California entirely.
And the potential for high-paying jobs goes with them.

   Some call it a "brain drain."

   "Ideas that are spun off from local universities are licensed to firms
outside of the area," said Ahmed A. Enany, executive director of the Southern
California Biomedical Council, a nonprofit formed to promote the development of
the industry in the region. In other cases, he said, "an investigator has an
idea and builds a local firm around it, but moves away when the idea is
developed."

   A number of local leaders, from universities, government and the industry
itself, are trying to change that flight of innovation by finding ways to
attract and hold onto biotechnology in a region better known for its
entertainment industry than for the development of new drugs, laboratory tests
and medical devices.

   These leaders talk about achieving "critical mass" with clusters of biotech
business that are large enough to attract even more companies, like a
self-sustaining nuclear reaction.

   But a number of obstacles must be overcome first. Among them:

   * Local government is late in encouraging this kind of development. As a
result, scientists with marketable discoveries and venture capitalists with the
needed cash gravitate to other areas that are already recognized for
biotechnology.

   * Land near the research institutions is generally both scarce and expensive.
This is in contrast with the state's major biotech centers in San Diego and
around San Francisco, where research parks were established more than a decade
ago on open land and at affordable prices.

   * University and nonprofit research institutes that should attract commercial
development are scattered across the landscape--with the City of Hope National
Medical Center in Duarte and Caltech in the east, UCLA and Harbor-UCLA Research
and Education Institute to the west, and the USC campuses in between. By
contrast, San Diego's three major biomedical research centers--the University of
California, the Scripps Research Institute and the Salk Institute, together
accounting for almost $ 300 million in NIH grants last year--are within a few
miles of one another. And many of that city's biotech businesses are located in
well-manicured research parks close by.

   Similarly, in Orange County, a number of biotech and medical device companies
have grown up around UC Irvine, an area that Los Angeles-based leaders see as a
competitor to their efforts.

   Psychological Stumbling Block

   Perhaps the biggest impediment of all is a psychological one: Los Angeles has
not been seen as a center for biotech development by entrepreneurs or investors.

   That could change quickly, said Mayor Richard J. Riordan, whose business team
has zeroed in on biotech as one of four industries it is trying to attract or
keep in the city. (The others are fashion, manufacturing and entertainment.)

   "Things seem to happen like magic," Riordan said. In San Diego or Irvine, one
company was soon followed by another and another, until "all of a sudden they
were up and running," he said. "We are setting the seeds for it here, making
people aware of the advantages. I can see it starting to take off."

   To encourage biotech companies--and the high-wage jobs that come with
them--Riordan's staff promises to find the land they need and offers packages of
tax incentives and training grants.

   Los Angeles has been slow to incubate the emerging industry. Enany, at the
biomedical council, has documented the lost opportunities, the companies that
have moved away.

   One of those is Medco Research, a small pharmaceutical company that produces
heart drugs--including Adenocard, used routinely in emergency rooms throughout
the country to slow a very rapid heartbeat.

   The company was founded in Los Angeles 20 years ago but moved to North
Carolina in 1993 as its drug business was beginning to take off. Company
executives "wanted to go to the East Coast and get closer to the pharmaceutical
business, closer to our partners and co-collaborators," said company spokesman
Michael Freeman.

   Enany points to examples of local discoveries that led to companies started
up outside the region. Applied Biosciences is the leading producer of machines
for decoding DNA--instruments that have been vital to unlocking the secrets of
genetics. The technology was developed in the 1980s by Caltech scientists. The
company, now part of instrument maker Perkin-Elmer, is based in Foster City, on
the San Francisco Peninsula.

   Winning Over Wary Venture Capitalists

   One problem is attracting venture capitalists to invest in biotechnology in
the Los Angeles area, especially at a time when there are prospects for quicker
payouts from software and Internet companies, according to Enany and others. The
Southern California Biomedical Medical Council is trying to encourage home-grown
venture capital partnerships with an interest in local biotech. But progress has
been slow, Enany said.

   However, Riordan, a venture capitalist himself before he got into politics,
is optimistic. "Venture capital money follows where the deals are," he said. If
there is the right mix of research and management and good products, he said,
"you'd have venture capitalists from all over the country investing."

   "There is an industry in Los Angeles," Enany said. But companies are moving
out of the area as fast as new firms are born. "It's as if we are running in the
same place," he said.

   In fact, there already is a surprisingly large number of health-related
businesses in Los Angeles and the surrounding counties--more than 1,000,
according to the California Health Care Institute, an industry lobbying and
educational organization.

   Included in the statistics are clinical laboratories, prescription drug
distributors and medical equipment suppliers. Most are manufacturers of medical
devices--pumps and monitors, heart valves and artificial knees, sterile tubing
and syringes. However, only a small number--fewer than 50--fall under the common
definition of biotechnology: companies using genetic engineering and other
biological tools to create drug products and lab tests.

   These companies are spread across the region. Most are very small.

   One of the exceptions is Amgen in Thousand Oaks, the world's largest
independent biotechnology company, with a stock market value of more than $ 30
billion. The company's best-selling products are two genetically engineered
versions of human hormones for kidney dialysis and cancer patients--each with
annual sales in excess of $ 1 billion.

   Another is MiniMed in Sylmar, a fast-growing company with a market value of $
1.7 billion that makes insulin pumps and blood sugar monitors for diabetes
patients.

   Few have done more to foster biomedical business development in the area than
MiniMed's founder and chairman, Alfred E. Mann. He has pledged $ 100 million to
USC to establish a biomedical engineering institute that will translate
scientific discovery into practical products, and he's offered another $ 100
million to UCLA.

   "The concept is to take raw technology and convert it to products and then
license that to companies," he said.

   In addition, Mann worked with city officials to establish a biomedical
research park on Cal State Northridge property, where MiniMed is leasing 28
acres for a new manufacturing facility.

   "The major problem with Los Angeles is that it is a megalopolis," Mann said.
"There isn't much land left. . . . The city is so enormous it's been an obstacle
to development of any of the high-tech businesses."

   But he sees San Diego and the Silicon Valley as choking on their own
success--with high housing costs and labor shortages--and that presents an
opportunity for the Los Angeles region.

   The Northridge campus is just one of several sites that could become the
center of a cluster of biomedical companies.

   Pasadena, working closely with Caltech and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, has
modified zoning for 100 acres as a high-tech corridor, which is expected to
provide lab space for biotechnology and other companies. "There's 60,000 square
feet of laboratories throughout the city, and it's all in use ," said Eric
Duyshart, the city's business development manager.

   The corridor has been slow getting started, he said, but the city is actively
negotiating with private developers interested in the site.

   Caltech President David Baltimore is a strong advocate for development of
commercial research facilities near the university.

   "I think it will work here," Baltimore said. "I think what we need to do is
have our facilities be at a reasonable price so that people who want to go to
the Silicon Valley or Cambridge Mass.  will see an opportunity to start up here
and to spin things out of Caltech and out of the surrounding universities."

   "Los Angeles is a very difficult place to work in because things are so
scattered," he said. "I'd love to have UCLA next door to us and I'd love to have
USC next door to us, so we could all come together and cooperate. But in fact,
we're far enough apart that we're going to have to develop separately in our
penumbras."

   Room for Growth at Duarte Center

   In Duarte, 10 miles to the east, the City of Hope National Medical Center has
broken ground on its $ 10-million Center for Biomedicine & Genetics to enable
the research center and hospital to convert its discoveries into products. And
it has acreage available for a biotech research park where those products could
advance to market.

   The idea for the development began when scientists at the facility found a
way to make genes that deactivate the AIDS virus. But to test those genes'
therapeutic possibilities, the research center had to pay a private company $
600,000 to manufacture enough of the material for use in patients, said Dr. John
S. Kovach, executive vice president for medical and scientific affairs at the
City of Hope. It took two years to negotiate the contract, which included
provisions for sharing patents if the therapy proves effective.

   The new facility will enable City of Hope to produce future gene therapy
products quickly on its own. "We could produce and follow four, five or six
leads at a time, and we know we couldn't do that if we had to go out and
negotiate production costs outside," Kovach said.

   As part of this effort, City of Hope is discussing development of 30 acres of
its property for private companies that would work with scientists from the
nonprofit research center and university campuses and commercialize discoveries,
Kovach said.

   Research Park Would Include Housing

   Far across the county, in Torrance, the Harbor-UCLA Research and Education
Institute is planning a new laboratory and office facility at surplus Navy
housing property in nearby San Pedro. The nonprofit institute wants to build
housing for its investigators and staff on a 29-acre parcel as well as a 20-acre
research park, providing badly needed lab space for institute scientists and for
start-up biotech companies.

   The new site could provide room for companies from both the institute and
UCLA's Westwood campus, said Dr. Daniel Hollander, the institute's president and
chief executive.

   "We do see faculty members' productive ideas leaving and going elsewhere," he
said. With new facilities, early-stage development of medical products could be
done locally.

   Los Angeles County Supervisor Gloria Molina is exploring the possibility of
developing a biomedical industry park near USC's health sciences campus east of
downtown. Among the possible sites is the county's earthquake-damaged juvenile
hall facility, which would have to be relocated.

   Molina spokesman Miguel Santana said a decision about the fate of the site
will have to wait until the supervisors resolve a long-running dispute about
rebuilding the Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center.

   Developing a job-generating biotech research park near the hospital and the
USC medical campus is "an interesting concept, and we're very excited about
pursuing it once the hospital issue is resolved," Santana said.

   USC would welcome such a development. If university scientists "could walk
across the street where their commercial ideas could be tested, that would be
very nice," said USC Associate Vice President John Hisserich.

   Others would like to see a research park developed on Veterans Affairs'
acreage in Westwood--property just off the San Diego Freeway and within a mile
of the UCLA campus.

   A few years ago, local VA officials began discussing a master plan for as
many as 120 acres, part of which could be commercial laboratory space, said Dr.
Stephen Pandol, former director of research and development at the facility.

   But specific plans would require public hearings, approval by the VA in
Washington and perhaps even congressional action, Pandol said. Some veterans'
groups and nearby property owners have already expressed opposition to the
proposal.

   "It is all on hold," Pandol said. And it will likely remain so. Federal
officials have stopped all research at the Veterans' facility because of concern
about the safety of patients receiving experimental treatments. The ban, which
affects animal research as well as human trials, would apply to private biotech
companies leasing space from the VA.

   The overall outlook remains hopeful, however, according to the biomedical
council's Enany.

   "People love to be here, not just for the weather," he said, "but for access
to resources. There's nothing that a business needs that doesn't exist in Los
Angeles. The problem here is mobilizing it."


   Wanted: A Home for Local Biotech Industry

   The Los Angeles area lacks the laboratory space that start-up biotechnology
companies need. To deal with the problem, Southland officials are trying to
create research parks that will nurture an emerging biotech industry. Unlike
clusters in other parts of the country known for biotech, such as San Diego and
Cambridge, Mass., these locations are scattered across the local landscape. And
some are only proposals, unlikely to be developed any time soon.


   *

   Times staff writer Paul Jacobs can be reached at paul.jacobs@latimes.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ahmed A. Enany of Southern California Biomedical Council says
ideas "from local universities are licensed to firms outside of the area."
PHOTOGRAPHER: LORI SHEPLER / Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC: Wanted: A Home for Local
Biotech Industry / LORENA IIGUEZ / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1999


                             1510 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            June 7, 1999 Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science Pg. 4

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: DNA process could help in operations
 New gene-delivery method may boost effectiveness of bypasses, heart transplants

BYLINE: RICHARD A. KNOX

SOURCE: Boston Globe

DATELINE: Boston

BODY:

   A technique for delivering genes into blood vessels and heart tissue opens
the door to an array of innovations, such as coronary bypass grafts that stay
open and heart transplants that resist rejection, a research team reports.

   The new method forces DNA into heart and blood vessel tissue under pressure.
This avoids the need to package the genetic material in engineered viruses,
microspheres of fat, or other delivery systems devised to insert genes where
they're wanted.

   The advantage, said Victor J. Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston,
is a high level of efficiency in getting the genes into target tissue without
apparent risks.

   The new method does not appear to damage tissue, Dzau said.

   Experiments with the new gene-delivery method were described in a paper
published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The high-pressure technique delivers snippets of DNA called oligonucleotides
into 90% of the cells lining veins.

   The Brigham and Women's group already is using the method to pretreat vein
grafts with DNA that blocks cell division, in an effort to prevent the grafts
from closing up.

   As many as half of all coronary grafts reclog eventually because the vein
tissue used to bypass obstructed arteries is exposed to much higher pressure
than veins normally are.

   In response, cells lining the vein grafts grow and form scar tissue. As many
as half these grafts will eventually close up entirely.

   In animal experiments, the high-pressure method was able to get genetic
material into 53% of heart muscle cells. The Harvard group showed that the
synthetic DNA inhibited by 50% the production of proteins involved in transplant
rejection.

   The animal experiments suggest that doctors may be able to "re-engineer"
human hearts genetically before transplantation to make them less likely to be
rejected by the donor's immune system, Dzau said in an interview.

   The new method might also be used in animal-to-human organ transplants, if
other safety issues can be overcome.

   Another possible application, Dzau said, may be to deliver genes that
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels inside hearts. A number of teams are
already using gene therapy in early human experiments to grow new blood supplies
for oxygen-starved hearts, either by injecting genes directly or by
incorporating them into disarmed viruses.

   While preliminary results from these experiments appear promising, success
might be enhanced if researchers could get the growth-promoting genes into a
higher proportion of heart cells. According to Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center in Boston, only about 1% to 5% of cells in the target area of a
direct injection take up the injected DNA.

   "We are keeping our eyes open for anything that would optimize gene
expression," Isner said.


LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1999


                             1511 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 7, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1697 words

HEADLINE: VA RESEARCH UNDER THE MICROSCOPE A NATIONAL PROBE OF ALLEGED
VIOLATIONS OF PATIENT RIGHTS NOW INCLUDES PHILADELPHIA'S MEDICAL CENTER.
MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A HEART STUDY HAS BEEN ALLEGED.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Marian Uhlman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   With 34,000 patients walking through its doors every year, the Philadelphia
Veterans Administration Medical Center in West Philadelphia does a brisk
business caring for veterans from three states.

   Just as important, but less well known, is the VA's mission in medical
research.

   Inside the medical center's research wing and in its many outpatient clinics,
VA doctors are studying everything from cocaine addiction to proteins that
transport salt out of kidney cells.

   "You couldn't name a major disease that the VA is not involved in studying,"
said Charles P. O'Brien, an internationally known psychiatrist and interim
associate chief of staff for research at the VA's sprawling red-brick complex at
University and Woodland Avenues.

   But VA research in Philadelphia, which attracts between $12 million and $15
million in outside funding every year, has now been brought into a national
probe of alleged violations of patient rights at VA hospitals and other medical
research centers around the country.

   Over the last year, federal investigators have taken the unprecedented step
of suspending research at two major medical centers - the VA West Los Angeles
Healthcare Center, the nation's largest VA medical facility, and Duke
University, long known for excellence in cutting-edge medical research.

   Last month, the U.S. Office of Protection from Research Risks (OPRR), a
watchdog arm of the National Institutes of Health that has been spearheading the
probes, announced it would bring its investigation to Philadelphia as well.

   The agency said it would review allegations of research misconduct involving
a heart study conducted at the Philadelphia VA and dozens of other sites across
the country.

   Joan Pastor, a former research nurse at the Philadelphia VA, contends that
some 2,800 patients enrolled in the study in the United States and Canada signed
consent forms that greatly understated the potential risk of injection with a
radioactive isotope commonly used in heart scans.

   She said the study was never approved by the Philadelphia VA's Radiation
Safety Committee, a violation of federal regulations.

   Pastor maintains that she was laid off from her job at the VA in 1998 in
retaliation for blowing the whistle on the problems.

   "These veterans fought in a war for us," Pastor said. "They earned all of the
benefits they get. If they are going to be experimented on, they ought to be
told about the risks involved."

   VA officials and others involved in the national heart study concede that the
original consent form was inaccurate, but they say the inaccuracy was
inconsequential. The study, they say, did not expose patients to dangerous
levels of radiation. After Pastor flagged the problem, the form was changed,
officials point out.

   "There is no way we would risk anybody's life," said Michael J. Sullivan,
director of the Philadelphia VA and a Navy veteran who fought in the Vietnam
War.

   Gary B. Ellis, OPRR director, said his office's review of what happened at
the Philadelphia VA was not likely to involve an on-site inspection or go much
beyond the specific allegations made by Pastor about the cardiac studies. Still,
some VA researchers are concerned the investigators might become overly zealous.

   "We are proud of what we do," said Ira R. Katz, a psychiatrist who studies
depression among veterans at the medical center's 240-bed nursing home. "We hope
it [the investigation] is not a witch hunt."

   The central issue under review here and elsewhere in the country turns on a
fundamental tenet of medical research - that people must give their fully
informed consent to take part in any experiments.

   The principle, which grew out of the postwar Nuremberg trials of Nazis
involved in grotesque medical experiments conducted on the Jews, has now been
enshrined in regulations enforced by the OPRR and other federal agencies.

   Last month, the OPRR gave Duke black marks for a variety of problems,
including conflicts of interest, inadequate staffing, and poor record-keeping in
clinical trials. The university was forced to temporarily suspend 2,000 studies
involving people.

   The OPRR has also been scrutinizing VA centers in Tampa, Cincinnati, New York
and West Los Angeles. The problems in West Los Angeles prompted the OPRR to
impose strict oversight procedures before research could continue. Enough red
flags have been raised that a joint House committee has asked for independent
audits of VA research centers across the country.

   "I would like to see VA medical research bounce back from this strong and
vital," said Rep. Terry Everett (R., Ala.), chairman of the subcommittee on
oversight and investigations of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs. "But I
can promise that if I ever hear again of medical research without a veteran's
consent at a VA facility, I will do my level best to put that facility out of
the research business permanently."

   In Philadelphia, VA officials say there is no systemic problem involving
patient consent. "I would be shocked if the place was shut down," O'Brien said.
"We are about as good as it gets."

   Local VA officials acknowledge that the heart study inadvertently did not go
before the medical center's Radiation Safety Committee, as required under
federal regulations. They say a new reporting system is in place to avoid that
problem in the future.

   But officials dispute Pastor's contention that she was laid off for becoming
a whistle-blower.

   When Pastor raised her concerns, the project was temporarily suspended so the
medical center could investigate the allegations, Sullivan said. By the time the
project was ready to resume, outside funders cut off its money because the study
had enrolled less than a dozen people. Pastor was paid under that funding.

   Pastor filed a lawsuit under the federal Whistleblower Protection Act. An
administrative judge in April found in her favor and ordered her reinstated with
back pay. The terms of her reemployment are still being negotiated. The judge
did not address her allegations of research violation, a topic that is expected
to be taken up by the OPRR.

   VA officials are confident that the federal agency will not find major fault
with the medical center's system of safeguarding patients involved in studies.
But they fully expect the review to turn up suggestions for improvement.

   "For us, it's an educational opportunity," said Peter Jucovy, a pathologist
and medical educator who is chairman of the VA's Institutional Review Board, a
committee that must approve every research project involving people. "You can't
possibly be doing everything in the ideal way every time."

   Each year, the VA brings in more than $12 million in research money, most of
it from the National Institutes of Health. The funding supports 225 research
projects, about half of them involving human subjects, and 90 investigators who
are studying everything from the role of B-cells in osteoporosis to gene therapy
for cystic fibrosis. Doctors at the VA have joint appointments with the
University of Pennsylvania Medical School, which is one of the largest research
schools in the country.

   "It is not necessarily research that affects only veterans," Sullivan said.
"It affects humanity."

   Among the medical advances to come out of VA research across the country are
the so-called Seattle foot, a mechanical device that improves the ability of
amputees to walk; the cardiac pacemaker; and new understandings about
post-traumatic stress syndrome that are now being applied everywhere from war
zones to Littleton, Colo.

   In Philadelphia, one of the VA's star researchers is O'Brien, who pulls in
more than $4 million in research grants a year. His team of behavioral
scientists has developed an important drug, naltrexone, to treat alcoholism, and
a system of measuring addiction that is used by treatment programs around the
world.

   Sullivan, who took over the reins of the Philadelphia VA last year, hopes to
boost research funding to more than $20 million a year, nearly double the
current level. As he hires new doctors, he said, he is looking for physicians
who will bring research grants with them. And soon, he expects to ask Washington
for $8 million to renovate the VA's five-story research wing. "We want to
upgrade the core facilities for our researchers," he said.

   VA officials say they are well aware of the need to take special care in
doing research among the veteran population, which includes large numbers of
drug addicts, people with limited reading skills, and patients with mental
illness.

   "We need to be particularly vigilant," Jucovy said.

   Psychologist Anna Rose Childress, for example, requires patients to pass a
multiple-choice quiz before they are accepted into studies. "Nobody likes
quizzes, but we think it helps," she said.

   Childress is studying what happens inside the brains of cocaine addicts when
they begin craving another hit of the drug. Her work, funded by a $1 million
federal grant, could someday lead to medicines that might shut off such craving,
not only for cocaine addicts but also for people addicted to food or sex.

   "We have a rather rigorous system [for reviewing research proposals] here,"
said Childress, who has been at the VA for more than a decade. "I don't think
I've ever seen a project come and go without some revision" by the VA's review
board.

   That system has recently gotten even more rigorous, Jucovy said.

   The review board is now asking all VA researchers to come up with three
questions they would ask patients to determine if the patients understand the
study they are being invited to join.

   Although the researchers aren't yet required to actually ask patients these
questions, Jucovy said, the scientists have to have the questions available when
they go before the review board.

   In other changes aimed at protecting patient rights, the VA is developing a
new system for reporting "adverse events," such as unexpected side-effects and
death, among patients enrolled in clinical trials.

   "The [research] procedures were good all along," Sullivan said. "But they are
better today than they were a year or two ago."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO
A statue of a World War I infantryman stands guard at the VA Medical Center in
West Philadelphia. A former nurse there says she was laid off for being a
whistleblower. (REBECCA BARGER-TUVIM, Inquirer Staff Photographer)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1512 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JUNE 7, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: 2 Local Companies Racing for a Genetic Cure for Hemophilia;

Also, readers sound off on genetically engineered crops

BYLINE: TOM ABATE

BODY:
Chiron Corp. has joined the race to use gene therapy to cure hemophilia.

    Scientists working with the Emeryville firm treated their first human
volunteer this week. Avigen Inc. of Alameda is testing a similar gene-therapy
approach to curing hemophilia.

    Over the past decade, scientists have conducted more than 200 human trials
that used some form of genetic therapy to cure a variety of diseases. Every
single experiment has failed. Scientists say one reason for the flops is that
gene therapies have tackled complex diseases like cancers, which can have
several causes.

    But hemophilia is simple. Our bodies have two different genes -- Factor 8
and Factor 9 -- that promote blood clotting. Hemophiliacs lack one of these two
genes. Supply the missing gene and the problem should be licked.

    This is a race both companies could win. Chiron is testing a gene therapy
for Factor 8. Avigen is trying to cure the Factor 9 deficiency. Avigen recently
got Food and Drug Administration approval to begin human tests.

    The whole industry is keeping its fingers crossed. If Chiron and Avigen
can't make gene therapy work on hemophilia, what hope is there for using gene
therapy on heart disease?

    The strategy behind gene therapy is to put viruses to good use. A virus is
simply a small amount of genetic material that knows how to burrow into cells.
Viruses can be annoying or deadly if they carry harmful genetic material. But
genetic engineers can replace the disease-causing stuff inside a virus with a
beneficial gene. The idea is to turn the virus into a delivery truck to carry
genetic cures into our cells.

    Chiron Chief Scientific Officer Lewis Williams gave a condensed explanation
of the test his company began this week.

    A 50-year-old hemophiliac in Pittsburg was given a small dose of liquid
intravenously. The liquid contained billions of virus particles, into which
Chiron had engineered the genetic material for Factor 8.

    Chiron expects these virus particles will flow through the bloodstream, and
catch certain cells in the act of dividing to form new cells. Chiron has used a
type of virus that can only inject its genetic payload into a cell while it is
dividing.

    In this case, the virus will deliver Factor 8. Once the virus penetrates a
cell, that cell should start producing the chemical needed for blood clotting,
helping the hemophiliac.

    Chiron's viral delivery agents must work quickly. The patient's immune
system treats most viruses as invaders and tries to wipe them out. Chiron
estimates its genetic therapy agents will only survive for a few minutes.

    Now you have a sense of why 300 previous experiments have failed. We'll stay
in touch with our local hopefuls in the gene therapy race.

   BIOFEEDBACK: My May 24 column on bioengineered foods and butterflies touched
a chord with readers, who e-mailed me comments ranging from aggravation with my
snide treatment of critics, to appreciation that I'd raised the issue at all.

    I'll share the highlights of these critiques here.

    Daniel Cox expressed dismay at my "shockingly naive and biased" portrayal of
biotech critics as "malodorous, dreadlocked romantics or boring Euro-crats."
Cox, a physics professor at the University of California at Davis, said many
scientists are leery of the rapid introduction of genetically engineered crops
into the environment.

    Ernie Lowe, an Oakland consultant in the field of sustainable agriculture,
said one scientific concern is that genes engineered into domesticated crops
might jump to wild plants through natural cross-breeding, with unforeseen
environmental risks.

    Steve Heilig said Mendocino County authors Marc Lappe and Britt Bailey made
some good observations about bioengineered foods in "Against the Grain," a book
from Common Courage Press.

    Roger Purves of Berkeley picked up on a point in my column that said
Europeans support small farms to a far greater extent than Americans. Purves
said he has friends in Canada and Wales who get government subsidies to run
small farms. He used to think that was silly, but now views the subsidies as
helping to preserve "skills and knowledge that might get lost in the free
market."

    On a similar theme, John Lynch suggested Bay Area people are "closer" to
their food than most Americans, as evidenced by their support for organic
produce and farmers' markets.

    Thanks for these and similar thoughts I don't have room to share. One of my
biggest pleasures as a writer is getting the sort of responses that let me know
I've touched a nerve -- even when your first line is "Of all the nerve."

   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.




LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1999


                             1513 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      June 07, 1999, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F23

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: CONVENTIONS

BODY:


   The following conventions are scheduled to start this week in the Washington
area.

   Planned Parenthood Federation of America Political Academy

   Dates: Through Wednesday

   Attendance: 170

   Headquarters: Sheraton City Centre Hotel

   Newsletter Publishers Association

   Dates: Through tomorrow

   Attendance: 900

   Headquarters: Renaissance Washington Hotel

   Recreation Vehicle Industry Association

   Dates: Today through Friday

   Attendance: 135

   Headquarters: Washington Marriott

   Planned Parenthood Federation of America Board Meeting

   Dates: Tomorrow through Saturday

   Attendance: 110

   Headquarters: Sheraton City Centre Hotel

   National Burglar Fire Alarm Association

   Dates: Tomorrow through Saturday

   Attendance: 100

   Headquarters: Loews L'Enfant Plaza Hotel

   Association of Trial Lawyers of America

   Dates: Tomorrow and Wednesday

   Attendance: 100

   Headquarters: Phoenix Park Hotel

   American Society of Gene Therapy

   Dates: Wednesday through Sunday

   Attendance: 1,600

   Headquarters: Marriott Wardman Park

   The United Methodist Church

   Dates: Wednesday through Friday

   Attendance: 1,600

   Headquarters: Renaissance Washington Hotel

   X-Ceed

   Dates: Thursday through June 16

   Attendance: 200

   Headquarters: Willard Inter-Continental

   Sinclair Communications

   Dates: Thursday through June 16

   Attendance: 300

   Headquarters: Radisson Plaza Hotel at Mark Center

   International Foundation for Employee Benefit Plans

   Dates: Friday through June 18

   Attendance: 504

   Headquarters: Capital Hilton

   Association of Area Business Publications

   Dates: Friday through Sunday

   Attendance: 180

   Headquarters: Washington Marriott

   National Coalition of Hispanic Health & Human Services Org.

   Dates: Saturday through June 16

   Attendance: 100

   Headquarters: Hyatt Regency Washington on Capitol Hill

   Presidential Classroom

   Dates: Saturday through June 19

   Attendance: 300

   Headquarters: Georgetown University Conference Center

   Sanditz Travel Management

   Dates: Saturday through June 15

   Attendance: 400

   Headquarters: Omni Shoreham

   International Association of Electrical Inspectors

   Dates: Sunday through June 15

   Attendance: Not available

   Headquarters: Holiday Inn Select

   PlanNet

   Dates: Sunday through June 16

   Attendance: 100

   Headquarters: Sheraton City Centre Hotel

   American Academy of Achievement

   Dates: Sunday through June 20

   Attendance: 400

   Headquarters: Hotel Washington

   Society of Toxicologic Pathologists

   Dates: Sunday through June 17

   Attendance: 350

   Headquarters: JW Marriott

   Scheduled at the Washington Convention Center this week:

   American Physical Therapy Association

   Dates: Today through Wednesday

   Attendance: 4,000

   Procurement Conference

   Dates: Thursday

   Attendance: 500

LOAD-DATE: June 07, 1999


                             1514 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                          June 4, 1999, Friday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,2A National Digest

LENGTH: 963 words

SOURCE: FROM WIRE REPORTS

BODY:

   In Washington

    Police firing ranges closed over problem with stray bullets

    District of Columbia Police Chief Charles H. Ramsey closed two department
firing ranges yesterday, 10 days after bullets from one of those facilities
landed in a residential neighborhood.

    "For me it boiled down to a simple question: Would I feel comfortable with
my own 12-year-old son playing in the backyard of one of the houses that was
struck by the live fire from our range? It took me a nanosecond to know I would
not," Ramsey said.

    A dozen homes and three vehicles in Lorton, Va., were hit by submachine gun
bullets that came from the range at the Lorton Correctional Facility on May 24.
No one was hurt.

    World War II monument approved for Mall site

    Adisputed World War II monument to be built on the Mall between the Lincoln
Memorial and the Washington Monument won 9-2 approval yesterday from the
National Capital Planning Commission.

    The vote came after witnesses denounced the plan as ugly and an obstacle to
one of Washington's best-known views. The witness list showed 26 against the
plan and six supporters.

    The Rainbow Pool at the opposite end of the Reflecting Pool from the Lincoln
Memorial would be rebuilt, with a memorial plaza around it. Ceremonial steps 170
feet wide would lead into the plaza from 17th Street. Two memorial arches would
be placed at the north and south entrances.

    3,200 stairway gates recalled for defective locks

    North States Industries Inc. is recalling about 3,200 stairway gates because
the lock can fail when the gate is shaken and could result in children falling
down the stairs, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission.

    Ames, Ann & Hope, Hambleton & Carr and Value City department stores sold the
gates from March through April of this year for about $15. Consumers should stop
using these gates and return them to the store where purchased for a refund.
They can also call the company at 800-848-8421.

    Group seeks FDA ban of popular antibiotic

    The popular antibiotic Trovan is too dangerous to stay on the market, a
consumer advocacy group contended in a petition filed yesterday that accuses the
government of approving the drug despite evidence it could harm patients'
livers.

    Since February 1998, 140 cases of serious liver damage have been reported
among Trovan users. Five patients died.

    Americans can buy eight other antibiotics from the same drug class, called
quinolones, that are equally effective but less dangerous to the liver, said Dr.
Sidney Wolfe of the consumer advocacy group Public Citizen, which petitioned the
Food and Drug Administration to ban Trovan.

    In the Nation

    Gene therapy intended for hemophilia A victims

    PITTSBURGH -- Researchers at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center are
testing a hemophilia therapy that could stop disease sufferers from bleeding.

    The gene therapy is injected into the veins of the hand and travels through
the blood. The idea is for a friendly virus shell to carry the blood-clotting
protein called factor VIII into the patient's body, where it will take up
residence in cells.

    Hemophilia A is passed on genetically and affects only males. About one in
every 10,000 men has the disorder.

    Crewman killed in crash of helicopter on training run

    FORT BRAGG, N.C. -- One crew member died yesterday when an Air Force special
operations helicopter crashed during a nighttime training mission.

    The MH- 53J Pave-Low, used to ferry troops behind enemy lines, went down
about 10: 30 p.m. Wednesday in a clearing in woods on the western side of Fort
Bragg.

    Staff Sgt. Kurt Upton, of Niota, Ill., died of injuries from the crash about
5 a.m. yesterday at Womack Army Medical Center, said senior airman Jodi Jordan,
a spokeswoman at Hurlburt. His age was not available. Other crew members
sustained minor injuries.

    Man charged in killing of woman as others watched

    MIAMI -- A former boyfriend was accused yesterday of stabbing a woman who
staggered from door to door, pleading for help, before she died in a driveway in
Miami's Little Haiti neighborhood.

    Anthony Gary Ferguson was charged with second-degree murder in the death May
24 of Portia Lee, 30, a mother of six who left a trail of blood for 100 yards
before she collapsed.

    Police said a handful of people watched the attack, but did nothing, police
said. Someone eventually called 911. "Not only did people watch her get beaten
up, they likely watched her get stabbed," Lt. Bill Schwartz said.

    Stanford University seeking source of racist e-mail

    STANFORD, Calif. -- Stanford University has turned loose its electronic
bloodhounds to track the source of racist e-mail sent to 25,000 campus computer
users over the weekend.

    The one-paragraph message accused the university of giving preference in
housing to non-whites, said Rachel Lotan, a professor in the School of Education
who received the e-mail. The message was so racist "it took my breath away," she
said. "It must be someone very angry."

    A housing shortage for students has been a problem at Stanford for some
time. Last week, about 1, 300 students were not selected in the lottery held for
scarce campus housing.

    Murder victim aids police in identifying a suspect

    FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. -- A murder victim helped police find a suspect in the
crime when he bit off the thumb of an attacker in a scuffle before he was
killed.

    Fort Lauderdale police said Wednesday they had identified the suspect after
matching his fingerprints to the thumb, which was left at the scene. The owner
of the thumb had been arrested before, so his prints were on file.

    Police issued a warrant for the arrest of Douglas O'Neil Hannam on a
first-degree murder charge. Two other suspects have already been arrested.


LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1999


                             1515 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        June 4, 1999 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 034

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:


   Boston Scientific OK'd for charge

   Boston Scientific Corp., one of the biggest makers of angioplasty products,
said federal regulators accepted the $ 524 million charge it took in connection
with its purchase of Schneider Worldwide.

   The company said the Securities and Exchange Commission approved the
allocation stemming from the $ 2.1 billion Schneider deal, including a
third-quarter charge for in-process research and development. Boston Scientific
bought Schneider from drugmaker Pfizer Inc. in September.

   Boston Scientific shares jumped $ 3.31 to $ 39.38 yesterday, a day after the
company said it received a patent for a key gene therapy which is expected to
lead to treatment of congestive heart failure. The patented method is expected
to help patients regenerate blood vessels in the heart. - HERALD STAFF

   Gaming panel: Go slow

   SAN FRANCISCO - The federal gambling commission, wrapping up its two-year
effort yesterday, urged a slowdown in new casinos and lotteries nationwide, an
increase to 21 in the minimum betting age and more help for addicted gamblers.
The heavily lobbied panel, whose report goes to the White House, Congress, state
governments and Indian tribes, also recommended curbing political contributions
by the gambling industry and banning betting on college sports. - ASSOCIATED
PRESS

   IGA settles claims

   IGA Leasing Co., formerly known as Surprenant Cable Corp. in Clinton, agreed
to pay $ 120,000 to settle allegations that it sold substandard electrical cable
to the Defense Department. The Pentagon's Inspector General said the company
falsely claimed its products met cable "watertightness" specifications. The
cable was made in Massachusetts. The company is now based in Connecticut. -
HERALD WIRE SERVICES

   Fidelity to expand in R.I.

   Fidelity Investments plans to build a facility in Smithfield, R.I., to
increase its staff in the state to about 2,500. Boston-based Fidelity opened an
office in Smithfield in April 1998 and employs more than 1,100 there. -
BLOOMBERG NEWS

   More MetroJet service

   US Airways said it will increase its low-fare MetroJet service from Logan
Airport to Florida with two daily nonstop flights to Fort Lauderdale and
Orlando. It said it will add a third daily flight between Logan and Tampa. -
HERALD STAFF

   Thermo to pay $ 8.1M

   A jury has ordered Thermo Electron Corp. in Waltham to pay a Rhode Island
businessman $ 8.1 million for selling him a faulty wastewater treatment system.
According to the suit, Allens Manufacturing Co., of Providence, had so many
problems with the system that it ran into trouble with the Environmental
Protection Agency and eventually had to shut its doors last year. Richard
Squizzero's firm bought the system from Thermo's Napco Inc. subsidiary in 1985.

   Thermo said it plans to appeal the award, made last week in Rhode Island
Superior Court. "We believe there was no fraud," said spokeswoman Karen
Kirkwood. - HERALD STAFF

   Bell Atlantic ups stake

   NEW YORK - Bell Atlantic Corp. has raised its stake in Omnitel Pronto Italia
SpA, Europe's second-largest wireless carrier, to 23.1 percent from 19.7
percent.- BLOOMBERG NEWS

   Ski slopes to make cuts

   KILLINGTON, Vt. - American Skiing Co. will temporarily cut by 20 percent the
number of hours that about 600 employees work at its Killington, Sugarbush and
Mount Snow resorts, following one of the worst ski seasons in years. Other
American Skiing resorts , including Sugarloaf in Maine and Attitash in New
Hampshire, have taken similar steps in past years. - ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: June 04, 1999


                             1516 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                      June 4, 1999, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: A NEW ATTACK ON HEMOPHILIA;
MOUNT PLEASANT MAN IN TRIAL OF GENE THERAPY TO RESTORE CLOTTING FACTOR

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A 50-year-old Mount Pleasant man has become the first participant in a new
clinical trial of gene therapy for hemophilia, receiving injections of genes
that make the blood-clotting protein he lacks.

   Don Miller had an initial dose of the treatment on Tuesday, with follow-up
injections Wednesday and yesterday at the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center-Montefiore. So far, he hasn't had any side effects from the experimental
therapy.

   Miller, who has had bleeding problems since he was 18 months old, said his
response to the doctors' request for his participation was immediately
enthusiastic: "When can I sign up?"

   About 20 people with severe hemophilia will be recruited from across the
country for a year-long trial to make sure the procedure is safe. Miller and one
or two more participants will be from the Pittsburgh area. The therapy and trial
were designed by Chiron Corp., based in Emeryville, Calif. The other
participating centers have not yet been named.

   The experimental therapy is intended for those patients with hemophilia A, in
which the blood does not clot due to the lack of a protein called factor VIII.

   Patients with hemophilia A now must inject themselves with the clotting
protein if they begin bleeding. In Miller's case, this has meant two or three
injection treatments every month. Clotting would occur naturally in these
patients if gene therapy eventually fulfills its promise.

   Patient cells can't make the protein because of defects in the factor
VIII-producing gene, which resides on the X chromosome. The disorder affects
about one in 10,000 men, who each have only one X chromosome. Women have two X
chromosomes and thus seldom have the disease; if one X chromosome has a
defective gene and the other carries the normal gene, that woman is a carrier,
but does not have the disease.

   "Gene therapy provides a way to deliver [a normal] factor VIII gene to the
cells so the cells can begin to make factor VIII," explained Dr. Margaret Ragni,
the leader of the local study and the director of the Hemophilia Treatment
Center of Western Pennsylvania.

   In the procedure, the gene is attached to a virus, which has been modified so
it cannot cause disease. The modified viruses are injected into the bloodstream
to infect the body's cells, taking the beneficial genes with them. Inside the
cell, the gene makes the clotting factor.

   People who have severe hemophilia make less than 1 percent of normal levels
of factor VIII and are at high risk of spontaneous bleeding. Sixty percent of
all hemophiliacs have the severe form.

   "I'd have joint bleeds and kidney bleeds and ear bleeds," Miller said,
especially during times of high stress, such as writing final exams in college.
When he was a child, bleeding was treated with whole blood transfusions. He
recalled that in one five-week period, he received more than 150 pints of blood.

   Miller was told more than once that he probably wouldn't live three years
longer because of the likelihood of bleeding to death from a sudden,
uncontrollable hemorrhage. The hemophiliacs he knew as a child have died.

   The advent of factor VIII injections has improved the lives of hemophiliacs,
but about 15 percent eventually develop antibodies against the foreign proteins
and can only use the injections with great care.

   To greatly improve the quality of life for people with severe hemophilia,
gene therapy need only increase a patient's production of factor VIII to about 2
percent of normal levels, Ragni said. Even that small change could markedly
reduce the chance of spontaneous bleeding.

   Preliminary studies in rabbits and dogs have shown that the human gene can
make protein for longer than a year from a single course of treatment, according
to Dr. Deborah Hurst, a spokesman for Chiron Corp. There were no adverse
effects.

   Other companies are also testing gene therapy techniques for the treatment of
hemophilia.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, PHOTO: Andy Starnes/Post-Gazette: Nurse
Valerie Bond applies ice to; the arm of Don Miller of Mount Pleasant, who is
participating in a new trial; of a gene therapy to treat hemophilia.;
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: UPMC Health System; Steve Thomas/Post-Gazette: Factor;
VIII gene therapy for Hemophilia A

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1999


                             1517 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 3, 1999, Thursday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: Boston Scientific gets OK to enter gene therapy

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Boston Scientific Corp. yesterday said it received a patent that will enable
it to enter the promising gene therapy field.

    The patent covers a process for injecting genes into the heart that could
stimulate the formation of blood vessels. It would be used to treat patients
with serious heart problems and could potentially create the next generation of
treatments for cardiovascular disease.

    "We hope to be in clinical trials with a novel minimally invasive myocardial
gene delivery device by the end of this year," predicted Dr. Arthur Rosenthal,
senior vice president and chief development officer of Natick-based Boston
Scientific, which makes catheters, stents, and devices for less invasive medical
procedures.

    The patent stems from research conducted by CardioGene Therapeutics Inc. of
Princeton, N.J., a cardiovascular gene therapy firm Boston Scientific acquired
last July. Included in the transaction was research on injecting genes directly
into the heart muscle, or myocardium, by Dr. Jeffrey Leiden, director of the
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Biology at Harvard University.

    Boston Scientific and CardioGene are among several groups scrambling to
develop gene therapies for the estimated 14 million Americans with heart and
vascular diseases. All have the same goal: Introduce normally occurring genes
that create the proteins to stimulate blood vessel growth, so that a weakened
heart will be spared further damage from blocked arteries and other conditions.

    Some medical specialists refer to this life-saving approach as "biological
bypass," since the injected genes will stimulate the production of blood vessels
to get around blocked or completely closed arteries.

    St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston is working with Human Genome
Sciences of Rockville, Md., and Cato Holding, a Research Triangle, N.C., company
to develop a gene treatment for vascular disease, while Warner-Lambert Co. has a
deal with GenVec Inc. of Rockville to develop cardiovascular gene therapy.

    Boston Scientific shares closed at 36 1/16, up 1/4.

LOAD-DATE: June 03, 1999


                             1518 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        June 3, 1999 Thursday, EAST N.O.

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. C5

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: ASIAN TULANE GRADUATES ARE PURSUING CAREERS

BYLINE: TINA SOONG

BODY:

   Two recent Asian graduates of Tulane University, Daniel Ree of Taiwan and
Anthony Cheung of Malaysia, have excelled in their studies and particularly in
research on diabetes.

   Ree received a combined doctor of medicine and master of public health degree
from the Tulane School of Medicine and the School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine. Cheung earned a doctoral degree in physiology.

   During the past two years, Ree and Cheung, along with other researchers, have
published several papers on their research in medical journals.

   In 1998, Ree presented an oral abstract of one paper at the American Diabetes
Association's 58th annual meeting in Chicago. Cheung was the lead author of two
abstracts published in the journal Diabetes in 1997 and 1998.

   Before he came to Tulane, Ree studied at the University of California at
Davis and Cornell University. Among other awards, he received a National
Institutes of Health medical student research fellowship from the University of
Tennessee in 1997-1998. He will begin a residency in neurology at the University
of California at Los Angeles in July.

   "I chose to study medicine because I wish to pursue a career that would serve
God and people at the same time. It is a profession that involves a lifetime of
learning to care and communicate with patients," Ree said.

   "As people continue to live longer, we will face an increase in neurological
disorders. I look forward to training that will prepare me for a career of
delivering quality care to people with neurological illnesses," he said.

   Cheung graduated from the University of British Columbia in Vancouver before
coming to Tulane. Among other honors, he won travel awards from Harvard Medical
School in 1998 and the Endocrine Society in 1997 and an American Heart
Association student fellowship in 1997. He also won a Tulane Chancellor's
Scholarship in 1995-96.

   He is planning to establish a biotechnology company in Los Angeles to develop
methods of gene therapy related to diabetes.

   The 12th International Business Exchange conference will be held Oct. 10-13
at Zhengzhou City in China's Henan Province.

   The event is designed to let representatives of small to medium-sized
companies meet one-on-one with representatives of 17 member cities and regions
of the SESAME Network, a collection of cities around the world that try to help
small and medium-sized businesses find products, services and joint ventures in
other parts of the world. Lafayette is a member of the network.

   In 1998, 21 Louisiana delegates met with representatives of 153 companies
from 15 countries at an International Business Exchange conference in England.

   The Zhengzhou meeting also will let business leaders experience firsthand
China's vast market potential for their products or services.

   For information, contact Le Centre International de Lafayette, a SESAME
member, at (318) 291-5474, or fax (318) 291-5480.

   Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to mail news items to Tina Soong at the Department of Human Performance
and Health Promotion, University of New Orleans, Lakefront, New Orleans, LA
70148.


COLUMN: TO THE RIM

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1999


                             1519 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         June 3, 1999 Thursday, MARRERO

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 12F3

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: ASIAN TULANE GRADUATES ARE PURSUING CAREERS

BYLINE: By Tina Soong

BODY:

   Two recent Asian graduates of Tulane University, Daniel Ree of Taiwan and
Anthony Cheung of Malaysia, have excelled in their studies and particularly in
research on diabetes.

   Ree received a combined doctor of medicine and master of public health degree
from the Tulane School of Medicine and the School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine. Cheung earned a doctoral degree in physiology.

   During the past two years, Ree and Cheung, along with other researchers, have
published several papers on their research in medical journals.

   In 1998, Ree presented an oral abstract of one paper at the American Diabetes
Association's 58th annual meeting in Chicago. Cheung was the lead author of two
abstracts published in the journal Diabetes in 1997 and 1998.

   Before he came to Tulane, Ree studied at the University of California at
Davis and Cornell University. Among other awards, he received a National
Institutes of Health medical student research fellowship from the University of
Tennessee in 1997-1998. He will begin a residency in neurology at the University
of California at Los Angeles in July.

   "I chose to study medicine because I wish to pursue a career that would serve
God and people at the same time. It is a profession that involves a lifetime of
learning to care and communicate with patients," Ree said.

   "As people continue to live longer, we will face an increase in neurological
disorders. I look forward to training that will prepare me for a career of
delivering quality care to people with neurological illnesses," he said.

   Cheung graduated from the University of British Columbia in Vancouver before
coming to Tulane. Among other honors, he won travel awards from Harvard Medical
School in 1998 and the Endocrine Society in 1997 and an American Heart
Association student fellowship in 1997. He also won a Tulane Chancellor's
Scholarship in 1995-96.

   He is planning to establish a biotechnology company in Los Angeles to develop
methods of gene therapy related to diabetes.

   The 12th International Business Exchange conference will be held Oct. 10-13
at Zhengzhou City in China's Henan Province.

   The event is designed to let representatives of small to medium-sized
companies meet one-on-one with representatives of 17 member cities and regions
of the SESAME Network, a collection of cities around the world that try to help
small and medium-sized businesses find products, services and joint ventures in
other parts of the world. Lafayette is a member of the network.

   In 1998, 21 Louisiana delegates met with representatives of 153 companies
from 15 countries at an International Business Exchange conference in England.

   The Zhengzhou meeting also will let business leaders experience firsthand
China's vast market potential for their products or services.

   For information, contact Le Centre International de Lafayette, a SESAME
member, at (318) 291-5474, or fax (318) 291-5480.

COLUMN: TO THE RIM

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1999


                             1520 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         June 3, 1999 Thursday, KENNER

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 8D1

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: ASIAN TULANE GRADUATES ARE PURSUING CAREERS

BYLINE: TINA SOONG

BODY:

   Two recent Asian graduates of Tulane University, Daniel Ree of Taiwan and
Anthony Cheung of Malaysia, have excelled in their studies and particularly in
research on diabetes.

   Ree received a combined doctor of medicine and master of public health degree
from the Tulane School of Medicine and the School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine. Cheung earned a doctoral degree in physiology.

   During the past two years, Ree and Cheung, along with other researchers, have
published several papers on their research in medical journals.

   In 1998, Ree presented an oral abstract of one paper at the American Diabetes
Association's 58th annual meeting in Chicago. Cheung was the lead author of two
abstracts published in the journal Diabetes in 1997 and 1998.

   Before he came to Tulane, Ree studied at the University of California at
Davis and Cornell University. Among other awards, he received a National
Institutes of Health medical student research fellowship from the University of
Tennessee in 1997-1998. He will begin a residency in neurology at the University
of California at Los Angeles in July.

   "I chose to study medicine because I wish to pursue a career that would serve
God and people at the same time. It is a profession that involves a lifetime of
learning to care and communicate with patients," Ree said.

   "As people continue to live longer, we will face an increase in neurological
disorders. I look forward to training that will prepare me for a career of
delivering quality care to people with neurological illnesses," he said.

   Cheung graduated from the University of British Columbia in Vancouver before
coming to Tulane. Among other honors, he won travel awards from Harvard Medical
School in 1998 and the Endocrine Society in 1997 and an American Heart
Association student fellowship in 1997. He also won a Tulane Chancellor's
Scholarship in 1995-96.

   He is planning to establish a biotechnology company in Los Angeles to develop
methods of gene therapy related to diabetes.

   The 12th International Business Exchange conference will be held Oct. 10-13
at Zhengzhou City in China's Henan Province.

   The event is designed to let representatives of small to medium-sized
companies meet one-on-one with representatives of 17 member cities and regions
of the SESAME Network, a collection of cities around the world that try to help
small and medium-sized businesses find products, services and joint ventures in
other parts of the world. Lafayette is a member of the network.

   In 1998, 21 Louisiana delegates met with representatives of 153 companies
from 15 countries at an International Business Exchange conference in England.

   The Zhengzhou meeting also will let business leaders experience firsthand
China's vast market potential for their products or services.

   For information, contact Le Centre International de Lafayette, a SESAME
member, at (318) 291-5474, or fax (318) 291-5480.


COLUMN: TO THE RIM

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1999


                             1521 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 2, 1999, Wednesday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 173 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme wins grant for cystic fibrosis work;
BUSINESS REGION BRIEFS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp., which has completed nine gene therapy clinical trials in its
quest to find a treatment for cystic fibrosis, said it has received a $1.05
million grant from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundaion to research and identify
potential drugs to treat the disease that affects about 30,000 children and
young adults. The Cambridge company said any therapeutic drug derived from
Genzyme's research will include a repayment of the grant plus limited royalties
on product sales. Genzyme has focused on correcting the basic defect in cystic
fibrosis cells through gene therapy and protein replacement therapy. The
debilitating disease makes breathing difficult as the lungs produce abnormally
thick mucus that clogs the airways and often leads to fatal lung infections. "We
hope that this project will increase the number of potential new drugs in the
development pipeline to benefit these [ cystic fibrosis] patients," said Robert
J. Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Genzyme's shares rose 1
7/16 to 42.

LOAD-DATE: June 02, 1999


                             1522 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                May 31, 1999, MONDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 531 words

HEADLINE: Medicine moves to quick beat;
Huge leaps seen for transplants, surgery

BYLINE: BY JIM RITTER

BODY:


   In the 1960s, surgeons transplanted kidneys from chimpanzees into six human
patients.

   These "xenotransplants" didn't work because patients rejected the organs.

   But with the shortage of human organs getting worse every year, research on
xenotransplantation continues. Scientists are genetically engineering pigs to
make their hearts, kidneys and other organs compatible with humans.

   Xenotransplantation is among eight medical technologies that will come of age
by 2010, says a report from the Institute for the Future. The report was
released in Chicago last week during a conference on the future of medicine
sponsored by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

   The report projects how the rapidly changing field of medicine will look in
10 years. It predicts, for example, that HMOs will continue to grow and hospital
occupancy rates will continue to fall.

   The report's most intriguing predictions involve medical technology. Here are
seven other technologies the institute predicts will make headlines.

   Artificial blood. By 2010, artificial blood will be a "nearly ideal"
substitute for real blood in transfusions and surgeries. It will have a shelf
life of one year, and be usable on patients with any blood type and free of
hepatitis, HIV and other viruses.

   Barriers include high cost, reluctance by patients to accept fake blood and
"resistance from an entrenched blood-banking industry," the report said.

   Designer drugs. In the old days, drug companies would test thousands of
naturally occurring chemicals before finding one new drug that worked. Now, they
are using computers to design drugs from scratch. This "rational drug design"
will produce promising new drugs for mental illness and viral diseases such as
AIDS, encephalitis and the flu.

   Vaccines. New vaccines are being developed to prevent such diseases as
childhood diarrhea. Vaccines also will be used to fight cancer. Vaccines
stimulate cells and antibodies that kill cancer cells. By 2010, vaccines "will
compete with rational drug design for airtime," the report said.

   Looking inside the body. Imaging technologies such as ultrasounds, CT scans
and MRIs are improving. Doctors "will use these technologies to look at the form
and function of organs that were once examined only by surgery."

   Surgery. The trend toward "minimally invasive" surgery will accelerate.
Rather than cutting open a patient, the surgeon manipulates surgical equipment
inserted through tiny incisions. The patient recovers more quickly, with less
pain. More surgeries in the brain, heart, abdomen and other areas will be
minimally invasive.

   Genetic testing. Scientists have developed tests to identify genes associated
with nearly 500 diseases, from rare disorders such as Huntington's disease to
common diseases such as breast cancer. As scientists finish mapping the human
DNA molecule, even more genetic tests will become available.

   Gene therapy. About 2,000 people worldwide are undergoing experimental gene
therapy, in which healthy genes are inserted into cells to replace defective
genes or give cells weapons to fight disease. Gene therapy could cure genetic
diseases such as cystic fibrosis and some cancers.

LOAD-DATE: June 03, 1999


                             1523 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                 May 31, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        May 31, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 2F

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: SEVERAL OPTIONS ARE AVAILABLE IN COLON CANCER TESTS

BYLINE: By DIANA KEOUGH

BODY:

   Which is the best colon cancer screening test?

   "That all depends on the patient's age, the family's medical history and
their own medical history," said Dr. James K.V. Willson, director of the Ireland
Cancer Center at University Hospitals of Cleveland. "Every test now being
offered for colon cancer screening is better than doing nothing, though."

   Following are colon cancer screening methods:

   A rectal exam, done by a physician at a patient's yearly physical, involves
the doctor inserting a gloved, lubricated finger into a patient's rectum to feel
for lumps. Cost: Usually included in the fee for the physical exam.

   A fecal occult blood exam, done at home, involves taking personal stool
samples over a three-day period. The samples are mailed back to the doctor's
office to be tested for any trace of blood. If any blood is found, a patient
undergoes either a sigmoidoscopy or a colonoscopy. The fecal blood exam should
be done yearly by everyone after the age of 50.

   The sigmoidoscopy involves passing a flexible, lighted tube into the rectum
and through the lower third of the colon, where more than 65 percent of polyps
usually occur. The test, usually done in the physician's office without
anesthesia, takes about 15 minutes and is said to be only slightly
uncomfortable. It is recommended every five years for patients considered
low-risk. Preparation includes two enemas to empty the rectum. Cost: $150 to
$200.

   The colonoscopy, recommended every 10 years, also uses a flexible, lighted
tube with a camera on its tip to examine the entire colon, not just the lower
third. Usually done in a hospital setting, the procedure requires mild
anesthesia, and takes anywhere from 15 minutes to an hour. If any polyps or
unusual growths are found, they are removed by using an instrument passed
through the scope.

   The tissue is analyzed to determine if the growths are cancerous. If the
polyps are too large to remove through the scope, the growth will need to be
surgically removed. If polyps are found, or if a patient is considered
high-risk, the colonoscopy should be done every three to five years. Cost: $235
to $450.

   A barium enema with air contrast uses barium sulfate and air to fill the
colon, allowing clear and crisp X-rays to be taken of the colon walls, revealing
tumors, polyps and areas of narrowing. The test takes about 20 minutes and can
be slightly uncomfortable. The test can be done every five to 10 years for
general screening purposes. Cost: Around $200.

   Many doctors suggest a barium enema be done every five years in conjunction
with flexible sigmoidoscopy for those with symptoms or signs of colon cancer.

   In the future, "virtual colonoscopy," a two-minute computed tomographic, or
CT scan, which will create multidimensional views of the colon. Researchers are
hoping that this virtual test might allow screening to be done without all of
the usual patient preparation. The Mayo Clinic is now involved in a three-year
study comparing the CT scan with other conventional colon cancer screening
tests.

   Surgery is the usual treatment when a large tumor is found, requiring only
removal of the portion of the colon containing the tumor. When the cancer is
more advanced, treatment involves removal of diseased sections of the colon and
surrounding lymph nodes.

   "The biggest fear many of my patients express prior to bowel surgery is
whether or not they're going to need 'a bag,' said Willson. The "bag" that holds
body waste is also known as a colostomy, which Willson said is required only
when the cancer is found in the rectum or lower third of the colon and when the
sphincter muscles can't be preserved, he said.

   For cancers in the more advanced stages, surgery, chemotherapy and radiation
are often used together and have shown to be effective in helping increase the
length of disease-free time.

   Gene therapy may someday be possible to prevent heredity cancer, said Dr.
Sanford Markowitz, University Hospitals hematologist/oncologist. He heads a
research team that has discovered the mutated gene that allows for unchecked
cell growth in the development of hereditary colon cancer.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1999


                             1524 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        May 30, 1999 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 063

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: New hope for Fragile children; Research on gene disorder brings gains

BYLINE: By KARYN MILLER-MEDZON

BODY:

   When Patrick Vershbow was 6 months old, his parents, Pamela and Jimmy,
wondered why their baby boy couldn't sit up. Four months later, the Watertown
couple was advised to consult a neurologist.

   "After a three-hour appointment, he was basically diagnosed," Pamela Vershbow
said.

   Blood tests quickly confirmed what the neurologist suspected: Patrick
suffered from Fragile X syndrome, a genetic disorder. Its effects include mental
retardation, hyperactivity, hypersensitity to sensory stimulation, delayed
speech, autism, loose joints, anxiety and emotional delays.

   Although the disorder is the single most common form of inherited mental
retardation (affecting about one in 2,000 children), Vershbow says that five
years ago, when she first learned about Patrick's condition, information was
scarce.

   "I went to the library and came home with one paragraph," she said.  "That's
it.  Today, you could find whole books."

   The emergence of Fragile X from its cloak of obscurity is critical for a
number of reasons, agree doctors and researchers. For one, early diagnosis of
the condition can have a significant impact on the child's prognosis. Then
there's the bottom line: Because scarce research dollars go to the most
prominent causes, keeping a high profile means more money at a time when
researchers are making significant strides in treating and finding a cure for
the condition.

   "It's much less known in the general public than disorders that occur with
much less frequency," said Dr. N. Paul Rosman, Patrick's physician and  chief of
pediatric neurology at the Floating Hospital for Children. "We're talking about
something subtle in its presentation.  It's not epilepsy or a marked congenital
malformation. But it is very, very important."

   Essentially, Fragile X is a defect in a specific gene. In affected
individuals, part of the gene expands or repeats  during normal cell division.
When this happens the gene shuts down, becoming unable to produce a protein
essential for normal development, said Dr. Wiliam Greenough, professor of
psychology, psychiatry, and cell and structural biology at the Beckman Institute
at the University of Illinois.

   For unknown reasons, the severity of the disease  - and the  list of symptoms
- varies greatly from child to child. Although affected boys usually suffer some
degree of mental retardation, girls occasionally escape the cognitive aspect.
Mildly affected  Fragile X patients may display emotional instability, shyness
and social dysfunction, said Dr. Randi Hagerman, a professor of pediatrics at
Children's Hospital in Denver.

   Because many  therapies are now available to even the youngest Fragile X
patients, early diagnosis is critical, Hagerman said. Treatments include  speech
and language intervention, sensory integration occupational therapy (to help
kids become accustomed to sensory stimuli) and physical therapy.

   Medication can also be used to lessen anxiety, reduce hyper-arousal, lessen
aggressiveness and stabilize mood. Among the medications prescribed are folic
acid, Prozac, dextroamphetamines and Zoloft.

   Using these medications allows kids to filter out background stimuli, focus
their attention and relax, freeing them up to process information more
effectively.

   "That way," Hagerman said, "they can really learn."

   Although current treatments do wonders for Fragile X patients, Hagerman and
others are hopeful that the next century will yield a more permanent solution.

   "I think it's going to be very curable in the next decades," Greenough said.
"Or at least more treatable."

   Reversing the effect of Fragile X, he said, may involve replacing the gene (a
treatment called gene therapy), or turning it back on (so it can produce its
protein), or substituting the missing protein with something that will perform
the same function.

   Fund-raiser nets research money

   Patrick's Pals, an organization dedicated to raising money for Fragile X
syndrome, is holding a basketball tournament fund-raiser June 6 from 9 a.m. to 4
p.m.

   Participants in the 3-on-3 tournament pay $ 120 a team, (or $ 40 a player for
those without a team) for an opportunity to dribble it out on the school courts
of Buckingham Browne & Nichols in Cambridge.

   Last year's tournament raised $ 20,000, which was donated to Fraxa, a
nonprofit research organization founded by parents of children affected by the
syndrome.

   Patrick's Pals is the brainchild of Pamela and Jimmy Vershbow, whose
6-year-old son, Patrick, suffers from the syndrome, and a group of their
friends.

   Those who don't want to play are still welcome to donate.

   For information about Patrick's Pals or a tournament application call (781)
648-6900. Visit the Fraxa Web site at www.fraxa.org. - KARYN MILLER-MEDZON

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1999


                             1525 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        May 30, 1999 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 063

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: New hope for Fragile children; Research on gene disorder brings gains

BYLINE: By KARYN MILLER-MEDZON

BODY:

   When Patrick Vershbow was 6 months old, his parents, Pamela and Jimmy,
wondered why their baby boy couldn't sit up. Four months later, the Watertown
couple was advised to consult a neurologist.

   "After a three-hour appointment, he was basically diagnosed," Pamela Vershbow
said.

   Blood tests quickly confirmed what the neurologist suspected: Patrick
suffered from Fragile X syndrome, a genetic disorder. Its effects include mental
retardation, hyperactivity, hypersensitity to sensory stimulation, delayed
speech, autism, loose joints, anxiety and emotional delays.

   Although the disorder is the single most common form of inherited mental
retardation (affecting about one in 2,000 children), Vershbow says that five
years ago, when she first learned about Patrick's condition, information was
scarce.

   "I went to the library and came home with one paragraph," she said.  "That's
it.  Today, you could find whole books."

   The emergence of Fragile X from its cloak of obscurity is critical for a
number of reasons, agree doctors and researchers. For one, early diagnosis of
the condition can have a significant impact on the child's prognosis. Then
there's the bottom line: Because scarce research dollars go to the most
prominent causes, keeping a high profile means more money at a time when
researchers are making significant strides in treating and finding a cure for
the condition.

   "It's much less known in the general public than disorders that occur with
much less frequency," said Dr. N. Paul Rosman, Patrick's physician and  chief of
pediatric neurology at the Floating Hospital for Children. "We're talking about
something subtle in its presentation.  It's not epilepsy or a marked congenital
malformation. But it is very, very important."

   Essentially, Fragile X is a defect in a specific gene. In affected
individuals, part of the gene expands or repeats  during normal cell division.
When this happens the gene shuts down, becoming unable to produce a protein
essential for normal development, said Dr. Wiliam Greenough, professor of
psychology, psychiatry, and cell and structural biology at the Beckman Institute
at the University of Illinois.

   For unknown reasons, the severity of the disease  - and the  list of symptoms
- varies greatly from child to child. Although affected boys usually suffer some
degree of mental retardation, girls occasionally escape the cognitive aspect.
Mildly affected  Fragile X patients may display emotional instability, shyness
and social dysfunction, said Dr. Randi Hagerman, a professor of pediatrics at
Children's Hospital in Denver.

   Because many  therapies are now available to even the youngest Fragile X
patients, early diagnosis is critical, Hagerman said. Treatments include  speech
and language intervention, sensory integration occupational therapy (to help
kids become accustomed to sensory stimuli) and physical therapy.

   Medication can also be used to lessen anxiety, reduce hyper-arousal, lessen
aggressiveness and stabilize mood. Among the medications prescribed are folic
acid, Prozac, dextroamphetamines and Zoloft.

   Using these medications allows kids to filter out background stimuli, focus
their attention and relax, freeing them up to process information more
effectively.

   "That way," Hagerman said, "they can really learn."

   Although current treatments do wonders for Fragile X patients, Hagerman and
others are hopeful that the next century will yield a more permanent solution.

   "I think it's going to be very curable in the next decades," Greenough said.
"Or at least more treatable."

   Reversing the effect of Fragile X, he said, may involve replacing the gene (a
treatment called gene therapy), or turning it back on (so it can produce its
protein), or substituting the missing protein with something that will perform
the same function.

   Fund-raiser nets research money

   Patrick's Pals, an organization dedicated to raising money for Fragile X
syndrome, is holding a basketball tournament fund-raiser June 6 from 9 a.m. to 4
p.m.

   Participants in the 3-on-3 tournament pay $ 120 a team, (or $ 40 a player for
those without a team) for an opportunity to dribble it out on the school courts
of Buckingham Browne & Nichols in Cambridge.

   Last year's tournament raised $ 20,000, which was donated to Fraxa, a
nonprofit research organization founded by parents of children affected by the
syndrome.

   Patrick's Pals is the brainchild of Pamela and Jimmy Vershbow, whose
6-year-old son, Patrick, suffers from the syndrome, and a group of their
friends.

   Those who don't want to play are still welcome to donate.

   For information about Patrick's Pals or a tournament application call (781)
648-6900. Visit the Fraxa Web site at www.fraxa.org. - KARYN MILLER-MEDZON

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1999


                             1526 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)



                      May 30, 1999, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 7

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: Doctor: Take diet, lifestyles to heart;

BYLINE: Susan H. Thompson;

BODY:


   A decade ago, physician Dean Ornish showed that a diet very low in fat,
combined with stress  relief and emotional support, could reverse heart disease
without the need for bypass surgery.

   His best- seller, "Dr. Dean Ornish's Program for Reversing Heart Disease,"
appeared in 1990. His  latest book, "Love & Survival: 8 Pathways to Intimacy and
Health," is now available in paperback.

   Ornish made a recent stop in Tampa to publicize Advantage/10, a line of
low-fat dinners, veggie  burgers and nutrition bars he helped develop.

   Over a quick breakfast, Ornish offered these thoughts:

   Q. What is the No. 1 thing people can do to improve their health?

   A. The first step is to become more aware of what a powerful role they play
in their own health.  People have a hard time believing that the simple choices
they make in their everyday lives can  make a more powerful difference in their
health and their well-being and even their survival than  anything that I or any
other doctor can do for them.

   Q. Why is the emotional aspect of a person's life important in heart disease?

   A. Study after study has shown that people who feel lonely and depressed and
isolated are three  to five times more likely to get sick and die prematurely
than if they have a sense of love and  connection and community. I don't know of
anything in medicine that has that powerful of an  across-the-board impact.

   Q. So what's more important: things like diet, or emotion and spirit?

   A. It's all important and they all interact. People are more likely to smoke
or overeat or drink  too much or work too hard or abuse drugs or behaviors like
that when they're lonely, depressed or  isolated.

   One woman said to us, "I've got 20 friends in this pack of cigarettes and
they're always there  for me and nobody else is. You're going to take away my 20
friends; what are you going to give me?"

   Q. What do you consider to be a safe cholesterol level?

   A. A third of heart attacks occur between cholesterol levels of 150 and 200.
To me, a normal  cholesterol level or goal should be the level below which heart
disease is very rare, and that  would be 150.

   Q. Many programs tell people with high cholesterol levels or heart disease to
eat a 30 percent  fat diet. You recommend a diet with 10 percent fat. Why the
difference?

   A. Virtually every study has shown that the majority of people who only make
moderate changes in  diet, who go on a 30 percent fat diet, that the majority of
them get worse. And we even know why  that is.

   The Nobel Prize in medicine in 1975 went to two doctors who discovered the
receptor that binds  and removes cholesterol from your blood. Some people are
genetically lucky, they have lots of  receptors, they can eat almost anything.

   On the other end of the bell curve are people who have heart disease or high
cholesterol levels  and, in general, they have fewer receptors so they're less
efficient at getting rid of fat and  cholesterol.

   If your cholesterol level is too high, you're told to eat a 30 percent fat
diet. And you do that  for a month or so. But virtually all of the studies show
your LDL cholesterol (the "bad" cholesterol)  probably comes down by maybe 5
percent so you don't get much response.

   Then you're told, "You failed diet, so now we're going to put you on
(cholesterol-lowering) drugs  for the rest of your life." And most people don't
even know that they didn't fail diet - they failed  the 30 percent fat diet.

   It's a very simple idea but it's true: If you eat more fat and cholesterol
than your body can  get rid of, it's got to go somewhere. So if it ends up in
your arteries or your heart, it can end  up in a heart attack.

   Q. New therapies in the future, such as genetic therapy, may dramatically
alter the way heart  disease is treated and even find a cure. Do you think there
will ever be a time when diet and  prevention won't be as important as now?

   A. It will be wonderful if genetic therapy cures heart disease but we
certainly are a long way  from that now. In the meantime, we've found that most
people, knowing what we know now, can avoid  bypass surgery or angioplasty or a
lifetime of medication if they're willing to make the bigger  changes in diet
and lifestyle that my colleagues and I recommend.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C),
 (C) Physician Dean Ornish's latest book is available now in paperback.

NOTES: TO-YOUR-HEALTH

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1999


                             1527 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         May 26, 1999, Wednesday ,FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS ,2C Business Digest

LENGTH: 1263 words

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Choice Hotels in e-commerce deal for product supplies

    Choice Hotels International Inc., the second-largest hotel franchise company
in the world, announced two e-commerce partnerships yesterday with product
supply giants Maintenance Warehouse, a division of Home Depot, and American
Hotel Register Co.

    The partnerships will give Choice's franchisees access to contracted pricing
for thousands of nationally known products from Home Depot's Maintenance
Warehouse and American Hotel Register.

    The products will be available on Choicebuys.com, the Silver Spring
company's Internet-based ordering system for franchisees that links them
directly to Choice's endorsed vendors.

    GenVec Inc. hires Church as chief financial officer

    GenVec Inc., which is developing a gene therapy to treat cardiovascular
diseases, said yesterday that it has hired Jeffrey W. Church as the Rockville
company's chief financial officer.

    Church was chief financial officer and senior vice president of Meridian
Medical Technologies Inc., a medical device firm in Columbia.

    GenVec said Church's work history includes a stint as president and chief
financial officer of Biospherics Inc. in Beltsville, which provides call center
services to state and federal agencies. He also has been an audit manager for
Price Waterhouse LLP, now PriceWaterhouseCoopers.

    Chief executive, board resign at Telecom Italia SpA

    The chief executive and board of Telecom Italia SpA resigned yesterday in
the aftermath of their defeat by rival Olivetti in the recent battle for control
of the telecommunications giant.

    The resignations of Franco Bernabe and the directors had been widely
expected, and Bernabe became the first top executive casualty since the three-
month brawl for control of Telecom Italia ended Friday, when Olivetti won 51. 9
percent of the company's shares in a tender offer.

    Bernabe had fought Olivetti with a range of defensive tactics that included
a widely criticized proposal of acquisition by Deutsche Telekom, Germany's
dominant carrier. He said he and the other directors would stay as caretakers
until replacements are chosen at a shareholders' meeting June 28.

    Allmerica gets OK to settle deceptive sales case

    Allmerica Financial Corp. received final court approval yesterday for a
settlement with policyholders who had sued over deceptive sales practices.

    The deal requires the Worcester, Mass., insurer to spend up to $31 million
compensating the owners of 400,000 policies issued over a 10-year period.

    The approval, by a U.S. District Court judge in Worcester, formalizes a
preliminary agreement reached in December between Allmerica and four
policyholders who had filed a class action suit asserting that nearly every life
policy that Allmerica peddled from 1978 to mid-1998 was sold deceptively. The
group said Allmerica agents encouraged policyholders to trade up to newer, more
expensive policies and wrongly promised that premiums would diminish over time.

    Computer Associates wins approval to purchase rival

    Computer Associates International Inc. won antitrust approval yesterday for
its $3.5 billion purchase of rival corporate software maker Platinum Technology
International Inc.

    Computer Associates agreed to sell six Platinum Technology mainframe systems
management software products. The Justice Department said the divestitures were
necessary to preserve competition in the market for business software.

    The accord clears the way for completion of the combination this week.
Computer Associates, the No. 4 U.S. software maker, extended its $29.25 tender
offer for shares of Platinum Technology until midnight tomorrow.

    DaimlerChrysler plans to expand truck plant

    DaimlerChrysler AG says it will spend $435 million to upgrade and expand the
Fenton, Mo., truck plant where it builds Dodge Ram Quad Cab pickups.

    DaimlerChrysler will add a $317 million body shop and $118 million paint
booth at the plant in the St. Louis suburb. The changes, which include expanding
the body shop by 311,000 square feet, won't require adding to the plant's work
force of 3,022.

    The company built 160,000 Dodge Rams at the plant last year. This year,
trucks are expected to overtake cars in total sales.

    U.S. joins woman in suit against Columbia/HCA

    The U.S. Justice Department has joined a whistle- blower's lawsuit against
Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. that accuses the nation's largest hospital chain
of paying doctors to refer patients to its facilities.

    The suit by Sara Ortega, a former employee of Nashville, Tenn.- based
Columbia/HCA, is the fourth that the department has joined in its Medicare fraud
investigation of the company.

    Judge rules Microsoft tools infringe on Sun copyrights

    Several Microsoft Corp. products, including Windows 98, infringed on Sun
Microsystems Inc.'s copyrights for its Java programming language, a federal
judge in San Jose, Calif., said yesterday in a tentative ruling.

    But the ruling said Microsoft can develop and distribute "independently
developed" tools that do not comply with a contract with Sun, so long as they do
not infringe any Sun copyright, patent or other intellectual property right. The
three-part ruling will become final -- and possibly will be changed -- after
oral arguments scheduled in June.

    Georgia- Pacific to buy Unisource Worldwide

    Georgia-Pacific Corp., the No. 2 U.S. maker of lumber and paper, has agreed
to buy Unisource Worldwide Inc. for $1.24 billion in cash and assumed debt,
acquiring a paper distributor two months after pledging to invest less in that
business.

    Georgia-Pacific shares fell as much as 8.7 percent, the biggest decline
since October 1987, as analysts and investors questioned the move to expand
distribution, a business that lost money at times in the past decade.

    Unisource is the largest U.S. distributor of office paper and the biggest
customer of Georgia- Pacific, which outbid No. 1 U.S. propane seller UGI Corp.

    Federated is buying stake in online wedding planner

    Federated Department Stores Inc., the No. 3 U.S. department store company,
is buying a 20 percent stake in online wedding planner WeddingChannel.com for an
undisclosed amount to attract bridal-registry customers.

    Cincinnati-based Federated, which owns Macy's, Bloomingdale's and Rich's,
will sell bridal-registry gifts online to wedding guests unable to come in
person to Federated stores to buy presents.

    SEC issues new booklet on international investing

    With more Americans investing in foreign companies than ever before, the
Securities and Exchange Commission has issued a new publication with basic
information about international investing.

    The booklet, "International Investing Get The Facts," explains the
differences between investing in U.S. and foreign companies. It also explains
the added costs of overseas investing and lists additional sources of
information.

    Paper copies are available by calling the agency at 1-800-SEC-0330. An
online version of the booklet is available on the SEC's Web site at www.sec.gov.

    Allied Domecq to sell pubs, restaurants to Whitbread

    British-based liquor conglomerate Allied Domecq PLC said yesterday that it
agreed to sell its U.K. pubs and restaurants to brewing and leisure company
Whitbread PLC in a 2.36 billion pound ($3.78 billion) deal.

    Allied would be left with two divisions: Spirits & Wine, the world's
second-largest international spirits group after Diageo; and Quick Service
Restaurants, with brands such as Baskin-Robbins ice cream and Dunkin' Donuts.


LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1999


                             1528 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 25, 1999, Tuesday ,City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Boston researchers cite promising new gene-delivery method

BYLINE: By Richard A. Kno, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A new technique for delivering genes into blood vessels and heart tissue
opens the door to an array of innovations, such as coronary bypass grafts that
stay open and heart transplants that resist rejection, a Boston research team
reported today.

    The new method forces DNA into heart and blood vessel tissue under pressure.
This avoids the need to package the genetic material in engineered viruses,
microspheres of fat, or other delivery systems devised to insert genes where
they're wanted.

    The advantage, said Dr. Victor J. Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital, is a
high level of efficiency in getting the genes into target tissue without
apparent risks. The new method does not appear to damage tissue, Dzau said.

    Experiments with the new gene-delivery method were described in a paper
published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

    The high-pressure technique delivers snippets of DNA called oligonucleotides
into 90 percent of the cells lining veins. The Brigham and Women's group is
already using the method to pretreat vein grafts with DNA that blocks cell
division, in an effort to prevent the grafts from closing up.

    As many as half of all coronary grafts reclog eventually because the vein
tissue used to bypass obstructed arteries is exposed to much higher pressure
than veins normally are. In response, cells lining the vein grafts grow and form
scar tissue. As many as half these grafts will eventually close up entirely.

    In animal experiments, the high-pressure method was able to get genetic
material into 53 percent of heart muscle cells. The Harvard group showed that
the synthetic DNA inhibited by 50 percent the production of proteins involved in
transplant rejection.

    The animal experiments suggest that doctors may be able to "reengineer"
human hearts genetically prior to transplantation to make them less likely to be
rejected by the donor's immune system, Dzau said in an interview.

    The new method might also be used in animal-to-human organ transplants, if
other safety issues can be overcome.

    Another possible application, Dzau said, may be to deliver genes that
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels inside hearts. A number of teams are
already using gene therapy in early human experiments to grow new blood supplies
for oxygen-starved hearts, either by injecting genes directly or by
incorporating them into disarmed viruses.

    While preliminary results from these experiments appear promising, success
might be enhanced if researchers could get the growth-promoting genes into a
higher proportion of heart cells. According to Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston, only about 1 to 5 percent of cells in the
target area of a direct injection take up the injected DNA.

    "We are keeping our eyes open for anything that would optimize gene
expression," Isner said.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1999


                             1529 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                         May 23, 1999 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: LFS; Pg. G-01

LENGTH: 1040 words

HEADLINE: Stamp subjects for the '90s List of nominees almost as puzzling as
those left out

BYLINE: By William Porter, Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   This month, Americans are choosing 15 new postage stamps whose subjects will
represent the people and events of the 1990s.

   Lucky us, the nominees already have been picked, thanks to a helpful citizens
panel appointed by the U.S. Postal Service. Which means that come April, you
could be licking stamps that depict a TV show about nothing, cell phones and
sport utility vehicles.

   Not to mention a stamp that commemorates a movie directed by a guy who was
last seen proclaiming himself, insufferably, as "king of the world."  It's been
a swell decade.   The nominations, which are meant to chronicle the big events
plus capture the zeitgeist, range across five categories: people and events,
arts and entertainment, sports, science and technology, and lifestyle.  Stamp
series saluting decades from the 1900s to 1940s already are available; a set
commemorating the 1950s goes on sale Wednesday. Stamps for the century's
remaining decades hit the shelves in coming months, winding up with an April
2000 rollout for the 1990s series.  While some nominations from this decade hit
the mark - the World Wide Web, cultural diversity and the Gulf War among them -
others seem open to debate. Still others are outright puzzlers.  A "Jurassic
Park" stamp? Hard to visualize

   "I guess it's too hard to visualize on a stamp such subjects as corporate
takeovers, immigration, the controversy over reproductive rights, euthanasia,
Y2K and Viagra," says Erika Doss, a professor of fine arts who directs the
American Studies program at the University of Colorado-Boulder. "And I suppose
they don't want stamps like that. But those are the stories of the '90s, right?"

  Granted, it's hard to muster perspective on a decade that is still playing
out. But the judgment calls on some nominations seem singularly lacking.  A very
real trend in this country in the 1990s has been the tabloiding of America,
ranging from television ("Jerry Springer" and its ilk) to pulp publications such
as The Star and The National Enquirer, which actually played roles as
news-breakers during the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal.  "You'd think there would be
some acknowledgment of the role of tabloid journalism and TV in this country,"
says Jack Nachbar, a professor in Bowling Green University's department of
popular culture. "We've seen some very real changes in how we view those
outlets, which probably started with the O.J. Simpson trial."

   Ah, yes, the trial of the century. Or at least the 1995 version.  Then there
are the nominees in the sports category.  Jordan ignored Michael Jordan and the
Chicago Bulls dominated the NBA this decade with six championships, and His
Airness elevated the game to new levels. Neither he or the Bulls won a
nomination. Junior golf and the Special Olympics did.  This puzzles Ron Zappolo,
sportscaster at KUSA-Channel 9.   "I don't know how you could ignore something
like that," he says. "What they did in this era is hard to ignore. And Michael
Jordan entertained millions."  Zappolo says the nomination of "baseball records
broken" seems obvious, particularly in light of last season's battle for the
single-season home run record.  "(Mark) McGwire and (Sammy) Sosa were the
biggest sports story in years," he says. "It captured the whole nation for a
season. People who can't tell the difference between a baseball and a football
followed it. That says something."  More gaps: No pro wrestling, a sport that's
enjoyed unprecedented cable TV ratings? What right-thinking citizen could resist
the image of piledrivers on stamps?  Oversights also seem to abound in arts and
entertainment. That category's nominees are contemporary architecture, "Jurassic
Park," computer art and graphics, Broadway musicals, "Seinfeld" and "Titanic."
The special-effects driven "Jurassic Park" and "Titanic" seem redundant, trumped
by the nomination of the wondrous advances in computer art and graphics.

   What about the popularity and influence of independent films?

   Not that we're dying to see director Quentin Tarantino's jut-jawed mug on a
stamp - besides, you have to be dead for 10 years to land your picture on
gummy-backed paper. Still, it would be a hoot to have a "Pulp Fiction" stamp.
Say, with John Travolta and Uma Thurman dancing and doing that funky hand thing.

  There's also not a single nod to the printed word. The decade has witnessed a
resurgence in the short story, rabid cross-cultural interest in poetry and
poetry slams, plus wholesale changes in the way books are sold.  The nomination
of Broadway musicals also seems to pale next to the phenomenon of grunge rock,
which has admittedly faded, and the rise of hip-hop, with its huge
trans-cultural popularity and influence on how things are marketed to youths.
"And who in America thinks about contemporary architecture?" Doss wonders. "How
about a stamp depicting the growth of gated and covenanted communities?"  A
nomination for "Seinfeld," which is already looking dated, and no nod to "The
Simpsons," simply the most astute commentary on American culture in years?  At
least they nominated coffee's popularity.  Maybe the glue will be latte
flavored. Get your vote in now

   Want a say in what postage stamps will commemorate the 1990s? The U.S. Postal
Service will print 15 stamps winnowed from a field of 30 nominees. You have
until the end of May to vote on the subjects you want to see represented.

   Ballots are available at post offices or via the Internet
(http://stampvote.msn.com).

   Here are the nominees and the categories:

   People and events: improving education, cultural diversity, sustained
economic growth, Gulf War, recovering species, active older Americans.

   Arts and entertainment: contemporary architecture, movie "Jurassic Park,"
computer art and graphics, Broadway musicals, TV series "Seinfeld," movie
"Titanic."

   Sports: baseball records broken, extreme sports, women's sports, in-line
skating, junior golf, Special Olympics.

   Science and technology: virtual reality, dinosaur fossil discovery, gene
therapy, World Wide Web, return to space, interplanetary exploration.

   Lifestyle: cellular phones, museum attendance, home offices, sport utility
vehicles, community service, popularity of coffee.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Denver Post photo illustration Some postage stamp ideas that
were omitted from the U.S. Postal Service's '90s collection include The O.J.
Simpson Trial, Viagra and Jerry Springer.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1999


                             1530 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         May 20, 1999 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: OUTLAY BUDGET COASTS THROUGH HOUSE

BYLINE: By Ed Anderson Capital bureau

DATELINE: BATON ROUGE

BODY:

   In record time, the House approved 99-0 the state's $2.6 billion annual
capital construction budget, resisting attempts to do a wholesale rewrite of the
measure or bloat it with more projects.

   House Bill 2, sponsored by Reps. John Alario, D-Westwego, and Jerry LeBlanc,
D-Lafayette, was approved in less than 10 minutes. It now heads to the Senate,
where senators get a shot at adding their projects.

      "It's pretty good record time," Alario said after the bill passed. In
years
past, the bill took hours of grueling debates and amendments, sometimes
stretching over a period of two or three days.
   Traditionally, senators insert projects in the waning days of the session,
deleting some House members' projects to make room for their own. The bill
normally winds up in a conference committee late in the session.
   Alario, chairman of the committee that handles the bond portion of the
bill, said he does not see that changing this year.
   The bill is divided into a bond portion of about $1.4 billion spread over
five priority categories, and $1.2 billion from federal and state sources.
   The House added just $4.4 million in projects to the bill Wednesday, mainly
$3.7 million for construction of the Louisiana Sports Hall of Fame in
Natchitoches. The project was added to categories three and four, which will
not be financed until at least the 2000-2001 fiscal year.
   LeBlanc said the bill contains $14.9 million in tobacco settlement money,
including $6.5 million for a gene therapy research center in New Orleans, $3.2
million for rural health clinics and $1.89 million for a biomedical center in
north Louisiana.
   Some of the main projects in the bill for the New Orleans area include $49
million for hurricane protection for West Jefferson, Algiers and the west bank
of Plaquemines Parish; $35 million to helpfinance the final stage of the
expansion of the Ernest Morial Convention Center; $18 million for a new health
lab in New Orleans; and $6.3 million for the National D-Day Museum in New
Orleans.
   Other projects include:
 * $23.1 million for the west approach to the Gramercy Bridge in the River
Parishes.
 * $142 million for planning and construction of a trauma center at Charity
Hospital in New Orleans, to be paid with bonds financed with fees charged by
the hospital.
 * $5.2 million for a new sprinkler system at Big Charity.
 * $3 million for site clearing, planning and construction at the Port of St.
Bernard in Chalmette.
 * $1.02 million for planning and construction of a marina by Jefferson Parish
Port officials at Bayou Segnette in Alario's district.  * $1.35 million for
planning and construction of a second phase at the Bayou Segnette Sports
Complex.
 * $200,000 for a multi-purpose center in Covington.
 * $14 million for the New Orleans Sewerage and Water Board for flood control
in Orleans, Jefferson and St. Tammany parishes.
 * $500,000 for improvements to City Park's Tad Gormley Stadium.
 * $1.365 million for additions to a juvenile detention center in New Orleans.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1999


                             1531 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     May 19, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 9C

LENGTH: 3339 words

HEADLINE: The games of the future, sport by sport

BODY:

   Competition might be timeless, but the look and feel of your favorite
sport will change in the next century. From the inevitable to
the fanciful, a few predictions:

   USA TODAY reporters spoke with athletes, owners, engineers, doctors,
designers and futurists to come up with these scenarios for sports
and recreation in the next century.

   Adventure sports: As wilderness expeditions become more
popular, experts warn that pristine areas could be blocked from
use for decades. Mount Everest, for example, could be placed off
limits until 2100 because of overuse.

   Climbers will wear avalanche survival vests, first designed in
1999, allowing them to breathe oxygen from snow while buried.
GPS-oriented beacons --which use satellites to pinpoint the sender's
location -- will guide rescuers. Snowboarders and skiers will
have gear that responds to changing snow conditions, becoming
more flexible in soft snow and stiffer in hardpack; compressed-air
backpack jets will push skiers and boarders up remote slopes,
allowing them to "ski up." Mountain bikes will evolve into urban
skyscraper bikes that climb and descend office-building stairs.

   More older Americans will participate in high adventure. This
trend will reach full bloom as baby boomers retire. More seniors
will take part in challenging outdoor experiences, even some extreme
raft trips, like the Futaleufu in Chile. Less challenging trips,
like cycling tours, also will be popular. The X Games will be
replaced by the Y Games and Z Games.

   Baseball: Playing a season-opening series in Japan has
been in the discussion stage for the last 1 1/2 years. The Mariners,
whose majority owner is the Nintendo Corp. of Kobe, Japan, have
expressed interest in playing there. "This is a sport that needs
to expand and involve the entire world, not just the U.S. and
Canada," Rockies general manager Bob Gebhard said. And the Padres
have a strong bias toward Latin America.

   Baseball in 25-50 years will have a true World Series.
Could be that Tokyo; Seoul, South Korea; and Sydney, Australia,
will be vying for a division crown. So will Caracas, Venezuela;
Monterrey, Mexico; and Frankfurt, Germany. Even Havana? Will the
Tokyo Giants play the San Francisco Giants in the World Series?
Look for massive realignment. The leagues, as we know them, will
be completely changed. At least three cities will inherit teams
from ailing franchises, such as Oakland, Minnesota and Montreal.
The designated hitter will be eliminated, which is likely, or
used by both leagues. This must happen for realignment to take
place.

   Baseball will have its longest strike ever unless the union agrees
during the next negotiation to become an equal partner. This will
be the only way to handle the disparity issue. The average annual
ballplayer's salary: $ 10 million. Signage will be standard on
outfield grass (mowed in) or the turf (painted on). Rain delays
will be much shorter because of machinery that will conquer wet
fields. The Cubs and Red Sox will win a World Series before 2500.

   Basketball (pro): Imagine a team of Kevin Garnetts -- five
players all 7 feet tall and all great leapers, fast runners, expert
ball handlers and dead-eye shooters. That's where the NBA could
be headed. Minnesota's Garnett, only 22, is the prototype of the
ideal player and, perhaps, a man 20 years ahead of his time. He
can play any position and often does. There will always be a place
in the game for the little man, but if a 7-footer is just as fast
and just as quick, but a foot taller, it's a no-brainer.

   The lane might get widened and the court lengthened, but forget
about the 12-foot basket.Zone defenses, however, will be allowed.
Rules will be adjusted to eliminate most of the bumping and contact.

   Officials will have uniforms equipped with the same sort of sensors
used to call the serve in tennis. A beep will go off if you foul
a guy. Another officiating tool might be off-court officials watching
television. If a game official needs help on a call, he presses
a button and gets an immediate buzz back, telling him whose ball
it is, if it's goaltending, etc.

   In the next 20 years, the league will have divisions in Europe,
Asia and South America. Each division will make one trip to play
the North American NBA. At the end of the season, all divisions
will compete for a truly world NBA title.

   Basketball will get away from the domes because the action isn't
intimate enough. In fact, NBA arenas, which got bigger in the
20th century, will get smaller in the 21st. On deck: studio basketball.
Cities will build cozy, 4,000-seat arenas and sell tickets to
the corporate elite who can afford $ 1,000 tickets. And the average
fan? He or she will watch from home via pay-per-view or head to
movie theater-like setups that provide big-screen TV, drinks,
food and the atmosphere of an arena. These will sprout up like
dandelions in every city, seating anywhere from 200 to 500.

   The Clippers will still be in the draft lottery -- and Michael
Jordan will still be the best to have ever played.

   Basketball (women's): Now that the dunk has become almost
commonplace, there are criticisms the women have departed from
the team-oriented style that helped establish a 24-team league
in the USA. Look for the WNBA power game. There are calls that
the WNBA should limit foreign players, who could pose a threat
in the Olympics.

   Bowling: Glow-in-the-dark balls and pins and players competing
under ultraviolet lights are part of the "cosmic" wave for this
sport. Bowling surely needs a makeover, with the overall number
of U.S. centers in a downward spin and membership in the key bowling
congresses also in decline. To combat that, centers are being
constructed in better market locations with state-of-the-art facilities,
more attractive decor, better food service and other entertainment.

   Football (college): It will remain recognizable, but who
plays and how champions are determined will change. Look for fewer
schools to play the sport at its highest level as spiraling costs
and Title IX concerns drive some programs out of the big-time
football business. A super conference of maybe 60 or 70 schools
will bring a concentration of wealth and power.

   "I see the number of those playing major football decreasing,
but there will be a satisfactory way for others to play at another
level," Texas athletic director DeLoss Dodds says. "They need
to find a level where they can succeed."

   You also can expect a playoff to determine a national champion.
It's inevitable as more and more fans demand it, and it will finally
be accepted as a way to inject a quick dose of money into cash-strapped
athletic departments. "When we do have a playoff, which we will,
it will enhance the sport considerably," Dodds says.

   One caveat: Fewer youngsters are playing the sport at the youth
and high school levels, which could lead to more schools dropping
football and a further reduction in squad sizes.

   Football (pro): Bigger, faster, more technical and far-flung.
That's how Peter Hadhazy, the NFL's director of game operations,
foresees pro football in the next 50 years.

   "The linemen will be over 400 pounds," Hadhazy says. "You might
see 7-foot wide receivers covered by 6-8 defensive backs. There
will be amazing advances in safety, the helmet and other equipment.
Medical services will be unbelievable. You might have an emergency
unit on the sidelines. It's possible you will see somebody break
an arm. They'll set it on the sidelines and he'll go back and
play. The game will spread to Europe and Japan. And with so much
speed and size, they'll have to widen and lengthen the field."

   Special-teams coach Mike Westhoff, entering his 17th season with
the Miami Dolphins, says kickers are gaining so much leg strength
that in 20 years, teams will be kicking off from the 10-yard line.
And in 50 years, they'll be lining up at their goal lines!

   The director who brought instant replay to football in 1963, Tony
Verda, says a new hand-held replay monitor could put replay literally
into the hands of officials on the field. The "Scanz Scannor,"
a digital video recorder he helped develop, is about the size
of a cell phone and stores 90 seconds of video it receives from
a nearby TV truck. So, rather than walk to a sideline monitor,
a referee can use a knob on the handheld device to rewind or fast
forward the tape at will.

   Golf: Jesper Parnevik, one of the PGA Tour's free spirits,
predicts golfers will have to improve their minds and muscles
to stay competitive in the coming years.

   "You'll see fitter and stronger players," he says. "Some guys
now are big muscle machines who look like football players. More
of them will come out, and there's nothing you can do to stop
them." The Swede says golfers have just scratched the surface
of training their minds: "It's hard to balance the best muscles
with the right mental attitude. In golf, the mental might outweigh
the physical. But a lot more players will have both."

   Future golf courses might not be big enough to contain new players
with their added strength and new technologies. At the present
rate, within 50 years there won't be holes long enough to qualify
as par-5s. Jack Nicklaus, who does more course designing than
playing these days, has come up with the best suggestion. He wants
players in professional tournaments to use a limited-distance
ball, so they can return to many traditional courses, such as
Merion in Ardmore, Pa., and Winged Foot in Mamaroneck, N.Y., that
have become obsolete. Everybody reaches into a basket on the first
tee and grabs a handful.

   No less an expert than Arnold Palmer, the man who led pro golf
into the electronic age in the 1960s, predicts golf will be divided
into segments. The PGA Tour will really be two tours: one taking
in the weekly fare of events, another for major championships
and world-class events featuring the world's best players. Courses,
at least those used by recreational golfers, will be shorter,
featuring what Palmer calls "some form of pitch and putt." The
reason for these changes is an increased interest in the game
as a recreation and a career. The wild card in all this is the
economy. If it falters, growth is probably stopped.

   Hockey: Most fans would probably like the NHL to expand
the size of the net, or at least do something pro-active to enhance
offense. "Make the net as big as a soccer net," says Anaheim's
Teemu Selanne, who led the NHL this season with 47 goals. The
1998-99 season marked the first full season since 1969-70 that
the NHL didn't have a 50-goal scorer. The general perception is
there's not nearly as much offensive excitement as a decade ago;
goal numbers back that up. The league has tried to pump up scoring
with a variety of measures, but it's expected over the next few
years, the NHL will have to look at more dramatic steps, such
as removing the red line. With two-line passes illegal, the red
line prevents the long pass to send players on breakaways.

   Horse racing: Forget mechanical jockeys or changes in racetrack
surfaces. Horse racing takes pride in tradition. The Kentucky
Derby hasn't changed in 125 years, and few even suggest tinkering.
The change will come in the fan base and how they wager
on their favorite horses. Telephone betting accounts are already
a thing of the present. The rage will be interactive television,
where you can watch your horses run and from your La-Z-Boy punch
your remote control and call up 100 different wagers. But as fewer
fans attend live events, more tracks will close and the racing
will be run only at five or six of the top tracks across the USA.

   Motor sports: Since the first Indy 500 in 1911, won by
Ray Harroun at an average of 74.602 mph, the challenge has been
to make the cars go faster. But looking to the next century, the
search is on for equitable ways to slow them down. Advancements
in technology, aerodynamics and tire design have outpaced safety
improvements at several tracks. CART has experimented with various
rear-wing designs, and NASCAR uses carburetor restrictor plates
to harness the runaway speeds. But as equipment and safety guru
Bill Simpson says of balancing safety and speed, "You certainly
can minimize the risk, but it's never ever going to be 100%."

   Open-wheel racing has fallen on hard times since its split four
years ago into CART and the Indy Racing League. Prospects for
a full recovery are dim unless there's a unification that makes
the venerable Indianapolis 500 the grand spectacle it once was.

   Olympics: Ballroom dancing will still be waiting to sweep
its way into the Games, but several new sports will crash the
party. Golf and trampoline could be well established by 2020,
as well as a couple of Xtreme sports friendly to television and
young audiences (roller hockey, mountain climbing) and women's
sports (the basketball offshoot called netball). Surfing, squash/racquetball,
bowling and karate could also break through.

   Half the participants in the Games will be women, up from 35%
in 1996.

   The two-year cycle of winter-summer Games will be a permanent
fixture -- it waters down the special nature of the Olympics but
is a boon to raising sponsorship dollars that could be harder
to come by in the post-scandal environment.

   The reforms triggered by the 1999 vote-influencing scandal will
create a more democratic environment, but the International Olympic
Committee will still be run like a private organization without
much outside accountability. Political interference will be as
unwelcome as ever. Thomas Bach of Germany, a member of the reform
panel, says he believes the IOC president should be limited to
one eight-year term, possibly with the option of a four-year second
term; retirement at 70 "would be a sensible limit." IOC members
will still vote to award the Games to cities, but the process
will be tightly controlled by headquarters. The members-only red
carpet will be moth-ridden.

   Mark McCormack, considered the godfather of sports marketing,
once said his dream would be to see athletes wearing Hertz and
Avis uniforms competing against each other in the Olympics. Could
nationalism be replaced by commercialism? University of Texas
professor John Hoberman, who has written extensively about the
Games, foresees athletes wearing drug companies' logos on their
uniforms. Commercialism and performance enhancement intersect
at the Games.

   Sailing: The future of America's Cup sailboat racing could
be closely linked with its past. The key phrase will be "cost
effective." Look for smaller boats, like the 12 meters used in
America's Cup racing through 1987 instead of the larger International
America's Cup Class boats introduced in 1992; a smaller crew of
11-12 sailors as opposed to the 16-man IACC crews and more cost
effective campaigns, much less expensive than the $ 30 million-$ 40
million ones being launched today.

   Computers will play more of a role in design. Instead of building
two boats, syndicates will use the computer -- not another boat
-- to test ideas and perfect designs, then build and sail only
one vessel.

   The major challenge? Keeping costs under control while preserving
the America's Cup as a design and sailing challenge. Sailing the
race in the same place each Cup would ultimately produce a less
costly event. They key is to find a site that would provide excellent
exposure for TV and sponsors. After the success of America[+3]:
The Women's Team in 1995, co-ed teams will definitely be the trend.

   Skiing: Imagine Alberto Tomba and Hermann Maier skiing
not against each other's times, but actually against each other
-- even throwing elbows and stuff. You know, James Bond on skis,
chased by the bad guys. They already do this sort of thing in
snowboarding circles, in an event called Boarder-cross, where
snowboarders race toward a finish line five or six at a time.
And snowboarding, as you might have noticed, is already in the
Olympics. So can Boarder-cross, then Skier-cross, be far behind?
It might increase the already high rate of injuries in the sport,
but hey, Austria's winning all the big races, anyway, and somehow
we don't think Austria's going to run out of skiers.

   Swimming/diving: The goal is to move out of the backwater
eddies and into the mainstream, finding a way into the public
consciousness more often than once every four years. One way is
marketing. Swimming shifted its administration from coaching-oriented
executives to a marketing-oriented staff and increased its participation
in the World Cup circuit, a popular tour in Europe and Australia
almost unknown in the USA. Diving has added crowd-pleasing, television-friendly
synchronized events to try to attract a broader base of fans.
Grass-roots outreach programs have been started to try to attract
minority participants, and the U.S. Olympic swim team could have
its first African American member by the 2000 Games.

   Tennis: The USA, which 20 years ago had 41 men's players
in the top 100, could have but a handful of top 100 pros by 2010.
But interest in the women's game will skyrocket. Superstar sisters
Venus and Serena Williams will spearhead the "women's movement"
of the new millenium. Female pros will demand and receive seven-figure
appearance fees and equal prize money with the men at Grand Slam
events. And Billie Jean King, ever the optimist, believes her
World TeamTennis concept of co-ed competition will help combat
a loss of interest in the sport. "We should (also) try to have
more professional tennis in more cities," she says. "We don't
have enough exposure, and our ratings are not good on television.
We're taking tennis to the people for the first time. We're doing
free lesson blitzes throughout the country. We're trying to include
multicultural people more and more. Young people need to see that."

   Track & field: The progress in performances probably
will be tied to drugs. Will testers be sincere and/or effective
in catching users? Could the sport just throw up its hands and
allow ergogenic aids? Will gene therapy make steroids look like
a vitamin C pill?

   Safe bet: A man will run the 100 meters faster than the 9.79 recorded
by Ben Johnson when he was disqualified for a positive steroid
test at the '88 Games. The late Florence Griffith Joyner's world
records (10.49 in the 100, 21.34 in the 200) might finally be
broken. At the other extreme: challenging the two-hour mark by
knocking off six minutes in the marathon (26.2 miles). Look for
more women to take up pole vaulting and the bar for their world
record raised to 5 meters (16 feet, 5 inches) and beyond. But
women need to work on upper-body strength.

   TV: Interactive TV will enable fans to choose the picture
angles for sports events. People will be able to check palm-size
TV sets with mini-satellite dishes for 24-hour sports events,
with the 500-channel universe including specific channels for
all sports, possibly including cricket from ESPN Caribbean and
rugby from Fox Sports Europe. As to announcers: Keith Olbermann's
face might appear on the side of a space station; Dick Vitale's
grandson could be yelling, "It's awesome, baby," on ESPN basketball;
Brent Musburger figures to be the studio host if WB Network gains
NFL TV rights -- and Billy Packer still won't believe the low
college basketball ratings.

   Contributing: David Brown, executive director of America Outdoors;
USA TODAY's Karen Allen, Kevin Allen, Mel Antonen, Rod Beaton,
Jarrett Bell, Harry Blauvelt, Hal Bodley, Greg Boeck, Jack Carey,
Reid Cherner, Matt Cimento, Mike Dodd, David DuPree, Gordon Forbes,
Steve Hershey, Rudy Martzke, David Leon Moore, Dick Patrick, Jerry
Potter, Sal Ruibal, Rachel Shuster, Doug Smith, Larry Weisman
and Carolyn White

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, B/W, Bob Riha Jr., USA TODAY (3); Keeping afloat: Sean Wei, 26,
of Taiwan has designed the 'Water Luge' shoe for water sports at the Art Center
College of Design in Pasadena, Calif. Current baby boomers are expected to be
more active in water sports after retirement. Pedals and metal: A touring/sport
bike at the Art Center College of Design. Mountain bikes will evolve into urban
skyscraper bikes.  America's Cup runneth less costly: 'Aquilone' is a 62-foot
yacht designed by Arild Dietrichson of Norway at the Art Center College of
Design.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1999


                             1532 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       May 18, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 002

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: HERALD FOCUS: HEALTH; FOR YOUR HEALTH; Prostate cancer patients band
together for support

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Manny Hamelberg doesn't like it when people tell him he's lucky that he got
prostate cancer rather than one of the less curable forms.

   Hamelberg made his feelings known in no uncertain terms last week at a
prostate cancer symposium in Westboro that was attended by some 700 patients.

   "I'm not lucky I got prostate cancer," he said. "People say that to me all
the time. 'Boy, are you lucky you didn't get a brain tumor or pancreatic
cancer.' "

   Hamelberg, a Braintree resident who heads the Prostate Cancer Support Network
and was a conference organizer, said he keeps a mailing list of support group
members and constantly has to update it as members die.

   "They weren't so lucky, were they?" he said.

   Hamelberg was responding to a series of comments from a number of cancer
doctors, many of whom were touting statistics showing successful treatment rates
for prostate cancer.

   "It's not easy to be impotent or incontinent either," he said, speaking about
two of the most common side effects of treatment.

   He asked for a show of hands among the hundreds of prostate cancer patients
in the audience. About three-quarters admitted to being impotent, while about
half conceded they were having problems with incontinence.

   "I don't think any of us feel lucky," Hamelberg said.

   Although prostate cancer is the second most common cause of cancer deaths
among American men, doctors say it can be cured in many cases if caught early.

   But confusion remains over who should be tested, and what kind of treatment
they should receive should they test positive.

   The various treatments for the slow-growing cancer include surgery, external
beam radiation, seed therapy, hormonal therapy or, in the case of older men,
doing nothing and hoping they die of something else first.

   But many patients remain unsure as to what is best for them.

   Doctors also said there is increasing evidence that chemotherapy can be
useful and said the future looks promising for gene therapy and immunotherapy.

   Positive studies on both were presented yesterday at a cancer conference in
Atlanta.

   But final answers could be five to 10 years off, said Dana-Farber's Dr.
Daniel George.

   "We really don't have a lot of new, exciting studies out there on new
therapies," he said. "I've been quite humbled."

   Stan Klein of the National Prostate Cancer Coalition urged men to lobby for
more funding for research.

   "Breast cancer gets three times the funding," he said. "Women know how to
lobby and make noise. We don't."

   Hamelberg said the state gives $ 8.5 million a year for breast cancer
research, but only $ 1.5 million for prostate cancer, and all of that is
earmarked for education and screening, not for research.

   In the meantime, he urges men to empower themselves by joining support groups
and to use spirituality, meditation or other types of mind-body medicine.

   Hamelberg, diagnosed 11 years ago, also said doctors must not dash patients'
hopes.

   "Hope is what has sustained me," he said.

   You can hear Herald medical writer Michael Lasalandra discuss the latest
medical and health news tomorrow and every Wednesday morning at 8:30 on WRPT,
650-AM, and WSRO, 1470-AM.

   Graphic-Sidebar: (Photo-text-art providing facts about prostate cancer
including risk factors and survival percentages.) STAFF GRAPHIC BY LEE ANN JACOB

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1999


                             1533 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         May 18, 1999 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: TOBACCO MONEY MAY AID COLLEGES

BYLINE: By Leslie Zganjar Associated Press writer

DATELINE: BATON ROUGE

BODY:

   Some of Louisiana's tobacco settlement money will pay for new equipment at
state colleges and universities and for a north Louisiana health clinic if the
full Legislature goes along with a construction budget approved in committee.

   Quickly and with little debate Monday, the House Appropriations Committee
approved the $2 billion-plus construction budget for the fiscal year beginning
July 1. The budget now goes to the House floor.

   But first, members added $3 million worth of projects to be paid for with
tobacco money. They include $2.5 million for equipment for colleges and
universities and $850,000 for a health clinic in Richland Parish.

   The construction bill already had $12 million worth of projects to be paid
for with tobacco money, including $6.5 million for a gene therapy institute in
New Orleans, $3.2 million for health units in Ouachita, Iberville and Tensas
parishes, and $1.9 million for a biomedical center in northwestern Louisiana.

   Louisiana is expected to get more than $4.4 billion over 25 years from the
national settlement with tobacco companies. For the 1999-2000 fiscal year, the
installment is expected to total almost $200 million.

   About $138 million is being used in the proposed state operating budget,
despite complaints from some that the money should be used to create trust funds
for education and health care.

   The committee also added projects to be paid for with state surplus funds,
and took money from some proposed projects to pay for new ones.

   Among the larger projects added: $1.9 million to buy voting machines for
Ascension and Tangipahoa parishes.

   One of the projects that lost money was the State Technology Innovation Fund.
The fund assists state agencies in upgrading their computer technology.
Commissioner of Administration Mark Drennen said he will try to get the $2
million restored.

   The construction budget includes building and renovation projects for state
buildings, highways and bridges to be built over a five-year period. Legislators
also use the bill as a way to get funding for local projects.

   The Legislature revamps and updates the five-year plan each year.

   Appropriations committee members debate and vote on the section of the budget
that outlines cash spending, amounting to about $980 million this year. Most of
the cash is federal highway dollars, money from the state transportation trust
fund, money from fees dedicated for specific purposes, and state surplus funds.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1999


                             1534 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      May 17, 1999, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: Gene helps fight cancer of prostate

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   ATLANTA - A form of gene therapy shrinks some prostate tumors and may improve
the effectiveness of surgery in men with advanced prostate cancer, two
University of Texas medical researchers reported Sunday.

   The p53 gene, which induces cells to "commit suicide," is lost in men with
prostate cancer. Without it, cells proliferate wildly and spread in the form of
tumors.

   Reintroducing the gene via injections into the prostate induces cell death
and shrinkage, Drs. Christopher Logothetis and Louis Pisters reported at the
annual convention of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. An ordinary cold
virus is used to "carry" the gene into the cells.

   The reduced tumor is easier for surgeons to remove. The p53 gene also is
being used to treat lung cancers and head and neck cancers.

   At the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Logothetis
and Pisters are injecting the gene into patients whose cancer has advanced to a
stage that puts them at high risk of a relapse.

   The therapy reduced the size of cancers in seven of 26 patients who completed
the therapy. One man's tumor was reduced by 80 percent.

   "Since the p53 gene, when it's mutated, makes the cancer more aggressive, we
hypothesize that if we replace the p53 . . .  there's an increased probability
you will cure the cancer," Logothetis said.

   "What we know now is you can give the gene, you can cause the cancer to
shrink, and you can remove the prostate. We don't know yet whether it will
impact survival."

   When the disease recurs after the prostate has been taken out - often years
later - usually there is no visible cancer, just a rise in the patient's PSA
level. A high level of PSA, or prostate-specific antigen, indicates that a
person may have cancer.

   When the disease becomes obvious again, it's usually in the bones. "That's
why our next goal is to take (the p53 gene) and target the bone," Logothetis
said. "One could logically assume that if you cause regression in the (prostate
tumor) . . .  you go to the next logical step and you anticipate it in bone."

   Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed in American men.


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1999


                             1535 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                 May 17, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      May 17, 1999 Monday, FINAL / MEDINA

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 4F

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS ARE DEVISING NEW WAYS OF TREATING PARKINSON'S DISEASE

BYLINE: By CAROL SMITH; SEATTLE POST-INTELLIGENCER

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   While scientists continue to search for the cause of Parkinson's disease,
they also are devising new ways to treat it.

   "In the course of the last two years, five new drugs for Parkinson's have
come on the market, compared with about one every five years previously," said
Dr. Donald Calne, a neurologist at the University of British Columbia in
Vancouver.

   Three of the new drugs mimic the action of dopamine, and two block the
breakdown of dopamine so that the brain's supply doesn't dwindle as quickly.

   Some researchers are looking at ways to stimulate the brain to make new
neurons, something thought impossible a few years ago, and new surgical
techniques show promise for better symptom control, especially for tremors.

   "Deep brain stimulation" involves threading a delicate electrode into the
thalamus, one of the structures of the basal ganglia. The electrode is attached
to a pacemakerlike device implanted in the patient's chest. The patient
activates the device by passing a magnet over his skin. The device then delivers
a mild electrical current that essentially "turns off" the tremor by blocking
nerve cells that are misfiring in the brain.

   The device can be "tuned" up or down, depending on the tremors' severity, and
generally creates fewer side effects than traditional surgery for tremors. It
also is reversible. Surgeons can remove the electrode, leaving the brain tissue
intact. In the traditional approach, surgeons burn small lesions in the brain,
permanently destroying tissue, said Dr. Sean Grady, of Harborview Medical
Center.

   As techniques improve, scientists also are experimenting with threading the
electrodes into an even smaller part of the brain, the subthalamic region, which
they think could control even more Parkinson's symptoms.

   There are even more futuristic therapies on the horizon. Scientists now
believe that fetal cells implanted in the brain can replace the missing
dopamine. For such implants to become widespread, however, researchers must
develop a cell line that can be cultured in the lab and produced in large
quantities.

   Even more enticing is the lure of gene therapy.

   University of Washington professor Richard Palmiter recently demonstrated a
technique for introducing new genes into the brain cells of mice, which could
lead to gene therapy.

   Palmiter used a modified virus to introduce a gene that caused mice with
Parkinson's-like symptoms to make more dopamine. Viruses, which are nature's
genetic engineers, can insert themselves into the DNA of host cells.

   The trick is to find the right gene to put into human brain cells, Palmiter
said. Researchers are looking for a gene that would protect the cells in the
substantia nigra from being destroyed by Parkinson's.

   To find such a gene, however, scientists need to understand how the cellular
machinery breaks down in the first place. This is the holy grail of brain
research. Scientists now think there may be a common mechanism that causes cell
death in patients with Alzheimer's, Lou Gehrig's disease, Progressive
Supranuclear Palsy and other neurodegenerative brain disorders.

   "We have pieces of information," said Dr. Phil Ballard, director of the
Movement Disorder Center at Swedish Medical Center. "It's like a picture
developing in a [darkroom] pan. The picture is just starting to get to where you
can tell what it is."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1999


                             1536 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 17, 1999, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: A genetic weapon in brain cancer battle Abnormalities in chromosomes
offer powerful clues for predicting tumors

BYLINE: Anita Manning

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   ATLANTA -- Edward Shaw would like nothing better than to announce
that a cure for brain cancer is right around the corner.

   That's not likely. In brain cancer research, says Shaw, chairman
of the department of radiation oncology at Wake Forest University
in Winston-Salem, N.C., advances "come in singles, not in home
runs."

   Meanwhile, brain cancer is on the increase, scientists say. About
17,000 cases of primary brain cancer, which begins in the brain,
are diagnosed each year, up from 15,000 a decade ago. Metastatic
brain cancer, which begins as cancer elsewhere in the body and
moves to the brain, is up from 150,000 cases a year in 1989 to
200,000 a year now.


   But Shaw and others here at a meeting of the American Society
of Clinical Oncology are excited about what they see as giant
steps forward in brain cancer research.

   Gene therapy -- identifying and disarming genes that predispose
a person to a disease -- holds promise for brain cancer, as it
does for other forms of cancer, Shaw says.

   Researchers at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., reported,
as part of a study on drug therapy in patients with low-grade
brain tumors, that they had confirmed a link between abnormalities
in chromosomes 1 and 19 and a type of tumor called oligodendrogliomas.
That corresponds with findings by Canadian researchers in a report
published last year in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

   That "ability to characterize a tumor by looking at its genetic
aberrations, its chromosomal abnormalities, is a major advance,"
says Mitchel Berger, chairman of the department of neurological
surgery and director of the Brain Tumor Research Center at the
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF).

   Scientists don't know why brain tumors occur, Berger says. "There
has been good epidemiology looking at everything from cell phones
to pesticides. We've looked at everything. We don't understand
the oncology."

   Now, greater understanding of genetics suggests that "it's a
preprogrammed destiny that somehow is unleashed," he says.

   "There's a gene inside a cell that can be programmed to become
a tumor. It's yin and yang -- the oncogene and the tumor-suppressor
gene are held in balance. The abnormality in a chromosome can
disrupt that balance."

   Shaw uses a football analogy.

   "There are two kinds of genes, oncogenes and tumor-suppressor
genes, the offense and defense," he says. When a chromosome is
deformed in some way -- it has an extra gene on the offense or
is missing a defensive player -- nature's delicate balance goes
out of whack, and cancer can erupt.

   Once scientists know which genes are involved in particular types
of brain cancer, they can work molecular magic, adding genes to
beef up the defensive team or deleting them to undermine the offense.

   Human trials are just beginning, but there could be preliminary
results by next year, Shaw says.

   A better understanding of which genes lead to certain cancers
will lead to new treatments.

   "These are going to be the brain-tumor therapies for my children
and yours and for our grandchildren," he says. "It's very, very
exciting."

   Genetic research soon may help doctors direct current treatments
more effectively. Berger says his group at UCSF is about to report
that an extra Chromosome 7 is a predictor of resistance to radiation
therapy. Knowing that, doctors may take steps to overcome that
resistance, using new technologies to aim high-dose bursts of
radiation precisely at a tumor.

   Other research "suggests that molecular therapies in combination
with chemotherapy and radiation can be used to improve the odds"
for people with brain cancer, Shaw says.

   "I've been doing this for 13 years, researching brain cancer,"
he says. "The advances have been few and far between. It's very
exciting when you actually cure a patient and know you can make
a difference in a patient's life."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Angiogenesis Foundation; MRI image: A 7-year-old's tumor
appears as a gray mass behind the eye.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1999


                             1537 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      May 16, 1999, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: KELLYS SHARE HOPES WITH OTHER PARENTS

BYLINE: T.J. PIGNATARO; News Staff Reporter

DATELINE: JAVA

BODY:


   Jim and Jill Kelly continue to hope for their son, Hunter.

   And this weekend they got a boost from more than two dozen families whose
children also suffer from the rare condition known as Krabbe's disease.

   "This weekend is good for families, but it's also really hard," Kelly said at
the event named in honor of their 27-month-old son. "If one family feels better
about it, it's a huge success."

   Parents, doctors and scientists from around the world shared their hopes,
experiences and their tears during the second annual Hunter's Hope Medical
Symposium in the Beaver Hollow Conference and Training Center.

   The Kellys are dedicating their lives to Hunter's care and to helping
families like themselves to gain support from each other and collectively search
for a cure.

   The spirit of the Kellys touched Debbie Wright, a mother who lost two
children to Krabbe's disease in the 1970s and traveled from Spokane, Wash., to
attend the symposium.

   "You come here and finally you're not the 'only person' (who has suffered
through children with the illness)," Ms. Wright said.

   "The first thing I remember is seeing (the Kellys) on TV. I knew I had to
talk to them. You just think about him as this 'big, famous guy,' but he's just
a real person, a real family man, and Jill couldn't be sweeter," Ms. Wright
said.

   A year ago, Mike and Sheila Schmitt of Amherst never would have expected to
be sharing such stories with the Kellys.

   "Our son Jimmy had a normal childhood until last summer," Schmitt said.

   The couple's 9-year-old son developed symptoms of leukodystrophy, robbing him
of his childhood. Just after Jimmy's diagnosis, his family traveled to Minnesota
for an emergency bone-marrow transplant. Now, Jimmy requires constant care at
home.

   "The doctors here are talking to us on an individual basis, saying he can
improve and he can come back," Mrs. Schmitt said. "We've got a long way to go,
but we're one of the fortunate ones -- we still have our son."

   The Kellys' son remains under constant care.

   "He's stabilized now," Mrs. Kelly said. "But he hasn't progressed negatively
or positively."

   Hunter has grown lengthwise but still weighs 20 pounds, the Kellys said. He
requires around-the-clock care, ranging from nighttime medicines, regular
exercise and physical and occupational therapy sessions to just personal time
with Mom and Dad. Such attention is rooted in unconditional love, they said.

   "The care for Hunter is 24 hours, and the way we want to care for him is very
aggressive," Mrs. Kelly said. "He requires a tremendous amount of responsibility
and care. We just want his quality of life to be the best it can be."

   The Hunter's Hope Scientific Advisory Board, consisting of world-renouned
doctors who specialize in Krabbe's disease and leukodystrophy, is awarding more
than $ 1.5 million in research grants to treat and begin to search that could
lead to a cure.

   "You can't just sit around and wait; you have to make things happen today,
not tomorrow," Kelly said.

   One of the major advances is gene therapy -- correcting the defective gene
that causes the disease, said Ian Duncan, a symposium participant and
neuroscientist at the University of Wisconsin at Madison.

   "We know there are some good new ideas that have come out, and we know we'll
see some new developments," he said.

   Contributions for research for Krabbe Disease and Leukodystrophy can be sent
to: Hunter's Hope, Box 643, 3881 N. Buffalo Road, Orchard Park, N.Y. 14127.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1999


                             1538 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                May 16, 1999, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: rl; STAMPS; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: Time now for '90s vote

BYLINE: BY LARRY FINLEY

BODY:


   The 1990s are not over yet, but the United States Postal Service is asking
for votes on stamps to honor events and people of the decade.

   As part of the Celebrate the Century observance, the postal service has
nominated 30 topics to represent each decade, starting with the '50s.  People
are asked to pick 15 favorites.

   This process will bring us stamps including rock 'n' roll and the polio
vaccine to represent the 1950s; the Vietnam War and "Star Trek" to represent the
1960s; the smiley face and disco for the 1970s and video games and cable TV for
the 1980s.  Fifteen stamps will represent each decade.

   Stamps for the first half of the century were selected by a postal service
panel. Voting for '90s stamps is going on now. Ballots are available at post
offices.

   There are no living people among the nominees because postal service rules
bar stamps honoring people who have been dead for less than 10 years.

   The 1990 nominees are:

   People and events: improving education, cultural diversity, economic growth,
the Gulf War and recovering species.

   Arts and entertainment: contemporary architecture, "Jurassic Park," computer
arts and graphics, Broadway musicals, "Seinfeld" and "Titanic."

   Sports: baseball records, extreme sports, women's sports, inline skating,
junior golf and the Special Olympics.

   Science and technology: virtual reality, dinosaur fossil discovery, gene
therapy, the World Wide Web, returns to space and interplanetary exploration.

   Lifestyle: cellular phones, museum attendance, home offices, sport utility
vehicles, community service and coffee.

   The stamps for the 1990s will be issued next year.

   The sheet of stamps saluting the 1950s will be released on May 28. They
include: "I Love Lucy," drive-in movies, Rocky Marciano and teen fashions.

   More information on the Celebrate the Century program can be found on the
postal service Web site: www.usps.com.

   Questions about stamps can be sent to: Larry Finley, Stamps, Chicago
Sun-Times, 401 N. Wabash, Chicago 60611.

GRAPHIC: An "I Love Lucy" stamp will represent the '50s.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1999


                             1539 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                              May 16, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 012

LENGTH: 1153 words

HEADLINE: NEW HOPE IN; THE WAR ON CANCER ; DRAMATIC RESULTS FROM INNOVATIVE
TREATMENTS

BYLINE: KIRSTEN DANIS

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS are on the brink of a cancer revolution.

   The brutal weapons used against the killer disease - surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy - haven't changed much in 50 years.

   But doctors soon may be able to understand every tumor at its molecular level
- and tailor treatments to fight cancers that are as unique as the people who
get them.

   Very few doctors are still holding out hope for the "magic bullet" cancer
cure-all.

   Researchers are learning how individual tumors grow and spread and are
developing ways to stop them - like sending in "smart bombs" instead of the
"blitzkrieg" now used against cancer.

   "The way we're heading, there's not going to be one development that's
effective against every cancer," said Dr. James Metz, associate editor of the
University of Pennsylvania's OncoLink cancer newsletter.

   Some scientists even believe cancer will never be eradicated - just
controlled so patients can live with it like any other chronic disease.

   These are some of the cutting-edge cancer treatments that could make that day
possible: VACCINESTHE immune system is surprisingly ho-hum about tumors. Cancer
cells don't belong in the body, but the body's defense system won't attack the
growing invaders.

   The solution could lie in vaccines, which trick the immune system into
recognizing proteins, called antigens, on the surface of tumors.

   Researchers harvest at least one antigen from a tumor and attach it to
something they know the body will attack - like a pox virus.

   The hope is the immune system will "see" the virus-antigen mix and destroy
anything that looks like it, including the tumor.

   Dr. Jean-Claude Bystryn of New York University's Kaplan Cancer Center has
seen encouraging - if not miraculous - results with patients who were given a
vaccine for melanoma, a deadly formof skin cancer.

   In a recent small NYU study, patients injected with dozens of melanoma
antigens lived 50 percent longer than people who underwent standard treatment.

   "We want to be very careful about jumping up and down saying we have a cure,"
said Bystryn, director of the center's melanoma program.

   "We're optimistic vaccines could be another treatment option," Bystryn said.

   Dr. Howard Kaufman of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in The Bronx
thinks vaccines might work against tougher cancers like prostate, colon, lung,
stomach and pancreatic.

   In a study of 18 people with different types of organ tumors, vaccines
containing the single antigen CEA put the brakes on tumors in four people.

   Not everyone responds to the vaccine boost - a problem doctors blame on
immune systems wiped out by sickness and chemotherapy.

   "We are sort of being forced to work backward," said Kaufman, a surgical
oncologist.

   Researchers hope they soon will be able to try vaccines on recently diagnosed
patients - or someday, on people who show a genetic predisposition toward
cancer.

   "It may be possible to prevent cancer in the first place," Bystryn said. GENE
THERAPYT UMORS start when the genes that control cell growth - either by
ordering cells to grow or by stopping them from growing - mutate. The cells get
the wrong message and start blossoming into tumors.

   Gene therapy tries to stop or fix the abnormal genes in several ways:

   *Anti-sense therapy keeps mutated genes from spreading by gumming up the
replication process.

   When DNA replicates, it sends out am RNA "messenger" copy. Anti-sense
messages bind to the copy, mixing it up so it can't be interpreted.

   "It's highly effective," said Dr. Richard Pestell of the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine.

   Anti-sense therapy has stopped the growth of tumors in mice, Pestell said.

   The researcher - who last week announced his joint discovery of a gene that
may cause colon cancer - believes the process eventually could curb the growth
of human tumors long enough for them to be removed by surgery or killed with
radiation.

   *Tumor-suppressant therapy replaces the genes that stop cell growth and order
damaged cells to commit suicide. When those genes go awry, cells start
blossoming out of control.

   Doctors inject a normal gene right into the tumor by linking it to a common
cold virus, which enters the cells like a missile.

   Researchers at the University of Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center recently
announced that replacing the p53 suppressant gene in prostate tumors shrunk them
by at least a quarter in 27 percent of the patients studied.

   "I think we're right on the horizon of major developments," said Dr. Louis
Pisters, who helped run the study.

   *Anti-oncogenic therapy works similarly to tumor-suppressant therapy - except
doctors replace the genes that order cells to grow.

   When they mutate, oncogenes like RAS - found in pancreatic, lung, head and
neck and other cancers - command cells to grow unchecked. DESIGNER DRUGSO NCE
scientists understand how tumors work, unique treatments can be developed to
target malignant cells at their core.

   Among the attack modes now being studied are:

   *Monoclonal antibodies: These large molecules - manufactured in mice - buzz
through the blood stream and latch onto proteins on the surface of tumor cells.

   Once there, the antibodies mark the tumor cells for destruction by the immune
system - or order the cells to die.

   "Which is the most important, we're not sure," said Dr. Andrew Zelenetz,
chief of lymphoma service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in
Manhattan.

   Doctors can even attach radioactive poisons to the antibodies, which then
wipe out individual tumor cells like smart bombs.

   The two-dose treatment shows the most promise for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
patients. Two drugs, Rituxin and Bexxar, zone in on the CE20 protein, a hallmark
of about 90 percent of lymphomas.

   Breast cancer may also be targeted with Herceptin, a monoclonal antibody
expected to be approved by the FDA this fall.

   *Anti-angiogenesis drugs kill tumors by cutting off the blood supply - a
strategy that has worked miraculously in mice.

   Two anti-angiogenesis drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, received a lot of
attention last year as the "cure" for cancer.

   Researchers are unsure whether the process will work as well in people. In
the late 1970s interluken-2 was hailed as a "cure" after great tests on mice -
but it had limited success in people.

   About 20 anti-angiogensis drugs are in trials now.

   *Anti-metastatic factors: These experimental drugs keep cancer cells from
entering the bloodstream by blocking enzymes that cells produce to drill through
capillaries and melt tissue.

   Once cancer cells hit the bloodstream, they colonize throughout the body -
the reason people die from the disease.


GRAPHIC: HEALINGRESEARCH:Dr. Howard Kaufman is studying possible organ-cancer
vaccines.Rick Dembow

   GOODSHOT: Dr. Jean-Claude Bystryn prepares a melanoma vaccine for a patient -
and hopes soon to be able to prevent skin cancer.Dan Brinzac

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1999


                             1540 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      May 15, 1999, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 11D

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: Cancer conferences meet in Atlanta;
 Bush and wife among attendees at May 23 event

BYLINE: Patricia Guthrie, Staff

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
The perennial informational trail of cancer research and prevention heads to
Atlanta this week as two major annual cancer conferences convene downtown.

   This afternoon at the Georgia World Congress Center, the American Society of
Clinical Oncology begins its four-day meeting to discuss new therapies and
research.

   On Wednesday, cancer organizations and advocates from more than 100 countries
are expected for the Second World Conference for Cancer Organizations at the
Atlanta Hilton & Towers Hotel.

   At the ASCO conference, the controversial use of bone-mar-
row transplants for breast cancer patients will be discussed Monday as early
results from four clinical studies are revealed.

   "A series of studies have suggested that bone-marrow treatment may not be as
effective for breast cancer patients as it is with other diseases," said Dr.
Derek Raghavan, chief of medical oncology at the University of Southern
California. "Three of the clinical trials showed virtually no effect, and one
trial showed some benefit."

   A major advance in gene therapy technology that could lead to lessening the
side effects of chemotherapy is among the many new treatments slated for
presentation, along with a long-awaited drug for advanced colon cancer and
advances in treating prostate cancer.

   Nearly 2,500 abstracts will be presented, and an estimated 20,000 physicians,
scientists and other health workers are expected to attend the ASCO convention.

   How to keep tobacco companies from gaining a foothold in developing countries
will be a major topic of conversation at the international conference that is
co-hosted by the American Cancer Society, based in Atlanta.

   Also on the agenda are former President Bush and his wife, Barbara, who will
speak at the closing luncheon May 23 about the need for every nation to have a
cancer plan.

GRAPHIC: Photo
George Bush

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1999


                             1541 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                    May 13, 1999 Thursday City final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 01C

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: State offers $50 million in seed funds to help companies, collegesgrow
ideas

BYLINE: DOUG SWORD; STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   DOUG SWORD; STAFF WRITER

   William Loveday sees it as a big step in the right direction.

   "There are more good ideas than can be funded now," said Loveday, president
and chief executive officer of Clarian Health Partners Inc.

   Wednesday morning, Loveday looked on as Gov. Frank O'Bannon signed a bill to
provide $50 million in taxpayer dollars over the next two years to help fund
scientific research for Indiana-hatched ideas.

   Industry and academic backers of the bill predict the funds will be well
spent and instrumental in attracting as much as $200 million in federal research
grants to Indiana universities and laboratories.

   It's not that federal grants, like those awarded by the National Institutes
for Health, require matching state dollars. The money will go toward building on
what companies such as Eli Lilly and Co. and schools such as Indiana University
already have in place.

   "It takes money to get money," said state Sen. Beverly Gard, R-Greenfield,
who pushed the legislation in the Indiana General Assembly. Gard noted that
NIH's funding of research grants is expected to double over the next five years
from its current level of $13.5 billion.

   A bigger share of those federal research dollars will help "attract the best
and the brightest to the state of Indiana," Gard predicted.

   The state seed money can help universities and businesses launch pilot
projects to advance ideas to the point where federal funding will be easier to
attract, Clarian's Loveday said. Methodist Hospital of Indiana, Indiana
University Hospital and Riley Hospital for Children merged to form Clarian on
Jan. 1, 1997.

   Imagine that researchers at the Indiana University School of Medicine have an
idea for a new gene therapy to treat cancer, said Dr. Robert Holden, the
school's dean.

   NIH might be interested in the therapy, but unwilling to fund the untried
idea, Holden said. So the school can apply for funding from the state, conduct
testing on 10 or so volunteer patients and, if it works, go back to the federal
agency with a more solid proposal.

   The state has a stake in promoting this kind of research, the governor said.
The combination of state funding and federal grants will help "build and
maintain high-tech and high-growth jobs" in Indiana, O'Bannon said.

   The bill signing was part of a bittersweet day for O'Bannon, who saw the fund
as the centerpiece of his economic development agenda. But Wednesday also marked
the end of the governor's hopes of calling lawmakers back to Indianapolis to
work out a deal on other economic development matters.

   Chief among O'Bannon's concerns was the death of legislation that American
United Life Insurance Co. said it needed to stay and grow in Indianapolis.
Without that bill, AUL's future as a source for Downtown job growth is murky
because the company might decide to move its headquarters to another state.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                             1542 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      May 11, 1999, Tuesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Video games top list for new stamp series

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - When it comes to what was important in the 1980s, more Americans
picked video games than the fall of the Berlin Wall. At least that's the way
they voted in the U.S. Postal Service's Celebrate the Century stamp series.

   The electronic toys drew 268,746 votes to narrowly top the Berlin Wall, which
received 265,147.

   The 15 stamps representing the 1980s will be issued in January. The other 13
are the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; the movie E.T., the Extra-Terrestrial;
Cabbage Patch dolls; personal computers; compact discs; figure skating; The
Cosby Show; cable TV; the National Football League's San Francisco 49ers; the
freed American hostages in Iran; the space shuttle program; Cats, the Broadway
musical; and hip-hop culture.

   Americans can vote this month on subjects for 15 postage stamps to represent
the people and events of the 1990s. Ballots are available at post offices
throughout the country and via the Internet at stampvote.msn.com. The 1990s
ballot subjects are:

   People and events: education, cultural diversity, economic growth, Persian
Gulf War, recovering species, active older Americans.

   Arts and entertainment: contemporary architecture, Jurassic Park, computer
art and graphics, Broadway musicals, Seinfeld, Titanic.

   Sports: baseball records broken, extreme sports, women's sports, in-line
skating, junior golf, Special Olympics.

   Science and technology: virtual reality, dinosaur fossils discovery, gene
therapy, World Wide Web, space and interplanetary exploration.

   Lifestyle: cellular phones, museum attendance, home offices, sport utility
vehicles, community service, popularity of coffee.

   The 1980s stamps will be issued in January 2000 and the 1990s in April 2000.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                             1543 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  May 11, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 7; Column 1; Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: Hospitals Reaching New Patients On Line

BYLINE: By LISA NAPOLI

BODY:

   As the Internet grows, so does the amount of health information available on
line. But the sheer volume of information available on the Web does not equal a
speedy, or accurate, search.

   To give order to the chaos of the Web, a handful of health care organizations
have put their imprimaturs on information-rich Web sites accessible to anyone
with a modem. While many medical centers use Web sites to advertise practical
information like hours, resources and the latest research, others consider
themselves full-fledged digital publishers, in the business of educating
patients as much as promoting themselves.

    The growing interest in acquiring medical information has fueled the idea,
said Ann Metzger, a spokeswoman for the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
(www.upmc.edu), which offers information about the university's medical
specialties like gene therapy, stroke treatment and minimally invasive surgery.

   "We recognize that many people increasingly want information when they want
it," Ms. Metzger said. "The Web is the ultimate expression of that." To keep up
with the demand, the hospital now spends less time and money on printed
brochures in favor of making more educational materials available on line.

   The Mayo Clinic has long provided books, newsletters, and recently, CD-ROM's
of health information. Now, it also maintains a Web site (www.mayohealth.org),
with a dozen full-time editorial workers who publish medical news daily. Each
story is reviewed by at least three physicians, said Dr. Brooks Edwards, the
medical editor for the site.

   It also gives access to medical expertise to people who live far from the
clinic. In a busy month, doctors at the Mayo Clinic see 40,000 patients, Dr.
Edwards said. But a busy month on the Internet brings 1.5 million visitors.

   Other on-line health centers report a wide geographic reach. The University
of Iowa Medical Center said only 10 percent of the visitors to its Virtual
Hospital Web site (www.vh.org) are from the state. Twenty percent are from
outside the country. The Virtual Hospital contains digital versions of hundreds
of medical textbooks and research reports, said Dr. Michael D'Alessandro, a
co-founder and its director. In essence, it opens the bookshelves of the staff
to the world.

   Making such data available introduces a new dimension to medicine. In an age
of easily accessible medical information, the sight of patients in hospitals and
doctors' waiting rooms clutching printouts of information mined from various Web
sites is common. Armed with knowledge, patients are also filled with questions.

   "The Web breaks down barriers," Dr. D'Alessandro said. "It becomes more of a
partnership or collaboration." But, he added, doctors who do not understand the
on-line medium sometimes become frustrated.  To address that frustration, some
hospitals have initiated training programs to teach health care workers about
the Web and the vast information and misinformation available on it.

   But even with an abundance of information, the Web should supplement, not
replace, advice and diagnosis from a physician, Dr. Edwards said.

   As medical knowledge expands, so do Web sites. Ms. Metzger of the Pittsburgh
medical center said her hospital's site was a "work in progress that would never
be completed."

   "People expect deeper information, the most current information," she said.
"And that gives organizations like mine a responsibility to put up the most
comprehensive information we can."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Volumes of material are available on health care organizations'
Web sites, like this one from the Mayo Clinic.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1999


                             1544 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                              May 09, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Mom takes Great Strides;
in search for child's cure

BYLINE: KYLE BRAZZEL, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   When 300 walkers make their way through the Heights on Saturday for the Great
Strides 5K benefiting the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, most will do so in honor
of a relative, a friend, maybe the child of a co-worker -- at any rate, someone
stricken with the genetic disease that attacks young lungs.
When residents of Searcy ran in a similar event May 1, they did it for Olivia.
Olivia is the 6-year-old daughter of Robin and Scott Morris, Searcy residents
who unknowingly passed the cystic fibrosis gene to her but not to their son
Denver, 9. Robin Morris organized the Searcy 5K, which she calls a "satellite"
to the main event in Little Rock, to capitalize on community support for
Olivia's plight.
"In Searcy, we do it for Olivia," says Morris. "We have Olivia's team, and most
of the people are on her team." With 65 participants, the Searcy walk raised
more than $ 10,000 for the foundation. Morris termed her event a great success
and is looking forward to Little Rock's turn, which traditionally raises $
50,000. The event will begin at 9:15 a.m. at Kavanaugh Boulevard and Taylor
Street and will culminate in the opening of New Orleans in the Heights.
"When Olivia was 8 months old, [the foundation] called to see if she would be a
poster child for CF," recalls Morris, who decided her daughter's exposure "was a
way we could help Olivia and also help other children."
Money raised through the foundation support research to perfect gene therapy, a
treatment option experts predict will evolve into a cystic fibrosis cure by the
time Olivia is a preteen. Patients with the condition produce an abnormally
thick mucus that covers the lungs, among other organs. Chronic lung infections
result. With treatment, patients can live into their early 30s.
Morris hopes the only dread her daughter will associate with turning 30 is the
same everyone experiences, which is to say she intends to see Olivia cured by
then.
She's done what she can to make sure that happens, and that Olivia stays healthy
in the meantime. Her efforts have included everything from testifying before
Congress with infant Olivia in tow to homeschooling her children to shield her
sensitive daughter from infections.
"I think of this as a way I can minister to other people," says Morris, a
counselor-on-call to parents whose children have been recently diagnosed at the
Cystic Fibrosis Clinic at Arkansas Children's Hospital. The busy 35-year-old
also runs a home-based business in which she designs and hand-fashions
lampshades. Her husband works in public relations for nearby Harding University,
where the two met as students.
"I know what they're going through," she says of parents with newly diagnosed
children. "You're thinking, 'My kid is going to die in a year or two.' "
Olivia was diagnosed when she was 9 months old. There is a 25 percent chance a
third child -- should the Morrises decide to conceive again -- would have cystic
fibrosis.
Morris can point to Olivia as living proof of best-case scenarios. Advances in
research and treatment have helped. In the past, Morris had to administer a
harrowing form of therapy in which she beat on her daughter's chest to loosen
the fluid surrounding her lungs.
But Arkansas Children's Hospital has been selected as one of four pediatric
centers in the country to fit their cystic fibrosis patients with a new vest
that takes the vibration therapy out of the hands of parents, literally. "It
looks like a life vest," Morris explains. "Now she's able to do the treatment
herself. She'll just sit at her computer, play 'Frogger' and do her treatments."

Like most children with cystic fibrosis, Olivia is blond-haired and blue-eyed.
Her mother doesn't know if all child CF patients share a fascination with all
things medical, but Olivia sure has one. She loves the television show ER, looks
forward to going to the doctor, consumes her four pre-meal enzyme tablets
happily and -- get this -- looks forward to getting her shots.
"She loves the medical part of it. She says she's going to be a doctor. She
likes to play doctor -- she'll call us back to her room like they do her at her
appointments. She'll say, 'I need to take your blood.' "
Olivia is also "very feisty, very independent," says her mother. "She'll take
good care of herself, and she'll be a leader. She'll probably do a lot for
cystic fibrosis, just like her Mom."
D1--Arkansas Democrat-Gazette/KAREN VANDONGE
Robin Morris is hustling toward a cure for cystic fibrosis, which afflicts her
6-year-old daughter, Olivia. Morris organized a Great Strides 5K fund-raiser May
1 in Searcy. Another Great Strides 5K is scheduled Saturday in the Heights.
D9--Arkansas Democrat-Gazette/KAREN VANDONGE
Robin Morris' daughter Olivia was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis when she was 9
months old. Since then, Morris has become an advocate for cystic fibrosis
patients, testifying before Congress on insurance and research issues.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1999


                             1545 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                       May 9, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Reader; Pg. 5g

LENGTH: 833 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
 THE WEEK'S TOP MEDICAL STORIES;
 Abnormal blood test not cancer scare

BYLINE: From staff and news services

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
A third of men whose cancerous prostates are removed will have blood tests
suggesting the cancer is returning. But it can be years before any new tumors
appear.

   Scientists said last week that it can take a median of eight years between
that first worrisome "PSA test" following prostate removal and development of
metastatic prostate cancer. And the longer it takes for that abnormal PSA test
to arise after surgery, the longer men will survive, Johns Hopkins University
researchers reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

   The study "provides evidence that a rising PSA level after a surgery is not a
death warrant for all patients," said Dr. Howard Scher of Memorial Sloan-
Kettering Cancer Center. Surgically removing the prostate often cures prostate
cancer. But the cancer can return in other parts of the body. This metastatic
disease is incurable; once men have recurrent cancer, median survival is five
years.

   Better cancer diagnosis: Large core needle biopsy is as effective as a
surgical incision in testing breast abnormalities for cancer, a study suggests.
Researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital looked at results from 1,836
patients with breast abnormalities. They said large core needle biopsy makes
sense for several reasons: The cost is about a third to a half of surgical
biopsy, the technique is less likely to leave scarring and is completed in less
than an hour and gets results back sooner. The report was presented at a media
briefing sponsored by the American Medical Association.

   Dioxin risk: Chemical workers exposed to high levels of dioxin have a 60
percent increased chance of dying of cancer, but the chemical poses no added
cancer risk to the general population, a study says. Kyle Steenland, co- author
of the study appearing in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, said the
research suggests most people typically are not exposed to dangerous levels of
dioxin and that cancer appears to result only among those who had high long-term
exposures to the chemical 15 to 20 years ago. Dioxin was a byproduct in the
manufacture of herbicides and pesticides that were in common use decades ago.

   Mushrooming insulin interest: Researchers who tested more than 50,000 natural
and synthetic substances say they have found a fungus compound that acts like
insulin, raising the possibility that diabetics in the future may take pills
instead of shots. Merck Research Laboratories isolated the insulinlike compound
from a fungus found in the jungles of Congo. When it was tested on mice that
have diabetes, the researchers found that it significantly lowered the sugar in
the animals' blood. The researchers said the compound is a mimic of insulin, the
natural hormone that allows the body to metabolize sugar. The researchers,
reporting their finding in the journal Science, said years of research remain
before the compound could be tested in humans.

   Saying no to colon cancer tests: Just 43 percent of family members at very
high risk for an inherited form of colon cancer agreed to be tested for the
genes responsible, a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association
found. Mutations in certain genes carry an 85 percent risk of hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Those who know they're at risk can get special
tests to detect cancer early, increasing their survival odds. But Georgetown
University's study of 208 members of four cancer-prone families found more than
half refused.

   New gene therapy potential: In a discovery that could lead to powerful new
vaccines and antibiotics, researchers have isolated a key gene that bacteria use
to launch killer infections. Researchers at the University of California, Santa
Barbara, have demonstrated in laboratory studies that removing or inactivating a
gene called DAM can disarm a strain of salmonella, bacteria that cause food
poisoning in humans. The gene discovery, announced in the journal Science, was
made during a five-year process of examining bacterial genes that are turned on
at the start of an infection in a host animal. Often these genes are quiet in
laboratory dishes and go into action only when the pathogen is starting an
infection.

   Checking for cervical cancer: DNA tests to detect a common viral infection
are very effective at uncovering early cervical cancer in women whose Pap smears
are unclear, a report today in the Journal of the American Medical Association
says. Pap smears can detect the first signs of cervical cancer, often in time to
cure. But some 2 million women annually have abnormal Pap results in which
doctors can't tell whether cancer is present. Those women usually get repeat
Paps. Human papillomavirus, or HPV, causes most cervical cancer, so Kaiser
Permanente researchers studied 995 women with abnormal Paps.  Testing for HPV
infection proved 89 percent accurate in pinpointing who was likely to have
cancer --- and needed an immediate biopsy --- while repeat tests were 76 percent
accurate.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1999


                             1546 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 1999 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                       May 7, 1999 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: WILLIAMS CONTROLS IMPROVES ITS RESULTS

SOURCE: JENNIFER BJORHUS and JOE ROJAS-BURKE The Oregonian

BODY:

   Portland-based Williams Controls Inc. earned profits of $1.5 million, or
seven cents per diluted share, in the second quarter-- a 36 percent increase
from the same period a year ago.

   Sales increased 7 percent to $16.64 million in the second quarter, which
ended March 31.

   The company, which manufactures throttle controls and electronic sensors for
the transportation industry, attributed the increases to healthy demand for its
products and to losses from its discontinued agricultural division in South
Carolina that lowered earnings in the period a year ago.


   An investment bank hired by the company is still contacting potential buyers
for the division, said Jerry Herlihy, Williams Controls' chief financial
officer.


   The company paid $150,000 in preferred stock dividends, reducing net income
available to common shareholders to $1.33 million.


   Herlihy said several things dampened second-quarter earnings, including
losses from the company's plastic injection molding operation, which is taking
longer than expected to adjust to its new facility in Michigan, and a 23 percent
increase in research and development costs.

   The company released its earnings Thursday afternoon. Its stock closed
Thursday at 2.56 a share, up 0.06 a share.

   -- Jennifer Bjorhus

   AVI BioPharma Inc.

   AVI BioPharma Inc. reported a net loss of $1.74 million in the first quarter,
which ended March 31, compared with a $1.42 million net loss in the first
quarter of last year.

   The company's net loss per share remained unchanged at 13 cents for the first
three months of both years.

   The Portland-based company is developing potential cancer vaccines and
gene-therapy drugs. Revenue from grants and research contracts dropped to $4.12
million for the quarter, down from $5.65 million a year ago. Research and
development expenses rose from $1.29 million to $1.34 million quarter to
quarter.

   AVI said its investigational cancer vaccine is ready for phase III clinical
trial against colorectal cancer. The company expects to file an investigational
new drug application this year for a gene-targeting drug under study as a way to
prevent the reclogging of arteries in people with cardiovascular disease.

   AVI shares rose 0.4375 cents Thursday, closing at 4.50. The company released
its results at 8 a.m. EDT.

   -- Joe Rojas-Burke


LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                             1547 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MAY 6, 1999 Thursday ACITY EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: PITT PLANS A NEW GENETICS CENTER

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH

BODY:

   The University of Pittsburgh plans to spend more than $36 million over the
next five years for what it hopes will become one of the nation's most advanced
centers for human genetic research.

   The center would be similar to several others across the country, including
one being developed at Harvard University and a smaller center at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, said Arthur Levine, Pitt's senior vice
chancellor for health sciences.

   Two weeks ago, Levine briefed a closed-door meeting of Pitt trustees on the
plan, which could help Pitt gain a greater foothold in an area that is rapidly
changing medicine.

   Centers for genetic research are proliferating across the country, but most
tend to focus on gene therapies for people who are already sick, said Michael
Gorin, interim chairman of Pitt's department of human genetics.

   Pitt's center would be broader, he said. It would explore how genetic makeup
can predict who will be most prone to developing conditions that include mental
illness, heart disease, Alzheimer's disease and cancer.

   The information could help doctors learn what medications would work best on
a particular patient.

   "What if you could find out in advance that you needed to get your child
checked for learning disabilities and you could get him into treatment or
education programs early?" Gorin said.

   The Center for Human Genetics at first would have a staff of 12 but would
draw on other sections of the university's vast health sciences complex.

   Pitt already has 50 researchers involved in genetics projects in such areas
as Alzheimer's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, muscular dystrophy and cancer.

   The plan calls for an initial investment in faculty, facilities and operating
expenses of $36.5 million over five years.

   Of that, about $17.9 million likely would be acquired through research grants
obtained by the center's new faculty, university officials say.

   That would leave Pitt needing donations for $18 million to $20 million.
Levine said Pitt had begun circulating the plan among foundations.

   Pitt plans to locate the center in 30,000 square feet of space in the
Biomedical Science Tower now filled by the Pitt Cancer Institute. The space will
be available in two years, after the cancer institute moves.

   The 12 new faculty members would be enlisted over five years. They would
include a director who Levine hopes will be a leading scientist able to recruit
top talent.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1548 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     May 5, 1999, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: PITT DEVELOPING PLANS FOR MAJOR GENETICS CENTER

BYLINE: BILL SCHACKNER, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The University of Pittsburgh plans to spend more than $ 36 million over five
years to start building what it hopes will be one of the nation's most advanced
centers for human genetic research.

   The Center for Human Genetics planned for the Oakland campus initially would
have a staff of 12 but would utilize resources from throughout the university's
vast health sciences complex. Its aim is to give Pitt a greater foothold in an
area that is rapidly changing not just the practice of medicine, but virtually
every basic science.

   The center would be similar to half a dozen others across the U.S., including
one now being developed at Harvard University and a smaller center in operation
at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, said Dr. Arthur Levine, senior
vice chancellor for health sciences. He briefed a closed-door meeting of Pitt
trustees on the plan two weeks ago.

   Centers for genetic research are proliferating across the U.S., but most tend
to be focused on gene therapies for people already afflicted with a condition,
said Michael Gorin, interim chairman of Pitt's department of human genetics.

   Pitt's center would be broader, he said. It would explore how a human's
genetic makeup can predict who will be most prone to developing various
conditions, from mental illness and heart disease to Alzheimer's disease and
cancer. Such information could also help doctors know in advance precisely what
medications will work best on a particular patient.

   "What if you could find out in advance that you needed to get your child
checked for learning disabilities and you could get him into treatment or
education programs early?" asked Gorin. "You could potentially avoid having your
child feel like a failure in school. You could avoid family conflicts. You could
avoid antisocial behavior by the child."

   Knowing in advance what medication will work best on someone's glaucoma, he
said, citing another example, "would save time, money and some loss of vision.
Pitt plans to locate the center in 30,000 square feet of space within the
Biomedical Science Tower currently occupied by the Pitt Cancer Institute. The
space will be available in two years, after the cancer institute moves to the
Shadyside campus.

   Twelve new faculty would be enlisted over five years for the genetics center,
including a director who Levine hopes will be a leading scientist able to
recruit top talent, help shape the center's focus and develop cutting-edge
research laboratories.

   The plan calls for an initial investment in faculty, facilities and operating
expenses of $ 36.5 million over five years. Of that, approximately $ 17.9
million would likely be acquired through research grants obtained by the
center's new faculty.

   That would leave Pitt with the need to obtain donations for the remaining $
18 million to $ 20 million. Levine said Pitt has begun circulating the plan
among foundations.

   A 10-page proposal for it predicts that with proper financial support, the
center could "put Pittsburgh and its schools of health sciences on the map as
one of the nation's most advanced programs for human genetics research."

   One of the missions of the Pitt's new center would be to take advantage of
information from the Human Genome Project, which seeks to map all the genes to
specific areas of the 46 chromosomes.

   "We don't know what all these genes are for or what they do," said Joseph
Glorioso, director of the Pittsburgh Human Gene Therapy Center. He is a member
of the committee that will recruit a genetics center director.

   He said that in the future, scientists might be able to flip genetic switches
to make skin cells turn into liver cells, for example, which would offer new
treatments for a variety of diseases.

   Researchers could also tackle basic problems such as how a small ball of
cells in an embryo grows and specializes until it creates a living baby.

   "We'll want to know where we came from and how we got here," Glorioso said.
"It's probably going to teach us about where we're going as well."

   Besides mining information from the genome project, the center would explore
how the products of genes function and how they relate to each other within the
body, Levine added.

   "For that we need to utilize the sciences of cell biology and structural
biology," he said. "We want to be on the cutting edge of that sort of
multi-disciplinary approach."

   Levine is a former scientific director within the National Institutes of
Health whose background is in molecular and developmental biology. He's made it
plain since coming to Pitt last year that he wants the university to become more
heavily involved in genetics research.

   "We will make a big push in this direction," he said.

   Pitt already has 50 researchers involved in various genetics projects in such
areas as Alzheimer's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, muscular dystrophy and
cancer.

   Levine said the center would coordinate those kinds of efforts in addition to
pursuing its own research. The center would encourage scientists to mount
interdisciplinary efforts across the health sciences.

   Levine did not discuss potential candidates for the director's job. Gorin
said whoever is chosen would help "mold it into his vision of what he feels it
should do."

   There are financial advantages to having a designated center, he said.

   "Genetics technologies are expensive and advancing rapidly. It is often very
difficult for a single investigator to raise enough money from his own grants or
other resources to have the state-of-the-art technology available to do the
cutting-edge research," he said.

   Having a center "allows you to recruit real talent," Gorin said. It makes a
statement about the university's commitment to genetics and suggests to the
individuals being recruited that they would not be working in isolation.

   Asked if $ 36 million is enough to build the type of center Pitt wants, Gorin
replied that one has to consider the pool of resources already available through
the schools of the health sciences - such as nursing, pharmacy, public health,
rehabilitation sciences, medicine and dentistry.

   "More [money] is always better. But quite frankly you have to consider the
fact that we actually already have a fair bit going on," he said.

   Staff Writer Anita Srikameswaran contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1999


                             1549 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                       May 3, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Southern California Living; Part E; Page 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 2080 words

HEADLINE: A SPECIAL PET SECTION;
 HIGH-TECH WAYS TO CURE WHAT AILS;
 VETS BORROW FROM HUMAN DOCTORS TO ALTER BEHAVIOR, DO TRANSPLANTS AND CURE
CANCER.

BYLINE: ROSIE MESTEL, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:


   Imagine if the late British author James Herriot were writing his stories
about veterinary practice today. You'd still have the animals, of course:
faithful old Fluffy, the arthritic golden retriever, creaking painfully to his
feet; or Lolita, the lovable Lhasa apso, apt to shred curtains to tatters and
deposit malodorous gifts on the rug when her mistress leaves the house. And
you'd still have vets and owners who care deeply about their furred and
whiskered charges.

   But you'd have many other things too. Scores of human drugs adopted for use
in pets--some developed especially for those pets. Pacemakers for dicey doggy
hearts. Transplants for clapped-out kitty kidneys. Orthodontics, hip
replacements, plastic surgery--little round implants, even, for neutered dogs
whose owners prefer that "natural" look. To say nothing of items a trifle large
for a roving veterinarian's medicine bag: behemoth brain scanners, and dialysis
and radiation therapy machines.

   Never have owners been able to do so much for their four-legged family
members, or spend so much. Never has pet medicine been so high tech, so similar
to human medicine. Here's a look at some of the latest advances--and a look,
too, at what may be lurking just around the corner.


   *

   Barney the boxer dog enjoyed one of the new fruits of veterinary medicine
recently. Aches from an old back injury--plus a touch of arthritis--had him
taking forever-and-again to get up from sitting down. And growling, too, at his
younger playmates when they eagerly approached him for roughhousing. That just
wasn't Barney, says owner Wendie Thompson of San Juan Capistrano.

   Barney's vet gave Thompson something new: Rimadyl, a pain-killing drug from
Pfizer Animal Health in Exton, Pa., approved for dogs by the Food and Drug
Administration in December 1996. Thompson slipped the pills into Barney's chow
for a few weeks, enough to last till the soothing summer heat sizzled in.
Thompson was delighted with the results.

   "It put the pep back in his step," she says.

   Now it's not as though pets had no pain pills before Rimadyl--vets commonly
treat dogs with aspirin and other human drugs, often with good success. The same
goes for other medical problems: These days, you'll see pets on digoxin, beta
blockers and ACE inhibitors for heart conditions, Prozac for obsessive fur
licking and aggression. And that's not the half of it. When all's said and done,
Gnasher the dog and Twinkletoes the cat are physiologically pretty similar to
their two-legged owners.

   Similar, but not the same, says Barney's vet, Dr. Bernadine Cruz in Laguna
Hills. Some drugs would knock people out at the proportional dose a dog gets.
Others could be toxic to a pet at low doses--cats, in particular, are easily
poisoned because their livers don't metabolize drugs as well.

   "Pets," Cruz stresses, "are not just fuzzy little people."

   So even though vets know a lot about which drugs are safe, it's great, they
say, when medicines go through the hoops required for approval by the FDA:
clinical trials for effectiveness and safety on the animal for which the pill is
intended. In Rimadyl trials, 81% of dogs showed improvement (a small percentage
developed gut irritation and liver toxicity, which can also develop with other
painkillers). Today, about 1 million pooches have taken Rimadyl, mostly for
osteoarthritis, a painful joint condition affecting one in five adult dogs.

   Pets need a healthy body, but they also need a healthy mind--and in December,
two more doggy drugs hit the news, both for doggy behaviors.

   One drug, Anipryl, helps de-fog the minds of dogs with senile dementia. The
other, Clomicalm, is for dogs who go nuts when they're left alone. We mean
really nuts. Dogs like Leffie.

   A collie-shepherd mix, Leffie is a sweet, good-natured creature, though
perhaps a tad skittish: He was always prone to nervously zig and zag on walks,
and cower in the closet when he heard loud noises. After the tragic death of his
owners, things got really bad.

   "If you were in the house with him, he'd be a couch potato--but if you left
him alone, he would totally panic," says Marsha Miller, a San Fernando Valley
volunteer with Adopt-a-Pooch, an organization that finds new homes for pets. "He
would chew through doors. He would chew through fences--they'd look like a
cannonball went through them. He was like a termite in fur."

   But Leffie is now happy and serene in a home--and Clomicalm, from Novartis
Animal Health in Greensboro, N.C., helped him get there.

   In humans, the drug--clomipramine--is prescribed for obsessive-compulsive
disorders. In dogs, it's been clinically shown to calm pets with separation
anxiety, when combined with a training program.

   Today, after two months on the drug, Leffie's given up his zigging and
zagging, and his termite tendencies are a thing of the past. (Though just to be
safe, Miller placed him in a home with a cement-block backyard wall.)


   *

   If lab-developed drugs can help clear up behavior problems, sometimes a pet's
own chemicals lend a hand. These days, vets can provide a product called
Feliway, containing a chemical from feline scent glands, to dissuade kitties
from odoriferously marking their territory. The same chemical is being tested
for its soothing effect on cats, says Dr. Vint Virga, of Cornell University
College of Veterinary Medicine in Ithaca, N.Y.

   "The hope is, it could be used to calm cats down when they go to the vet's so
they wouldn't have to be as heavily medicated," he says.

   And better behavior modification techniques--ones tailored to fit the precise
problem an animal is having--are also helping the pet with "issues." Is a dog
snapping at his owner because he thinks he's top dog? Or is he just plain
scared? Vet behaviorists try to figure out the root so they can design the best
behavior program.

   Eventually, though, for some unlucky dogs and cats, a time comes when
something's going on in the brain that no amount of behavior modification can
correct: senility.

   The condition--which may affect more than half of all dogs 11 or older,
studies suggest--is similar to Alzheimer's disease, although vets instead term
it cognitive dysfunction syndrome. Brain cells are dying. Brain chemistry's
going awry. The pet gets confused, starts staring off into space, maybe snapping
at its owner because it doesn't remember them or defecating where it shouldn't
because it doesn't know where it is.

   Down in the brain, supplies of a key nerve chemical, called dopamine, are
running short. Anipryl, another Pfizer drug--one that's been used in humans to
treat Parkinson's disease--increases the supply, explains Dr. David Bruyette,
medical director of the VCA Animal Hospital in West Los Angeles, and pioneering
Anipryl researcher. In a trial of 199 dogs with dementia, 70% showed improvement
after 12 weeks on the drug. It's not a cure, says Bruyette--but it can buy extra
time.


   *

   Anipryl, Clomicalm, Rimadyl--all this new stuff for dogs. What's going on?
Are cats getting short shrift?

   If cat drugs lag behind, say vets, that's partly because it's much trickier
to bring human drugs into kitties, because of their super-sensitive livers.
Rimadyl, for instance, would be a poison for a cat.

   Cats are getting Anipryl, but the clinical studies were done on dogs, because
IQ-testing a cat (an admirably uncooperative creature) is no easy business.

   As for separation anxiety--well, cats don't suffer from it as much, maybe
because they're solitary critters. In fact, dogs are generally more prone to
behavior problems.

   "There's so many more things you have to do in order to make a dog a good
pet--you can fall down in a lot of places," says Dr. Gary Landsberg, veterinary
behaviorist in Toronto.

   Finally, when a dog is sick, you're more apt to notice it.

   "Dogs are very demonstrative when they don't feel good," says Cruz, the
Laguna Hills veterinarian, "whereas cats will curl up into a little ball: 'Maybe
I do hurt, but I don't go for walks with you anyway.' "

   Such doggy centrism won't go on, wagers Bruyette: There are more pet cats
than dogs these days.

   "We can't ignore 59 million cats," he says.

   Cats, in any case, are ahead of the game in one veterinary arena: kidney
transplantation.

   That's right. When cats' kidneys fail, owners can now get replacements at
several sites in the U.S., including the UC Davis School of Veterinary
Medicine--the first such program--and the All-Care Animal Referral Center in
Fountain Valley. The donors are stray or research cats, who give up just one of
their kidneys. The deal: Cat parents have to adopt the donor. "Most people want
the donor--they worship that cat," says Dr. Clare Gregory, who runs the Davis
program, where about 130 cats have had the operation to date, some flying in
from as far as Japan.

   The big problem is cost: Thousands of dollars for the transplant itself and $
150 a month for life for rejection-fighting drugs, and that's for a 10-pound
cat. By the time you're talking drugs for a 60-pound Labrador, you're talking
about $ 2,000, says Gregory--which is one reason the procedure's rarely done in
dogs. Another is the high rejection rate. For some reason, dogs' immune systems
are much more likely to view the new organ as an invading interloper.

   New drugs are coming down the pike, says Gregory, ones that he and others are
testing, and which could be powerful enough to end the doggy rejection problem.

   Transplants, meanwhile, aren't the only option for a pet with failing
kidneys. Dialysis, or cleansing of the blood to remove fluid and toxins, is also
available at Davis and several other sites around the U.S. (Davis plans another
for San Diego County).

   The Davis dialysis program began as a treatment for acute kidney failure,
usually from antifreeze poisoning, common among dogs and cats. Today, though,
says Dr. Larry Cowgill, who runs the program, the center sees many pets with
chronic irreversible kidney failure--pets that must come several days a week,
week after week. It gives owners something precious, says Cowgill--time to
accept and say a graceful goodbye.


   *

   Things are getting high tech, too, in other areas of animal health, such as
cancer and joint repair.

   These days, the knees of racehorses--which get such a drubbing during the
animals' careers--are being rebuilt with injections of cartilage into the joint.
In fact, says Dr. Alan Nixon, associate professor of orthopedic surgery at
Cornell, it's now possible to grow horse cartilage from horse blood cells, and
to boost that cartilage development, once inserted, with certain
growth-promoting chemicals. Nixon is now experimenting with gene therapy, to try
get the cartilage cells to make their own growth chemicals, and thus make even
more cartilage.

   The very same techniques that Nixon pioneered in horse medicine are spilling
over into human medicine--and that's happening with pet cancer therapies as
well.

   Cancer is a big concern for pet owners. In dogs, it's the leading cause of
death. It's close to the top cause in cats.

   "When I graduated 25 years ago, it was pretty much test and euthanize," says
Dr. Steven Withrow, head of clinical oncology at Colorado State University
Veterinary Teaching Hospital in Fort Collins. "Today we have all the tools and
toys available to any physician."

   Withrow's particular contribution, in collaboration with Dr. Ross Wilkins, a
Denver physician, is the development of a limb-sparing bone cancer surgery.
Instead of amputating, vets remove just the cancerous part of bone and replace
it with bone from a dead, donor animal (unlike kidneys, rejection isn't an issue
here). Withrow and Wilkins' work has helped fine-tune the procedure in humans.

   And there are lots of other developments on the pet cancer front. Scientists
at Colorado State have developed a special diet that helps dogs better tolerate
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. They're involved in testing new drugs,
including some of the latest hopes for human cancer therapies. There are
national trials, headed by Duke University, to use heat to fight tumors. And at
UC Davis, efforts are afoot to use gene therapy to combat rare dog brain tumors.

   All in all, it's a brave new world for animal medicine. And it's changing all
the time. It's hard to imagine, but also very likely that one day all this
newfangled stuff will seem as quaint and old-fashioned as Dr. James Herriot
rattling his jalopy over the lonely Yorkshire dales.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (No caption / dog)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1999


                             1550 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        MAY 3, 1999 Monday CWEST EDITION

SECTION: NEIGHBORS; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 978 words

HEADLINE: GIRLS UNITE TO HELP ENVIRONMENT

BYLINE: Gloria A. Hoffner, INQUIRER SUBURBAN STAFF

BODY:

   Agnes Irwin School students were joined by students from The Baldwin School,
Philadelphia High School for Girls, and Springside School recently on a project
to remove weeds from the banks of the lake in Franklin D. Roosevelt Park in
Philadelphia.

   The event, now in its seventh year, is organized by Girls United to Support
the Environment. More than 90 schools nationwide took part in similar Earth Day
activities.

   Agnes Irwin, Baldwin and Springside are private girls' schools.

   BIOETHICS CONFERENCE * Akiba Hebrew Academy, a private Jewish day school in
Merion, recently was host of a bioethics conference on topics ranging from gene
therapy and fertility drugs to assisted suicide.

   VICTIMS ASSISTED * Benchmark School students recently raised $3,257 for
Heifer Project International, an organization that provides animals and trees
for impoverished areas around the world.

   The students donated their chore, gift and allowance money and were able to
purchase heifers, oxen, goats, chickens and rabbits, as well as 100 pine
seedlings, for Honduran villages suffering from Hurricane Mitch.

   Benchmark, in Upper Providence Township, is a private school for children
ages 6 to 15 with learning disabilities.

   SMOKING PREVENTION * Bridgeport Elementary School fourth graders recently
took part in a five-week smoking prevention program sponsored by Bryn Mawr,
Lankenau and Paoli Memorial Hospitals.

   Smoking Prevention Activates Responsible Kids (SPARK) was created by the
American Lung Association of Southeastern Pennsylvania and teaches students
about diseases associated with smoking.

   The school is part of the Upper Merion School District.

   STORIES OF ARTISTS * French International School recently was visited by
Barbara F. Freed, professor of French and former head of the modern languages
department at Carnegie Mellon University.

   She spoke on "Stories of Artists and Their Museums on the Riviera." The
private language school is located in Bala Cynwyd.

   FREE LUNCH PROGRAM * All children, ages 1 through 18, who are residents of
the Chichester School District are eligible for free lunches at the Linwood
Elementary School cafeteria, to be served from 11:45 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. June 21
through July 30. Lunch must be eaten at the school, 1403 Huddel Ave., Linwood.

   For further information call 610-485-6881, Ext. 266 or 267.

   LEADERSHIP AWARD * Marple Newtown High School senior Katie Calabrese is one
of 150 winners of the National Principal's Leadership Award presented by the
National Association of Secondary School Principals.

   She is co-editor of the school yearbook, president of Student Council,
secretary of the senior class, president of the drama club and co-captain of the
speech team. She also sings in the school choir and participates in Kids on the
Block, a diversity program.

   She received a $1,000 college scholarship with the award. The school is part
of the Marple Newtown School District.

   LIBRARY CHALLENGE * Media Providence Friends School students recently
completed the challenge of reading one book from every category of the Dewey
Decimal System.

   Students at the Quaker school in Media also celebrated their study of Africa
with a presentation of African music and an artistic recreation of an Egyptian
tomb.

   MR. WIZARD VISITS * Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary School students
recently enjoyed a presentation by the Mr. Wizard Science Assembly. The program
presents science facts and live demonstrations to students.

   Fourth grade student Eva Derrickson won the assembly and a pizza party for
her school by writing an essay on "My Favorite Science Experiment."

   The Philadelphia Archdiocese school is in Media and serves children in
pre-kindergarten through eighth grade.

   WORDMASTERS CHAMPION * Oakmont Elementary School fifth grader Abbe Lefkowitz
earned a perfect score in the WordMasters Challenge, a national language arts
contest of more than 240,000 students.

   Abbe was one of 147 entrants who earned a perfect score.

   The school is part of the Haverford Township School District.

   WINNING NEWSPAPER * Ridley High School's Green Raider newspaper has won the
Peacemaker Award from the National Scholastic Press Association and the Gold
Crown from the Columbia Scholastic Press Association.

   The school paper has also won the Pennsylvania School Press Association
All-State Award for seven of the last eight years. The school is part of the
Ridley School District.

   WALKAMERICA CHALLENGE * Rosemont School of the Holy Child, a private Catholic
school in Rosemont, was recently recognized by the March of Dimes as the
number-one school in the Southeast Pennsylvania Chapter for its 100 percent
participation and collection of $10,000 in the 1998 Walk-Athon. The school was
selected as a pilot school for promoting youth volunteerism.

   In the event last week, the school raised about $11,000.

   SPECIAL PEOPLE * New Eagle Elementary School, part of the Tredyffrin/Easttown
School District, recently honored noninstructional staff members - including
cafeteria workers, custodians, aides and bus drivers - with special badges and
refreshments.

   On Friday, the students plan to honor a special older person in their lives,
such as a grandparent, aunt, uncle or another relative, with a picnic lunch at
the school.

   MEGA BAND PERFORMANCE * Upper Darby High School's marching band will join
students from bands at the district's eight elementary and two middle schools,
as well as some faculty, board members and support staff, to form a Mega Band of
about 700 musicians.

   The Mega Band is scheduled to perform tomorrow at the Phillies game at
Veterans Stadium.

   You can send educational news to Gloria A. Hoffner by email at
gloriah@phillynews.com; fax it to 610-313-8227; mail it to her at The Inquirer,
800 River Rd., Conshohocken, Pa. 19428; or call 610-313-8006.

NOTES: Education Notes

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1551 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                         May 2, 1999 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: LFS; Pg. E-10

LENGTH: 625 words

HEADLINE: Consider value of pets

BYLINE: By Robin Downing, D.V.M., PETS

BODY:

   Pets add life to our years and years to our life. Humans provide the special
care that pets need and pets have positive effects on human health and wellness.
Higher quality medical care is sought for animal family members; increased
importance of the human-animal bond is at the core of improved medical care.
Many high-tech medical procedures that physicians use daily also are being used
by veterinarians. Cancer therapy for pets now includes radiation therapy, bone
replacement and gene therapy. CT scans, MRIs, and nuclear medical procedures are
becoming commonplace, even to the point that diagnostic centers for animals are
found in many metropolitan areas.

   There are specialty practices where surgeons, neurologists, ophthalmologists,
oncologists and others work side-by-side augmenting the care offered by
primary-care veterinarians. Veterinary researchers and human medical scientists
often collaborate to find answers to problems that face both human and animal
patients.

   Part of being a caring "pet parent" is understanding the level of commitment
required to enjoy a long, healthy, and successful relationship with an animal
companion. Before getting a pet, decide which type of pet best fits into your
household. Don't forget that besides supplying love and attention, you'll also
need to provide your animal with food, health care and accessories including a
leash, collar, name tag and feeding dishes.

   It's also important to decide who will care for the pet. Spending time
training the animal or housebreaking a puppy, for instance, is essential.

   Dogs are like children in that they require structure and routine in their
lives, as well as gentle discipline. Commit to teaching your dog good manners so
it may be the best companion it can. The relationship between humans and animals
is visible throughout history. Now there is solid science to support that
contact with animals changes many physical parameters like blood pressure.
Physicians now recommend and use pets to help people in extended-care
facilities, children undergoing psychiatric treatment, and to increase the
survival of individuals who have suffered a heart attack.

   Some doctors may go so far as to prescribe a daily walk with the family dog
to reduce stress and increase cardiovascular fitness. The human-animal bond also
may benefit the health of senior citizens, giving them a focus outside
themselves, a reason to get up in the morning. Animals fill roles as companions
and caretakers for individuals living with various disabilities. Not only do
dogs act as the eyes of people who are visually impaired, they also serve as
ears for the deaf, and signal animals for people who have seizures.

   In addition, dogs may act as companions for individuals with physical
disabilities, carrying parcels, towing wheelchairs, calling elevators, and
opening doors. These animals change the lifestyles of their human companions,
making life in an "able-bodied" world a bit less intimidating - a little more
accessible. National Pet Week is identified each year by the Auxiliary to the
American Veterinary Medical Association, the American Animal Hospital
Association, and the North American Veterinary Technician Association Inc. as a
time to focus national attention on the important bond between people and
animals and the ways in which they can take better care of each other.

   Look for educational seminars, "dog jogs", fun runs, and other animal-related
activities in your area. Your local veterinarian may be sponsoring an open house
or kid/pet carnival. Write to Robin Downing, D.V.M., at P.O. Box 460, Windsor
80550 or e-mail her at drrobin@frii.com. She'll respond to reader questions in
her column, but cannot contact letter-writers individually.

LOAD-DATE: May 03, 1999


                             1552 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      May 1, 1999, Saturday, FIRST EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT, Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 535 words

HEADLINE: PUBLIC BESTOWS ITS STAMP OF APPROVAL

BYLINE: BILL MCALLISTER; Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Bill Cosby's television program "The Cosby Show" is going to get a stamp in
January and fellow comedian Jerry Seinfeld may get one in April. So might the
movies "Titanic" and "Jurassic Park." How about John Glenn's return to space and
cellular telephones?

   Those are among the stamps being discussed for the final two sheets of stamps
in the U.S. Postal Service's big Celebrate the Century stamp series. As the
agency's stamp director, Azeezaly S. Jaffer, promised when he unveiled the
series, the stamps only get more controversial as the public is asked to make
selections for the stamps in the 1980s and 1990s.

   Judging from the recently announced winners of the balloting on stamps for
the 1980s, Jaffer seems to have been right. Consider, for example, the Cosby
stamp. It will honor one of TV's greatest stars, but Cosby himself can't be on
it. That's because postal guidelines prohibit any living person from being on a
stamp, so expect the stamp to illustrate the show's logo.

   So what was the most important subject of the 1980s, the subject most
Americans wanted on a stamp? Video games. It drew 268,746 votes and beat out the
fall of the Berlin Wall, which pulled 265,147 votes.

   Washington's Vietnam Veterans Memorial was third with 258,515 votes, followed
by: the movie "E.T., the Extra-Terrestrial," 239,189; Cabbage Patch dolls,
207,505; personal computers, 205,527; compact discs, 199,925; figure skating,
198,841; "The Cosby Show," 194,517; cable TV, 190,533; the National Football
League's San Francisco 49ers, 188,845; the freed American hostages in Iran,
182,784; the space shuttle program, 177,138; "Cats," the Broadway musical,
169,357, and finally, "hip-hop culture," 158,509.

   Losers: basketball's Los Angeles Lakers series against the Boston Celtics,
158,075; mountain biking, 147,779; AIDS awareness, 144,824; college basketball's
"March madness" playoffs, 141,308; broadcast talk shows, 127,283; beach
volleyball, 126,687; country music, 120,977; video camcorders, 114,950; arms
reduction treaties, 94,928; aerobics, 77,904; minivans, 75,915; Vladimir
Horowitz concerts, 64,563; the Senior PGA golf tour, 58,475; gene mapping,
55,411, and Tom Wolfe's novel "The Bonfire of the Vanities," 34,669.

   If you don't like any of the winners, vote now on the final 15 stamps in the
series of 150. Nominees for stamps of the 1990s include:

   People and Events: improving education, cultural diversity, the Persian Gulf
war, recovering endangered species and active older Americans.

   Arts and Entertainment: contemporary architecture, "Jurassic Park," computer
art and graphics, Broadway musicals, "Seinfeld" and "Titanic."

   Sports: baseball records, "extreme" sports, women's sports, in-line skating,
junior golf and Special Olympics.

   Science and Technology: virtual reality, dinosaur fossil recovery, gene
therapy, the World Wide Web, Glenn's return to space, interplanetary
exploration.

   Lifestyle: cellular phones, museum attendance, home offices, sport utility
vehicles, community service and coffee shops.

   Paper ballots for the 1990s stamps are available at most post offices and on
the Internet at http://stampvote.msn.com. Paper ballots must be postmarked by
May 31.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1999


                             1553 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      April 30, 1999, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 6F

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: Voting opens on '90s series of stamps

BYLINE: Associated Press

SOURCE: Constitution

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:
Americans can start voting Saturday on subjects for 15 new postage stamps to
represent the people and events of the '90s.

   Through May, voters can choose among 30 topics proposed by postal officials.
Candidates include cell phones, ''Seinfeld'' and the Persian Gulf War.

   Ballots will be available at post offices across the country and via the
Internet for the set, the last of 10 to highlight each decade of the century.
The Internet site is stampvote.msn.com.

   ''Last year the public cast more than 24 million votes to let us know what
they wanted to see on postage stamps honoring the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s,'' said
Postmaster General William Henderson. ''This year the public has decided that
video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall and personal computers will be among
the subjects representing the 1980s. Now we'll see what 1990s topics stand
out.''

   The post office's ''Celebrate the Century'' program is highlighting some of
the most significant people, places, events with commemorative stamps into the
year 2000.

   The ballot subjects for the 1990s set are:

   People and events: improving education, cultural diversity, sustained
economic growth, Persian Gulf War, recovering species, active older Americans.

   Arts and entertainment: contemporary architecture, ''Jurassic Park,''
computer art and graphics, Broadway musicals, ''Seinfeld,'' ''Titanic.''

   Sports: baseball records broken, extreme sports, women's sports, in-line
skating, junior golf, Special Olympics.

   Science and technology: virtual reality, dinosaur fossil discovery, gene
therapy, World Wide Web, return to space, interplanetary exploration.

   Lifestyle: cellular phones, museum attendance, home offices, sport utility
vehicles, community service, popularity of coffee.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1999


                             1554 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 30, 1999, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. N75; STAMPS & COINS

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: A 'Cos' for Celebration

BYLINE: Bill McAllister, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   BILL COSBY'S television program "The Cosby Show" is going to get a stamp next
January and fellow comedian Jerry Seinfeld may get one next April. So might the
movies "Titanic" and "Jurassic Park." How about John Glenn's return to space and
cellular telephones?

   Those are among the stamps being discussed for the final two sheets of stamps
in the U.S. Postal Service's big Celebrate the Century stamp series. As the
agency's stamp director Azeezaly S. Jaffer promised when he unveiled the series,
the stamps only get more controversial as the public is asked to make selections
for the stamps in the 1980s and 1990s.

   Judging from the recently-announced winners of the balloting on stamps for
the 1980s, Jaffer seems to have been right. Consider, for example, the Cosby
stamp. It will honor one of TV's greatest stars, but Cosby himself can't be on
it. That's because postal guidelines prohibit any living person from being on a
stamp, so expect the stamp to illustrate the show's logo or, in Seinfeld's case,
perhaps the empty restaurant set that was featured in the show.

   So what was the most important subject of the 1980s, the subject most
Americans wanted on a stamp? Video games. It drew 268,746 votes to top the Fall
of the Berlin Wall, which pulled 265,147 votes.

   Washington's Vietnam Veterans Memorial was third with 258,515 votes, followed
by: the movie "E.T., the Extra-Terrestrial," 239,189; "Cabbage Patch" dolls,
207,505; personal computers, 205,527; compact discs, 199,925; figure skating,
198,841; "The Cosby Show," 194,517; cable TV, 190,533; the National Football
League's San Francisco 49ers, 188,845; the freed American hostages in Iran,
182,784; the space shuttle program, 177,138; "Cats," the Broadway musical,
169,357; and, finally, "hip-hop culture," 158,509.

   Losers: basketball's Los Angeles Lakers series against the Boston Celtics,
158,075; mountain biking, 147,779; AIDS awareness, 144,824; college basketball's
March madness playoffs, 141,308; broadcast talk shows, 127,283; beach
volleyball, 126,687; country music, 120,977; video camcorders, 114,950; arms
reduction treaties, 94,928; aerobics, 77,904; minivans, 75,915; Vladimir
Horowitz concerts, 64,563; the Senior PGA Golf tour, 58,475; gene mapping,
55,411; and Tom Wolfe's novel "The Bonfire of the Vanities," 34,669.

   If you don't like any of the winners, vote now on the final 15 stamps in the
series of 150. Nominees for stamps of the 1990s include:

   People and Events: improving education, cultural diversity, the Gulf War,
recovering endangered species and active older Americans.

   Arts and Entertainment: contemporary architecture, "Jurassic Park," computer
art and graphics, Broadway musicals, "Seinfeld" and "Titanic."

   Sports: baseball records, "extreme" sports, women's sports, in-line skating,
junior golf and Special Olympics.

   Science and Technology: virtual reality, dinosaur fossil recovery, gene
therapy, the World Wide Web, Glenn's return to space, interplanetary
exploration.

   Lifestyle: cellular phones, museum attendance, home offices, sport utility
vehicles, community service and coffee shops.

   Paper ballots for the 1990s stamps are available at most post offices and on
the Internet at: http://stampvote.msn.com. All paper ballots must be postmarked
by May 31.

   Meanwhile, new stamps are pouring out of the nation's post offices at a rapid
rate. On Saturday, the agency will issue a booklet of four tropical flower
stamps in Honolulu. It is the first booklet of self-adhesive stamps with stamps
printed on both sides of the booklet. It also marks the first gravure stamps
that have been printed with a 550-line screen. That should make for much sharper
printing than most gravure stamps, which are usually printed with a 300-line
screen.

   In addition, the agency is releasing a set of new international mail stamps
to match the new international rates that become effective May 30. But with one
exception, a 55-cent stamp for Gen. Billy Mitchell, the founder of the Air
Force, these international mail stamps will no longer feature airmail subjects.

   Members of the Citizens Stamp Advisory Committee think images of the "scenic
wonders of America would be of more interest to people abroad," according to
stamp spokesman Don Smeraldi.

   As a result there will be a 48-cent stamp featuring a photo of Niagara Falls,
a 40-cent Rio Grande stamp and a 60-cent Grand Canyon stamp. A 60-cent
aerogramme (a thin sheet that folds into an airmail envelope) featuring
Voyageurs National Park and a 55-cent postal card that features Mount Ranier go
on sale May 15 in Denver.

   The 48-cent self-adhesive Niagara Falls stamp goes on sale May 12 in Niagara
Falls. Dates for the Rio Grande and Grand Canyon stamps have not been announced.

   On May 14, the Postal Service will pay tribute to Mount Vernon, the home of
George Washington where he died 200 years ago. The postal card reproduces a 1792
painting from the National Gallery of Art by an unknown artist. Titled "A View
From Mount Vernon," it will sell for 21 cents each, although it carries a
20-cent denomination.

   INDIVIDUALS seeking first-day cancellations of the tropical flowers, should
purchase the stamps at their local post office and place them on addressed
envelopes. These should be mailed in a larger envelope to: Tropical Flowers
Stamps, Postmaster, 3600 Aolele St., Honolulu, HI 96820-9991. Requests should be
postmarked by May 31.

   Next week in this space: Photography columnist Frank Van Riper. On May 14, a
new postal card will pay tribute to Mount Vernon.


GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1999


                             1555 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 26, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 1806 words

HEADLINE: AND NOW, THE ALZHEIMER'S 'COCKTAIL';
 SELF-HELP: MORE PEOPLE ARE TURNING TO A COMBINATION OF VITAMINS AND DRUGS TO
WARD OFF THE DISEASE. BUT DOCTORS WORRY ABOUT THE PERILS OF SELF-MEDICATION.

BYLINE: ROBERT A. ROSENBLATT, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Shellie Brassler, 47, has a simple goal: to reach age 49 and be able to
remember the birthday party that her friends and family will throw for her. Her
father wasn't so lucky. He was a victim of Alzheimer's disease at 49, passing
the next 24 years of his life in a painful, blank state.

   "I take a handful of pills. I religiously take them and hope and pray it
makes a difference," said Brassler, a resident of Geneva, a suburb of Orlando,
Fla.

   She is among a growing number of Americans who hope to ward off Alzheimer's
disease by taking preventive "cocktails," combinations of vitamins, estrogen and
anti-inflammatory drugs like Advil.

   Refusing to wait for hard evidence from the deliberate pace of drug trials or
for the scientific breakthrough that might come from gene therapy, people like
Brassler are seizing on every hopeful preliminary finding to write their own
prescriptions for keeping memories intact.

   Doctors are sympathetic to their sense of urgency but concerned about the
potential perils of self-medication. Vitamin E is a frequent ingredient for
those hoping to ward off Alzheimer's, and doctors see little risk--though no
sure cure--in its use. But anti-inflammatory drugs can cause ulcers, and
estrogen can raise the risk of cancer.

   "The safe answer is that there is insufficient evidence to make a
recommendation," said Dr. Jeffrey Cummings, who runs the Alzheimer's research
and treatment unit at UCLA.

   With the majority of baby boomers now in their 40s and 50s, the trend toward
self-doctoring is in full swing. Already, their demands have made this an age of
10,000 Web sites and Internet chat rooms on health, libraries filled with
self-help books, and television commercials urging consumers to pester their
doctors for particular drugs.

   There is a special temptation to self-medicate as a preventive strategy
against Alzheimer's, because the devastating disease is so mysterious. It has no
known cure and may not strike for decades. It destroys in stages the memory of
the victim, the ability to think and live independently and wreaks havoc on
family members and loved ones trying to care for the patient. The physical body
can last for years, hale and hearty, even after the mind is gone.

   Unlike heart disease, where diet and exercise are proven preventatives, there
is no way to stop Alzheimer's. So those who fear its deadly impact are seizing
on a fistful of vitamins and drugs, taken in hopes of beating the odds.

   For those in families where Alzheimer's strikes early--in the 30s, 40s and
50s--dooming victims to decades of additional life without memory or cognition,
the urge to do something--anything--is even greater.

   This "early onset" group, families such as Shellie Brassler's, accounts for
just 1% or 2% of everyone who gets Alzheimer's, but the impact is particularly
devastating because it happens at an early age, and many members of a family can
become victims.

   Perhaps the families of "early onset victims" are like the advance patrols of
an army, venturing into dangerous territory years before large numbers of their
baby boom contemporaries will witness the disease's devastating progression or
feel the burden of being caregivers.

   Alzheimer's has become a distressingly frequent plague as more and more
people live to advanced old age. The incidence of the disease is just 1% at age
60, but it doubles every five years. And by age 85, as much as 40% of the
population may suffer from Alzheimer's or another form of dementia.

   There are about 4 million people with Alzheimer's disease and other
memory-destroying dementias in today's U.S. population, which includes 34
million people over the age of 65.

   Alzheimer's Population Could Swell to 14 Million

   With 76 million Americans in the baby boom generation--those born in the
years 1946 through 1964--the incidence of Alzheimer's could explode as better
health care and new technology swells the ranks of those living to 80 and
beyond. The Alzheimer's population could reach 14 million in the next 30 or 40
years, experts say.

   The Alzheimer's cocktail is a joking phrase among the advocates rather than a
literal description of what they consume.

   "There is no blue martini-looking drink," said Brassler, an activist who
founded and directs the Alzheimer Resource Center in Orlando, which provides
advice and counseling for families and caregivers.

   Instead of a unique cocktail, each person has a personal version of pills,
compounds and extracts he or she hopes will ward off the dread disease. There is
a broad selection: vitamins (A, C, and E), anti-inflammatory products often
taken by arthritis victims (aspirin and ibuprofen), and ginkgo biloba, an herbal
supplement. In addition, women can take estrogen, a hormone usually prescribed
for menopausal women to prevent osteoporosis and heart disease.

   Brassler takes daily doses of vitamins A, C and E and estrogen as part of a
hormone replacement regimen.

   "I have a doctor who supports what I am doing," she said. "He has a tendency
to lean a bit towards holistic methods, anyway." The doctor has cautioned her
about her vitamin E megadose, which totals 1,200 units daily.

   To doctors, a mixture of over-the-counter compounds and prescription drugs is
cause for concern.

   "We know that exercising, eating a proper diet and refraining from smoking
can reduce the risk of heart disease and may reduce the risk of some cancers,"
said Dr. Victor Henderson, professor of neurology, gerontology and psychology at
USC. "There may be certain things one could do for Alzheimer's, but we aren't
smart enough to know what they are yet."

   Scientists are racing to find out. Studies are underway on several fronts to
pin down early signs of promise.

   Dr. Leon Thal, head of the department of neuroscience at UC San Diego, is
running a major trial to see whether vitamin E can slow the deterioration of
people with mild memory loss and prevent them from slipping into Alzheimer's.

   Some 700 patients with early cognitive decline are being recruited. These are
people who manage well in their daily lives but are becoming forgetful and
having difficulty concentrating. But they are not yet in the early stages of
Alzheimer's, which is typically marked by people having trouble handling their
checkbook and remembering directions when they drive. Typically, about 15% of
those with mild cognitive decline will deteriorate into cases of full-blown
Alzheimer's.

   Thal, backed by funding from the National Institute on Aging, wants to prove
that mental decline can be arrested in people before they tumble down the slope
of memory loss into Alzheimer's. If he finds something that works conclusively,
it would be a major step toward slowing the onset of the disease so that elderly
patients die of other causes before Alzheimer's sets in. The typical new patient
is over 80. A treatment successful at delaying Alzheimer's onset for five years
could cut the number of victims by more than 30%.

   In the study, just getting underway, a third of the participants will get
vitamin E. A third will get Aricept, a commonly used drug that has had some
success in slowing memory loss for six months or a year in Alzheimer's patients.
And a third will receive a placebo, a neutral compound without any medical
properties.

   In some prior studies, vitamin E has slowed the pace at which Alzheimer's
patients lose their ability to remember things. But Thal emphasizes that there
is no scientific proof that vitamin E--or anything else--is a preventive.

   Certain Drugs Might Just Seem Like the Answer

   Other research involving patients with Alzheimer's who were taking
anti-inflammatory drugs, such as aspirin or ibuprofen, showed a slowdown in the
rate of mental decay. But it might not be the drugs that helped, scientists
caution. Perhaps there is something genetic in those prone to arthritis that
provides some temporary natural protection.

   Estrogen already is being studied as part of the massive Women's Health
Initiative, the biggest systematic study ever conducted on the health of
American women. Women participating in the federally financed study will be
asked questions to measure their mental functioning, and to detect the incidence
of incipient Alzheimer's.

   A study of ginkgo biloba showed a number of patients were marginally helped,
but it has not yet been tested on a large scale.

   Vitamin E the Only Pill Without Serious Risks?

   In the meantime, doctors are in general agreement that, of all the pills one
could pop in a self-medicating fight against Alzheimer's, vitamin E is the only
one without serious health risks.

   Vitamin E is "very, very big for caregivers," said John Gorman, who runs the
Alzheimer's Aid Society of Northern California, based in Sacramento. Among the
15,000 people on his mailing list, almost all the adult children of Alzheimer's
victims take vitamin E. So does his wife, Bea, whose mother, two brothers and
two sisters got the disease in their 40s or 50s.

   But the medical profession discourages use of herbs or vitamins other than
vitamin E.

   Too much vitamin A can stain the skin orange, cause hair loss, mouth sores,
headaches and liver damage. Excess C can cause diarrhea and gastric irritation
and kidney stones.

   Anti-inflammatory drugs can cause intestinal bleeding and ulcers. And because
ginkgo biloba isn't regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, consumers
can't be sure of the purity or consistency of a particular batch.

   In the meantime, doctors say, a bountiful supply of drugs is under
development, and an explosion of biological and genetic knowledge offers promise
for the future.

   "We know a whole lot more than we did five or 10 years ago," said Dr. Thomas
Bird, professor of neurology at the University of Washington.

   But he urges caution for those who are impatient, want to act now and are
willing to spend large amounts of money on vitamins and drugs.

   "Consider the costs . . . and be careful of potential side effects," he said.

   But that won't deter Janet Walsh, whose father and three aunts were struck
down with Alzheimer's. When a genetic test at age 40 revealed she has a high
likelihood of developing the disease, she was severely depressed for a month.

   "Then I said to myself, 'Hello, let's fight this thing and try to beat it,' "
she said. Now, at 43, she runs the Long Island Alzheimer's Foundation.

   She also takes vitamins, and she tried anti-inflammatory drugs but stopped
after getting indigestion. Walsh eagerly reads the scientific journals, scans
research papers and talks to physicians and scientists in search of other things
that might work, to guarantee someday that her own children will never get the
disease.

   "I want to find out if there is a preventive cocktail that will work," she
said. "I'm not going to sit back and just wait."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Shellie Brassler, whose father got Alzheimer's at 49, became an
PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1999


                             1556 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 26, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D13

LENGTH: 6874 words

HEADLINE: THE CHRONICLE 500;

PROFILES A - C

BODY:
3Com Corp.

   Computer Networking Systems

   5400 Bayfront Plaza

   Santa Clara, CA 95052-8145

   408-326-5000

   COMS

   www.3com.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $5,732.05 / 25.82%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $379.91 / 24,401.00%

   CEO Eric Benhamou

   Employees 13,371; Bay Area 2,880

   -----------------------------

   3Dfx Interactive Inc.

   Media/Entertainment Software

   4435 Fortran Drive

   San Jose, CA 95134-2300

   408-935-4400

   TDFX

   www.3dfx.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $202.60 / 2,359.73%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $21.70 / NA

   CEO Greg Ballard

   Employees 247; Bay Area 214

   -----------------------------

   3DO Co.

   Game/Entertainment Software

   600 Galveston Drive

   Redwood City, CA 94063

   650-261-3000

   THDO

   www.3do.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $26.40 / -60.09%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($22.40) / NA

   CEO Trip Hawkins

   Employees 403; Bay Area 325

   -----------------------------


   8X8 Inc.

   Chips/Video-Conferencing

   2445 Mission College Blvd.

   Santa Clara, CA 95054-1214

   408-727-1885

   EGHT

   www.8x8.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $38.31 / -9.07%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($10.76) / NA

   CEO Paul Voois

   Employees 165; Bay Area 146

   -----------------------------


   Abaxis Inc.

   Medical Instruments

   1320 Chesapeake Terrace

   Sunnyvale, CA 94089-1100

   408-734-0200

   ABAX

   www.abaxis.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $12.98 / 213.37%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $4.30 / -7.00%

   CEO Clint Severson

   Employees 107; Bay Area 99

   -----------------------------


   Abgenix Inc.

   Biotechnology

   7601 Dumbarton Circle

   Fremont, CA 94555-3616

   510-608-6500

   ABGX

   www.abgenix.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $3.84 / 296.62%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($16.82) / NA

   CEO R. Scott Greer

   Employees 62; Bay Area 62

   -----------------------------


   ABM Industries Inc.

   Building Maintenance

   160 Pacific Ave. Suite 222

   San Francisco, CA 94111

   415-733-4000

   ABM

   www.abm.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $1,534.91 / 216.31%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $35.16 / 225.00%

   CEO William W. Steele

   Employees 55,000; Bay Area 5,400

   -----------------------------


   AboveNet Communications Inc.

   Internet co-location services

   50 W. San Fernando St. Suite 1010

   San Jose, CA 95113

   408-367-6666

   ABOV

   www.above.net

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $6.77 / 2,341.43%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($12.70) / NA

   CEO Sherman Tuan

   Employees 77; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Actel Corp.

   Semiconductors

   955 E. Arques Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-4533

   408-739-1010

   ACTL

   www.actel.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $154.42 / -.91%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $14.98 / -11.00%

   CEO John East

   Employees 457; Bay Area 400

   -----------------------------


   Actuate Software Corp.

   Software

   999 Baker Way

   San Mateo, CA 94404-1566

   650-425-2300

   ACTU

   www.actuate.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $21.87 / 2,129.79%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($3.17) / NA

   CEO Nicolas Nierenberg

   Employees 162; Bay Area 115

   -----------------------------


   Acuson Corp.

   Medical Ultrasound Equipment

   1220 Charleston Road

   Mountain View, CA 94043-1361

   650-969-9112

   ACN

   www.acuson.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $455.08 / 23.95%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $20.82 / -7.00%

   CEO Samuel H. Maslak

   Employees 1,900; Bay Area 1,200

   -----------------------------


   ADAC Laboratories

   Medical Imaging Equipment

   540 Alder Drive

   Milpitas, CA 95035-7443

   408-321-9100

   ADAC

   www.adaclabs.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $327.00 / 223.91%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $7.40 / -45.00%

   CEO Andrew Eckert

   Employees 1,031; Bay Area 750

   -----------------------------


   Adaptec Inc.

   Networking Products

   691 S. Milpitas Blvd.

   Milpitas, CA 95035-5484

   408-945-8600

   ADPT

   www.adaptec.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $712.02 / -33.38%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($51.47) / NA

   CEO Bob Stephens

   Employees 2,200; Bay Area 1,200

   -----------------------------


   Adept Technology Inc.

   Robotics/Vision Systems

   150 Rose Orchard Way

   San Jose, CA 95134

   408-432-0888

   ADTK

   www.adept.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $85.54 / -12.61%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1.21 / -75.00%

   CEO Brian Carlisle

   Employees 389; Bay Area 230

   -----------------------------


   Adobe Systems Inc.

   Computer Software

   345 Park Ave.

   San Jose, CA 95110-2704

   408-536-6000

   ADBE

   www.adobe.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $923.88 / 24.60%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $116.67 / -30.00%

   CEO John Warnock

   Employees 2,712; Bay Area 1,425

   -----------------------------


   Advanced Fibre Communications Inc.

   Telecommunications

   1 Willowbrook Court

   Petaluma, CA 94954-6507

   707-794-7700

   AFCI

   www.fibre.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $312.74 / 216.75%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $27.21 / -26.00%

   CEO John Schofield

   Employees 830; Bay Area 722

   -----------------------------


   Advanced Micro Devices

   Semiconductors

   1 AMD Place

   Sunnyvale, CA 94088-3453

   408-732-2400

   AMD

   www.amd.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $2,542.14 / 27.88%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($103.96) / NA

   CEO W. J. Sanders III

   Employees 12,800; Bay Area 2,988

   -----------------------------


   Advanced Polymer Systems Inc.

   Polymer-Based Delivery Systems

   123 Saginaw Drive

   Redwood City, CA 94063-4717

   650-366-2626

   APOS

   www.advancedpolymer.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $19.99 / 29.04%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1.89 / NA

   CEO John Meakem Jr.

   Employees 90; Bay Area 45

   -----------------------------


   Advent Software Inc.

   Investment Management Software

   301 Brannan St.

   San Francisco, CA 94107-1849

   415-543-7696

   ADVS

   www.advent.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $70.99 / 246.04%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $4.39 / -34.00%

   CEO Stephanie Di Marco

   Employees 481; Bay Area 396

   -----------------------------


   Aehr Test Systems

   Semiconductor Equipment

   1667 Plymouth St.

   Mountain View, CA 94043-1203

   650-691-9400

   AEHR

   www.aehr.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $28.00 / -38.94%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $0.03 / -99.00%

   CEO Rhea Posedel

   Employees 155; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   AeroCentury Corp.

   Airplane leasing

   1440 Chapin Ave. Suite 310

   Burlingame, CA 94010-4011

   650-696-3900

   ACY

   www.aerocentury.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $3.78 / 2

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1.18 / NA

   CEO Neal Crispin

   Employees 13; Bay Area 12

   -----------------------------


   Affymetrix Inc.

   Biotechnology

   3380 Central Expressway

   Santa Clara, CA 95051-0704

   408-731-5000

   AFFX

   www.affymetrix.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $52.02 / 2,163.21%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($23.13) / NA

   CEO Stephen Fodor

   Employees 321; Bay Area 321

   -----------------------------


   AirTouch Communications Inc.

   Cellular/Wireless Telecommunications

   1 California St.

   San Francisco, CA 94111-5401

   415-658-2000

   ATI

   www.airtouch.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $5,181.00 / 244.15%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $725.00 / 262.00%

   CEO Sam Ginn

   Employees 13,000; Bay Area 1,000

   -----------------------------


   Alliance Semiconductor Corp.

   Imbedded Memory Products

   3099 N. First St.

   San Jose, CA 95134

   408-383-4900

   ALSC

   www.alsc.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $62.19 / -48.25%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($22.52) / NA

   CEO N. Damodar Reddy

   Employees 168; Bay Area 100

   -----------------------------


   Altera Corp.

   Programmable Integrated Circuits

   101 Innovation Drive

   San Jose, CA 95134-1941

   408-544-7000

   ALTR

   www.altera.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $654.34 / 23.68%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $154.38 / 216.00%

   CEO Rodney Smith

   Employees 1,086; Bay Area 966

   -----------------------------


   Alza Corp.

   Drug Delivery

   950 Page Mill Road

   Palo Alto, CA 94303-0802

   650-494-5000

   AZA

   www.alza.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $584.50 / 225.86%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $112.30 / NA

   CEO Ernest Mario

   Employees 1,800; Bay Area 1,300

   -----------------------------


   AMB Property Corp.

   Real Estate Investment Trust

   505 Montgomery St. 5th Floor

   San Francisco, CA 94111-2552

   415-394-9000

   AMB

   www.amb.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $358.88 / 226.07%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $112.59 / 213.00%

   CEO Hamid Moghadam

   Employees 118; Bay Area 104

   -----------------------------


   American Champion Entertainment Inc.

   Entertainment

   1694 The Alameda Suite 100

   San Jose, CA 95123

   408-288-8199

   ACEI

   www.americanchamp.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.80 / -33.33%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($1.04) / NA

   CEO Anthony Chan

   Employees 19; Bay Area 19

   -----------------------------


   American Xtal Technology Inc.

   Semiconductor Materials

   4311 Solar Way

   Fremont, CA 94538

   510-683-5900

   AXTI

   www.axt.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $43.29 / 270.87%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $6.32 / 294.00%

   CEO Morris Young

   Employees 314; Bay Area 309

   -----------------------------


   Ampex Corp.

   Digital Recording/Imaging

   500 Broadway

   Redwood City, CA 94063-3199

   650-367-2011

   AXC

   www.ampex.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $76.92 / -20.55%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $12.94 / 27.00%

   CEO Edward J. Bramson

   Employees 445; Bay Area 209

   -----------------------------


   Apple Computer Inc.

   Computer Hardware

   1 Infinite Loop

   Cupertino, CA 95014-2084

   408-996-1010

   AAPL

   www.apple.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $6,073.00 / -7.01%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $414.00 / NA

   CEO Steve Jobs

   Employees 8,299; Bay Area 3,000

   -----------------------------


   Applied Imaging Corp.

   Medical Devices

   2380 Walsh Ave. Building B

   Sunnyvale, CA 94085-5148

   408-749-1888

   AICX

   www.aicorp.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $11.68 / -11.04%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $8.47 / 213.00%

   CEO Jack Goldstein

   Employees 75; Bay Area 42

   -----------------------------


   Applied Materials Inc.

   Semiconductor Equipment

   3050 Bowers Ave.

   Santa Clara, CA 95054-3298

   408-727-5555

   AMAT

   www.appliedmaterials.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $3,476.48 / -23.52%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $54.89 / -92.00%

   CEO James C. Morgan

   Employees 12,060; Bay Area 5,000

   -----------------------------


   Applied Signal Technology

   Digital Signal Processing Equipment

   400 W. California Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-5148

   408-749-1888

   APSG

   www.appsig.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $110.10 / 214.33%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $10.10 / 231.00%

   CEO Gary L. Yancey

   Employees 648; Bay Area 632

   -----------------------------


   Aradigm Corp.

   Drug Delivery

   3929 Point Eden Way

   Hayward, CA 94545-3718

   510-265-9000

   ARDM

   www.aradigm.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $17.51 / 2,375.30%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($15.45) / NA

   CEO Richard P. Thompson

   Employees 175; Bay Area 100

   -----------------------------


   Arthrocare Corp.

   Medical Devices

   595 N. Pastoria Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2916

   408-736-0224

   ARTC

   www.arthrocare.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $26.99 / 2,110.92%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($2.14) / NA

   CEO Michael A. Baker

   Employees 245; Bay Area 230

   -----------------------------


   Artisan Components Inc.

   Semiconductors

   1195 Bordeaux Drive

   Sunnyvale, CA 94089

   408-734-5600

   ARTI

   www.artisan.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $16.19 / 249.13%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1.44 / 276.00%

   CEO Mark Templeton

   Employees 92; Bay Area 89

   -----------------------------


   Asante Technologies Inc.

   Networking Solutions

   821 Fox Lane

   San Jose, CA 95131

   408-435-8388

   ASNT

   www.asante.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $45.51 / -45.36%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($19.03) / NA

   CEO Wilson Wong

   Employees 100; Bay Area 86

   -----------------------------


   Ascend Communications Inc.

   Networking Solutions

   1701 Harbor Bay Parkway

   Alameda, CA 94502-3002

   510-769-6001

   ASND

   www.ascend.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $1,478.68 / 226.66%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($19.65) / NA

   CEO Mory Ejabat

   Employees 3,225; Bay Area 832

   -----------------------------


   Aspec Technology Inc.

   Semiconductor services

   830 E. Arques Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-4519

   408-774-2199

   ASPC

   www.aspec.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $23.09 / 213.86%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($6.53) / NA

   CEO Douglas E. Klint (Acting)

   Employees 162; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Aspect Development Inc.

   Computer Software

   1300 Charleston Road

   Mountain View, CA 94043-1331

   650-428-2743

   ASDV

   www.aspectdv.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $86.36 / 272.97%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $16.02 / NA

   CEO Romesh Wadhwani

   Employees 878; Bay Area 214

   -----------------------------


   Aspect Telecommunications

   Customer Relation Services

   1730 Fox Drive

   San Jose, CA 95131-2311

   408-325-2200

   ASPT

   www.aspect.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $512.31 / 231.14%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $32.49 / -8.00%

   CEO James Carreker

   Employees 1,963; Bay Area 787

   -----------------------------


   Asyst Technologies Inc.

   Semiconductor Equipment

   48761 Kato Road

   Fremont, CA 94538-7313

   510-661-5000

   ASYT

   www.asyst.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $112.06 / -32.27%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($10.20) / NA

   CEO Mihir Parikh

   Employees 565; Bay Area 412

   -----------------------------


   ATG Inc.

   Radioactive Waste Management

   47375 Fremont Blvd.

   Fremont, CA 94538-6502

   510-490-3008

   ATGC

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $35.90 / 287.88%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $5.14 / 2,406.00%

   CEO Doreen Chiu

   Employees 319; Bay Area 45

   -----------------------------


   AtHome Corp.

   Internet Service Provider

   425 Broadway St.

   Redwood City, CA 94063-3126

   650-569-5000

   ATHM

   www.home.net

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $48.04 / 2,546.02%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($144.17) / NA

   CEO Thomas Jermoluk

   Employees 715; Bay Area 600

   -----------------------------


   Atmel Corp.

   Semiconductor Equipment

   2325 Orchard Parkway

   San Jose, CA 95131-1034

   408-441-0311

   ATML

   www.atmel.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $1,111.09 / 215.94%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($50.04) / NA

   CEO George Perlegos

   Employees 6,615; Bay Area 1,275

   -----------------------------


   Aureal Semiconductor

   Semiconductor Equipment

   4245 Technology Drive

   Fremont, CA 94538-6339

   510-252-4245

   AURL

   www.aureal.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $25.32 / 21,444.39%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($18.51) / NA

   CEO Kenneth Kokinakis

   Employees 150; Bay Area 140

   -----------------------------


   Aurora Foods Inc.

   Foods

   456 Montgomery St. Suite 2200

   San Francisco, CA 94104

   415-982-3019

   AOR

   www.aurorafoods.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $947.00 / 28.35%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $34.20 / 230.00%

   CEO Ian Wilson

   Employees 1,200; Bay Area 8

   -----------------------------


   Auspex Systems Inc.

   Computer Hardware/Software

   2300 Central Expressway

   Santa Clara, CA 95050-2516

   408-566-2000

   ASPX

   www.auspex.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $137.50 / -32.07%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($26.14) / NA

   CEO Bruce Moore

   Employees 600; Bay Area 450

   -----------------------------


   Autodesk Inc.

   Computer Software

   111 McInnis Parkway

   San Rafael, CA 94903-2700

   415-507-5000

   ADSK

   www.autodesk.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $740.16 / 217.04%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $91.00 / 2,101.00%

   CEO Carol Bartz

   Employees 2,470; Bay Area 1,500

   -----------------------------


   Avant Corp.

   Computer Software

   46871 Bayside Parkway

   Fremont, CA 94538-6572

   510-413-8000

   AVNT

   www.avanticorp.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $227.14 / 238.17%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $27.16 / 2,403.00%

   CEO Gerald Hsu

   Employees 701; Bay Area 450

   -----------------------------


   Avigen Inc.

   Gene Therapy

   1201 Harbor Bay Parkway Suite 1000

   Alameda, CA 94502-6553

   510-748-7150

   AVGN

   www.avigen.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.17 / 277.55%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($9.30) / NA

   CEO John Monahan

   Employees 60; Bay Area 60

   -----------------------------


   Aviron

   Genetically Engineered Vaccines

   297 N. Bernardo Ave.

   Mountain View, CA 94043

   650-919-6500

   AVIR

   www.aviron.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.74 / -49.55%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($54.80) / NA

   CEO J. Leighton Read

   Employees 160; Bay Area 160

   -----------------------------


   Axys Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Pharmaceuticals

   180 Kimball Way

   South San Francisco, CA 94080-6218

   650-829-1000

   AXPH

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $47.42 / 291.10%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($156.12) / NA

   CEO John Walker

   Employees 427; Bay Area 235

   -----------------------------


   BA Merchant Services Inc.

   Banking

   1 S. Van Ness Ave.

   San Francisco, CA 94103-1226

   415-241-3390

   BPI

   www.bankamerica.com/b-banking/bbmerchov.html

   Assets($mil) $372.29

   Income($mil)/%CHG $36.66 / -2.00%

   CEO Sharif Bayyari

   Employees 806; Bay Area 325

   -----------------------------


   Barra Inc.

   Financial Software/Services

   2100 Milvia St.

   Berkeley, CA 94704-1113

   510-548-5442

   BARZ

   www.barra.com.

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $153.77 / 217.76%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $18.58 / 2,142.00%

   CEO Andrew Rudd

   Employees 700; Bay Area 300

   -----------------------------


   Bay Area Bancshares

   Banking

   900 Veterans Blvd.

   Redwood City, CA 94063

   650-367-1600

   BYAR

   www.bayareabank.com

   Assets($mil) $155.32

   Income($mil)/%CHG $2.36 / 231.00%

   CEO Robert Haight

   Employees 44; Bay Area 44

   -----------------------------


   Bay View Capital Corp.

   Savings & Loan

   1840 Gateway Drive

   San Mateo, CA 94404

   650-312-7200

   BVCC

   wwww.bvcc.com

   Assets($mil) $5,596.23

   Income($mil)/%CHG $22.71 / 262.00%

   CEO Edward Sondker

   Employees 1,000; Bay Area 1,000

   -----------------------------


   BEA Systems Inc.

   Computer Software

   2315 N. First St.

   San Jose, CA 95131

   408-570-8000

   BEAS

   www.beasys.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $289.04 / 273.65%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($46.36) / NA

   CEO William T. Coleman

   Employees 1,234; Bay Area 384

   -----------------------------


   Bebe Stores Inc.

   Women's Apparel/Accessories

   380 Valley Drive

   Brisbane, CA 94005-1208

   415-715-3900

   BEBE

   www.bebe.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $173.02 / 238.41%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $23.08 / 288.00%

   CEO Manny Mashouf

   Employees 1,101; Bay Area 400

   -----------------------------


   Bedford Property Investors Inc.

   Real Estate Investment Trust

   270 Lafayette Circle

   Lafayette, CA 94549-4379

   925-283-8910

   BED

   www.bedfordproperty.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $73.67 / 257.87%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $31.49 / 21.00%

   CEO Peter Bedford

   Employees 43; Bay Area 32

   -----------------------------


   BEI Technologies Inc.

   Industrial Products

   1 Post St. Suite 2500

   San Francisco, CA 94104-5229

   415-956-4477

   BEIQ

   www.bei-tech.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $132.75 / 224.19%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $2.42 / -56.00%

   CEO Charles Crocker

   Employees 1,107; Bay Area 426

   -----------------------------


   Bell Microproducts Inc.

   Semiconductor Distribution

   1941 Ringwood Ave.

   San Jose, CA 95131-1721

   408-451-9400

   BELM

   www.bellmicro.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $661.42 / 223.92%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $6.07 / 230.00%

   CEO W. Donald Bell

   Employees 880; Bay Area 590

   -----------------------------


   Beringer Wine Estates Holdings

   Wine

   610 Airpark Road

   Napa, CA 94558-7516

   707-963-7115

   BERW

   www.berw.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $345.85 / 216.62%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $23.87 / 24,666.00%

   CEO Walter Klenz

   Employees 710; Bay Area 575

   -----------------------------


   Beyond.com Corp.

   Software

   1195 W. Fremont Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94087

   408-616-4200

   BYND

   www.beyond.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $36.65 / 2,118.07%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($31.07) / NA

   CEO Mark Breier

   Employees 300; Bay Area 283

   -----------------------------


   BF Enterprises Inc.

   Real Estate

   100 Bush St. Suite 1250

   San Francisco, CA 94104-3914

   415-989-6580

   BFEN

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $5.63 / 2.58%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $2.82 / -8.00%

   CEO Brian Burns

   Employees 8; Bay Area 7

   -----------------------------


   Bio-Rad Labs

   Diagnostic Products/Instruments

   1000 Alfred Nobel Drive

   Hercules, CA 94547-1898

   510-724-7000

   BIO.A

   www.bio-rad.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $441.94 / 23.52%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $24.30 / 249.00%

   CEO David Schwartz

   Employees 2,650; Bay Area 1,000

   -----------------------------


   BioTime Inc.

   Biotechnology

   935 Pardee St. 2nd Floor

   Berkeley, CA 94710-2623

   510-845-9535

   BTIM

   www.biotimeinc.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $1.30 / 2,584.21%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($3.60) / NA

   CEO Paul Segall

   Employees 13; Bay Area 12

   -----------------------------


   Boole & Babbage Inc.

   Software Retail/Services

   3131 Zanker Road

   San Jose, CA 95134-1933

   408-526-3000

   BOOL

   www.boole.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $226.02 / 212.85%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $38.57 / 294.00%

   CEO Paul Newton

   Employees 955; Bay Area 420

   -----------------------------


   Borel Bank & Trust San Mateo

   Commercial Banking

   160 Bovet Road

   San Mateo, CA 94402-3124

   650-378-3700

   BLCA

   www.borel.com

   Assets($mil) $293.50

   Income($mil)/%CHG $3.54 / 26.00%

   CEO Ronald G. Fick

   Employees 73; Bay Area 73

   -----------------------------


   BRE Properties

   Real Estate Investment Trust

   44 Montgomery St. 36th Floor

   San Francisco, CA 94104-4809

   415-445-6530

   BRE

   www.breproperties.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $203.24 / 247.53%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $60.64 / -20.00%

   CEO Frank McDowell

   Employees 1,000; Bay Area 150

   -----------------------------


   Brio Technology Inc.

   Software

   3460 W. Bayshore Road

   Palo Alto, CA 94303-4227

   650-856-8000

   BRYO

   www.brio.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $40.51 / 274.41%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($3.04) / NA

   CEO Yorgen Edholm

   Employees 258; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Broadvision Inc.

   Internet Software Commerce

   585 Broadway St.

   Redwood City, CA 94063-3122

   650-261-5100

   BVSN

   www.broadvision.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $50.91 / 287.82%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $4.03 / NA

   CEO Pehong Chen

   Employees 188; Bay Area 295

   -----------------------------


   Building Materials Holding Corp.

   Building Materials

   1 Market Plaza, Steuart Tower, Suite 2650

   San Francisco, CA 94105

   415-227-1650

   BMHC

   www.bhmc.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $877.28 / 220.49%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $15.14 / 260.00%

   CEO Robert Mellor

   Employees 4,100; Bay Area 4

   -----------------------------


   Business Resource Group

   Workspace Products/Services

   2150 N. First St. Suite 101

   San Jose, CA 95131-2029

   408-325-3200

   BRGP

   www.brg.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $101.29 / 247.51%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1.72 / NA

   CEO John Peth

   Employees 425; Bay Area 195

   -----------------------------


   BWC Financial Corp.

   Community Banking

   1400 Civic Drive

   Walnut Creek, CA 94596

   925-932-5353

   BWCF

   www.bowc.com

   Assets($mil) $264.97

   Income($mil)/%CHG $4.22 / 245.00%

   CEO James L. Ryan

   Employees 103; Bay Area 103

   -----------------------------


   C-Cube Microsystems Inc.

   Digital Video Circuits

   1778 McCarthy Blvd.

   Milpitas, CA 95035-7421

   408-944-6300

   CUBE

   www.c-cube.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $351.79 / 24.38%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $46.28 / 24.00%

   CEO Alexandre Balkanski

   Employees 900; Bay Area 726

   -----------------------------


   Cadence Design Systems Inc.

   Electronic Design Automation

   555 River Oaks Parkway

   San Jose, CA 95134-1917

   408-943-1234

   CDN

   www.cadence.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $1,216.07 / 232.77%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($100.22) / NA

   CEO Jack Harding

   Employees 3,945; Bay Area NA

   Chronicle 500 Type Page 2

   -----------------------------


   Caere Corp.

   Scanning Software

   100 Cooper Court

   Los Gatos, CA 95032-7604

   408-395-7000

   CAER

   www.caere.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $65.80 / 219.60%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $10.27 / 2,227.00%

   CEO Robert Teresi

   Employees 293; Bay Area 231

   -----------------------------


   California Culinary Academy

   Culinary Education

   625 Polk St.

   San Francisco, CA 94102

   415-771-3536

   COOK

   www.baychef.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $17.81 / 210.40%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $0.06 / NA

   CEO Keith Keogh

   Employees 152; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   California Micro Devices Corp.

   Electronic Components

   215 Topaz St.

   Milpitas, CA 95035-5430

   408-263-3214

   CAMD

   www.camd.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $33.83 / 25.94%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($3.86) / NA

   CEO Jeffery Kalb

   Employees 256; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   California Microwave

   Wireless Internet Access

   1143 Borregas Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94089-1306

   408-732-4000

   CMIC

   www.calmike.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $255.97 / -1.78%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($25.43) / NA

   CEO Frederick Lawrence

   Employees 842; Bay Area 25

   -----------------------------


   California Water Service Group

   Water Utilities

   1720 N. First St.

   San Jose, CA 95112-4598

   408-367-8200

   CWT

   www.calwater.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $186.27 / -4.63%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $18.39 / -21.00%

   CEO Peter Nelson

   Employees 658; Bay Area 245

   -----------------------------


   Calpine Corp.

   Power Producers

   50 W. San Fernando St.

   San Jose, CA 95113-2424

   408-995-5115

   CPN

   www.calpine.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $530.70 / 2,103.72%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $45.67 / 232.00%

   CEO Peter Cartwright

   Employees 356; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Calypte Biomedical Corp.

   Diagnostic Kits

   1440 Fourth St.

   Berkeley, CA 94710-1336

   510-749-5100

   CALY

   www.calypte.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.95 / 2,152.92%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($8.46) / NA

   CEO William A. Boeger

   Employees 50; Bay Area 29

   -----------------------------


   Cardiac Pathways Corp.

   Medical Devices

   995 Benicia Ave.

   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2805

   408-737-0505

   CPWY

   www.cardiac.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $3.60 / 2,118.56%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($18.46) / NA

   CEO William Starling

   Employees 127; Bay Area 115

   -----------------------------


   Cardima Inc.

   Medical Devices

   47266 Benicia St.

   Fremont, CA 94538-7330

   510-354-0300

   CRDM

   www.cardima.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $2.49 / 298.17%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($16.18) / NA

   CEO Phillip Radlick

   Employees 86; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Cardiothoracic Systems Inc.

   Medical Devices

   10600 N. Tantau Ave.

   Cupertino, CA 95014-0739

   408-342-1700

   CTSI

   www.cardioth.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $16.14 / 272.18%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($22.56) / NA

   CEO Richard Ferrari

   Employees 142; Bay Area 100

   -----------------------------


   Catalytica Inc.

   Specialty Chemicals

   430 Ferguson Drive

   Mountain View, CA 94043-5272

   650-960-3000

   CTAL

   www.catalytica-inc.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $375.15 / 2,107.33%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $20.76 / 26,598.00%

   CEO Ricardo Levy

   Employees 1,400; Bay Area 75

   -----------------------------


   Catapult Communications Corp.

   Telecommunications Test Equipment

   160 S. Whisman Road

   Mountain View, CA 94041

   650-960-1025

   CATT

   www.catapult.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $24.70 / 235.71%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $6.80 / 251.00%

   CEO Richard A. Karp

   Employees 78; Bay Area 44

   -----------------------------


   Catellus Development Corp.

   Land Development

   201 Mission St.

   San Francisco, CA 94105-1831

   415-974-4500

   CDX

   www.catellus.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $165.60 / 240.10%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $34.73 / 238.00%

   CEO Nelson Rising

   Employees 415; Bay Area 144

   -----------------------------


   CBT Group PLC

   Interactive Training Software

   900 Chesapeake Drive

   Redwood City, CA 94063

   650-817-5900

   CBTSY

   www.cbtsys.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $162.23 / 218.37%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $16.53 / -8.00%

   CEO Greg Priest

   Employees 1,195; Bay Area 109

   -----------------------------


   Celeritek Inc.

   Satellite Telecommunications

   3236 Scott Blvd.

   Santa Clara, CA 95054-3011

   408-986-5060

   CLTK

   www.celeritek.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $46.81 / -10.22%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($4.76) / NA

   CEO Tamer Husseini

   Employees 340; Bay Area 340

   -----------------------------


   Cell Genesys Inc.

   Gene Therapy

   342 Lakeside Drive

   Foster City, CA 94404-1146

   650-425-4400

   CEGE

   www.cellgenesys.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $24.14 / 21.42%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($12.12) / NA

   CEO Stephen A. Sherwin

   Employees 151; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Cellegy Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   349 Oyster Point Blvd. Suite 200

   South San Francisco, CA 94080

   650-616-2200

   CLGY

   www.cellegy.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.83 / 2.48%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($7.36) / NA

   CEO K. Michael Forrest

   Employees 29; Bay Area 29

   -----------------------------


   CellNet Data Systems Inc.

   Wireless Information Services

   125 Shoreway Road

   San Carlos, CA 94070-2704

   650-508-6000

   CNDS

   www.cellnet.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $13.00 / 2,122.68%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($141.48) / NA

   CEO John Seidl

   Employees 800; Bay Area 600

   -----------------------------


   Celtrix Pharmaceuticals

   Biopharmaceuticals

   2033 Gateway Place Suite 600

   Santa Jose, CA 95110

   408-988-2500

   CTRX

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.62 / -6.01%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($16.73) / NA

   CEO Andreas Sommer

   Employees 7; Bay Area 7

   -----------------------------


   Centigram Communications Corp.

   Telecommunications Equipment

   91 E. Tasman Drive

   San Jose, CA 95134-1618

   408-944-0250

   CGRM

   www.centigram.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $79.66 / -19.59%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($6.87) / NA

   CEO Robert Puette

   Employees 325; Bay Area 213

   -----------------------------


   Central Garden & Pet Co.

   Consumer Products

   3697 Mt. Diablo Blvd.

   Lafayette, CA 94549-3745

   925-283-4573

   CENT

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $1,384.05 / 257.33%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $33.77 / 279.00%

   CEO William E. Brown

   Employees 4,500; Bay Area 200

   -----------------------------


   Centura Software Corp.

   Network Software

   975 Island Drive

   Redwood Shores, CA 94065-5147

   650-596-3400

   CNTR

   www.centurasoft.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $53.49 / -7.67%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $2.11 / NA

   CEO Scott Broomfield

   Employees 210; Bay Area 120

   -----------------------------


   Cerus Corp.

   Biotechnology/Medical Products

   2525 Stanwell Drive Suite 300

   Concord, CA 94520-4824

   925-603-9071

   CERS

   www.ceruscorp.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $2.90 / -57.62%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($29.55) / NA

   CEO Stephen Isaacs

   Employees 90; Bay Area 90

   -----------------------------


   Chalone Wine Group Ltd.

   Wine

   621 Airpark Road

   Napa, CA 94558-6272

   707-254-4200

   CHLN

   www.chalonewinegroup.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $41.73 / 28.28%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $3.58 / -5.00%

   CEO Thomas B. Selfridge

   Employees 117; Bay Area 66

   -----------------------------


   Chevron Corp.

   Energy-Oil and Gas

   575 Market St.

   San Francisco, CA 94105-2823

   415-894-7700

   CHV

   www.chevron.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $26,187.00 / -25.19%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1,332.00 / -59.00%

   CEO Kenneth Derr

   Employees 33,676; Bay Area 8,209

   -----------------------------


   Chiron Corp.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   4560 Horton St.

   Emeryville, CA 94608-2916

   510-655-8730

   CHIR

   www.chiron.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $662.70 / 241.52%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $524.11 / 2,636.00%

   CEO Edward Penhoet

   Employees 6,482; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Cholestech Corp.

   Medical Devices

   3347 Investment Blvd.

   Hayward, CA 94545-3808

   510-732-7200

   CTEC

   www.cholestech.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $22.58 / 217.99%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $0.76 / -33.00%

   CEO Warren E. Pinckert

   Employees 136; Bay Area 122

   -----------------------------


   Cidco Inc.

   Telecommunications Equipment

   220 Cochrane Circle

   Morgan Hill, CA 95037-2803

   408-779-1162

   CDCO

   www.cidco.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $174.70 / -32.03%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($51.43) / NA

   CEO Paul Locklin

   Employees 250; Bay Area 195

   -----------------------------


   Circle International Group Inc.

   Transportation/Logistics

   260 Townsend St.

   San Francisco, CA 94107-1719

   415-978-0600

   CRCL

   www.circleintl.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $737.67 / 22.88%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $18.51 / -30.00%

   CEO David I. Beatson

   Employees 4,602; Bay Area 286

   -----------------------------


   Cirrus Logic Inc.

   Integrated Circuits

   3100 W. Warren Ave.

   Fremont, CA 94538-6423

   510-623-8300

   CRUS

   www.cirrus.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $788.32 / -10.53%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($200.89) / NA

   CEO David D. French

   Employees 1,400; Bay Area 550

   -----------------------------


   Cisco Systems Inc.

   Networking Products

   170 W. Tasman Drive

   San Jose, CA 95134-1706

   408-526-4000

   CSCO

   www.cisco.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $9,988.74 / 236.86%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $1,362.25 / 23.00%

   CEO John Chambers

   Employees 17,124; Bay Area 8,800

   -----------------------------


   Civic Bancorp

   Commercial Banking

   2101 Webster St. 14th Floor

   Oakland, CA 94612

   510-836-6500

   CIVC

   www.civicbank.com

   Assets($mil) $389.58

   Income($mil)/%CHG $5.51 / 217.00%

   CEO Herbert Foster

   Employees 112; Bay Area 112

   -----------------------------


   Clarify Inc.

   Business Software

   2125 O'Nel Drive

   San Jose, CA 95131-2032

   408-573-3000

   CLFY

   www.clarify.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $130.51 / 247.94%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $7.31 / 286.00%

   CEO Tony Zingale

   Employees 672; Bay Area 357

   -----------------------------


   Clorox Co.

   Consumer Goods

   1221 Broadway

   Oakland, CA 94612-1888

   510-271-7000

   CLX

   www.clorox.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $4,008.03 / 26.32%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $374.78 / 222.00%

   CEO G. Craig Sullivan

   Employees 12,000; Bay Area 1,770

   -----------------------------


   CMC Industries Inc.

   Electronic Manufacturing Services

   4950 Patrick Henry Drive

   Santa Clara, CA 95054-1822

   408-982-9999

   CMCI

   www.cmcindustries.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $271.22 / -8.14%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($1.92) / NA

   CEO Matthew Landa

   Employees 1,402; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Cnet Inc.

   Internet Content Provider

   150 Chestnut St.

   San Francisco, CA 94111-1004

   415-395-7800

   CNET

   www.cnet.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $56.42 / 267.74%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $2.59 / NA

   CEO Halsey Minor

   Employees 491; Bay Area 440

   -----------------------------


   CNF Transportation Inc.

   Freight Transportation

   3240 Hillview Ave.

   Palo Alto, CA 94304-1201

   650-494-2900

   CNF

   www.cnf.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $4,941.49 / 215.81%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $138.97 / 215.00%

   CEO Gregory Quesnel

   Employees 35,000; Bay Area 1,500

   -----------------------------


   Coast Distribution System

   Recreational Vehicle Accessories

   350 Woodview Ave.

   Morgan Hill, CA 95037

   408-782-6686

   CRV

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $148.68 / 29.36%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $0.12 / NA

   CEO Thomas McGuire

   Employees 360; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Coherent Inc.

   Laser Instruments

   5100 Patrick Henry Drive

   Santa Clara, CA 95054-1112

   408-764-4000

   COHR

   www.cohr.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $414.71 / 24.06%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $15.56 / -53.00%

   CEO Bernard Couillaud

   Employees 2,261; Bay Area 1,000

   -----------------------------


   Cohesion Technologies Inc.

   Medical Products

   2500 Faber Place

   Palo Alto, CA 94303

   650-354-4300

   CSON

   www.cohesiontech.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $2.03 / -19.68%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($9.57) / NA

   CEO David J. Foster

   Employees 72; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Collagen Aesthetic Inc.

   Medical Devices

   2500 Faber Place

   Palo Alto, CA 94303-3308

   415-856-0200

   CGEN

   www.collagen.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $83.06 / 28.18%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($3.41) / NA

   CEO Gary Petersmeyer

   Employees 280; Bay Area 150

   -----------------------------


   Com21 Inc.

   Telecommunications Equipment

   750 Tasman Drive

   Milpitas, CA 95035-7456

   408-953-9100

   CMTO

   www.com21.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $48.11 / 2,207.45%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($13.36) / NA

   CEO Peter Fenner

   Employees 190; Bay Area 175

   -----------------------------


   Communication Intelligence

   Pen-Based Software

   275 Shoreline Drive Suite 500

   Redwood City, CA 94065-1413

   650-802-7888

   CICI

   www.cic.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $5.22 / 29.23%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($3.59) / NA

   CEO Guido DiGregorio (President)

   Employees 73; Bay Area 28

   -----------------------------


   Concentric Network Corp.

   Network Service Provider

   1400 Parkmoor Ave.

   San Jose, CA 95126

   408-817-2800

   CNCX

   www.concentric.net

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $82.80 / 282.16%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($82.10) / NA

   CEO Henry Nothhaft

   Employees 570; Bay Area 275

   -----------------------------


   Conceptus Inc.

   Medical Devices

   1021 Howard Ave.

   San Carlos, CA 94070-4028

   650-802-7240

   CPTS

   www.conceptus.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.44 / -68.51%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($9.66) / NA

   CEO Kathryn Tunstall

   Employees 22; Bay Area 22

   -----------------------------


   Connect Inc.

   Applications Software

   515 Ellis St.

   Mountain View, CA 94043-2242

   650-254-4000

   CNKT

   www.connectinc.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $6.47 / -30.79%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($7.90) / NA

   CEO Craig D. Norris

   Employees 93; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Connetics Corp.

   Biotechnology

   3400 W. Bayshore Road

   Palo Alto, CA 94303-4227

   650-843-2800

   CNCT

   www.connetics.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $9.12 / 234.07%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($26.59) / NA

   CEO Thomas Wiggans

   Employees 71; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Consolidated Freightways Corp.

   Freight Transport

   175 Linfield Drive

   Menlo Park, CA 94025-3799

   650-326-1700

   CFWY

   www.cf.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $2,238.42 / -2.63%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $26.34 / 229.00%

   CEO W. Roger Curry

   Employees 21,000; Bay Area 920

   -----------------------------


   Copart Inc.

   Salvage

   5500 E. Second St.

   Benicia, CA 94510-1020

   707-748-5003

   CPRT

   www.copart.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $122.78 / 24.89%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $17.63 / 233.00%

   CEO Willis Johnson

   Employees 1,355; Bay Area 185

   -----------------------------


   COR Therapeutics Inc.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   256 E. Grand Ave.

   South San Francisco, CA 94080-4810

   650-244-6800

   CORR

   www.corr.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $41.96 / 289.10%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($27.61) / NA

   CEO Vaughn M. Kailian

   Employees 321; Bay Area 220

   -----------------------------


   Corsair Communications Inc.

   Telecommunications Equipment

   3408 Hillview Ave.

   Palo Alto, CA 94304-1321

   650-842-3300

   CAIR

   www.corsair.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $65.21 / 27.16%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($6.86) / NA

   CEO Mary Ann Byrnes

   Employees 120; Bay Area 100

   -----------------------------


   Cost Plus Inc.

   Home Furnishings/Gifts Retailer

   200 Fourth St.

   Oakland, CA 94607

   510-893-7300

   CPWM

   NA

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $315.13 / 220.97%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $13.23 / 232.00%

   CEO Murray Dashe

   Employees 2,473; Bay Area 525

   -----------------------------


   Cotelligent Inc.

   Information Technology Consulting Services

   101 California St. Suite 2050

   San Francisco, CA 94111

   415-439-6400

   CGZ

   www.cotelligent.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $305.32 / 224.77%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $14.03 / 245.00%

   CEO James Lavelle

   Employees 3,300; Bay Area 578

   -----------------------------


   Coulter Pharmaceutical Inc.

   Pharmaceuticals

   600 Gateway Blvd.

   South San Francisco, CA 94080

   650-553-2000

   CLTR

   www.coulterpharm.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $34.25 / 2

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($1.95) / NA

   CEO Michael Bigham

   Employees 154; Bay Area 154

   -----------------------------


   Covad Communications Group

   Digital Internet Services

   2330 Central Expressway

   Santa Clara, CA 95050

   408-844-7500

   COVD

   www.covad.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $5.32 / 21,948.46%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($48.12) / NA

   CEO Robert E. Knowling Jr.

   Employees 371; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Credence Systems Corp.

   Automated Testing Equipment

   215 Fourier Ave.

   Fremont, CA 94539-7828

   510-657-7400

   CMOS

   www.credence.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $160.91 / -34.64%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($42.02) / NA

   CEO (To Be Determined)

   Employees 646; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------


   Crescendo Pharmaceuticals Corp.

   Pharmaceuticals

   1454 Page Mill Road

   Palo Alto, CA 94304-1124

   650-494-5600

   CNDO

   www.crescendo-pharm.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $0.00 / 2

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($95.79) / NA

   CEO Gary L. Neil

   Employees 1; Bay Area 1

   -----------------------------


   Crown Vantage Inc.

   Printing/Packaging Papers

   300 Lakeside Drive

   Oakland, CA 94612-3534

   510-874-3400

   CVAN

   www.crownvantage.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $850.99 / -5.18%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($140.50) / NA

   CEO Robert Olah

   Employees 3,552; Bay Area 40

   -----------------------------


   CV Therapeutics Inc.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   3172 Porter Drive

   Palo Alto, CA 94304-1212

   650-812-0585

   CVTX

   www.cvt.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $4.50 / 274.90%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($12.60) / NA

   CEO Louis Lange

   Employees 66; Bay Area 66

   -----------------------------


   Cygnus Inc.

   Drug Delivery

   400 Penobscot Drive

   Redwood City, CA 94063

   650-369-4300

   CYGN

   www.cygnus.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $11.65 / -60.49%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($39.42) / NA

   CEO John Hodgman

   Employees 157; Bay Area 157

   -----------------------------


   Cylink Corp.

   Communications Security

   910 Hermosa Court

   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-4103

   408-735-5800

   CYLK

   www.cylink.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $42.76 / -13.31%

   Income($mil)/%CHG $5.16 / NA

   CEO William Crowell

   Employees 360; Bay Area 200

   -----------------------------


   Cypress Semiconductor Corp.

   Integrated Circuits

   3901 N. First St.

   San Jose, CA 95134-1599

   408-943-2600

   CY

   www.cypress.com

   Sales($mil)/%CHG $486.84 / -9.82%

   Income($mil)/%CHG ($111.18) / NA

   CEO T.J. Rodgers

   Employees 2,770; Bay Area NA

   -----------------------------



GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE TEXT

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1999


                             1557 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         April 24, 1999 Saturday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 5

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy hasn't produced cures yet, doctors say at conference

BYLINE: JOE MANNING

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Science has cloned bulls and sheep to produce genetically desired
agricultural animals. Genes have been inserted into food crops to provide them
with resistance to diseases and to keep them fresh longer.

   But science has not yet kept the decades-old promise that gene therapy could
be used to cure multiple human diseases, Michael J. Dunn, dean and executive
vice president of the Medical College of Wisconsin, Wauwatosa, said during a
conference this week.

   How long that promise will remain unfulfilled remains unknown, Du nn said at
a seminar on genetics sponsored by the college.

   Regardless, scientists at the college continue to seek out the genetic causes
of a variety of diseases, from high blood pressure to color blindness to
obesity, in the hope of one da y being able to correct the defective genes
causing the problems, Dunn said.

   The medical college has just established a Human and Molecular Genetics
Center, one of the first facilities in the world to focus on "functional"
genetic researc h, Dunn said.

   The research conducted at the center will be "critical to translating genetic
research to clinical genetic therapy," Dunn said. "The center's mission is to
identify gene function in disease and ultimately, to translate this research
into improved health."

   While most, if not all, human ailments are caused "solely or partly" as the
result of defective genes, gene therapy so far has failed to produce any cures,
Dunn said.

   The primarily reason: "We can not get the new genes to do the job."

   The "new genes" are healthy genes inserted into the cells of laboratory
animals and patients. Their "job" is to correct the function of faulty genes.

   Eventually, that problem will be overco me, Dunn said, but, at this point
science cannot yet treat genetic conditions caused by one faulty gene, let alone
treat ailments involving multiple genes.

   With the scientific community realizing diseases have genetic origins, Dunn
said, a "total shift" has occurred in biomedical research from an organ-centered
to a molecular approach.

   Despite the slowness in producing treatments, the promise of gene therapy is
still held out to humanity searching to be disease-free, said Jeffrey Osborn,
director of the center for science education at the medical college.

   In fact, Osborn said, genetic research could eventually unlock the secrets of
aging, also thought to be linked to genes.

   "When we figure out a ging, we will be able to stop it," Osborn promised.


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1999


                             1558 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 18, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 180; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

HEADLINE: Best Question;
Did God Have a Choice?

BYLINE: By Dennis Overbye
<BLB>The universe is knowable -- up to a point.;  Dennis Overbye, deputy science
editor of The Times, is the author of "Lonely Hearts of the Cosmos" and the
forthcoming "Einstein in Love."

BODY:

   <DC>'What really interests me," Albert Einstein once remarked, "is whether
God had any choice in the creation of the world." Few scientists have ever
poised their ambitions as poetically or as nakedly as Einstein, who spoke
sometimes as if God were someone he met for coffee every day. When he spoke of
God, however, the last thing he had in mind was a white-bearded man sitting up
in Heaven toting up sins and dispensing favors to prayerful supplicants. The
question was just his way of asking whether the universe could be any other way
than it appears to be -- and if not, how much room remains in that universe for
things like chance and miracles?

   Is it just pure luck that our own universe has the friendly qualities it
does, or if we knew all the laws of physics from a God-like perspective, would
we know that the universe could not be any other way? Would we know why atoms
are small and galaxies are big? Would we know not just how, but why the universe
began? For Einstein, the only conceivable answer to these concrete questions was
yes.

    History teaches that most ideas are flops, in science and otherwise. But
every once in a while a hunch that began as pure thought, a wild gem of poetry
about the way nature should be, blossoms into a theory that turns out to fit the
world so miraculously that its authors cannot help feeling that they have tapped
into the secret order of reality -- into God's "mind," as Stephen Hawking once
put it. Einstein knew that giddy feeling back in 1915 when he realized that his
theory of general relativity correctly predicted a puzzling motion of the planet
Mercury that had bedeviled astronomers for decades; he later confessed to a
friend that he had had heart palpitations. Today those same palpitations are
being provoked in his successors by something called M theory, a shadowy concept
posited to lie at the end of a mathematical labyrinth known as superstrings. The
theory seems to contain everything that physicists ever wanted to know about the
forces of nature but were afraid to ask. Curiously, nobody claims to know what M
theory actually will say, only that it seems to be there at the end of the
mathematical rainbow, still undiscovered, a metaphysical headwaters of the Nile.
The source perhaps of the River Why.

   Still, there are many reasons to wonder if the River Why can ever be drained.
Every great triumph of adventure in thought, as Alfred North Whitehead called
general relativity, has invariably bred a new batch of questions. There is no
reason to think that we are at the end of the cycle yet, and no guarantee that
we are or ever will be God-like enough in our comprehension to recognize the
cosmic secret if it were carved on a tree trunk. It may be that humans are fated
only to know many small truths rather than one big truth about the universe,
while we spin off ancillary marvels like space flight, gene therapy and the
World Wide Web.

   A God with no choice, of course, might seem to be a cold comfort or even no
God at all, at least in the traditional sense. In fact, Einstein noted that a
well-ordered universe left no room for "causes of a divine nature." What role
then is left for God? Only the main role. To Einstein, God was a code word for
the mystery and grandeur of the universe, the wellspring of awe, a reminder that
there was something at the core of existence that all his equations could only
graze, as he said once, "something we cannot penetrate."

   All our science, Einstein often pointed out, would never vanquish that
mystery or slake our thirst for something beyond. Written on a blackboard or a
T-shirt, the so-called theory of everything would just lie there waiting for
something else to breathe life into it and the universe. It would not tell us
what we really want to know: Does God love us? Do our lives have any meaning?
Nor would it even tell us that science itself has any value. The idea that the
universe makes sense, of course, is the sheerest faith of all. The most
incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it is comprehensible, Einstein
remarked. In reality, we will probably never know the answer to his question. We
will always be stuck in the middle of an endless journey, not knowing whether
the final answer is just around the corner or a million miles away or whether we
are just going in circles with our excellent particle accelerators and ingenious
mathematics, projecting our own wishes for form onto chaos. Moreover, modern
cosmological theories seem to suggest that our universe is not unique, but might
be only one among an almost infinite variety of worlds -- worlds in which atoms
are the size of bumblebees and all stars are black holes, worlds of 3 or 6 or 11
dimensions, worlds forever inaccessible to our probing eyes.

   But science is nothing if not the search for reasons, for the smoking gene in
our coiled cells, the atom of consciousness, the quantum butterfly flapping its
wings at the heart of the world. It is the job of scientists to believe in
answers. But like card players with an incomplete knowledge of how the cards
lie, physicists are forced to play their cards as if there were a way to win the
game of science. Without faith that there is order, as Einstein pointed out, the
enterprise is doomed anyway. But with that faith, as Einstein proved, it is
possible to change the world.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Einstein once remarked, the most incomprehensible thing about
the universe is that it is comprehensible.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1999


                             1559 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         April 18, 1999 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS, ETHICISTS DEBATE IMPACT OF DECODNG DNA;
EXPERT GATHER AT XAVIER CAMPUS

BYLINE: By Rhonda Bell Staff writer

BODY:

   While others are studying galaxies far, far away, a group of scientists and
ethicists gathered at Xavier University this weekend to explore the genetic
constellations within the human body and their implications on communities.

   In a $300 million-a-year project under way at laboratories across the
country, scientists are for the first time mapping the entire genetic code: 3
billion bits of information contained in the DNA in each human cell. The
research will provide a road map to understanding the physical and to some
extent, the mental characteristics of mankind as well as our predispositions to
certain diseases.

   But some bioethicists are wondering where that map will lead. If, for
example, prospective employers or health care providers know that someone
carries the gene for certain diseases, such as breast or prostate cancer or
Alzheimer's disease - will they discriminate against those who carry the
potentially lethal gene sequences? Those questions were debated at the
"Information and Dialogue Conference on the Human Genome Project for the
Minority Communities in the State of Louisiana" Friday and Saturday.

   "In 1964, when the Civil Rights Act was passed, we never dreamed of what we'd
be facing in 1999," said Keith Hill, regional attorney for the New Orleans
Office of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. "This is truly new
territory. And I'm not sure we're going to be able to keep up. Little did I know
when I was reading Aldous Huxley's 'Brave New World,' we'd be living it."

   Along with the unfathomable benefits that lie ahead for medicine, there is
the usual quagmire of civil rights concerns as protective laws are not keeping
up with the pace of scientific discoveries.

   "This is going to affect the individual, the family, the community, the
region and the nation and beyond," said Valerie Setlow, deputy director of the
Tulane/Xavier Center for Bioenvironmental Research. "As a technological society,
we're very capable. But as a human society, we're amateurs at charting the
course for the implications of technology.

   "Knowing about this is a social obligation," Setlow said. "All of what I
learned as a microbiologist in college is either gone or no longer true. It is
imperative that we keep up with the times."

   For minority communities in which some members may have predispositions to
certain diseases, such as sickle cell anemia, which mostly afflicts
African-Americans, and Tay-Sachs disease, which affects those of Jewish descent,
the project can have far-reaching implications that will help scientists further
understand the maladies. Eventually, researchers said they will be able to use
gene therapy to cure or treat the diseases that are the result of misplaced
genetic sequences.

   Scientists already know that all humans share 99.9 percent of their genes
regardless of ethnicity with minuscule differences between members of different
races. In fact, among members of separate groups, for example, those of African,
Asian and European descent, the genetic variation is greater than it is from
group to group, scientists said.

   "We're more alike than a lot of people think," said Betty Mansfield, managing
editor of the U.S. Department of Energy's "Human Genome News." "Most of the
differences between ethnic groups are not significant from a medical
perspective."

   The Genome Project, sponsored by the National Institute of Health and the
U.S. Department of Energy, will also provide information on how genetic
differences may follow geographic populations. In Louisiana, for example, with
its gumbo of ethnicities that have often mixed, the genetic differences may be
even smaller from group to group, experts said.

   Although the genetic map will be completed by 2003, the solution to the DNA
puzzle and what its pieces mean will be far from complete. Scientists by then
will know the code but will only know a tiny fraction of how the sequences
translate into certain traits and health issues.

   Conference participants urged minorities to become aware and get involved in
the project. Diversity is needed in the genetic research, they said. And the
exponentially budding field has endless opportunities for employment in medical
research and computer technology, two fields that are sorely lacking in minority
representation.

   "This is part of our shared future, whether we get actively involved or
don't," said Issie L. Shelton Jenkins, a chairperson of the Zeta Phi Beta
Sorority National Education Foundation, which co-sponsored the conference with
Xavier and the Department of Energy. "We need to be actively involved."

   More information on the Humane Genome Project is available at
www.ornl.gov/hgmis on the Internet.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1999


                             1560 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     April 16, 1999, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING BACK;
M.D. Anderson is a worthy recipient of tobacco money

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   At the behest of state Sen. Mario Gallegos, D-Galena Park, the Senate Finance
Committee is proposing to direct $ 150 million from the settlement of the
state's tobacco lawsuit to an endowment for the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center in the Texas Medical Center. A better repository for the
money, meant to combat and remedy the ills of tobacco use and addiction, could
hardly be found.

   M.D. Anderson's mission is to reduce and one day end the threat of cancer as
a leading cause of death in Texas, the nation and the world. For years the
Houston institution has provided the finest patient care, cancer research and
education.

   About one-third of M.D. Anderson's patients, many of them uninsured Texans,
are there for treatment of tobacco-related diseases. One-third - that is
approximately equal to the fraction of all cancer deaths in the United States
that can be blamed on tobacco use.

   Tobacco-related illness in the United States each year claims more lives than
alcohol, heroin, cocaine, homicide, fires, automobile accidents and AIDS
combined. This year more than 10,000 Texans will die of lung cancer, which kills
more American women than the scourge of breast cancer.

   These figures would be even higher were it not for the advances in knowledge
and treatment that M.D. Anderson has made over the years. Researchers at the
center discovered the hereditary factor in nicotine addiction; learned how
tobacco causes the genetic mutations that can lead to cancer; developed a gene
therapy to prolong the life of lung cancer patients; and researched chemical
therapies to prevent former smokers from getting lung cancer and keep cancer
from recurring in patients successfully treated for head and neck cancers.

   Sen. Gallegos persuaded the Senate committee to raise M.D. Anderson's
proposed allotment from $ 100 million to $ 150 million. The additional funds
were redirected from a proposed $ 200 million endowment meant to help fund a new
children's cancer center in San Antonio. Legislators representing San Antonio
are not pleased, but they have little cause for resentment, since the work of
M.D. Anderson benefits all Texans equally.

   Could it possibly make sense to give less money to a cancer center that is
making breakthrough after breakthrough, to the benefit of the entire world, and
to give more money to a cancer center that does not yet exist?

   M.D. Anderson treats patients from all over Texas, particularly indigent
patients whose care must be paid for by state taxpayers and revenues that
Anderson's dedicated staff generate for the institution. In the last five years,
the hospital has provided more than $ 575 million in charity care.

   The issue of which hospital should get which money should not be viewed as
one of regional competition for state dollars. M.D. Anderson has done as much as
any institution in the world to reduce the toll of cancer, and it continues to
do so every day, regardless of how much money the Legislature in its wisdom is
inclined to bestow.

   For that, all Texans can be grateful, no matter where they reside.











TYPE: Editorial Opinion

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1999


                             1561 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    April 15, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

NAME: JAMES QUANDER

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 1038 words

HEADLINE: 75 Years of Defying Odds and Diabetes; D.C. Man Has Surprised Doctors
by Leading a Full Life and Raising a Family

BYLINE: Avram Goldstein, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   James Quander grew up expecting to die young. It was the 1920s, and he was a
scrawny diabetic kid who couldn't eat the same foods or play the same sports as
his classmates. Doctors said he probably wouldn't see his 10th birthday.

   Even after he became one of the first Washingtonians to take daily injections
of a promising new diabetes drug called insulin to control his blood sugar,
doctors said the outlook was grim. Although he was a brilliant student, medical
school or a teaching career would kill him, they predicted.

   "I know what it is to be young and feel like an abnormality," he said. "At 7
or 8, they told me I'd be impotent. The only thing that I was born to do was to
die."

   That's not quite how it turned out. Quander will celebrate his 81st birthday
this month after nearly 75 years of daily insulin injections that enabled him to
press on with a full life that confounded every prediction.

   One by one, he outlived them all: his parents, two brothers, three sisters,
many of his Dunbar High School classmates and all the doctors who tamped down
his expectations.

   "I've had friends who became doctors, and they're all dead," he said. "All
the people who turned me down, they're all dead."

   Along the way, he and his wife of 57 years, Joherra Quander, raised four
children, and they have 10 grandchildren. They live in the same house on 13th
Street NW where they have lived for a half-century.

   James Quander had a long career as a white-collar federal employee in several
agencies. But his life flowered after retirement when he became a seminarian and
was ordained as a Catholic deacon in 1971. As a deacon, he assisted the disabled
and the elderly and officiated at weddings and funerals. He was based most
recently at the Shrine of the Sacred Heart in Washington.

   "I don't think there are too many people in this country who have had
diabetes for 75 years," said D.C. internal medicine specialist Susan H.
Houseman, his doctor for 20 years. "He's probably got either the record or close
to the world record for length of time with diabetes and still being alive. His
innate feistiness and his intelligence have helped him figure out how to handle
both the diabetes and some of the complications he's had to live with."

   Gerald Bernstein, a diabetes doctor and president of the American Diabetes
Association, called Quander's experience "pretty extraordinary." Other diabetics
have survived to an older age, but few lived with the disease for so many years,
he said.

   Diabetes is an inherited condition in which the body is unable to break down
glucose, a form of sugar the bloodstream delivers to provide energy to muscles
and organs. When excess glucose builds up, it sticks to tissues and interferes
with their functions, especially blood vessels and the nervous system.

   Diabetes is the leading cause of kidney failure, adult blindness and loss of
limbs, and it increases the chances of heart attack, stroke, nerve damage and
impotence. Newborn children of diabetic mothers are also more likely to die in
the first year.

   Most of the country's 16 million diabetics are diagnosed as adults with Type
II diabetes, a condition in which they are able to produce insulin but unable to
use it effectively.

   But about 1 million are like Quander and have lived with Type I diabetes
since they were children. Also known as juvenile diabetes, it leaves sufferers
unable to manufacture insulin in the pancreas, so they must take insulin to
break down the glucose.

   Researchers are studying gene therapies that they hope will cure diabetes
over the next 20 years, but the only option now is for each diabetic patient to
carefully manage his or her blood sugar level.

   Quander has been diligent in monitoring his glucose. He pricks his finger at
least twice a day and takes a glucose reading with a hand-held computerized
monitor. He injects himself with insulin when needed--at least once a day.

   But he has not escaped the scourge of the disease. Four years ago, doctors
amputated his right leg below the knee, a common complication for diabetics. He
has a prosthesis and can walk with the aid of two canes, but today he is mostly
confined to his home.

   In hindsight, the blunt and pessimistic advice Quander got throughout his
life seems condescending and paternalistic, but specialists say that only since
the 1960s have scientists known enough about diabetes to steer patients through
the obstacle course of complications.

   "When he was being guided for his career, nobody knew what was going to
happen," said Robert A. Goldstein, vice president of research for the Juvenile
Diabetes Foundation. "Most of the people before insulin died right away."

   Even in the insulin age, Goldstein said, "it wasn't until the 1980s that
studies showed that tight control of insulin significantly diminishes the
complications."

   Since Quander was a youngster, all the talk of his disease made him
comfortable with the idea of his own death. He remembers going to a cemetery
with his schoolbooks, a thermos and food to study for exams. He knew it would be
quiet there and he wouldn't see many other people.

   "I wasn't afraid of death," he said.

   He still isn't, and lately he has talked more frequently with his wife about
his wish to die naturally and without heroic measures taken to prevent it.

   Yet it isn't diabetes that Quander thinks will bring him to that point. It's
prostate cancer, which doctors diagnosed in September and have been treating
with anti-tumor medications.

   "I have adjusted to being a diabetic, but I have never adjusted to having
cancer," he said.

   But it's not clear that this deadly disease will claim him, either. Houseman
said Quander is doing well in holding it off. Doctors say prostate cancer
sometimes progresses extremely slowly in men in their eighties, so James Quander
very well could survive this challenge, too.

   Whenever death comes, though, Quander is ready, and he wants his family to be
ready. "When I die, I want it to be a happy occasion," he said. "There's no
point in being somber."

   James Quander, of Northwest, who started taking insulin when it was newly
available, turns 81 this month. He was ordained as a Catholic deacon in 1971.


GRAPHIC: Photo, NANCY ANDREWS

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1999


                             1562 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 13, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z05; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 892 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE

BODY:


   YOUNG SMOKERS RISK GREATER DNA DAMAGE

   Young smokers incur more severe or persistent DNA damage than adults, placing
them at increased risk of lung cancer, according to a new study.

   The study of 143 lung cancer patients measured levels of chemically altered
segments of DNA. Known as DNA adducts, these segments are believed to represent
the first step in the pathway that leads to lung cancer.

   This is one of the first studies to pinpoint the age at which smoking begins
as a predictor of smoke-related DNA damage. It was done by researchers at the
University of California at San Francisco (UCSF) and Harvard University in
Boston.

   Reporting in last week's Journal of the National Cancer Institute, the
research team said DNA adduct levels were lowest in those lung cancer patients
who had never smoked.

   Levels were nearly four times higher in former smokers than in nonsmokers and
eight times higher among current smokers with lung cancer than in nonsmokers
with lung cancer.

   All smokers sustain DNA damage to their lungs. The best predictor of such
damage among former smokers is the age at which they began smoking, according to
the study. The highest levels of DNA damage were found in study participants who
began smoking between ages 9 and 12, the researchers reported.

   Even when researchers accounted for both the number of years and the number
of cigarettes the participants smoked, the study still found that smoking in
adolescence produced more DNA damage than in adulthood.

   "Our finding suggests that young smokers incur more severe or persistent DNA
damage than adults," said John K. Wiencke, associate professor of epidemiology
at UCSF and the study's lead author.

   Why the DNA damage is worse in teenagers who smoke is not known.

   It may be that smoking in childhood and adolescence produces more physiologic
changes to developing lungs than to more mature adult lungs. This in turn may
set the stage for persistent and elevated DNA damage, he said. Or it could be
that younger smokers are markedly more susceptible to DNA damage than adults.

   Even if they quit smoking as adults, the damage may be greater than in those
who don't start smoking until later in life, Weincke said.

   --Sally Squires

   GENE THERAPY RESEARCH ON ARTERIES, HEMOPHILIA

   Promising results from two recent tests of gene therapy in animals suggest
that the new techniques may someday be used to treat human patients who suffer
from blocked arteries or hemophilia.

   In one study, researchers at Stanford University's Institute of
Bioengineering and Molecular Medicine reported that a form of gene therapy
improved the success of bypass surgery used to treat blocked arteries in
rabbits.

   Sections of a leg vein are often used surgically as grafts to bypass such
blockages, but in the first few weeks after surgery, clots can form inside the
grafts, either shutting off blood flow immediately or contributing to graft
failure later.

   To remedy this problem, researchers inserted the gene for tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA), a clot-busting drug, into healthy rabbit leg veins before using
the vessels as bypass grafts in rabbits with blocked leg arteries.

   Cells in the walls of treated veins churned out tPA for two to four weeks
after surgery, which reduced clotting in grafts by 75 percent, the researchers
reported. Since tPA production occurred only within the graft, the treatment
didn't cause bleeding--an occasional and dangerous side effect of giving tPA
intravenously, according to lead researcher Michael Kuo.

   If the procedure works equally well in humans, it could improve long-term
results of bypass grafts in heart surgery and leg surgery, Kuo suggested.

   "If you can minimize clot formation early on, you can significantly decrease
problems of long-term clogging," he said.

   The results were reported at last month's meeting of the Society of
Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology.

   In another study, scientists at the Salk Institute for Biological Science
successfully treated hemophilia in mice with gene therapy.

   The mice suffered from hemophilia B, caused by a defect in the gene for a
blood-clotting protein called factor IX. (Hemophilia A, caused by a defective
gene for a different protein, factor VIII, is the more common form of this
inherited disease.)

   Using a modified gene-carrying virus specially designed to infect liver cells
without causing illness, Salk researchers injected the gene for factor IX into
the portal veins of affected mice. (The portal vein supplies blood to the liver,
which makes the body's clotting proteins.)

   A single injection of the virus successfully incorporated the gene into liver
cells and corrected the mice's hemophilia for five months, about a quarter of
their lifespan, reported Inder Verma, a professor at the Salk Institute and lead
author of the study.

   "If the same could be achieved in people, it would be like curing a
hemophiliac for 20 years with a single shot," Verma said in a statement.

   The virus used in the study cannot accommodate the larger gene that would be
needed to correct factor VIII deficiency. Verma's laboratory is developing other
carrier viruses that may be able to do so.

   The results of the study were reported in the March 30 issue of the journal
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   --Susan Okie

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1999


                             1563 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        APRIL 12, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1538 words

HEADLINE: HONORING HIS LONG HISTORY OF CANCER DISCOVERIES CARLO M. CROCE HUNTS
THE GENETIC MUTATIONS THAT UNDERLIE THE DISEASE. HE IS A RECOGNIZED PIONEER IN
THE FIELD.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   From his elegant 10th-floor office at Thomas Jefferson University, Dr. Carlo
M. Croce has a commanding view of the Philadelphia skyline. But the sweeping
panorama isn't what captures his attention.

   Croce, 54, one of the world's leading cancer researchers, spends up to 14
hours a day immersed in the sub-microscopic world inside human cells. Using the
techniques of molecular biology, he hunts for the genetic mutations that
underlie all cancers.

   By his own count, Croce has identified more than 20 cancer-related genes
since he began the hunt as a young researcher at Philadelphia's Wistar Institute
almost 30 years ago. Many more findings, he predicted, are yet to come.

   "What I love more than anything else is discovery," Croce said.

   Yesterday, Croce's discoveries earned him the Pezcoller International Award,
one of the top honors in his field. It is given annually by the Pezcoller
Foundation, which promotes cancer research, and the American Association for
Cancer Research.

   The award, which carries a $75,000 prize, was announced at the Convention
Center, where the association is holding its annual scientific meeting. The
meeting, which runs through Wednesday, has drawn more than 8,500 cancer
researchers from around the world.

   "Carlo Croce has really been one of the pioneers in the molecular genetics of
cancer," said Dr. Peter C. Nowell, a cancer geneticist at the University of
Pennsylvania who discovered the so-called Philadelphia chromosome, which is
involved in a type of leukemia. "In the early 1980s, he was one of the first
people to clone the genes in human cancer."

   Croce, who has been at Jefferson since 1991, is director of the university's
Kimmel Cancer Center, home to more than 100 scientists whose research is funded
with the help of $57.6 million in outside grants, most from the federal
government.

   "We have one of the best DNA sequencing machines in the country," Croce said
as he showed off the heart and soul of his laboratory - state-of-the-art
equipment used to identify abnormal sequences in DNA, the molecule that carries
the genetic code. "We can sequence very large segments of DNA very fast."

   The task of finding mutant DNA would seem daunting. The long DNA molecule is
made up of 3 billion pairs of chemical bases. An alteration in just one of those
chemical units in one of the trillions of cells in the human body could trigger
a cancer. How can scientists pinpoint a particular mutation that causes a
particular cancer?

   "It's very simple," said Croce. "The cancer cells tell us where to look."

   Croce's lab, like others now in the race to find cancer genes, collects
hundreds of samples of tumor tissue surgically removed from patients around the
world. The scientists extract the DNA from the tissue and examine the sequence
of its chemical units using the DNA sequencing machines. When they find common
sequences from the same type of tumor - lung tumors, for example - they know
they may have located a mutation that triggered the cancer.

   Croce and his colleagues have identified genetic alterations that play a key
role in various leukemias and lymphomas. Now, they are homing in on a gene they
have dubbed FHIT, the second largest in the entire human genome and one that is
particularly prone to break or sustain damage.

   Scientists don't know the precise function of FHIT, but they believe it is a
tumor suppressor gene, putting the brakes on the uncontrolled cell growth
involved in cancer. When FHIT is damaged by cigarette smoke or some other
carcinogen, normal cells can be transformed into cancer cells, Croce said.

   Croce's team has found that more than 88 percent of people with bronchial
dysplasia - abnormal cells in the airways that precede the development of lung
cancer - have deletions in both copies of the FHIT gene.

   Such mutations may be the earliest detectable genetic changes involved in
lung cancer and possibly other cancers, Croce said.

   In laboratory experiments, Croce's group has been able to cause these
pre-cancerous cells in people with bronchial dysplasia to commit suicide by
infecting them with a virus containing a normal FHIT gene.

   The finding, he said, is "very exciting" and could lead to a gene therapy
that would prevent people with bronchial dysplasia from going on to develop lung
cancer.

   Croce soon hopes to test the experimental therapy among heavy smokers who
have bronchial dysplasia. These people would be given a nasal spray containing a
cold virus that has been genetically engineered to ferry the normal FHIT gene
into the lungs. When the gene enters cells in the airways, the scientists hope
it will kill those cells that are pre-cancerous.

   "If we can cure these people of most of their [pre-cancerous] lesions, the
incidence of lung cancer would drop dramatically," Croce said.

   As he spoke, Croce, dressed in jeans and a checkered cotton shirt, sat on a
leather couch in his sunny, spacious office filled with the Italian Renaissance
paintings that he began collecting when he was 12 years old. "This is my little
hobby - a very expensive hobby," he laughed.

   Croce said the Italian masters used "the workbench model" to create their
art, with dozens of aspiring artisans studying under one master. The same
process, Croce said, is used by molecular biologists to make important
discoveries. "A lot of young people work with a master."

   Croce has offended some in the scientific community with his bold style and
strong ego.

   There were bitter feelings at Temple University, for instance, when he jumped
ship to Jefferson after just three years, taking 200 workers, including 40
scientists, with him. Croce said he decided to move on because Temple didn't
share his passion for discovery.

   The young people in Croce's lab come from around the world - including
Russia, Germany, Switzerland, Spain and his native Italy. Croce said he gives
them wide leeway to pursue their own scientific hunches, but he likes to stay in
close touch with their results.

   "I walk through the lab all day and talk to my people," he said. "I like to
look at the raw data, when they are just obtained. People advance through the
ranks only by making new discoveries."

   Born in Milan, Croce was an only child who took an early interest in science
and medicine. His father was a mechanical engineer and his mother was a
homemaker. "She had two problems," Croce said. "She smoked like a chimney and
she talked incessantly."

   After graduating from medical school in Rome, Croce left Italy to pursue a
career in research medicine. "To do science in Italy is pretty hard," he said.
"Italy is the paradise of bureaucrats."

   Were it not for a bizarre accident, Croce would never have ended up in
Philadelphia. Fresh out of medical school, Croce wanted to study tumor viruses.
He got a fellowship at the Scripps Institute in La Jolla, Calif., where he was
to work under a well-known immunologist.

   But his would-be mentor was attacked by a monkey in his laboratory, developed
viral encephalitis and fell into a coma. Instead of La Jolla, Croce ended up in
Philadelphia to work under the wing of Hilary Koprowski, a noted immunologist at
the Wistar Institute.

   As is often the case in science, Croce's first major discovery in the cancer
field came not from studying cancer but from studying something seemingly
unrelated - the genetics of antibodies, one of the immune system's key weapons
in combating a viral infection.

   Antibodies are secreted by a type of white blood cell known as B cells. In
1979, Croce and his colleagues at Wistar located the genes that instruct B cells
to produce antibodies.

   Three years later, they found something else near those genes in people who
had Burkitt's lymphoma, a malignancy of B cells. It was a gene called c-myc,
which normally occupied another spot on the human genome.

   The finding led to the discovery that Burkitt's lymphoma involved the
displacement of the c-myc gene from one site to another, an alteration that
caused the gene to function improperly, triggering the uncontrolled growth of B
cells.

   It was among the first clear pieces of evidence that genetic mutations were
at the root of cancer.

   Now, there is widespread agreement in the scientific community that cancer is
basically a genetic disease - not in the sense that most cancers are inherited
(they are not), but in the sense that cancer is triggered by genetic mutations,
most of which are set off by environmental or other factors outside the cell.

   A cure for cancer, Croce said, will come only from gene therapy or drugs that
are targeted at the gene products that go askew with cancer. "That's the only
way," he said.

   Although much progress has been made since 1972, when President Richard Nixon
declared war on cancer, Croce said, much more needs to be made.

   He said the federal government, which is now pumping $2.7 billion a year into
cancer research through the National Cancer Institute, should make an even
greater commitment. The need is for more money and more daring in funding
cutting-edge research, he said.

   "The problem is, federal funding is given for highly predictable research. If
you write a very imaginative and creative grant, it will be turned down."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Carlo M. Croce directs cancer research at Thomas Jefferson University. (WILLIAM
F. STEINMETZ, Inquirer Staff Photographer)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1564 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 12, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1790 words

HEADLINE: Possible Leap Forward for Hemophiliacs;

Biotech firm close to starting clinical trials on humans

BYLINE: Tom Abate, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
Mark Ross was born without the gene his blood needs to clot. Although he's never
suffered a gushing wound, almost 40 years of living with hemophilia have hobbled
him.

    With every step, the weight of his torso has caused tiny leaks in the blood
vessels where his bones meet, and escaping blood has gummed up his joints and
destroyed their protective cartilage.

    "My knees don't bend," said Ross, describing one of the common, crippling
side-effects of hemophilia. "I walk with a cane, sort of stiff-legged, like
Frankenstein."

    Now, this Palo Alto man could be among the first human volunteers to test a
genetic treatment for hemophilia, created by Avigen Inc., a biotech startup in
Alameda.

    The Food and Drug Administration soon could ap- prove human clinical trials
of the drug. Provided it gets that OK, Avigen will ask researchers at Stanford
University Medical Center and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia to inject nine
hemophiliacs with a harmless virus that has been altered to deliver the
blood-clotting gene they lack.

    Avigen's drug is based on gene therapy -- a promising technology that has
stubbornly refused to live up to its potential.

    "Over the past decade, I've tracked more than 200 human gene therapy trials,
costing over a billion dollars, and I've yet to see a single one cure a human
disease," said Charles Engelberg, a stock analyst with AmeriCal Securities in
San Francisco.

    But Engelberg, an oncologist, believes that Avigen could break the 10-year
gene therapy jinx. "I'm confident it's going to work and be the first successful
human gene therapy protocol," he said.

    In theory, gene therapy is simple. Genes produce proteins, the chemicals
that perform every task in the body. If a person has a disease caused by a
missing or defective gene, giving the patient the correct gene should enable the
body to produce the protein needed to cure the problem.

    In practice, however, gene therapy has flopped. The reasons have varied.
Some researchers tackled diseases like cancer that may have several genetic
causes. Other experiments failed when the immune systems of patient volunteers
attacked the viruses carrying the gene therapies.

    Malcolm Brenner, gene therapy research chief at Baylor College of Medicine
in Houston, said scientists think that Avigen could succeed because it's aiming
at a simple target.

    "We know what it takes to make blood clot, and we know hemophiliacs don't
have it," Brenner said. "If Avigen's gene therapy produces the clotting factor,
it would be the sort of unequivocal success that would boost the morale of the
whole field."

    Blood clotting is a straightforward process, explained Mark Kay, the
Stanford researcher working with Avigen on the project.

    Most people have two proteins floating in their blood -- Factor 8 and Factor
9. When the body detects a leak in a blood vessel, Kay said, these two proteins
rush to the scene and join forces to help form a clot.

    But more than 15,000 living Americans were born without the gene that
produces either Factor 8 or Factor 9, which means their blood won't clot.

    Kay said doctors have long been able to stop hemophiliacs from bleeding by
giving them infusions of blood or blood concentrates that contain the missing
clotting factors. Unfortunately, during the past two decades, many hemophiliacs
contracted HIV or Hepatitis from contaminated blood.

    Six years ago, the biotech industry gave hemophiliacs their first big break
when Baxter Healthcare Corp. won FDA approval for a Factor 8 protein called
Recombinate, made through recombinant DNA technology.

    In essence, the protein was "brewed" in huge metal vats in a process akin to
fermentation. This pure medicine could be injected safely into hemophiliacs once
or twice a week, without fear of infection from tainted blood.

    In 1997, Genetics Institute won FDA approval for recombinant Factor 9
protein called Refacto.

    Avigen chief executive John Monahan said those factory-made proteins were a
great advance but fell short of a cure.

    "When you take periodic injections, there are times when you have plenty of
clotting factor in your blood and other times when you haven't enough," he said.
Between injections, hemophiliacs can suffer minor internal bleeding that, over
time, can be crippling.

    Monahan said gene therapy puts the "factory" where nature intended, inside
cells.

    Cells essentially are protein production lines. Genes are the factory
bosses, telling the cells which proteins to produce. Put the right gene into a
hemophiliac's body, and their cells should produce a steady supply of Factor 9
-- preventing not just catastrophic gushers, but the intermittent bleeds between
injections.

    Like other gene therapy firms, Avigen proposes to deliver its gene to the
target cells by using a modified virus.

    Using a virus to treat a disease seems counterproductive. But viruses do one
thing well -- worm their way into cells. Most viruses are made of two parts.
Their outer shell, which does the burrowing, is generally benign. It is only the
inner core of the virus -- when it contains harmful DNA -- that makes us sick.

    During the past decade, gene therapists have learned how to scoop out that
harmful DNA and replace it with a beneficial gene -- while preserving the outer
shell that delivers the genetic payload into cells.

    Avigen is using a relatively novel, harmless virus called adeno-associated
virus, or AAV, as its delivery vehicle.

    In lab and animal tests, AAV hasn't provoked the immune system reactions
that have caused the body to destroy other viral delivery agents. The reason it
hasn't been widely used in experiments until now is that it is extraordinarily
small, and scientists at firms like Avigen and Cell Genesys in Foster City are
only now learning how to insert useful genes into this tiny package.

    Nadine Wong, editor of the BioTech Navigator, an Oregon newsletter, called
AAV "probably the most popular (delivery) system currently being developed." She
named Avigen as "a leader" in AAV work.

    Of course gene therapists have spent the past decade touting one new virus
after another. But Avigen convinced some skeptics that AAV could succeed when it
published the results of an animal experiment in the January edition of the
journal Nature Medicine.

    Five hemophiliac beagles, deficient in Factor 9, received a single injection
of Avigen's gene therapy. Within two weeks, the dogs's blood started to clot.
Katherine High of Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who led the experiment,
measured Factor 9 in their blood. More than 17 months after that one injection,
the dogs still showed clotting ability.

    "I've made a career of insisting positive results in animals don't always
mean positive results in humans," said Engelberg, the stock analyst. But
Avigen's results wowed him because the dog disease is so much like human
hemophilia. "What works in dogs should work in humans," he said.

    Armed with that dog data, Avigen asked the FDA for permission to give nine
human hemophiliacs three different doses of its gene therapy. It would inject
the altered AAV into the rumps of volunteers. If they respond like the dogs, the
AAV would be absorbed by a dime-sized swath of muscle cells around the
injection. Once in the cells, AAV's shell would dissolve and the new gene should
order those cells to pump out Factor 9.

    The tight-lipped FDA hasn't signalled whether it will approve this human
trial, but Avigen recently received the blessing of another scientific body,
which the FDA relies upon to review cutting-edge gene therapy experiments.

    The FDA asked the Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National Institutes
of Health to consider whether one of Avigen's altered AAV particles might ignore
the muscle cells and migrate to the patient's sperm cells, possibly causing a
mutation that would be passed on to any offspring.

    "The public and scientific community have been adamant that we not alter
cells that are passed from one generation to the next," said genetic scientist
Estuardo Aguilar, a member of the NIH committee. "We decided this was an almost
nonexistent probability in this case."

    Now, Avigen awaits FDA OK to test AAV in humans. Founded in 1992, and taken
public in 1996, all the company's hopes ride on making AAV the first gene
therapy drug -- a risky process that will take years. Avigen traded between $2
and $4 dollars in 1998. It peaked at $8 in January on publication of the dog
data. It since has slipped, losing 19 cents Friday to close at $6.25.

    Meanwhile, Ross, who is in a pool of potential test subjects, is doing some
soul-searching. He would like to volunteer for the trials that Kay will conduct
at Stanford, but he fears the experiment could leave him worse off. Like many
hemophiliacs who contracted hepatitis from contaminated blood in the 1970s and
1980s, he's leery of scientific safety claims.

    In the final analysis, he says he'll probably take the experimental shot if
given the chance -- not for himself, but for his 13-year-old nephew Julian, who
also has inherited the genetic flaw.

    "It's too late to do me much good; I'm already bent over," Ross said. "But
if somebody like me doesn't take the test, we'll never know if it works for the
young people."

   ---------------------------------------------------

   A GENETIC TREATMENT FOR HEMOPHILIA

    More than 15,000 Americans are afflicted with Hemophilia, a disease that
prevents their blood from clotting. Victims lack the genes that make two blood
clotting factors, Factor 8 or Factor 9. An experimental therapy WOULD inject the
gene for Factor 9 production into hemophiliacs. The human trials cannot begin
until the Food and Drug Administration okays the experiment.

   .

   1: DELIVERING A THERAPEUTIC GENE

    Scientists will insert the Factor 9 gene into a harmless virus, called
adeno-associated virus. AAV is made of two parts: an outer shell that burrows
into muscle cells, and an inner core of DNA. Avigen will replace that viral DNA
with the gene for Factor 9 -- while leaving the outer viral shell intact.

   .

   2: PATIENT VOLUNTEERS

    Researchers at Stanford University and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
will inject the viral solution into the leg muscles of nine human volunteers.

    .

   3: ABSORPTION BY CELLS

    Researchers expect the viral delivery agents to be absorbed into a
dime-sized swath of muscle cells right around at the point of injection.

    .

   4: FACTOR 9 PRODUCTION

    Inside each cell, the viral shell will dissolve. The gene inside to begin
producing Factor 9.

    .

   5: WILL THE BLOOD CLOT?

    Factor 9 should enter the blood stream, team up with Factor 8 and improve
normal blood clotting.

   .

   Source: Avigen.

   John Blanchard/The Chronicle



GRAPHIC: PHOTO (3), GRAPHIC, PHOTOS: (1) New gene therapy may save Julian from
the hobbling effects of the disease., (2) Mark Ross (left) and his nephew Julian
laughed over dinner at McDonald's in Palo Alto. Both have hemophilia., (3) Mark
Ross, 38, crippled by hemophilia, watches nephew Julian Ross, 14, shoot hoops.
Mark may take an experimental gene therapy drug in hopes that a cure could help
Julian, also a hemophiliac. / Photos by Michael Macor/The Chronicle, GRAPHIC:
John Blanchard/The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1999


                             1565 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 11, 1999 Sunday

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1635 words

HEADLINE: Tenor of the times;
Andrea Bocelli, this week's hot singing sensation, makes money, controversy
wherever he goes -- next stop, San Diego, for his local debut

BYLINE: Valerie Scher, CLASSICAL MUSIC CRITIC

BODY:

   Who is Andrea Bocelli and why should we care? That's what some people will
undoubtedly wonder about Bocelli's local debut Wednesday at the San Diego Sports
Arena. But those who have purchased tickets already know the answer.

   Especially if they paid $500 for the most desirable of the 14,375 seats.
Bocelli, performing with the San Diego Symphony as part of a North American
tour, is the must-hear attraction of the moment, the biggest singing sensation
since Luciano Pavarotti or Julio Iglesias. Blind since childhood, the
40-year-old Italian tenor is forging a reputation as a crossover icon, both
artistic and endearing.

   And he is marketed so effectively that he seems to be everywhere. Bocelli has
sung at the Grammys and the Academy Awards.

   His CDs, including "Romanza," "Viaggio Italiano" and "Aria -- The Opera
Album," have racked up millions in worldwide sales. The video "Andrea Bocelli: A
Night in Tuscany" has boosted PBS pledge drives, much in the manner of The Three
Tenors' videos.

   And Bocelli -- last year named one of People magazine's 50 "most beautiful
people" -- also has a lavish Web site (www.bocelli.net). The site is reverently
divided into such categories as "The Man," "His Music" and "His Words."

   Naturally, there's also a category devoted to buying Bocelli-related items,
from CDs to videos to opera books. Not bad for a former crooner in Italian piano
bars, who received a law degree from the University of Pisa but spent only a
year as a court-appointed defense lawyer. "Law was not for me," Bocelli has
said.

   "I was thinking always of the singing." But that doesn't make him the next
Pavarotti.

   At least, not to San Diego Opera general director Ian Campbell, known for
casting promising young singers in opera productions and for presenting such
established stars as Pavarotti and Placido Domingo in concert. "Luciano has
achieved something totally different, with a different beginning and a different
level of training," says Campbell.

   "Mr. Bocelli is brilliant at what he does -- he's a marvelous entertainer.

   His popularity makes him the Julio Iglesias of the world of classical
singing." Bocelli's voice is undeniably attractive, with a rich, ardent timbre
that, in particularly emotional moments, contains a hint of a sob.

   Campbell, a former opera tenor, characterizes it as having a "bright,
forward-placed, Italianate sound -- a sound that gets a gut reaction, and that
audiences love.

   It's pretty." But many tenors have pretty voices.

   Their voices, moreover, are better trained, providing a stylistic flexibility
that's necessary to convey the nuances of different types of opera.

   They also have a technique that permits them to forcefully project their
singing in opera houses, without benefit of electronic amplification. But
Bocelli doesn't usually sing in opera houses or concert halls.

   He's a star of popular culture, a creature of the mass media who relies on
audio technology in the recording studio, on TV, or in massive venues such as
the Sports Arena.

   That dependence is one of the things that separates him from traditional
tenors. Pavarotti also uses a mike when he sings at the Sports Arena.

   But he'd never use one in a conventional opera performance. "We don't know
whether Mr. Bocelli can sing well without a microphone," says Campbell.

   "We only know that he has a wonderfully developed microphone technique."
Clearly, Bocelli has qualities that transcend musicianship. He's a romantic
figure who appeals to a vast audience, mostly female. There's the swept-back
hair, the manly stubble, the handsome features.

   In his "Night in Tuscany" video, he rides one of his Arabian horses in the
Italian countryside, almost like the hero of a romantic novel. His sensitive
nature, coupled with his blindness, brings out protective feelings in his fans.

   Although marketed as a sex symbol, the 6-foot-1 singer displays a disarming
lack of vanity that makes him all the more likable. "I never think of this," he
once said about image-building, speaking in his thickly accented English.

   "Sometimes my manager tells me, 'Your look has to be better!' But I don't
understand this problems." Visually impaired since birth, Bocelli grew up in the
Italian farming community of where his father, Sandro, still makes the wine he
calls "Chianti Bocelli." Young Andrea began piano lessons at age 6, later
learning flute and saxophone.

   He listened to recordings by such legendary Italian singers as Enrico Caruso
and Gigli, and also enjoyed singing pop tunes. At 12, he became blind after
suffering a brain hemorrhage from a soccer accident.

   But Bocelli doesn't consider that tragic.

   Self-pity isn't his style. "The tragedy," he says, "is that people continue
to make a fuss out of something which they consider tragic, not I." After
graduating from law school, Bocelli auditioned for former Metropolitan Opera
tenor Franco Corelli and became his student.

   Playing piano in bars helped pay the bills.

   And Bocelli honed his pop vocal style singing songs associated with Frank
Sinatra and Charles Aznavour. But Bocelli wasn't a saloon singer for long.

   In 1992, the Italian pop star Zucchero chose Bocelli to record a demo of
"Miserere," the song Zucchero wrote with U2's Bono. The idea was to interest
Pavarotti in recording the song, and it worked better than anyone could have
imagined. Pavarotti made the recording, praising Bocelli's demo efforts.

   And when Pavarotti was too busy to tour with Zucchero, the eager Bocelli took
his place, winning such an enthusiastic audience response that the Tuscan tenor
was given a solo spot on the concerts. Pavarotti and Bocelli later became chums,
and shared the stage at Pavarotti's annual charity concerts.

   Bocelli's recording career began flourishing in 1993, when he signed with the
Milan-based Sugar Records.

   His reputation was further enhanced the next year, when he won the
competition based at Italy's San Remo Music Festival and appeared on European
TV. In 1995, his recording of the song "Con Te Partiro" ("Time to Say Goodbye")
became an international success, leading to the bilingual duet version he
recorded with Sarah Brightman.

   His latest recording, "Sogno," shows Bocelli in his pop mode. His stature in
the classical-music world has been increased by his association with the
prestigious Philips record label.

   Plans include a sacred album, with accompanying video, plus a complete
recording of Puccini's "La Boheme," conducted by Myun-Wha Chung. But don't
expect to hear him on the La Jolla Chamber Music Society's Celebrity Series. On
Wednesday, the very night that Bocelli sings at the Sports Arena, the Chamber
Music Society will present Polish-born piano virtuoso Zimerman in a Civic
Theatre program of music by Chopin and Schumann. And executive director Perl
wouldn't have it any other way. "He (Bocelli) is not our kind of artist," says
Perl of the Chamber Music Society, San Diego's leading classical-music importer.

   "He doesn't fit into our programming.

   It's not like we've been collecting his CDs for years." Meanwhile,
classical-music purists dismiss Bocelli as a novelty act, a passing phenomenon.

   The harshest of them say he's beloved for being disabled, akin to the
mentally ill Australian pianist David Helfgott, who was the subject of 1997's
Oscar-winning biographical film "Shine." Yet Wednesday's repertoire is a test of
musical prowess.

   Taking a cue from the CD "Aria," the lineup focuses on songs and arias, with
music by composers ranging from Rossini to Puccini, Verdi to Tosti, including
duets sung with soprano Ana Maria Martinez. On its own, the San Diego Symphony
will supply such instrumental items as Bellini's Overture to "Norma" and Bizet's
Intermezzo from "Carmen."

   In the process, it will be heard by thousands of listeners who might
otherwise never encounter the orchestra. According to San Diego Symphony general
manager Drew Cady, the 76 symphony musicians accompanying Bocelli's tour are
"very enthusiastic.

   They recognize that he has a lot of stature.

   The program he has chosen is very interesting.

   It's primarily opera.

   Not schlock at all." The San Diego concert is partly a fund-raiser for the
Vision of Children Foundation, whose goal is to eradicate childhood blindness
through gene therapy.

   And the San Diego Symphony receives not only a portion of the limelight, but
a good chunk of change. Cady is under contractual obligation not to reveal the
orchestra's fee for the tour. (And no one will say what Bocelli's making, though
it's probably enough to buy a whole herd of champion Arabians.) "We're being
remunerated well," says Cady. The symphony, which accompanied Bocelli on Dec. 31
and January 1 at Las Vegas' new, billion-dollar Bellagio hotel and casino, will
perform on nearly all the stops.

   In addition to San Diego, it's slated for today's in Phoenix, Thursday in
Anaheim, Saturday in Oakland and April 22 in Seattle. The exceptions are the
April 19 date in Vancouver, which includes the Vancouver Symphony, and the April
24 concert at the Hollywood Bowl, featuring the Hollywood Bowl Orchestra.
"Touring with Bocelli is good for the orchestra," Cady says of the San Diego
Symphony's first tour since its two-week trek with singer Linda Ronstadt in the
summer of 1996.

   "He is a very sweet fellow with a very beautiful voice." But is Bocelli a
genuine opera singer?

   And if not, should he try to become one through continued training? San Diego
Opera's Campbell thinks not.

   His advice? "Don't bother," says Campbell.

   "I would tell Mr. Bocelli not to do all the work that's involved in making an
operatic career.

   He should enjoy what he's doing now, entertain millions and put the money in
the bank." Datebook Andrea Bocelli, tenor With Ana Maria Martinez, soprano, and
the San Diego Symphony conducted by Marcello Rota. 8 p.m. Wednesday; San Diego
Sports Arena, 3500 Sports Arena Blvd. Only $45 tickets remain; (619) 220-TIXS.

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Singing sensation: Andrea Bocelli is on a tour
that capitalizes on his vocal abilities and sex appeal. 2. Tuneful twosome:
Andrea Bocelli and Celine Dion performed "The Prayer" during the 41st annual
Grammy Awards held in February in Los Angeles. (E-11); PHOTOBY: 1. SARAH WONG 2.
KEVORK DJANSEZIAN

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1566 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   April 8, 1999 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 402 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE ALLIANCE: MICHIGAN SCHOOLS COULD CHANGE THE WORLD

BODY:

   Michigan stands at a very tantalizing crossroads to the future, where
projects involving four major research institutions could point the state in a
new and powerful direction.

   Imagine teams from two or more institutions pooling their knowledge in the
quest for medical discoveries. The potential is enormous, particularly because
of the strength of the institutions: Michigan State University, the University
of Michigan, Wayne State University and the Van Andel Institute in Grand Rapids,
which would identify themselves as part of a new Life Sciences Corridor.

   Life sciences used to be mostly plain old biology with some chemistry thrown
in. Now, especially as genes are isolated and identified, it is a field so broad
that it draws on everything from engineering and information organization to
psychology and ethics. Expensive equipment is essential; so are powerful
computers.

   And so is collaboration. The corridor group is pitching for about $50 million
a year from the state to launch joint research projects. The cooperative
possibilities alone would seem to justify the use of taxpayers' money. In
particular, the universities may find they can share costs on equipment and
support services, attract higher-caliber faculty and grants, and push their own
research further as teams build upon each member's best thinking.

   The payoffs could be big, too. Nowadays, discoveries often have major
implications far beyond their defined research goal. New knowledge about how a
complex system organizes itself -- and the computer modeling involved -- can
apply to everything from gene therapy to weather forecasts. The economic
spin-offs from such research could be huge.

   U-M has stepped initially to the forefront as it firms up plans for a
$200-million-plus investment of its own in a building and faculty expansion that
would support five initiatives from genetics to neuroscience. But U-M is hardly
alone in its worry about maintaining top-notch faculty and scientific research;
retirements and recruiting are taking their toll at the other universities, too.

   Make no mistake, a Life Sciences Corridor would be a big investment -- both
for the institutions themselves, if others follow U-M's lead, and for the state
to help give it a solid launch. But the ground is so fertile that this could
well be Michigan's investment opportunity of a lifetime and its corridor to the
future.

NOTES: IN OUR OPINION

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1567 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 8, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Gene injected into baldness research Mutation in hairless girl also
could lead to immune system repairs

BYLINE: Robert Davis

BODY:

   Researchers have linked a genetic mutation to hair loss and are
trying to grow hair by injecting a healthy gene into follicles
of hairless mice, says a report out today.

   The gene mutation was discovered by the same Columbia University
team that last year found the first human gene associated with
human hair loss.

   They dubbed that first gene "hairless."


   "Gene No. 2 to us is just as exciting because it proves we're
on the right track," says Angela Christiano, lead researcher
on the study.

   "Like 'hairless,' this gene must turn something on. The question
now is what gets turned on next."

   The discovery, reported in the journal Nature, came from
the team's investigation into the condition of two sisters in
a small village in southern Italy. The sisters were born hairless
and with severely depressed immune systems.

   One died within a year, but the other survived after getting a
bone marrow transplant from their healthy brother.

   The team obtained blood samples from the family and hunted for
the "whn" or "nude" gene, which when mutated causes mice to
be born hairless. That same genetic mutation existed in the girls.

   In mammals without the nude gene, there is either no hair or just
a few stunted strands that rarely emerge from the skin.

   But the hair follicles, the chambers in the skin where hair grows,
remain healthy. And these follicles can produce hair when a healthy
version of the nude gene appears.

   Christiano and her colleagues currently are conducting gene therapy
experiments: They're introducing a functional nude gene into hair
follicles of nude mice in an attempt to grow hair.

   If the experiment works in mice, the gene will be injected into
the Italian girl's hair follicles.

   Similar treatments for male pattern baldness would require a better
understanding of the other genes at work in that hair-loss process.
Christiano estimates that 100 genes are involved.

   "These (two genes) are the master switches," she says. "These
are the big-picture genes."

   Now her team will try to "find out what they control downstream
and put all the puzzle pieces together."

   The finding also may lead to better treatments for autoimmune
diseases such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, conditions that
arise when the immune system attacks the otherwise healthy body.

   The team found that the nude gene is linked to the thymus, a small
organ above the heart where the immune system's soldiers, called
T-cells, are taught to fight foreign cells.

   In the thymus, young T-cells either learn to rid the body of intruders
or are killed themselves.

   Neither of the girls was born with a normal thymus, which apparently
prevented the immune system T-cells from maturing. This left them
with faulty immune systems.

   The thymus can degenerate during childhood, leaving some people
vulnerable to autoimmune disease later in life.

   Christiano and other researchers hope the nude gene someday will
be used to rejuvenate the organ to re-educate the T-cells in people
with autoimmune disease.

   "Part of the fascination with this gene is it's been around for
like 500 million years doing different things, before there was
a thymus and before there was hair," Christiano says.

   "We think it has a lot more biological functions than just these
two."

LOAD-DATE: April 08, 1999


                             1568 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    April 07, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: PG EXTRA; Pg. M13; NAMES IN THE NEWS

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: NAMES IN THE NEWS

BYLINE: Alicia Cypress

BODY:



   Athletes Win Medals


   Eight athletes representing Prince George's County in the Maryland State
Special Olympics, held this year at the Wisp Ski Resort, on Deep Creek Lake in
McHenry, Md., have returned with a total of nine gold and silver medals to their
credit: The winners are Terry Harvey, of Parkdale High School; Victoria
Strother, Perla Corona, Mark Smith and Lewis Smith, all of Central High School;
Durrell Johnson, of High Point High School; and Brandon Johnson and Renea
Turner, both of Bowie High School.


   Honors for Science


   Two Oxon Hill High School seniors have been honored for their talent in the
medical science field.

   Melinna Alleyne won the Poster/Paper Presentation Competition at the State of
Maryland Junior Science and Humanities Symposium for a biochemistry project
based on gene therapy. The project, called "Biological Activities of Retroviral
Vectors," focused on the first genetic disease to undergo gene therapy. Her
research was conducted at the National Institutes of Health in the Clinical Gene
Therapy Branch.

   David M. Harris was awarded an NIH-Howard Hughes Medical Institute Summer
Research Fellowship. Only 20 fellowships were awarded to students in Maryland,
Virginia and the District. The fellowship includes a $ 2,500 stipend for at
least eight weeks of summer research at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda or the Frederick Cancer Research Facility. The program also includes
weekly teaching sessions and seminars where Harris will have the opportunity to
present his own research findings.



   If you have an item for Names in the News, please let us know. Fax to
301-952-1397, e-mail to pgextra@washpost.com or write to Names in the News,
Prince George's Extra, The Washington Post, 14402 Old Mill Rd., Suite 201, Upper
Marlboro, Md. 20772.


LOAD-DATE: April 07, 1999


                             1569 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                    April 6, 1999 Tuesday City final Edition

SECTION: EXTRA; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 1872 words

HEADLINE: timeless passion;
Marion native Michael Hartman clears obstacles to breathe rarefied air of guitar
heroes.

BYLINE: DAVID LINDQUIST; STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   DAVID LINDQUIST; STAFF WRITER

   For a rock 'n' roll musician, Michael Hartman seems to be unstuck in time.

   He's a guitar hero, a title that just hasn't been the same since anti-rock
star Kurt Cobain launched Nirvana from Seattle to the world in 1991.

   "There are so many people out there these days who turn their nose up,"
Hartman says. " 'Oh, that thing is so out. You probably spend all day in your
closet woodshedding on your guitar.' "

   But Hartman has nothing to apologize for.

   His debut album is being released today by Fuel 2000 Records - one of many
labels that make Universal Music Group a corporate giant.

   With Black Glue, Hartman makes a bid to join the elite company of Jeff Beck,
Joe Satriani and Steve Vai: instrumental specialists who influenced new waves of
players.

   Still, the Marion native doesn't sound like someone banking on international
stardom.

   "Instrumental music isn't, you know, officially burning up the charts or
anything," Hartman says.

   In addition to being unstuck, Hartman is racing against time.

   He has cystic fibrosis, a fatal genetic disorder that affects the normal
function of the lungs and digestive system.

   "It's uncurable," Hartman says. "I always have a breath of fresh air for four
or five months when I'm not in the hospital and I'm doing really great. Yeah, I
have the occasional runny nose, sniffle or cough, but it's not to the extent
where I have to be hooked up to any machines.

   "Then I always have reality in the back of my mind: 'You are going to be in
the hospital within the next few months. There's no way you can run from it.' "

   In the 1960s, children diagnosed with cystic fibrosis were not expected to
live past the age of 8. Thanks to new drugs and experimental gene-therapy
treatment, the life expectancy age recently was bumped from 31 to 32.

   "Hey, I'm 23 years old," Hartman says. "By the time I hit 31, hopefully
they're going to raise the life expectancy to 41."

   The story goes that Marsha Hartman bought her son his first guitar when he
was 7.

   Vai was in heavy rotation on MTV three years later, and that's when Michael's
life changed.

   Vai, playing logic-defying guitar solos as sidekick to bombastic David Lee
Roth in 1986, became Hartman's artistic role model.

   "You've got to work day in and day out," Hartman says of the road to guitar
mastery. "If you plan on moving to Los Angeles, you really better have your
stuff together. Out here is where all the hometown heroes go."

   Hartman recorded his first tape, No Lyrics Required, at age 16. Before
leaving two years later to attend the Musicians Institute in Hollywood, he gave
guitar lessons in Marion.

   "When I moved to L.A., it was an eye-opener," Hartman says. "Here's the guy
who was the local cat from Boston or the teacher from Boise, Idaho. It puts it
on a different playing level."

   Hartman made his first visit to Los Angeles in 1991, when Vai agreed to meet
the teen-ager as part of the Make-A-Wish Foundation program.

   Diagnosed with cystic fibrosis six weeks after birth, Hartman had been
virtually counted out by doctors at age 8.

   After an unexpected recovery, Hartman was struggling again in the months
leading up to the visit with Vai.

   "To be honest, I was very, very sick when I was 15," Hartman says. "(Vai)
knew what was going on with me, and a lot of people thought I was going to pass
away."

   Hartman hung tough, and Vai encouraged the young player to follow his dreams.
Their relationship moved from the fan-idol realm to something akin to
pupil-mentor.

   "I don't think he would have had a different opinion of me if I was healthy,"
Hartman says. "He's one of those guys that will bend over backward for you. He
sees if you're making an honest effort."

   A quote from Vai is affixed to the packaging of Black Glue: "Michael Hartman
keeps the spirit of rock 'n' roll alive."

   When Hartman arrived in Los Angeles for good in 1994, the days of
spandex-clad, gunslinging guitarists had passed.

   "It was kind of depressing for a while when the whole grunge thing came in,"
Hartman says. "It knocked out a lot of the guitar heroes I had. All of a sudden,
some guy with a flannel shirt and cut-off shorts comes on and a whole genre is
completely wiped out. Bands that were selling a million records are out playing
clubs that seat 300 people. It's a brutal shock."

   The always-diligent Hartman tackled his studies, though, and he met Jeanie
Nieves, a New Jersey native who was studying the finer points of studio
recording.

   "We had a lot of the same interests and goals," Hartman says. "She also
really helped me out when things were financially straining on my part. She was
working a full-time job in the morning and part time in the afternoon. She
really believed in what I was doing."

   Michael and Jeanie married in 1996, the same year the couple began work on
his solo debut album.

   The treatment regimen hasn't changed in more than 20 years.

   He takes about 40 pills a day to assist in food digestion and breathing.

   Three times a day, he breathes an aerosol solution to clear his lungs.

   He needs "percussion," a cup-handed massage that breaks up mucous in his
lungs, each morning and night.

   As one might expect, the decision to leave Marion weighed heavily on
Michael's parents, Marsha and Larry Hartman.

   "The first few years, my mother had a really hard time," Hartman says. "She
still does when I get sick. Naturally, certain things go through people's minds.
'He's out there, 2,000 miles away.' "

   Hartman usually sees his parents and two younger brothers once a year, flying
to Indiana for an extended visit each summer. When Midwest weather is
unpredictable - the majority of the year, naturally - it's too risky to subject
himself to wide swings in climate.

   "My body will go into shock," he says.

   In the summer of 1996, Hartman's plan was to record a solo album at Vai's
home studio, The Mothership.

   Plans changed when Hartman took a chance in 1997 to pursue what he envisioned
as a dream gig: guitar player for David Lee Roth.

   "I managed to get a couple of phone numbers and started calling them out of
the blue," Hartman says. 'Hey, this is me. This is what I'm doing. Are you guys
interested in hearing any of it?' "

   Roth's management didn't bite initially but was swayed when Hartman faxed a
page of references that included high-profile musicians such as Vai and bass
player Rudy Sarzo (Quiet Riot, Ozzy Osbourne, Whitesnake).

   Two songs written by Hartman, King of the Hill and Indeed I Do, appeared on
Roth's 1998 album, DLR Band. The songs are included on Black Glue in their
original instrumental form as Stomp and Southern Romp.

   "For a kid who has been worshiping Dave and Steve Vai since the age of 10, it
was like a dream come true," Hartman says of his early association with Roth.

   A car accident on Jan. 6, 1998, put both the Roth project and solo record in
peril for Hartman.

   A drunken driver careened into a vehicle carrying Jeanie and Michael, who
recalled the hospital room scene in which he was recovering from pneumonia and
exhaustion in the wake of the crash.

   "My wife broke her pelvis, leg and was getting ready for surgery," Hartman
says. "On the other end of the phone, I had David's manager: 'Look, we have four
weeks to get songs in for the new album's deadline.' I myself was sick with
pneumonia and had IVs in my arm.

   "I was trying to write songs for an album that was going to be my debut in
front of the world. There's so much pressure. Thousands of guitar players are
going to be going out and buying this album."

   Michael wrote a song in the hospital - the aptly titled Insanity - that
appears on Black Glue.

   Roth, meanwhile, ended his association with Hartman and hired John Lowery as
guitarist for the balance of his album. In a bit of rock 'n' roll irony, Lowery
abandoned Roth within months to join Marilyn Manson (where he's known as
"John5").

   Hartman credits his wife for helping him put a positive spin on the Roth
fallout and resume the recording of Black Glue.

   "I look at it as a stepping stone," Hartman says. "Even though I'm not with
David, he generated a lot of publicity that led to the deal I have now. My wife
and I worked very hard on our own. We recorded on our own, with our own money. I
just think it was that added bit of publicity that kind of created some
circulation of my name."

   Meanwhile, Hartman's profile continues to rise.

   He has a sponsor relationship with Washburn Guitars, which provides
instruments in exchange for appearances at music-store clinics.

   In addition to his recording contract with Fuel 2000, Hartman recently signed
a three-album publishing deal with industry leader Warner/Chappell - a company
that will work to place his songs in film and television projects.

   Right now, the Black Glue acoustic gem A Song For Jeanie can be heard in
Forces of Nature, the DreamWorks box-office hit starring Sandra Bullock and Ben
Affleck.

   "Certain artists still sell 100,000 units," Hartman says of the guitar hero
fraternity. "When you can make a record for $3,000, take it to a label and then
they sell 100,000 copies, it's a huge profit margin."

   Because cystic fibrosis takes its victims at a young age, there are few - if
any - role models in customary fields of entertainment or sports.

   Football star Boomer Esiason has raised some awareness through a foundation
established after his son Gunnar was diagnosed in 1993.

   But the disorder, which restricts the ability to breathe and increases the
body's output of salt, essentially has guaranteed that Gunnar will not follow
his father into athletics.

   Michael Hartman's playing speed and agility reside in long, lean fingers that
have the potential for setting a new standard in rock instrumentation.

   On the topic of role models, Hartman says his work probably is more important
to parents than children.

   "Look, just because your son is diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, don't put any
barriers around the kid," Hartman says. " 'Look at this guy. He graduated from
high school and went out and did his own thing. He's married, and he has this
and this and this.' "

   Guitar picks

   Three albums Michael Hartman cites as important influences:

   Steve Vai Passion & Warfare, (1990, Relativity)

   This solo record came after Vai had ended his association with David Lee Roth
and Whitesnake.

   "It was such a huge breathrough record for guitar. Everyone had pushed the
limit so far in the '80s. Steve pretty much took it the farthest it could go.
After that album went gold, grunge came in. This was the last signifying record
for what you can do guitar virtuoso-wise. You couldn't get any hotter, faster or
musical with the guitar."

   David Lee Roth Eat 'Em and Smile (1986, Warner Bros.)

   The ex-Van Halen vocalist's solo album was Hartman's introduction to Vai.
"This came out when I was 10, and it was the first time I could grasp what the
guitar player was doing. The talking guitar intro on Yankee Rose blew my mind.
That made me go out and buy the record."

   Kiss Destroyer (1976, Casablanca/Mercury)

   The makeup-wearing monsters of rock made a big impression on Hartman.

   "It was the whole thing about Paul Stanley and Gene Simmons. To a kid, Kiss
was pretty big. That was the first rock record that caught my attention.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                             1570 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             April 6, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 083

LENGTH: 238 words

HEADLINE: TV TICKER

BYLINE: Michael Starr

BODY:

   Gene therapy Gene Wilder will return to A&E for "The Lady in Question," a
followup to his highly rated A&E movie, "Murder in a Small Town."

   Reuniting with Wilder: Mike Starr, Cherry Jones and director Joyce Chopra.
The movie goes into production next month.

   Deja-'View' OK, but will they ever choose a new co-host?

   ABC's "The View" is partnering with Red Lobster restaurants for a tour of
"The View" in shopping malls nationwide.

   The mall tour will encompass three months and 13 cities and begins this
Saturday at Roosevelt Field Mall on Long Island.

   A re-created "View" set will be used, with shoppers able to meet the
attending co-host (Joy Behar, Star Jones or Meredith Vieira) - and one lucky
winner chosen to participate in the show's "Hot Topics" segment.

   Since January, "The View" has conducted many on-air auditions to replace
Debbie Matenopoulos, but has yet to make any decisions.

   Express Lines:*MSNBC's John Hockenberry-hosted "Hockenberry" (10 p.m.) is
airing live from Albania until further notice ...

   *WABC/Ch.7's newscasts are now available on the Internet, 24/7, at
www.7online.com ...

   *A&E's new "Biography" of Serb leader Slobodan Milosevic debuts Friday at 8
p.m. Harry Smith hosts ...

   *The U.N. will host a conference on the future of world television tomorrow
and Thursday. Admission is free ...

   *The WB will add "Pokemon" to its weekday lineup (7-8 a.m. on Ch.11) this
fall.-

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1999


                             1571 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     April 6, 1999, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. G-4

LENGTH: 1479 words

HEADLINE: ON ALL FRONTS;
ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY, GENE RESEARCH, LIFESTYLE HABITS LEADING TO;
IMPROVEMENTS IN TREATMENT

BYLINE: ROBERT COOKE, NEWSDAY

BODY:


   Lifestyle adjustments - stopping smoking, practicing good dietary habits and
using skin protection in the sun - can reduce the incidence of cancer,
particularly lung and skin cancer. And early detection is credited for reduction
of cancers of the breast, colon, rectum, cervix, prostate, testes and skin.

   Solid tumor treatment generally involves surgical removal, often followed by
chemotherapy, radiation, or both. Cancers without solid tumors, such as
leukemia, are treated with drugs designed to kill body cells. Recently, hormonal
therapy (blocking testosterone, for instance, to control tumor growth in
prostate cancer) and immunotherapy (attempting to enlist the immune system to
block cancer expansion) have been used with some success.

   Cancer researchers are working on three main tracks, experts say, all of
which seem to hold quick promise. They include efforts to make the so-called
"slash, poison and burn" approaches - surgery, chemotherapy and radiation more
precise and effective; drugs to block new cancer in high-risk individuals; and
ways to stop cancer growth after early detection.

   Dr. Harmon Eyre, the American Cancer Society's executive vice president for
research and medical affairs, said the most significant change could be the
quick, general acceptance of "the concept of chemo-prevention of cancer" for
persons at high risk of getting specific tumors.

   For instance, two drugs - Tamoxifen and Raloxifene, both members of a new
class of drugs called "selective estrogen receptor modulators" - have recently
been shown to dramatically reduce the risk of breast cancer in women.

   The results on Tamoxifen, an estrogen inhibitor, were the first to be
released and have since resulted in federal approval for wide use in women. But
Tamoxifen tends to increase risk of endometrial cancer and heart disease.

   These risks have led some cancer experts to suggest quick federal approval
for Raloxifene - which is designed to act like estrogen, instead of as an
inhibitor - as a cancer preventive. To date, however, Raloxifene is approved
only against osteoporosis. Described by Eyre as a "new concept for us," the idea
of blocking cancer in high-risk individuals could also be used against prostate
cancer within five years. Then, Eyre said, "we expect to have the results of
prevention trials" examining use of a drug called Proscar, which blocks the
action of the male hormone testosterone on the prostate gland.

   The new therapy "is analogous to treating high blood pressure and high
cholesterol to prevent heart disease and stroke," Eyre said.

   Advanced technology

   But what if one already has cancer?

   With the advent and continuing improvement of imaging techniques such as MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging), CT scans (computerized axial tomography) and
ultrasound, assessing a tumor's location and shape has become more precise, so
less damage is done to nearby tissue during treatment.

   In brain cancer, for example, leading medical centers already are teaming the
imaging technology with powerful computers to guide surgeons doing
ultra-delicate surgery. The aim is to remove tumor tissue without seriously
damaging the brain's neuronal circuitry.

   Similar technology also is begin ning to be used to help pinpoint radiation
on organ-based tumors. In 3-D conformal radiation therapy, for instance, many
cross-sectional scans of a tumor-bearing prostate are combined to create an
exact 3-D image, which gets fed into a computerized rotating accelerator. The
accelerator's radiation beam is then shaped to precisely match the prostate
dimensions, minimizing "burn" of surrounding tissue.

   Although this form of radiation therapy hasn't been shown to improve cure
rates, experts say it seems to limit side effects. Developed by medical
physicist Lawrence Reinstein, who is on staff at the University Hospital and
Medical Center at Stony Brook, N.Y., the new technology is growing in use in
major medical centers throughout the country.

   There are also several emerging treatments for cancers that don't involve
solid tumors, such as leukemia. For instance, the success rate for bone marrow
transplants - used to restore the body's blood-making system after it has been
destroyed by harsh anti-cancer treatments - seems to be improving.

   This treatment, already available, is progressing on two fronts, experts say:
improving the matching of bone marrow cells between donor and recipient in order
to reduce chances of rejection; and developing new ways to siphon some of the
patient's bone marrow so it can be "cleansed" of cancer cells and re-implanted
after treatment to help restore immune function.

   Research avenues

   There are several main research highways in the quest for cures, or at least
to control tumor growth. Researchers seek to sharpen and strengthen the immune
system as a way to kill incipient tumors; to control blood flow as a way to
starve existing tumors and to make genetic adjustments that stop the minute
changes that occur as cancer progesses.

   "Only 10 years ago, we knew virtually nothing about the internal mechanisms"
of cancer cells, Dr. Richard Klausner, director of the National Cancer
Institute, said recently. But now, he and others agree, the internal mechanisms
of cancer - from the cellular level down to the genetic level are being
identified and dismantled.

   The result is a new philosophy that scientists generally refer to as rational
drug design. "Instead of developing drugs that just kill growing cells, you
actually look inside the cancers for specific mutations" that have generated
malignancy, Eyre said. "Then you design a drug that controls the mutation."

   Types of cancer that would be likely targets for this genetic therapy include
chronic myelogenous leukemia, caused when chromosomes inside a cell break and
rejoin abnormally, creating a new enzyme that eventually leads to cancer. "If
you can block or remove that single mutation, you can eliminate the disease,"
Eyre said. "So people have now begun looking at drugs that are absolutely
specific for that one enzyme."

   Other genetic solutions are also being considered.

   For instance, researchers are studying how to insert new genes into immune
system T-cells as a way to strengthen their attack on tumor cells. Dr. Glenn
Dranoff, at the Dana-Farber Cancer Center in Boston, is a leader in this effort,
inserting genes that make a growth-stimulating molecule, GM-csf, into T-cells in
early clinical trials.

   Researchers have suggested that, in some cases, cancer may occur when immune
cells fail to notice or act against an incipient tumor. The long-term goal then
is to sharpen or wake up the immune system so it can overwhelm and kill cancer
cells in a growing tumor, essentially a vaccine.

   Such a vaccine could be especially important after major tumors have been
removed, Eyre said. In this case, "the vaccine is given to turn the immune
system on to cancer and prevent it from recurring."

   Finally, Eyre points out that ge netic research also promises to give doctors
new tools for early diagnosis. At present, patients go through a process called
"staging," in which doctors assess how aggressive the cancer is by noting
measures such as tumor size, location, metastases to lymph nodes and tumor type.

   "All cancers for the past 100 years have been characterized this way," Eyre
said. "But within 10 years it's going to be completely different. The potential
key to this puzzle is to molecularly characterize every individual tumor,
looking at the spectrum of gene mutations. That should give us clues to which
are going to be lethal or simple."

   Besides genetics, another immunological approach is to develop vaccines to
prevent infections that can lead to cancer.

   Experimenting with immunity requires caution, however, because it may be
possible to accidentally touch off an auto-immune reaction, inducing the immune
system to attack normal cells as well as cancer cells. If that happens, the
treatment's side effects may be worse than the disease.

   Yet another treatment option being explored is anti-angiogenesis, attacking
tumors by starving them to death. That can be achieved by finding a way to shut
off the tumor's blood supply.

   Research led by Judah Folkman and his colleagues at Children's Hospital in
Boston has focused on isolating and identifying natural factors that make blood
vessels grow, and other factors that make blood vessels stop growing.

   Recently, Folkman's team uncovered several of the long-sought
growth-inhibiting factors - he calls them anti-angiogenesis factors - that
dramatically stop the growth of massive tumors in mice. These factors - the
first two were named angiostatin and endostatin - are so potent that they cause
tumors to shrink and disappear. Folkman's findings have recently been
duplicated, and extended, by researchers in other laboratories.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Steve
Thomas/Post-Gazette; CA-A Cancer Journal; for Clinicians: Estimated cancer cases
and deaths for 1999

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1999


                             1572 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 6, 1999, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: Blood-blocking cancer drugs might fight artery clogs

BYLINE: Kathleen Fackelmann

BODY:

   Experimental drugs that have been used to combat cancer also might
halt the progression of artery-clogging plaque that can lead to
a heart attack or stroke, an animal study out today says.

   The hope is that such compounds will one day help prevent heart
attacks and stroke, which together kill more than 600,000 Americans
each year.

   Judah Folkman of Children's Hospital in Boston, Karen Moulton
and their colleagues report the findings in today's Circulation.

   Folkman, a pioneer in cancer research, had shown that such substances,
including a drug he worked with called endostatin, could shrink
mouse tumors. Folkman showed that such compounds cut off the tumor's
blood supply and thus stop its wild growth.


   Surprisingly, plaque comprises not just fat, but white cells and
smooth muscle cells.

   "It's living tissue," says Moulton, who notes that the cells
in plaque do not grow wildly like cancer but do divide and grow.

   At first these cells get enough nourishment from the blood rushing
by in the artery. But more established plaque might need to grow
tiny blood vessels in order to get bigger. Moulton's team wondered
whether blood-vessel-blocking compounds such as endostatin and
TNP-470 could halt the growth of plaque in a mouse artery.

   To find out, they turned to mice that had been fed high-fat, high-cholesterol

lab chow -- the mouse equivalent of cheeseburgers and fries. The
researchers let the mice develop a thick coat of plaque on their
artery walls. Then the researchers gave the mice injections of
endostatin or TNP-470.

   After 16 weeks, the researchers found that mice treated with endostatin
had an 85% reduction in the growth of new plaque compared with
mice that received injections of just salt water.

   The mice that got TNP-470 had a 70% drop in the amount of new
plaque deposited on their arteries.

   When the researchers treated very young mice with the same compounds,
they found no significant difference in the amount of plaque clogging
the arteries. Moulton suspects that plaque doesn't start to grow
blood vessels until it is established and needs the extra boost
in nourishment in order to keep growing.

   Blood-vessel blockers have generated an enormous amount of excitement
as treatments for cancer. This is the first time such drugs have
been used to limit the growth of plaque, Moulton says.

   The mouse study holds out the hope that vessel-blocking compounds
will keep plaque from getting thicker as people age, Moulton says.

   If additional studies pan out, doctors might one day use such
compounds to hold the line on plaque that chokes arteries of middle-age
and older people, she says.

   A lot more work needs to be done before such therapy could be
tried in humans, cautions Valentin Fuster, the president of the
Dallas-based American Heart Association. Moulton says her team
is at least five years away from human testing of such compounds.

   Ronald Crystal, a researcher at Cornell University's medical school
in New York, worries that such a therapy, which would be given
over long periods, would pose unforeseen risks to humans. Moulton
says the mice in her study gained weight on the high-fat diet
but didn't suffer other side effects.

   The findings also raise questions about another avenue of cardiovascular
research: the use of compounds that promote the growth of new
blood vessels to bypass a clogged heart artery. Could such a strategy
make the clog worse by giving it the blood to grow larger?

   "We've seen no evidence of accelerated plaque," says Jeffrey
Isner, a cardiologist at Tufts Medical School in Boston. Isner's
team has given 120 people with clogged heart and leg arteries
genes that direct the production of a substance that gets blood
vessels to grow. The new vessels bypass the clog in the leg or
heart artery.

   Isner wrote an editorial that appears in today's issue of Circulation,
a journal of the American Heart Association.

   Crystal, who is doing similar experiments, also does not believe
that such treatment will make plaque worse.

   His gene therapy, given to people with clogged heart arteries,
is designed to last a week. It's unlikely that such a short-term
therapy would accelerate the growth of plaque, he says.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Jeff Geissler, AP; Judah Folkman: Cancer pioneer shrank
tumors in mice.

LOAD-DATE: April 06, 1999


                             1573 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 06, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z09

LENGTH: 1410 words

HEADLINE: Researchers Take Aim at Uterine Fibroids; New Techniques Expand
Treatment Options to Help Women Avoid Major Surgery

BYLINE: Gail McBride, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:


   They may affect up to half of women of childbearing age and can cause
bleeding, pain and perhaps infertility. Yet until recently, medical research
paid scant attention to those benign growths in the uterus called fibroids.

   Now a range of new procedures--from a technique that blocks blood vessels in
the uterus to experimental drugs--may allow many women more options besides
major surgery to treat uterine fibroids. For years, the principal treatment has
been hysterectomy, in which the whole uterus is removed, or another operation
called myomectomy in which the individual fibroids are cut out. But increasingly
it looks like fibroids may be forced into submission in other ways.

   The newest treatment shrinks fibroids by cutting off their blood supply.
Called uterine artery embolization (UAE), it was first performed in Paris in
1991 by gynecologist Jacques-Henri Ravina. Today it is done in many countries,
including the United States.

   In this procedure, a catheter is inserted into an artery in the groin. With
X-ray guidance, a specially trained "interventional radiologist" directs the
catheter into the two arteries that supply the uterus and the fibroids with
blood. Small plastic or gel particles are injected through the catheter into the
arteries, causing the blood to clot. The result is closure of the arteries,
marked shrinkage of the fibroids and cessation of bleeding.

   The procedure takes 60 to 90 minutes, according to interventional radiologist
Scott Goodwin, who with gynecologist Bruce McLucas has performed more than 200
of them at UCLA Medical Center. Patients are sedated but do not have to undergo
general anesthesia. Afterward, there is considerable cramp-like pelvic pain, and
pain medication is necessary. Infections occasionally occur. Patients are
encouraged to take a week off from work or other daily routines.

   For some women, this treatment is a welcome alternative to a hysterectomy.
"My uterus was full of fibroids, and I had been to four or five gynecologists,"
said Susan DeBoismilon of Orinda, Calif. "They all urged me to have a
hysterectomy." Then she heard about McLucas' work. "The procedure made sense to
me, and I had it done a month later. It's definitely the best course."

   Goodwin said that about 80 percent of the 2,000 women worldwide who underwent
UAE have had relief of symptoms, shrinkage of fibroids and no need for a
hysterectomy.

   Six patients of Goodwin and McLucas have become pregnant and had normal or
C-section deliveries after UAE, but no one really has kept close track of
patients' attempts to get pregnant until very recently. There is some concern,
Goodwin said, that the blood supply to the ovaries may be damaged by UAE in 1
percent to 2 percent of cases, and he warns women about this if they want to
maintain fertility.

   Until the uncertainties about long-term results and pregnancy are resolved,
the procedure "probably will be best for women at the end of their reproductive
lives," said Bryan Cowan, professor of obstetrics and gynecology and director of
the division of reproductive endocrinology at the University of Mississippi in
Jackson.

   "On the other hand, someone needs to be out there doing new procedures."

   Another relatively new procedure destroys fibroids by zapping them with
electricity or a laser. Called myolysis, it was introduced in the United States
in 1990 by gynecologist Herbert Goldfarb of Montclair, N.J., and Manhattan.

   In this approach, a woman first takes drugs such as Lupron to suppress the
production of estrogen, known to enlarge fibroids, for about three months. Then
after surgery to remove the uterus's inner layer, the patient undergoes a
laparoscopic procedure, in which the surgeon makes small incisions in the
abdomen and uses tiny instruments employing magnification to guide the
operation.

   With the patient under general anesthesia, each fibroid is treated
individually by repeated application of an electric current (which Goldfarb
uses) or a high-intensity laser beam that destroys cells on contact. There is
some pain and discomfort with the one-day procedure, Goldfarb said, although
less than with UAE. Goldfarb reports a success rate of nearly 90 percent in the
400 patients he has treated.

   The problem with myolysis is that scar tissue may form after the surgery and
entangle internal structures, including fallopian tubes. This can interfere with
pregnancy. Some gynecologists advise women who want to become pregnant to do so
as soon as possible after myolysis.

   Charles March, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of
Southern California, is cautious about both myolysis and UAE. "They are probably
best suited to carefully selected patients who are not concerned about fertility
or who don't want to undergo major abdominal surgery," he said. "Certainly, only
doctors with a lot of experience should be doing them."

   Meanwhile, researchers are also looking into gene therapy and experimental
drugs. At Brigham and Women's Hospital's Center for Uterine Fibroids in Boston,
cell biologist Romana Nowak is studying two substances called growth factors
that stimulate the formation of collagen or new blood vessels and accelerate the
growth of tumors. Several agents that inhibit both growth factors are being
considered for fibroid treatment, Nowak said.

   Just what causes fibroids is not known. Cynthia Morton, a molecular
geneticist at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital is looking
for genetic clues. She and her colleagues are investigating two of the
chromosomal abnormalities that occur in 40 percent of fibroids. In addition,
they and others at the Center for Uterine Fibroids are recruiting sisters or
other close family members who have fibroids in an effort to identify a common
genetic factor.

   Doctors point out that many women with fibroids have no symptoms. As March
noted, "it's only necessary to remove fibroids when they are causing symptoms."
Many women with symptomatic fibroids try to hang on until menopause, hoping the
fibroids will shrink as their hormone levels decrease. Fibroids are sensitive to
both estrogen and progesterone, said cell biologist Janet Andersen of the State
University of New York at Stony Brook. After menopause, when levels of these
hormones decline, many women experience relief.

   For women whose symptoms require treatment, hysterectomy remains the only
true cure: no uterus, no fibroids. However, hysterectomy carries the risks of
all major surgical procedures. Also, recovery requires a lot of "down time," and
some patients contend there are lasting adverse effects on health and sexual
function.

   Moreover, many women just don't want to lose their uteri. The only surgical
alternative is myomectomy, but this operation is not always successful. Blood
transfusions may be needed during surgery, and fibroids recur in 30 percent of
cases. In addition, the operation can lead to problems from scar tissue.

   For women who still want children, myomectomy has been the only route,
although Caesarean section is required for delivery because the uterus is too
weak. Now there are alternatives.

   Are they better than myomectomy? "Let's put it this way," said McLucas. "If
myomectomy were a better procedure, I wouldn't be advocating UAE--or even
myolysis. New procedures may come along in a few years, but right now, if I were
a woman who wanted to become pregnant, I'd consider UAE as my first
alternative."

   Resources

   There are at least three fibroid web sites in the Internet:

   * www.fibroids.net is maintained by the Center for Uterine Fibroids, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Boston.

   * www.fibroidcorner.com is maintained by gynecologist Francis L. Hutchins Jr.
and interventional radiologist Robert L. Worthington-Kirsch, both of the
Philadelphia area.

   * www.fibroids.org is maintained by the UCLA Medical Group Uterine Artery
Embolization team.

   Fibroid Tumors at a Glance

   Uterine fibroids are benign tumors. They occur in more than 20 percent of
women of childbearing age, although symptoms do not generally develop until the
patient is in her late thirties or forties.

   Fibroids are the most common cause of hysterectomies. They are named for
their position in the uterus. Submucosal or intramural fibroids are often
associated with abnormal bleeding, while pelvic and back pain are frequently
caused by intramural and subserosal fibroids.

   Source: Georgetown University Medical Center


GRAPHIC: Illustration; Illustration, tony fitch for The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: April 06, 1999


                             1574 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 1, 1999 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 59

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Scientists: Use your brain or lose it

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   Children who grow up in environments that stimulate learning may have a
better chance of avoiding degenerative brain disorders such as Alzheimer's
disease later in life, researchers said yesterday.

    A study involving laboratory rats provided the first compelling evidence
that a stimulating environment early in life, followed by continued learning,
not only can help protect the brain from disease but also increase its capacity
to repair and regrow damaged cells, researchers at Thomas Jefferson University
in Philadelphia said.

    Their study was published in April's edition of the journal Nature Medicine.

    The study by researchers at Thomas Jefferson University and the University
of Auckland in New Zealand showed that rats lost 45 percent fewer brain cells to
aging if they had been provided with rubber balls, running wheels and tunnels to
play with and received special treats such as corn chips.

    Moreover, active rats that also received a brain stimulant called kainic
acid showed almost complete protection from brain cell loss.

    "We were hoping to get some scientific underpinnings to the age-old maxim
'use it or lose it,'" said Dr. Matthew During, director of Jefferson Medical
College's Central Nervous System Gene Therapy Center.

    "An enriched environment switched on genes in the brain, and we believe by
that mechanism the brain becomes super-resilient, resistant to aging and
diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, and traumatic brain injury,"
During said.

    But the study's authors said further research will be needed to determine
exactly what it was about the environment that helped stimulate brain-protecting
genes.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                             1575 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 31, 1999, Wednesday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 152 words

HEADLINE: Vascular Genetics raises cash for tests;
BUSINESS REGION BRIEFS

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   Vascular Genetics Inc., a Boston-based venture, which is partially owned by
Human Genome Sciences of Rockville, Md., said it has raised an undisclosed
amount of money to fund its next human trials of a pioneering gene therapy for
cardiovascular disease. "We think the fact that the investors have expanded
beyond the original group is a sign of how promising this therapy is," Kate
DeSantis, a spokeswoman for Human Genome, said. Vascular Genetics is one of
nearly a dozen biotechnology companies in a high-stakes race to develop a
breakthrough gene or human protein-based drugs to stimulate the growth of new
blood vessels to treat cardiovascular conditions ranging from artery blockages
to heart damage. Heart disease remains the leading cause of death annually in
the United States, and the American Heart Association estimates that more than
58 million Americans have cardiovascular disease.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1999


                             1576 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     March 31, 1999 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 035

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: Children's Hospital planning $ 160M expansion

BYLINE: By COSMO MACERO JR.

BODY:

   Children's Hospital plans to spend $ 160 million on a major expansion of its
research and clinical facilities, erecting a pair of 11-story buildings in the
heart of its Longwood Medical Area campus.

   Children's - though financially strapped, it's among the national leaders in
pediatric care - seeks to increase clinical capacity to keep up with "enormous
competition for patient volumes." It also wants to better link patient care with
ongoing research into tissue engineering, gene therapy and other areas.

   Such "bench to bedside" applications are at the core of Children's research
as it moves to capitalize on its funding from the National Institutes for
Health.

   "We need to have the right type of space and realignment for the right type
of patient care," said Steven Marsh, vice president for facilities management.
"This is a really significant time for getting involved in the research side of
things."

   Children's, a Harvard Medical School hospital, posted an operating loss of $
2 million in 1997. But it has resisted an industry trend toward forming regional
networks - choosing to remain independent, despite its budget woes.

   Plans call for an 11-floor, 208,000-square-foot Carnegie Clinical Building to
replace a 20,000-square-foot structure on Shattuck Street. The clinical enter,
slated for groundbreaking next year and completion in 2002, will be connected to
Children's Hospital's Main and Bader Buildings and to the Dana-Farber Jimmy Fund
Building.

   The 214,000-square-foot Blackfan Research Building - also 11 floors but about
40 feet taller than the clinic - will go up on the same timetable along Blackfan
Circle, on the north side of Longwood Avenue.

   The entire project, which Marsh said will be the subject of a major
fund-raising campaign, has yet to be approved by the Boston Redevelopment
Authority.

   Response from the nearby Mission Hill and Fenway communities has been
positive, Marsh said, noting that Children's Hospital is "sensitive to their
concerns" about traffic, parking and other issues.

   Still, like others planning development near the Fenway, the hospital is apt
to run up against some who want no new projects until the city writes a master
plan for the area.

   "Anything that goes in here is objectionable," said Peter Catalano of the
Fenway Action Coaltion, which is trying to kill plans for a new Red Sox
ballpark. "We have no idea how each project is going to affect the area."

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1999


                             1577 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                March 31, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     March 31, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: REPUBLIC, PARTNER TO CLOSE ILLINOIS PLANT

BYLINE: FROM STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

BODY:

   Republic Engineered Steels Inc. and Bar Technologies Inc. will shutter a
jointly held cold-finishing plant in Batavia, Ill., by July 2. The 22-year-old,
61,000-square-foot plant employs about 24. Republic and Bar, which are merging
to form Republic Technologies International, said the move stemmed from the
companies' decision to focus on plants closer to their customers. "The decision
to close a plant is very difficult because of the impact on our employees and
the community," said John G. Asimou, executive vice president and general
manager of Republic's cold finished bar division. "The closing of the Batavia
facility is part of the companies' overall strategic plan to utilize their
cold-finished operations in key market areas to best service our customer base."

   DIVIDEND CUT

   Associated Estates Realty Corp. cut its quarterly dividend 19 percent to 37.5
cents a share. The dividend is payable May 1 to shareholders of record April 15.
The dividend represents an annual yield of about 14.5 percent based on Monday's
closing price of $10.3125, and reflects a reduction of 9 cents per share from
the quarterly amount previously paid.

   NEW PHONE PLANS

   Ameritech has started offering wireless-phone customers new plans that
eliminate long-distance charges for calls placed from its network. The plans,
which begin at $75 a month for 600 minutes, also cut out "roaming" charges while
customers remain within the company's five-state service area. When users travel
elsewhere, they will pay a flat rate of 39 cents a minute, compared with up to
69 cents a minute on Ameritech's other plans. Ameritech is targeting customers
who want to cut out long-distance charges but don't travel extensively outside
the company's home region.

   PATENTS GRANTED

   Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. said yesterday it has received two new U.S.
patents bolstering its position in gene therapy. The patents cover the company's
technology for compacting genetic material into small particles so they can be
inserted into human cells to treat disease. Copernicus is working on two
different means to target drugs to specific tissues and cells, starting with
cystic fibrosis.

   JURY SELECTED

   A jury of five men and seven women was selected yesterday at the trial of two
Taiwanese executives accused of stealing trade secrets from American adhesive
maker Avery Dennison Corp. Pin Yen Yang, 72, president of Four Pillars Co. of
Taiwan, and his daughter, Hwei Chen "Sally" Yang, 40, are on trial in U.S.
District Court in Youngstown. The Yangs are accused of taking secrets that could
be used for labels and tape by paying off one of the company's researchers in
Ohio. They have denied the charges. Opening statements are scheduled to take
place today.

   NIGHTTOWN TO RENOVATE

   Discussions about a possible bed and breakfast at the popular Nighttown
restaurant at 12383 Cedar Rd. in Cleveland Heights have ended, but the
restaurant's owners have bought the building and are planning to renovate.
"We're going to redo it. We're going to start with the roof and work down," said
John M. Barr, president of PRAB Inc., a partnership that paid $1 million for the
property. Built around 1916, the three-story building has 16 apartments and the
250-seat restaurant. The apartments will also be renovated as they are vacated,
said Barr, who owns Nighttown with Brendan Ring and a silent partner.

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

   LOCAL TICKER

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1999


                             1578 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         March 30, 1999, Tuesday ,FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS ,2C

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: Vascular Genetics raises funds for therapy trials; Human Genome
venture seeks gene-based drug for cardiovascular disease

BYLINE: Mark Guidera

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Vascular Genetics Inc., a Boston-based venture which is partially owned by
Human Genome Sciences of Rockville, said yesterday that it has raised an
undisclosed amount of money to fund its next human trials of a pioneering gene
therapy for cardiovascular disease.

    "We think the fact that the investors have expanded beyond the original
group is a sign of how promising this therapy is," said Kate DeSantis, a
spokeswoman for Human Genome Sciences Inc.

    Vascular Genetics is one of almost a dozen biotechnology companies in a
high-stakes race to develop breakthrough gene or human protein-based drugs to
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels to treat cardiovascular conditions
ranging from artery blockages to heart damage.

    At stake is a large potential market. Heart disease remains the leading
cause of death annually in the United States, and the American Heart Association
estimates that more than 58 million Americans have cardiovascular disease.

    Vascular Genetics is completing a small human study of the safety and
effectiveness of its leading experimental treatment, a gene-based therapy for
treating an advanced form of peripheral artery disease known as critical limb
ischemia. The painful condition, which affects 150,000 people in the United
States, involves reduced blood flow to the arms and legs, and skin lesions that
are difficult to heal.

    DeSantis, the spokeswoman for Human Genome, said data on the Phase I/II
trial is expected to be published this summer. The treatment, Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor-2, or VEGF-2, is designed to stimulate new blood
vessel growth. VEGF-2 is years away from being commercially available; it must
undergo additional human trials before the U.S. Food and Drug Administration can
review it for marketing.

    Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, a co-founder of Vascular Genetics and chief of
cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston, said
preliminary results from early studies of the treatment are encouraging.

    " It is enormously encouraging to think that sometime in the near future we
may have an effective treatment to offer patients suffering from these
debilitating and devastating diseases," Isner said.

    The money Vascular Genetics said was raised yesterday came from a private
placement of preferred stock sold to a number of wealthy individuals.

    DeSantis said the companies had decided not to disclose the identities of
the investors, terms of the financing, or how much money was raised in the
placement, handled by Century Capital Associates of Princeton, N.J.

    The money, she said, will be provided in three stages, and will be made
available if and when Vascular Genetics clears certain undisclosed research and
development milestones for VEGF-2.

    Vascular Genetics is a joint venture of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston, Dr. Isner and Cato Holding, a contract research outfit in Durham, N.C.
Rather than providing equity financing, Human Genome and the other founders are
underwriting the venture with research and development services.


LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1999


                             1579 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                     March 30, 1999, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Southern California Living; Part E; Page 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: PAGE 2 / NEWS, TRENDS, GOSSIP AND STUFF TO DO;
 AN ANNUAL LOOK AT GIVING;
 AROUND TOWN;
 JUST IMAGINE THE POSSIBILITIES

BYLINE: PAMELA WARRICK, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   It is the million-dollar question. And to charities, large or small, it is an
invitation to dream. It is also license to describe, sometimes in excruciating
detail, the enormous needs of children who are sick or dying, of adolescents who
are gifted but without hope, of women who are homeless and abused, even of pets
mistreated and abandoned,

   What, we asked six thrifty nonprofit groups, would you do with $ 1 million?

   Children of the Night: "We rescue children from pimps, that's what we do,"
says Lois Lee, who founded the Van Nuys-based charity 20 years ago. "We've
pulled more than 10,000 kids off the streets since our beginning, and the reason
we're so successful is we are privately funded. But that also means it's up to
me to raise the $ 2 million we need every year just to keep going. We have no
savings account, no loans. That makes me scared. I shiver at the onus being on
me. So, if I had $ 1 million today, I'd use it to start an endowment campaign
because I am convinced that no one else is going to operate a program for child
prostitutes--and I don't want this one to come to an end when I do."

   Cystic Fibrosis Foundation: There is no cure for cystic fibrosis, a fatal
genetic disease that attacks the respiratory and digestive systems. But an extra
million dollars could help researchers in California find one, says Robert
Beall, president. Scientists have a better way to rapidly screen new drugs to
fight CF, but the tests, which use fluorescent "green glow" to tag the defect in
damaged cells, cost $ 4 each. With $ 1 million, Beall says, researchers could
screen 250,000 compounds that hold the most promise. Or the windfall could boost
research at Stanford University, where scientists are refining a novel method of
gene therapy to treat--and one day, perhaps cure--CF patients.

   Mr. Holland's Opus Foundation: Every year, hundreds of musically gifted young
people ask this Sherman Oaks foundation for the only thing they need to become
great musicians--instruments. And every year, the charity provides what it can,
which this year meant buying just 12 instruments for needy students throughout
the nation. With an annual budget of $ 500,000, a million-dollar gift would mean
more and bigger gifts of music. "A good bassoon costs $ 16,000; a flute, $
5,000. A million dollars can buy a lot of musical equipment for schools and give
a lot of kids with talent professional instruments," says Gillian Baylow,
director of programs and operations.

   Pasadena Humane Society: "If we had a million dollars? Well, we'd put
ourselves right out of business," says Steve McNall, executive director of the
popular and overburdened animal shelter. "That's our mission statement--to
eliminate the pet overpopulation problem and stop the euthanasia of unwanted
animals." The first step would be to build a hospital where pets could be
sterilized for free. That, says McNall, along with a strong public education
program, could help eliminate the current crisis. "Just by having one male and
one female cat get together, within six years, you've got 450,000 cats!" Last
year, the shelter was forced to euthanize about 800 adoptable animals out of the
8,000 dogs and cats turned in.

   Voices in Harmony: What happens when you put a young actor together with a
teenager and ask them to write a one-act play? You get the play, and, if you're
lucky, something more, says Melissa Fitzgerald, co-founder of the unique
mentoring and performing group for urban L.A. young people. "It's funny to be
asked what we'd do with a million dollars right now because, once again, we're
in serious financial straits," Fitzgerald says. The all-volunteer program can
afford to work one-on-one with only about 25 students a year. With a million
dollars, it could work with 100. "If we had money," Fitzgerald adds, "I'd also
buy a copying machine, maybe a fax, rent an office and hire a director."

   WomenShelter of Long Beach: "We badly need transitional housing for the women
who come here, a safe place for them to live with their children while they're
putting their lives back together," says Brenda Weathers, executive director.
"We're a 30-day shelter, and that's not long enough for most women. I'd also
like to have a little cushion in the bank so we're not afraid of not making the
next payroll. Last year, we sheltered 116 women and 148 children, and we took
about 2,000 calls on our crisis hotline. We're providing round-the-clock care on
a shoestring. It's better than nothing but--wow, a million dollars?--sure, we'd
love it."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption, hands), Illustrations by REUBEN MUNOZ /
Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption), Illustrations by REUBEN MUNOZ /
Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption), Illustrations by REUBEN MUNOZ /
Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption), Illustrations by REUBEN MUNOZ /
Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption), Illustrations by REUBEN MUNOZ /
Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption), Illustrations by REUBEN MUNOZ /
Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1999


                             1580 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 30, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY EASE A MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Opening an avenue of hope for a currently incurable disease, scientists have
devised a form of gene therapy that in animals appears to stave off the wasting
effects of some forms of muscular dystrophy.

   Surgeon Hansell Stedman, of the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for
Human Gene Therapy, used a disabled virus to deliver working versions of a gene
that is defective in people who have a form of the disease called limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy. By experimenting on hamsters, he said he was able to get the
virus to insert the corrective genes directly into animals' muscle cells. And he
found that it helped stop their deterioration.

   He and his colleagues plan to begin human trials in Philadelphia this summer.

   Some experts on muscular dystrophy consider gene therapy the most exciting
treatment on the horizon. "For decades, people have tried every conceivable
thing: calcium channel blockers, steroids, everything," said Leon Charash, a
neurologist at Cornell University Medical Center and chairman of the Muscular
Dystrophy Association's medical advisory committee.

   While some treatments bought people a little time, "the disease has always
gone on to its inexorable, lethal end," Charash said.

   Children with severe muscular dystrophy need wheelchairs by the time they
reach about 12. The disease wastes away heart and lung muscles so that, for
them, ordinary colds and flu infections turn into pneumonia. The combined
effects of the disease kill most people before they reach 30.

   Although this new gene-therapy approach, described in today's issue of the
journal Nature Medicine, applies only to the limb-girdle form, which affects
only a few thousand people nationwide, it may eventually prove helpful to
victims of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects about one in every 3,000
males.

   Scientists uncovered the genes responsible for muscular dystrophy in the mid
1980s. They realized that, in the limb-girdle version, the gene defect prevented
the manufacture of a a protein found in muscle cells. No one then knew what the
protein did, although the severity of the disease showed that it must be
crucial.

   But replacing it would not be easy. There did not seem to be any way to get
this protein from the bloodstream into muscle cells. So Stedman tried another
route: delivering the genes that carry the protein's blueprint, hoping to coax
the muscle cells to manufacture it themselves.

   Stedman chose to try the gene therapy on hamsters, which get a disease
similar to muscular dystrophy.

   He used a cold virus, modified so that it was no longer infectious, but
carried the needed muscular dystrophy gene. Then he injected the virus into the
hamster.

   After treatment, the hamsters produced the protein - sarcogycan - that is
missing in the limb-girdle type of muscular dystrophy. Their muscles later
appeared stronger, he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1581 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 30, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: Salk work bolsters promise for gene cure for hemophilia

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   New research from the Salk Institute supports growing enthusiasm that a
genetic treatment for hemophilia, a deficiency in blood clotting, may become the
first reliable gene therapy - an approach to disease sometimes regarded as the
medicine of the 21st century. By delivering a beneficial gene to hemophilic
mice, the Salk scientists corrected the inability of the mice's blood to clot.
Scientists from Stanford University and The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
are seeking federal approval to treat people with hemophilia using a similar
genetic technique based on their earlier, successful results in mice and dogs.

   The Food and Drug Administration's answer to that application could come as
early as next month, the scientists said, and they would hope to start tests in
10 to 20 patients by summer. "The gene is like a permanent syringe," delivering
the missing protein needed for clotting, said Inder Verma, co-director of the
Salk's genetics laboratory. The scientists have worked first on hemophilia B,
which affects about 3,000 Americans, who because of a genetic mutation, cannot
produce the clotting protein factor IX. About 25,000 Americans have hemophilia A
and lack clotting factor VIII, which is now the subject of other, more
preliminary tests. Hemophiliacs are subject to bleeding in their joints and
internal organs, including the brain, which can be fatal.

   Injection of a clotting factor with a syringe during a bleeding episode is
the standard treatment now. In work reported today in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, Verma's Salk team supplied the gene for factor IX
to mice with hemophilia B. The gene was placed inside a virus and delivered into
the blood stream where the virus worked to penetrate liver cells.

   There, the gene imbedded among the cells' normal compliment of genes.

   Verma and Salk researcher Lili Wang reported that the mice produced more than
10 times the amount of factor IX needed to clot blood -- or about three times
the amount found in healthy mice.

   Verma's lab is conducting similar tests in dogs now. "The picture is
extremely encouraging in that we are seeing proof of principle that gene therapy
can effect a complete cure," Verma said. The Salk work further confirms studies
of mice and dogs reported by Stanford and Philadelphia scientists in January,
said Theodore Friedmann, a UCSD pioneer in the field of gene therapy. Different
from most medical interventions, gene therapy is appealing because it typically
is used to eradicate the source of a disease, not just treat symptoms. Genetic
interventions have been tried for several diseases in recent years -- from
replacement of growth factors to immune system components to cancer treatment --
but the applications have proved more complicated or less effective than most
researchers imagined.

   Treating hemophilia looks to be different, Friedmann said. "We've been
seduced before by what we thought were good (gene therapy) models," he said.

   "I think this likely will be a real one.

   I think we're likely to see some clinical efficacy." For one, the disease
involves a single gene that can be placed in the body relatively easily,
Friedmann said. Hemophilia also is a relatively well understood disease, not
complicated by environmental influences, noted Mark Kay, the director of the
human gene therapy program at Stanford.

   Kay and Katherine High, of The Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia, have the
human trial application pending with the FDA. The successful experiments in
hemophilic dogs also were crucial, Kay said. Because dogs are much larger
animals than mice, researchers can expect similar, robust expression of the
transplanted gene in people, he said. In January, Kay reported that genes
transferred to hemophilic dogs' livers reduced clotting time from 60 minutes to
a range of 12 to 20 minutes. Healthy dogs clot in 6 to 8 minutes, but larger
doses of the transferred gene would likely "cure" the dogs, he added. Even so,
there could be shortcomings.

   For example, scientists do not know whether patients' immune systems would
consider the new clotting factor a foreign substance and attack it, High noted.
The initial trials, if approved, would involve injecting genes in thigh muscle,
High said, where the genes would churn out the therapeutic factor. Muscle tissue
is easier to reach for the initial tests, she said. Eventually, however,
scientists want to deliver the genes to the liver, where the factor naturally is
produced.

   Verma said he hopes his research might one day lead to clinical trials for
delivery of the gene to the liver, too. Researchers hope that one transfer of
the factor IX gene might benefit patients for months or perhaps years in some
cases.

   In experiments in High's lab, dogs given a gene transplant 21 months ago
still are producing large quantities of factor IX. The research groups also are
pursuing gene therapy for hemophilia A. They studied hemophilia B first because
the gene for factor IX is smaller and easier to work with as they learn how to
develop the potential treatments. In studying hemophilia B, each of the labs
used the adeno-associated virus, or AAV virus -- one harmless to people -- to
carry the factor IX gene into the cells, as AAV has emerged as an efficient
candidate for that task.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1582 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         March 28, 1999, Sunday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,7A

LENGTH: 1095 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy shows signs of success after years of hype; Synthetic
genes helping patients with 2 diseases

SOURCE: CHICAGO TRIBUNE

BODY:

   At 16 months of age, curly-headed Max can reach out and grab a toy. With his
eyes he can follow his mother, Ilyce Randell, as she walks around their home in
Palatine, Ill.

    For a child with Canavan's disease, a rare neurological disorder that starts
unwiring the brain after birth, Max wasn't supposed to be playing with toys and
smiling at the sight of his mother. The defective gene he inherited wipes out
thinking, feeling, emotions, vision and muscles.

    But Max has millions of copies of a healthy gene implanted in his brain to
do the job that the defective one has failed to do.

    "He had very little mobility with his arms before he was treated, and he
couldn't see very much at all," said Randell. "It's very encouraging."

    Not far from the Randells, Cynthia Yannias of Palatine is eagerly following
a gene therapy experiment to cure Gaucher's disease.

    That experiment also is producing promising early results, and if the
therapy works, Yannias' 3-year-old daughter, Valerie, will be on the list to
receive a good gene to replace the dysfunctional one that has given her
Gaucher's disease.

    Gaucher's disease, which causes deadly cellular debris to build up in the
brain, liver, spleen and bone marrow, affects 10,000 to 20,000 Americans.

    Right now, Valerie's disorder is being kept at bay by another piece of gene
magic. Twice a month she receives 4-hour-long infusions of the product that her
dysfunctional gene doesn't make, an enzyme that removes cellular debris from
vital organs.

    But at $10,000 a month, the enzyme, which is made from a human gene
transplanted into the ovaries of Chinese hamsters, is expensive.

    The Canavan and Gaucher experiments represent the first ray of light that
gene therapy, after nearly 10 frustrating years of failures, may be coming of
age - - that it can undo the damage of defective genes and free people from
devastating inherited diseases.

    Scientists warn that more work is needed to prove that the therapies are
effective, but many in the field believe a milestone has been reached.

    Few breakthroughs in medicine have been greeted with greater anticipation
than gene therapy. It holds the promise of defeating ancient inherited enemies,
such as hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, sickle cell anemia, and
Tay Sachs disease, by replacing bad genes with good ones.

    It even promises to cure such common genetically linked diseases as cancer,
heart disease, stroke and Alzheimer's disease. Once a gene is discovered, it can
be made synthetically.

    Disappointing experiments

    So far, gene therapy hasn't lived up to its promise, despite more than 250
experiments involving several thousand people.

    The field was shaken up in 1995 by the National Institutes of Health, which
at that time was spending $200 million a year to support gene therapy research.
NIH issued a report critical of researchers for making claims that never came
true.

    Chastised, scientists went back to their laboratories, keeping low profiles
while they tried to figure out how to deliver curative genes to people.

    Techniques improved as a result of that reassessment, and there is growing
confidence that gene therapy may finally be approved for general use in the next
three to five years.

    Fueling the new feeling of optimism are the early results of the Canavan and
Gaucher's gene therapy experiments, along with a third project conducted by Dr.
Jeffrey M. Isner of St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston.

    Isner has reported using genes to grow new blood vessels in the legs of
diabetic patients to restore circulation and forestall amputations.

    He has also reported using the same genes to grow new vessels to feed the
hearts of patients with crippling heart disease, putting them back on their
feet.

    "The field of gene therapy is certainly feeling better after several years
of being in the doldrums," said Dr. French Anderson of the University of
Southern California.

    In 1990 Anderson and colleagues at the National Institutes of Health
performed the first gene therapy experiment, giving a gene that builds a
critical part of the body's immune defense system to two young girls who were
born without the gene.

    The girls suffered from severe combined immunodeficiency disease, which was
made famous by the boy who lived in a protective "bubble" in a Texas hospital
until he chose to walk out. He died of an infection a short time later.

    The two girls were being kept alive by infusions of the enzyme made by the
gene they were missing. Anderson's team put the gene into their white blood
cells, hoping the girls could make their own enzyme.

    Although there was some evidence that the healthy genes worked for a while,
the experiment failed to prove that gene therapy could cure the disease.

    The next step came in 1995 when Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia, showed that he could remove liver cells, put in a gene that lowers
cholesterol, and give the cells back to patients with life-threatening
cholesterol levels.

    The genetically engineered liver cells worked like a charm, but the
experiment came to a dead end. Not enough liver cells could be removed from a
patient and genetically re-engineered to alter the course of the disease.

    The delivery roadblock

    The main roadblock to gene therapy has been the inability to devise an
effective means of delivering genes to target cells so that they take hold and
survive for the life of the cell.

    Viruses are a favorite delivery vehicle. Viruses can be emptied of their own
genetic cargo, making them harmless, but their ability to enter cells is
preserved. Scientists pack human genes into the empty viral shells, and use them
in studies of inherited disorders.

    "Over the next 18 months, we will see the definitive proof that gene therapy
works to cure patients," Wilson said. "Over the next few years we will see the
first commercialization "

    Ilyce Randell believes she is seeing some of these wonders already in her
son, Max.

    When Max was born, his parents noticed that he was extremely unresponsive,
and he wasn't developing. They thought he might be autistic.

    "He wasn't hitting any of the milestones," Randell said. "He didn't notice
toys. You'd shake keys in front of his face and it was like he didn't see them.
He was like spaced out, and not really part of the world at all."

    Still profoundly disabled, Max now plays with toys. His favorite has a big
yellow button that plays music and moves an animal when he pushes it.


LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1999


                             1583 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                March 24, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     March 24, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: SBC-AMERITECH MERGER CLEARS HURDLE

BYLINE: FROM STAFF REPORTS

BODY:

   SBC Communications Inc. cleared an important hurdle yesterday in its bid to
take over Ameritech Corp., winning approval from the U.S. Department of Justice,
which had examined antitrust issues. In a consent decree, the companies agreed
to sell, by the time the merger closes, some wireless-phone businesses in
Chicago, St. Louis and 15 smaller localities. Ameritech and SBC own - or soon
will, because of another pending SBC acquistion - two wireless operations in
each locality; they agreed to sell one of each pair. The companies had earlier
said they would make the sales. "The Justice Department's decision confirms that
this merger is not anticompetitive," said Kelly Welsh, Ameritech's general
counsel. The merger is still subject to approval by the Federal Communications
Commission, and the Wall Street Journal reported Monday that it could impose
major conditions. The approval of Illinois regulators is also needed, and the
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio soon will review a settlement proposed by
the companies and some others.

   OGLEBAY BUYS LIME FACILITIES

   Oglebay Norton Co.'s Global Stone unit is acquiring assets of W. S. Frey Co.,
including lime and limestone production facilities and quarries in Winchester,
Va. The assets are near Global Stone's Chemstone operation and will be
incorporated into that business unit, said Danny R. Shepherd, who heads Global
Stone. The deal was for an undisclosed amount of cash and stock. Global Stone,
which was acquired last May by Cleveland-based Oglebay Norton, is the
fifth-largest U.S. lime producer.

   COPERNICUS GETS GENE GRANT

   Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. in Beachwood won a grant for up to $250,000 from
the National Cancer Institute to help develop technologies to control the dose
and duration of gene therapy products. Gene therapy is the insertion of genes
into human cells to treat disease. Copernicus is working on ways to deliver
treatments for diseases such as cancer and cystic fibrosis. The treatments were
developed by Dr. Mark Cooper, its senior vice president of science and medical
affairs, under patents issued to Case Western Reserve University.

   ST. LUKE'S MAKES 1ST AWARDS

   The St. Luke's Foundation completed its first round of grant awards, giving a
total of $197,753 to seven programs. First United Methodist Church of Cleveland
received the largest grant, $50,438, to fund a program that serves homeless
people, senior citizens and others with shelter, nutrition and access to health
care. The foundation was formed two years ago from the proceeds of the sale of
St. Luke's Medical Center.

   MARCUS WINS ADDYS

   Beachwood-based Marcus Advertising won a gold Addy award, a silver Addy, a
"judges' choice" award and three certificates of merit at the Cleveland
Advertising Association's annual awards show last week. Five judges from
Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Columbus and Minneapolis judged 638 advertising
entries in December to find the most creative advertising work for 1998.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                             1584 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   March 22, 1999 Monday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: DAVID HACKER: JOURNALIST PART OF PULITZER-WINNING TEAM

BYLINE: Free Press Staff and news reports

BODY:

   David Hacker, who took part in the Kansas City Times' Pulitzer Prize-winning
coverage of the 1981 Hyatt Regency skywalks disaster, died Saturday in Ann
Arbor. He was 70.

   Mr. Hacker, who worked for the Free Press as its Traverse City correspondent
from 1987 to 1994, died in his sleep at his sister's home. The cause of death
was not immediately known.

   He was staying in Ann Arbor while awaiting experimental gene therapy at the
University of Michigan to restore circulation in his legs, said his wife,
Barbara Hacker. He faced amputation of his legs if the treatment was
unsuccessful.

   In July 1981, Mr. Hacker was part of a team from the Kansas City Times that
covered the collapse of two concrete skywalks into the lobby of the downtown
Hyatt Regency hotel. The collapse, which took place during a Friday night tea
dance, killed 114 people and injured more than 200.

   Shortly after the disaster, Mr. Hacker became editor of the Manhattan Mercury
in Kansas. He served five years before resigning in 1986 to become writing coach
at the Wichita Eagle.

   While at the Free Press, Mr. Hacker served as its outstate reporter. "He had
a very strong affection for northern Michigan and its people, and that's
something that came through in his writing," said Bob Campbell, metro
assignments editor.

   Free Press photographer Alan Kamuda, who also worked with Mr. Hacker on many
assignments, said he appreciated the natural beauty of the region and openness
of the people in the Upper Peninsula. "A trip to the Upper Peninsula for him was
like a trip to church on Sunday," Kamuda said.

   After Mr. Hacker retired, he returned to Wamego, Kan., where he wrote a
column for the Manhattan Mercury.

   Earlier in his career, he worked at newspapers in Little Rock, Ark., and
Louisville, Ky., before becoming a founding editor of the National Observer, a
Dow Jones weekly publication that operated between 1952 and 1977. At the
Observer, he worked as sports editor, food editor, photo editor, columnist,
editorial writer, book reviewer and chief of the newspaper's Chicago bureau.

   Known for a feisty demeanor, Mr. Hacker once generated boxes of mail from
angry West Virginians to the Manhattan Mercury for calling that state "a vast
thicket of nothingness." He remarked that the best newspapers routinely had
"blood on the floor."

   Mr. Hacker is also survived by a son, Jonathan Hacker, and daughters Holly
Osterhout, Sandy Johnson and Sarah Hacker.

   A memorial service will be held in Manhattan.

GRAPHIC: Photo;
David Hacker

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1585 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 22, 1999 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 1052 words

HEADLINE: A man of things great and small;
Nobel laureate has been a pioneer in the study of cells

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It's not enough that UCSD's George Emil Palade was among the first to use
electron microscope techniques to visualize the tiniest structures inside the
human cell. Or that he spent the last several decades scrutinizing those
structures, naming several, and trying to understand how they interact, a body
of work that won Palade and two colleagues the 1974 Nobel Prize in
physiology/medicine. Nor is it enough that this quiet, gentle man speaks six
languages, nurtures a growing molecular research institution in his Romanian
homeland and continues to publish important work in his field.

   He is also a Roman scholar and the father of two grown children. At age 86,
Palade believes it still isn't enough. For the last nine years, he has held the
title of dean for scientific affairs at UCSD's School of Medicine, and he is
working hard to bring more scientists here to enhance this region's contribution
to the search for the function of the 100,000 genes now being identified by the
Human Genome Project. "Science is moving forward very rapidly," he said during a
recent interview in his campus office.

   "But university medical schools are falling behind. Most of the time, they
are not on the crest of the wave.

   We need to be on the crest of that wave." To honor Palade, one of the eight
Nobel laureates in the county, about 200 of the world's most prominent cell
biologists will come here Thursday for a daylong symposium sponsored by the
School of Medicine at the Price Center Theater. Among his colleagues, Palade is
known as a founder of modern cell biology and a giant in his field. And many of
the scientists and colleagues attending the symposium are his former students,
whose projects spun off from their teacher's research.

   So they are traveling from as far as Europe and South America to talk about
how they are following his path. Dan Predescu, who came from Romania to work
with Palade at UCSD, described some of the reasons for the extreme loyalty,
saying that the Nobel laureate is "a living encyclopedia and a maestro teacher."
"When he looks at the work you have done or the (electron microscope)picture you
have, he knows exactly what's wrong.

   The tissue wasn't prepared right, and you know you have to go back and
improve it again," he said. Predescu said Palade, a perfectionist, always
challenges his students to repeat, repeat, repeat their experiments, and then do
them one more time to see if some inconsistency may provoke even more avenues
for inquiry. Palade was born in Moldavia, eastern Romania, the son of wealthy
parents -- a philosophy professor and a schoolteacher.

   Preferring tangible sciences to philosophy, he entered the University of
Bucharest School of Medicine and began training in internal medicine. But
instead of concentrating on patient care, Palade was fascinated by anatomical
structure and did his doctoral thesis on the cellular anatomy of the dolphin
kidney.

   He said he wanted to understand better how a mammal adapts to marine life. He
realized he was better suited to anatomy than patient care, and after World War
II came to the United States to study at New York University and later the
Rockefeller Institute. There, he was introduced to the possibilities of the
electron microscope and realized his life's interest.

   It was the beginning of a new field of science that allowed researchers to
actually see structures inside cells. Now scientists could isolate cells, smash
them down to release pieces inside, divide the parts and analyze their
biochemistry. Today, Palade grapples with the mysteries of a specific layer of
those cells called the endothelium that form the barrier between blood and
tissue of the cardiovascular system. He is trying to figure out how components
from blood get into tissue, and vice versa, and has a theory about the
mechanism, called "secretion," that he said is extremely controversial. "It's
like trying to understand complex cellular interactions that allow proteins
inside cells to get out, like figuring out how air trapped inside a balloon is
released while the balloon stays intact," said Larry Goldstein, a UCSD professor
of cellular and molecular medicine and a Palade colleague and friend. It is
important that scientists understand that mechanism thoroughly, for the process
has tremendous implications for gene therapy.

   If genes are not delivered to the correct destination, all the effort to find
the correct gene sequence to solve a medical problem will be of no use. In 1990,
when many other scientists his age were cutting back, Palade took on a new
challenge.

   After scientific careers at Rockefeller University and Yale University
Medical School, where he published hundreds of papers, Palade and his wife,
Marilyn Gist Farquhar, now coordinator of UCSD's division of cellular and
molecular medicine, tore away from their East Coast roots and moved to UCSD. He
has spent the last nine years strengthening weak spots in scientific education
and research and helping to bolster funding, drawing grants from the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, the Ludwig Foundation and the Lucille P. Markey
charitable trust funding for graduate fellowships. Dr. John Alksne, dean of
UCSD's School of Medicine, described Palade as "an awesome man whose energy
radiates from within.

   He has a futuristic look to everything, and very intense, so excited about
the science of cells."

   It is not always cells and science, however.

   For years, Palade and his wife have regenerated themselves with summer hikes
above Aspen, Colo., up to 12,500 feet, and plan another trip in August. There,
he said, influenced by the cool, oxygen-deprived air, "some of the most
important ideas appear, inscribed in the snow." Asked what advice he would give
a student trying to win a Nobel Prize, Palade has three brief rules. "The
important thing is to believe in what you're doing.

   That's No. 1," he said.

   "No. 2 is to realize that always things can be done better, and there's a
continuous need to improve. "And third, recognize that we must build stepwise a
concept or a system up to the point where we understand its logic, why it is the
way it is, how structured the way it is structured, and what particular reason
it functions the way it functions. "This is the source of your satisfaction.

   And if, on top of that, you get a Nobel Prize, all so much the better."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: George Emil Palade: Nobel laureate is a meticulous and
methodical scientist, as well as a "maestro teacher."; PHOTOBY: JOHN GASTALDO /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1586 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               March 21, 1999, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: LI; HEART BEAT; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: Followup stress test proves dad's heart all right

BYLINE: Stephen Devries

BODY:


   Q. Last year, I convinced my 65-year-old father to get a heart scan for
calcium deposits. His scan detected substantial quantities of plaque, and the
report recommended immediate followup. He went to another cardiologist, who
ordered a stress test. The results were satisfactory, and no further action was
suggested. My feeling is that the results of the scan and the stress test seem
to contradict each other. My father is comfortable with the recommendation of
his cardiologist, but I am not. Any suggestions?

   A. I understand why you are concerned about your father's heart tests.
Although the results appear to contradict each other, the findings are easily
explained.

   The calcium deposits found on your father's heart scan show that he has
hardening of the arteries. Think of the scan as a test for rusty pipes.  The
higher the calcium count on the scan, the more rust, or hardening of the
arteries. Nevertheless, scans for coronary calcium are not able to determine if
the arteries are plugged.

   Exercise stress tests look for signs of plugged arteries. Plugged arteries
choke the flow of blood to the heart, causing signs of strain during exercise. A
normal stress test usually means the arteries are not seriously plugged.

   I see many patients like your father, with high calcium scores and a normal
stress test. These results suggest his arteries are hardened, but not yet
blocked. Although further heart testing is generally not required, his risk
factors need to be carefully controlled.

   Q. I suffer from lack of circulation in both legs and feet. I have had bypass
surgery on both legs. One leg has a large ulcer, and the doctors say there is
nothing more that can be done. I read about a procedure where new blood vessels
are grown with gene therapy. Could I benefit from this treatment?

   A. Gene therapy for poor circulation is an experimental therapy that has been
tested only in a small number of patients. At this time, it is not a treatment
option. Nevertheless, early results are promising. The goal of this innovative
treatment is to stimulate the body to literally grow new blood vessels. This is
done through an ingenious method of inserting the recipe for a potent blood
vessel stimulant into a gene. The gene is injected into the leg, where it
energizes the blood vessels to grow.

   This therapy might be available in the future. In the meantime, I suggest you
request a second opinion to make sure all conventional treatment options,
including some of the newer balloon procedures, have been explored. I suggest
you ask your doctor for a referral to a medical center with expertise in your
condition.

   Dr. Stephen Devries is director of the Heart Center at the University of
Illinois at Chicago. He welcomes readers' questions on heart health and disease.
E-mail him at DevriesMD@aol.com or write to Heart Beat in care of the Sunday
Editor, Chicago Sun-Times, 401 N. Wabash, Chicago 60611.

   Heart Beat is intended for general informational purposes only and is not
intended to serve as the basis for decisions in your own health care. All health
care decisions should be made only after consultation with your health care
professional.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1999


                             1587 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        March 21, 1999 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-34

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: New test identifies carriers of rare, inherited disease

BYLINE: By Barbara Ferry, The Santa Fe New Mexican

BODY:
 ALBUQUERQUE - Dennis Sanchez remembers being a teenager, watching helplessly as
his younger brother Teddy's body and mind broke down, ravaged by a mysterious
illness.

   Later, after his brother died at age 20, Sanchez learned the disease was
genetic. He began to wonder whether he was at risk of fathering children who
would suffer and die like Teddy.

   Now 35, Sanchez, a mortgage company owner in Albuquerque, can find out
whether he is a carrier of the disease that killed his brother. He said he and
his wife will use the information to help decide whether to have children of
their own.

   The disease is Niemann-Pick type C. It is rare - with doctors diagnosing
about 50 new cases in the United States each year - and always fatal.

   For years, researchers have known that Niemann-Pick C is unusually prevalent
among the descendants of the Spanish colonialists in the San Luis Valley of
Colorado and along the Rio Grande. Advances in genetic research have partially
explained why.

   Doctors still have no cure or effective therapy for Niemann-Pick C.

   But Dr. David Wenger, a professor of neurology who began diagnosing patients
with Niemann-Pick C about 25 years ago at the University of Colorado, has
identified a single mutation on the gene that causes the disease to appear among
Hispanic families in northern New Mexico.

   That discovery has led to a simple test that will allow people to know with
certainty whether they are carriers of the disease - and to measure whether
their own children are at risk of developing the disease.

   "I'm very excited about this," said Wenger, now a researcher at Thomas
Jefferson University in Philadelphia. "For 20 years I've been getting letters
from families, saying, 'Can you tell me if my other children are carriers?' Now
we finally can. All it is going to take is a small sample of blood."

   Wenger and other health-care providers will meet with families of children
affected by Niemann-Pick C in Santa Fe in April to discuss the latest findings.
He envisions a grassroots movement of parents paralleling the effort among
Ashkenazic Jews to screen for Tay Sachs, a fatal genetic disease prevalent among
that group.

   Dr. Leslie Morrison, a pediatric neurologist at University Hospital in
Albuquerque who is caring for four Niemann-Pick C patients in New Mexico,
predicted that about half the families will want to be tested while the other
half won't.

   "We have to ask the question, 'What if the person doesn't want to know?"' she
said. "Some families may not want to be tested and no one is going to be
forced."

   Like Tay Sachs, Niemann-Pick C is recessive, meaning an affected child must
inherit the gene from each parent. Carriers have no symptoms.

   If both parents are carriers, they have a 25 percent chance of having an
affected child. People from families with no history of Niemann-Pick C can still
be carriers and can have an affected child.

   It is Niemann-Pick C's delayed onset that makes it particularly devastating.
The average age of onset is 8. Until then, the child often appears perfectly
healthy.

   "Kids who used to be his friends treated him like he was an animal," Sanchez
said of his brother. "Teddy didn't understand what was happening and we didn't
either."

   Even now doctors don't completely understand Niemann-Pick C. Somehow, the
defect causes cholesterol to build up in storage compartments of liver and
spleen cells. Eventually nerve cells in the brain are destroyed.

   Researchers have tried treating patients with low-cholesterol diets and
cholesterol-lowering medicines and have experimented with bone marrow
transplants. But so far, nothing has worked, Wenger said.

   Wenger began seeing an unusually high number of Niemann-Pick C patients while
he was at the University of Colorado's medical school in Denver in the 1970s,
diagnosing about 40 patients over the course of 25 years.

   In 1977, he published a scientific paper, identifying a Spanish-American
variant of the disease. Wenger continues to study other genetic diseases,
including one found in Southern Alaskan Eskimos and the Navajo, but has
maintained his interest in Niemann-Pick C.

   The breakthrough came in 1997, when after a 20-year search, scientists
discovered the gene that causes Niemann-Pick C.

   "It was a question of finding a needle in 100,000 haystacks," said Dr. Peter
Pentchev, a geneticist at the National Institutes of Health who led the
research.

   Researchers hope the discovery of the gene will open the door for the
development of treatments such as drug and gene therapies.

   There are 20 gene mutations that could cause the disease, but Wenger
suspected the Hispanic New Mexico and Colorado cases were caused by the same
mutation. He sent cultured cells from patients to Dr. Marie Vanier, a colleague
in Lyons, France.

   "I was betting on it," he said. "She called and said, 'You were right. All of
your patients have the same mutation."'

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1999


                             1588 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         March 20, 1999 Saturday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 1

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: UW chosen to help test promising new cancer drug
 Substance blocks the growth of blood vessels that feed tumors

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel s
taff

BODY:

   The University of Wisconsin's Comprehensive Cancer Center is one of two sites
in the nation to get approval to do the first human tests of endostatin, a
promising cancer treatment developed by Harvard researcher Judah Folkman that
elimi nated some tumors in mice.

   UW and the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston were
selected for the initial endostatin clinical trials. They will involve only a
small number of patients with advanced cancers, the Nation al Cancer Institute
announced Friday.

   Endostatin and a similar substance, angiostatin, are angiogenesis inhibitors
naturally occurring proteins that fight cancer by blocking angiogenesis, the
formation of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow.

   These attack cancer in a different way than current treatment options
surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, gene therapy, immunotherapy and may offer hope
for patients with inoperable tumors or cancer that has spread to vital organs .

   Interest in the substances soared after Folkman reported that they made
tumors shrink or disappear in lab mice. After initial problems in duplicating
and verifying Folkman's work, government scientists announced in February that
they had been able to do so with endostatin and that cancer centers now could
apply for permission to test the substance in humans.

   Lab production of angiostatin is going much more slowly, and the protein is
not available in enough quantity to star t human trials yet, a cancer institute
spokeswoman said.

   "We are honored and very excited to be taking part in these trials," said a
statement from the UW cancer center's director, John Niederhuber. "This is an
important opportunity to an swer some key questions about a very interesting
compound."


   It's not known when patients can enroll for the experiments, but "probably no
sooner than fall," said George Wilding, the professor of medicine who will lead
the study at UW. The study needs to go through several more review processes,
although the funding for the work has been awarded.

   "We are not taking a waiting list," and most of the patients probably will be
those already going through UW for cancer treat ment, Wilding said. "The
research team will recruit patients with solid tumors that have failed to
respond to treatment."

   The best candidates are patients with breast cancer, melanoma, kidney cancer,
or mesothelioma, a cancer of the lining of the lung that's been associated with
asbestos exposure. Those cancers typically need many blood vessels, which
endostatin targets.

   This will be a Phase 1 clinical trial, which is designed just to determine
optimal dose, the best way to administer the treatment and whether there are
immediately apparent harmful side effects.

   Three to six patients will get small doses of endostatin and will be
monitored for side effects. Additional patients will get graduated doses until
the optimal or tolerable level is determined.

   Endostatin and angiostatin are being developed by EntreMed Inc., a biotech
company in Rockville, Md.

   Progress in continuing the research appeared to suffer a setback in February,
w hen Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. announced it was pulling out of a partnership
with EntreMed to develop the proteins and test them as anti-cancer agents. But
days later, hopes soared again when government researchers said they had
successfully duplicated Folkman's work.

   More than a dozen human experiments already are under way in the United
States, including a couple in Wisconsin, using angiogenesis inhibitors that work
in ways similar to endostatin and angiostatin.  ----------- Anyone interested in
the UW study should call (800) 622-8922 (in Madison, call 262-5223). To find
other anti-angiogenesis experiments, call the National Cancer Institute's Cancer
Information Service, (800) 422-6237 (4-CANCER), and request informa tion on
anti-angiogenesis clinical trials.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1999


                             1589 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         March 20, 1999 Saturday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 6

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could help cystic fibrosis, study says

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel wire reports

DATELINE: London

BODY:

   An aerosol spray containing a healthy gene could help alle viate a dangerous
abnormality that appears in cystic fibrosis, a new study says.

   In Friday's issue of The Lancet, a British medical journal, a team led by
Eric Alton, a professor of gene therapy at Britain's National Heart and Lung
Instit ute, described how it administered the gene, known as Cystic Fibrosis
Transmembrane Conductance Regulator, in an aerosol spray.

   In cystic fibrosis, abnormally thick mucus forms in the bronchial tubes,
clogging airways and causing lung infect ions.


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1999


                             1590 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            March 20, 1999, Saturday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 017

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: BILL: NO GUTS, NO MEDICARE

BYLINE: Maggie Gallagher

BODY:

   ABSTRACT:

   History will not be kind to President Clinton. I'm not talking about his
scandals but about his failure to confront the looming crisis in Social Security
and Medicare. On Tuesday, by denouncing his own blue-ribbon Medicare panel,
President Clinton put the final nail in his coffin.

   After six years of peace and economic growth, the biggest single challenge on
the horizon is defusing the demographic time bomb that threatens the Social
Security and Medicare system. And this president muffed it.

   Since 1990 the average life expectancy has nearly doubled. Women live on
average to 79; met to 76. Genetics researchers say we may break through the age
barrier. using gene therapy, scientists have already extended the life of fruit
flies, rodents and worms. (Restricting calories, they tell us, has the same
effect.) Already, "Some demographers would argue that life expectancy for a girl
born today is more likely to be closer to 100 years," one expert told USA today.
Even private pensions are going to go broke if that happens.

   How are we going to pay for it all?

   Old age is not for sissies, they say, and neither is the job of planning for
the great Gray Boom to come.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1999


                             1591 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



               March 19, 1999, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 54; S

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy aids cystic fibrosis patients

BYLINE: BY DAN VERGANO

BODY:


   Patients with a deadly lung disorder derived real benefits from gene therapy,
according to a new study by British and American researchers.

   Cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease, strikes some 30,000 people nationwide
and dramatically shortens their lifespans, according to the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation of Bethesda, Md. Discovery of the gene that causes the ailment 10
years ago spurred researchers to consider techniques for its replacement in
living lung cells.

   In 1993, researchers first tried giving patients a cold virus that carried a
corrected version of the gene. But until now, gene transfer efforts have met
with limited success.

   ''We have proof of principle'' that gene therapy can help cystic fibrosis
patients, said Dr. Eric Alton of Imperial College in London, lead author of the
study, which appears in today's issue of the international medical journal the
Lancet.

   Alton's research team found improved lung function in three-quarters of a
small group of cystic fibrosis patients after treatment with corrected genetic
material.

   ''This is good news for people with cystic fibrosis,'' said Dr. Robert J.
Beall, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's president. ''It represents continuing
progress in the evolution of gene therapy.'' Because of a defective gene, the
lung cells of patients with the disease produce unusually thick mucus that
inflames the lungs, making them a breeding zone for infection. Wracked by lung
illness and difficult breathing, cystic fibrosis victims often die early, on
average at age 31.

   In the study, half of 16 male cystic fibrosis patients randomly received
corrected DNA three times a week, as a mist sprayed into the airways. Half
received a dummy treatment.

   Because the participants received DNA only, and not an entirely new gene,
researchers expected that new lung cells would not reproduce the corrected
genetic package. Genzyme, a Cambridge, Mass. genetics corporation, contributed
researchers and materials to the study.

   Researchers are pursuing a number of avenues to place genes into the lungs of
cystic fibrosis patients, McCray said. Several U.S. scientists are considering
using adeno-associated viruses, the germs that cause colds, which could cause
permanent genetic changes by inserting genetic material into the cells of study
volunteers. In effect, suggests McCray, patients may someday catch a cold to
cure cystic fibrosis.

GRAPHIC: MEDICAL TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1999


                             1592 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 17, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 2254 words

HEADLINE: Forever young? Science finds no limit on life span

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   How long would you want to live if you could hold on to most of
your health and not lose your mind?

   How long could you live if it were possible to delay the heart
disease, cancer, Alzheimer's, broken hips and pneumonia that eventually
send most older people knocking on death's door?

   Jeanne Louise Calment of Arles, France, lived longer than any
human on record. She was 122 when she died Aug. 5, 1997. Her longevity
is rare today. But experts believe it represents a milestone that
is within the reach of millions.

   "Many people who are living today will be around to see the beginning
of the 22nd century," says Richard Hodes, director of the National
Institute on Aging (NIA).


   When scientists, including Hodes, are asked what the upper limit
of the human life span is, they rely on Calment's record age for
the answer. The truth, however, is that no one knows. Theoretically,
there might be no limit.

   "There appears to be no absolute limit, which is contrary to
what I thought 10 years ago," says Michael Rose, professor of
ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of California,
Irvine.

   Rose says studies conducted in the '90s have convinced him that
rather than a "wall of death, which we hit like a fly on the
windshield of a car," there is a ramp. If we can get over the
ramp, it might be possible to live extremely long lives.

   The biggest surprise came with data on death rates among people
ages 85 to 100. They show that rates have been steadily declining
for a century, says Richard Suzman, associate director of the
social and behavioral sciences program at the aging institute.

   That decline supports Rose's notion of a ramp and means that if
people can make it past 85 in good shape, they are likely to have
very long lives. It also suggests that if there is an upper limit
to life expectancy, it is nowhere in sight.

   "If anything, the decline is accelerating rather than plateauing,"
he says. "To me, that is quite persuasive evidence to suggest
that we're going to see a continuing improvement of life expectancy
at very old ages."

   Why Calment lived as long as she did is anyone's guess. But how
she lived life offers several important insights for the future
of aging baby boomers -- along with a few inconsistencies.
C'est la vie.

   Like most who live long lives, Calment was financially comfortable,
well-educated, physically active and lucky. Indeed, two of the
most common factors among the long-lived are higher education
and not being too poor, Hodes says.

   Calment attended opera, played tennis, roller-skated, swam, enjoyed
hunting and rode a bike until she was 100.

   But she also was the kind of person whom healthy-lifestyle preachers
hate. She regularly ate foie gras, duck thighs and cheese and
enjoyed 2 pounds of chocolate a week. She didn't quit smoking
until she was 117.

   At 110, frailty forced her into a nursing home.

   At 115 she fell and broke two bones.

   She retained her saucy personality until death, but her memory
and hearing had faded.

   Calment's family was a different story. Her husband died of food
poisoning in 1946 (she ate the same spoiled cherry dessert and
survived). Her daughter died of pneumonia in 1934, eight years
after giving birth to a son. He died in a car wreck in 1960.

   While there always has been a small minority of very long-lived
people like Calment (Ramses II lived into his 90s back
in the 13th century B.C.), the human race has only made progress
in extending its average life expectancy over the past 200 years
or so.

   That progress, Hodes says, was born from simple advances that
dramatically reduced the number of deaths among babies and young
children: improvements in basic hygiene, particularly the introduction
of sewers; acceptance by doctors of the germ theory of disease;
and the more recent introduction of antibiotics.

   After a snail's rate of progress since the Stone Age, the average
life expectancy shot to 49 in 1900, up from 35 when Rembrandt
was mastering the use of light in his paintings in the 17th century
and 22 when Augustus ruled the Roman Empire 2,000 years ago.

   Since 1900, life expectancy has nearly doubled. Today, the average
white American woman lives to age 79; the average white man lives
to 76. The figure is lower for blacks, mostly because of higher
infant mortality rates and probably because of less access to
health care.

   Help from medicine

   Whatever the upper limit of the human life span, society will
move closer to it in the 21st century. The most commonly cited
estimate of life expectancy by 2020 is 85 years. But a growing
number of experts believe that it will exceed 100.

   "Some demographers would argue that life expectancy for a girl
born today is more likely to be closer to 100 years," Suzman
says.

   A girl or boy born today also could have extra help when she or
he hits old age. And by 2020, baby boomers who have the money
could have medicine cabinets stocked with drugs and gene therapies
that delay or reverse aging the way antibiotics extended life
expectancy in this century.

   Research paying off

   This has only become possible over the past 20 years as aging
research was converted from a fringe science to a major focus
of the National Institutes of Health and most major pharmaceutical
and biotechnology companies. The majority of money spent by NIH
has been directed at age-related conditions such as heart disease,
cancer and Alzheimer's disease.

   This large-scale research effort finally is showing how the body
breaks down and how to begin fixing problems once accepted as
an inevitable part of growing old, Hodes says.

   "We can be optimistic that we can extend the span of high-quality
life," he says.

   Today, there is no doubt that science can fiddle with the forces
of nature and extend life. It has been done in fruit flies, rodents
and worms called nematodes. At least among these short-lived creatures,
life span can be lengthened by up to 40% by manipulating genes
or restricting calories by about 30%.

   Indeed, calorie restriction has been an important tool for learning
how to extend life, says George Roth, who leads calorie restriction
studies in monkeys at the National Institute on Aging. Most important,
he says, calorie restriction appears to turn on a slew of switches
that activate the body's life-extending machinery.

   "This is like running an engine at lower speeds," Roth says.
"You use fuel more efficiently, use less fuel and have less damage
to the engine. With calorie restriction, you are optimizing metabolism."

   Roth believes that calorie restriction will prolong human life,
but he says it's impractical for most people. Instead, scientists
should focus on the switches and package them into a pill.

   Genetic answers

   Those switches most certainly lie in our genes.

   "The science has really matured along with the biology," Roth
says. "In the area of new biology, it's genes, genes and more
genes. The focus is really going in that direction, but we don't
want to lose sight that aging is a process."

   Researchers are well on their way to understanding that process.
It is a fact that molecules called oxygen-free radicals degrade
the cells of vital organs, including the brain, the same way rust
eats through a car. And it is a fact that antioxidant vitamins
and drugs can prevent some of this damage.

   As the knowledge base grows, so do the opportunities. Studies
of how the body is affected by insulin, glucose and aging-related
enzymes, hormones and proteins are providing targets for drug
discovery.

   Most major pharmaceutical companies and more than 100 biotechnology
companies are actively developing compounds and genetic strategies
to alter the biological causes of aging. It is a safe bet that
some of these products will work.

   "This is the healthiest generation of older people we've ever
seen and they want to stay that way," says John Niblack of Pfizer
in New York. "We want to keep the graying population up and at
'em and enjoying life. That's where we are."

   Future shopping list

   Among potential products for the medicine cabinet are drugs designed
to:

   * Boost connections between certain brain cells to keep
old memories alive and keep people thinking clearly. Two nationwide
clinical trials were announced this week that begin the first
tests of drugs designed to reverse or halt mild cognitive impairment,
which is thought to lead to Alzheimer's disease in most cases.

   * Grow muscle fibers in frail legs to prevent falls. Both
Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer are developing drugs to boost
muscle mass.

   * Build bone mineral to delay osteoporosis. Most companies
are testing new-generation drugs that act on the direct causes
of bone mineral loss. A few products are close to market.

   * Create stores of cells to refurbish degenerating organs.
Scientists at Geron Corp., the University of Texas and Johns Hopkins
University have learned how to keep healthy human cells dividing
indefinitely and are teasing out the secrets of how early, undefined
embryonic cells learn to become skin, bone, brain, liver or blood.

   * Stimulate growth of new blood vessels to improve blood
flow in the heart and legs. About a dozen biotechnology firms,
including Collateral Therapeutics and Human Genome Sciences, are
testing gene therapies for growing blood vessels. Results on heart
arteries should become available this year.

   * Delay progress of age-related blindness and hearing loss.
Antioxidant drugs and gene therapies are being studied to halt
the progression of these common ailments.

   Buying better lives

   Peter Ringrose, president of Bristol-Myers Squibb's Pharmaceutical
Research Institute, is confident that the industry will deliver
the goods and that consumers will want them.

   If Calment had access to drugs that could boost muscle strength,
she might have delayed her admission to a nursing home. Pills
that make bone mineral could have prevented her broken bones.
Cognitive enhancers could have kept her memories fresher.

   Such drugs could make a tremendous difference in how much we enjoy
a longer life. But, now that such drugs are becoming likely, society
will be forced to ask how far it is willing to go to get them.

   Many of the remaining secrets of longevity could be teased from
studying human embryos. Will we be willing to create them for
research or clone embryos of ourselves for making spare parts?

   If recent history is a guide, society as a whole will accept the
scientific means that make it possible to live longer and healthier
lives. Of this, Ringrose is certain.

   "Baby boomers will buy these new drugs in the future," he says,
"the same way they buy fine wines today."

   TEXT WITHIN GRAPHICS BEGINS HERE

   A body of knowledge to slow aging

   Ailments accepted as normal aging are now targets of biotechnology.
If science prevails in the next century, the fountain of youth
will spring from our own genes.

   Here is how the body ages and what science is doing about it:

   Lungs: Maximum breathing capacity begins declining at age 20 and
falls 40% by age 80.

   Pancreas: Glucose metabolism declines progressively with age and
appears to accelerate degeneration of vital organs, especially
after age 60.

   Muscles: Muscle mass declines progressively after age 40, accompanied
by 5-10% decline in oxygen consumption during exercise every ten
years. Hand grip strength declines 45% by age 75.

   Bones: Bone mineral declines after 35. Loss accelerates after
menopause in women and after age 60 in men.

   Brain: Memory loss accelerates and reaction times slow at about
age 70.

   Eyes: Close objects get fuzzy after age 40; suceptibility to glare
increases after age 50 while night vision decreases; ability to
see fine detail declines after age 70; risk of macular degeneration
-- the most common form of age related blindness -- rises after
age 60.

   Ears: Ability to hear high-frequency tones begins declining in
the 20s, low frequency in the 60s.

   Heart: Heart rate during maximal exercise declines 25% between
ages 20 to 75; coronoary artery vessels build plaque beginning
in childhood and begin clogging after age 50.

   Joints: Common forms of arthritis begin in the 30s and progress
with each decade.

   Aging of the nation

   The aging of baby boomers will markedly change the age structure
of the U.S. population by 2020. Between 1990 and 2020, the population
age 65 to 74 is expected to grow 74%, while the population under
age 65 will increase 24%.

Age19902020
0 to 47.6%6.8%
5 to 97.2%6.7%
10 to 146.9%6.6%
15 to 197.1%6.6%
20 to 247.7%6.6%
25 to 298.5%6.7%
30 to 348.8%6.6%
35 to 398.0%6.4%
40 to 447.1%5.9%
45 to 495.5%5.7%
50 to 544.6%6.0%
55 to 594.2%6.6%
60 to 644.3%6.4%
65 to 694.0%5.4%
70 to 743.2%4.3%
75 to 792.5%2.9%
80 to 841.6%1.8%
85+1.2%2.0%

   Note: Because of rounding percentages may not total 100%

   Source: U.S. Census Bureau; USA TODAY analysis by Anthony DeBarros

   Life Expectancy Through Time

   Beginning of Christian era: Rome, age 22.

   Middle Ages: England, age 33.

   1687-91: Breslau, Germany, age 33.5

   Colonial Massachusetts and New Hampshire before 1798: age 35.5

   1838-54: England and Wales, age 41

   1900-02: U.S., age 49.2

   1966: U.S., 70.1

   Today: 76

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Grant Jerding, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research;
GRAPHIC, Color, Sam Ward, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research; GRAPHIC, B/W,
J.L. Albert, USA TODAY, Source: U.S. Census Bureau; USA TODAY analysis by
Anthony DeBarros (BAR GRAPH); PHOTO, Color, Reuters; PHOTO, Color, National
Gallery of Art/Woodner Collection; PHOTO, Color, Portrait by Charles Wilson
Peale; Calment: She smoked until age 117 and died at 122.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1999


                             1593 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 16, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 041

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS; Thomas Perls imparts wisdom for living to a ripe old age

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Want to know how to live to a ripe old age?

   Dr. Thomas Perls' new book, "Living to 100" (Basic Books, $ 25), is about as
good a guide as you are likely to find.

   Perls, a geriatrician at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, has
been studying centenarians for years. This book, written with Margery Hutter
Silver and John F. Lauerman, summarizes Perls' work and offers tips on how
anyone can increase his or her odds on making it to a very old age.

   It turns out living to the century mark isn't as rare as one might think.
There are currently more than 50,000 centenarians in the United States, three
times the number 20 years ago. You will meet a number of them in this remarkable
book.

   Perhaps the most surprising thing about Perls' centenarians is their
astoundingly good health. Perls says he suspected these survivors would be a
hardy bunch. But that turned out to be an understatement.

   Take Tom Spear, who is profiled in the book, for example. He is still playing
18 holes of golf three times a week at the age of 102 and shooting 15 strokes
under his age. He hits his 3-wood up to 180 yards!

   And he's not all that unusual among his centenarian peers.

   Perls' work with the New England Centenarian Study found that growing old
doesn't necessarily mean growing sicker.

   "Our eyes told us that the oldest old were sometimes among our healthiest
patients," he writes. "Perhaps rather than having survived disease, centenarians
were more likely to have avoided the chronic and acute diseases associated with
aging in order to live to 100."

   Good genes help, of course. Yes, most of his centenarians were born with
genes that helped them reach the century mark. These genes may help them avoid
the chronic diseases associated with aging.

   But does this mean that until gene therapy is perfected it is useless to
adopt healthy lifestyles that may help us live longer and healthier lives?

   No, Perls concludes. Rather, he urges people to look into their family
histories, determine whether their ancestors lived beyond average life
expectancy, find the causes of death and disability and make intelligent choices
about how they can delay or even prevent the diseases that killed or disabled
their predecessors.

   "People with an optimal combination of genes that affect aging can probably
afford to relax and indulge themselves a bit," Perls writes.

   "But those who have family histories of cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's,
diabetes and other afflictions should begin doing what they can now to compress
inevitable illness into a small percentage of what could possibly be a long
life."

   How?

   By taking vitamins, minerals and antioxidants; performing mental exercises to
keep the brain sharp; getting regular exercise; reducing stress; eating a
healthy diet; not smoking; keeping your blood pressure and cholesterol under
control; taking an aspirin a day; and, for women, considering estrogen
replacement therapy.

   The book gives specific recommendations for all of these items and more.

   It also includes a test you can take to determine just how long you are
likely to live.

   Perls, however, derides those who claim to practice "anti-aging" medicine.
Those who boast unproven hormonal supplements and other expensive treatments to
supposedly delay the aging process are nothing but hucksters, he says.

   "All these quick fixes     are sold on the premise that they provide the
benefits of a healthy lifestyle with none of the work," he writes. "In fact,
compressing morbidity may require some of us to make drastic changes in the way
we live. Living to be a centenarian takes 100 years of effort."

   Photo Caption: DR. THOMAS PERLS.

   Photo Caption: SILVER; Helped Thomas Perls author 'Living to 100.'

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1999


                             1594 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   MARCH 16, 1999 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 16F

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: MICHIGAN DOCTOR MAKES VACCINE HIGHEST PRIORITY

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   Michigan physician Dr. Gary Nabel was named director of the nation's first
vaccine research center by the White House last week.

   Nabel's first priority in the National Institutes of Health job will be to
develop a vaccine against the AIDS virus. He will take the position April 11.

   Construction of a five-story facility on the NIH campus is expected to be
completed by mid-2000. When the vaccine research center is operating, Nabel will
oversee about 100 scientists and support staff.

   Nabel is a graduate of the Harvard University Medical School. His U-M work
concerned gene therapy for heart disease and cancer and various vaccine
projects.

   He will move to the Washington, D.C., area for the job, a spokesman said.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1595 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          March 15, 1999 Monday Final

SECTION: Business Pg. 1

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Center provides more space for new ideas

BYLINE: DOUGLAS ARMSTRONG

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

DATELINE: Madison

BODY:

   A high-tech business incubator at the Universit y Research Park that nearly
triples the size of the previous facility will open Friday to provide office and
laboratory space for 14 small ventures, five of them new.

   Construction workers are putting the finishing touches on the $4.5 mi llion,
55,000-square-foot office building on Madison's west side that will house the
new MGE Innovation Center and several other tenants.

   About half of the building, 27,000 square feet, will be occupied by incubator
firms in the center. It replaces an existing 10,000-square-foot facility in
another building that will be renovated for another tenant. The center is
supported by a $1 million donation from Madison Gas and Electric.

   The new building was completed in just nine mo nths and will open at 85%
occupancy in the fast-growing research park, which provides offices to more than
70 companies, including fast-growth high-tech firms.

   One of those companies, Third Wave Technologies, which develops new tools for
DNA analysis and therapy, will take space in the new building in addition to a
separate building it occupies in the park.

   Other tenants include UW Learning Innovations, an educational technology
firm, and Mirus Corp., which specializes in gene therapy.

   Built on University of Wisconsin-Madison land three miles from campus, the
research park was designed to provide a place to transfer technology from the
university to the private sector. Profits from leasing the land are re turned to
the school.

   Some of the companies in the research park license patents held by the
university and develop and market commercial applications of technology first
developed in university research.

   A total of 27 businesse s have originated at the incubator in the decade
since it began. Some 90% of them have survived and now provide high-salaried
employment for 200.

   The five new companies that will use the center and its shared clerical and
phone support se rvices are:

   Quiq Inc., which is developing Internet-based software that helps
organizations create online communities based on research by UW-Madison computer
scientist Raghu Ramakrishnan.

   Metabiologics, which is developing a drug to treat muscle disorders and
spasms from a toxic food contaminant, botulinum toxin. It is an extension of
research by bacteriology professor Eric Johnson.

   KiwiChem International, a developer of purification and reaction processes f
or naturally derived products and chemicals, including agricultural products.
The company's principal consultant is UW-Madison chemical engineering PhD
graduate Michael Cockrem.

   TomoTherapy Inc., which is developing more precise radiation technology that
allows physicians to treat cancerous growths with less damage to healthy tissues
around them. It is based on research by medical physics professor Thomas "Rock"
Mackie.

   ProCertus BioPharm, which is developing products to lessen the side effects
of chemotherapy such as hair loss and weakened immune systems, based on the
research of oncology professor William Fahl of UW-Madison's McArdle Laboratory
for Cancer Research.

   Other companies relocating to the ne w building are:

   PiezoMax Technologies, developer of nano-scale devices.

   The Madison Group, developer of simulation technology for the plastics
industry.

   Clarion Pharmaceuticals, a drug developer.

   Spect rum Research, a developer of computer-aided drug design software.

   GeriGene, a developer of genetic therapies for age-related diseases.

   Genome Technologies, a developer of tools for large-scale DNA sequencing.

   Fr ontier Science and Technology Research Foundation, a non-profit
organization doing clinical trial research in cancer and AIDS.


LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1999


                             1596 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             March 14, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. J1

LENGTH: 1518 words

HEADLINE: Decline in investment forces biotech industry to scale back

BYLINE: ANDREW POLLACK, New York Times News Service

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES -- The biotechnology industry is facing a financial reckoning.
Investors, disappointed by the financial returns the industry has provided so
far, are growing more reluctant to provide the huge amounts of money young
companies need to develop, test and sell new drugs.
The result, analysts and executives say, is that many small biotechnology
companies are cutting back on research. Some are falling by the wayside or being
acquired by bigger companies. And many others are giving up ambitions of
becoming full-fledged pharmaceutical companies and instead becoming, in effect,
subcontractors to the big drug companies.
Some executives warn that the lack of capital could also slow medical innovation
because the small biotechnology companies have often been pioneers, playing a
crucial role in quickly moving scientific discoveries from university
laboratories to the marketplace.
Although it is too early to say what the impact will be, biotechnology companies
need to spend heavily in their efforts to develop drugs and diagnostic tests for
cancer, AIDS, Alzheimer's disease and a wide range of other conditions, as well
as to develop basic drug discovery techniques like gene-hunting and chemical
screening.
The Immunex Corp. of Seattle struggled with losses for 17 years and spent
hundreds of millions of dollars on research and development before finally
introducing an important new drug for rheumatoid. But biotechnology companies
just starting out might not get the same chance.
"What it means, unfortunately--even brutally--in some cases, is that promising
areas of research will not be pursued," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization, a trade group.
Some biotechnology industry executives, however, say the elimination of weaker
companies will be healthy, freeing money for more deserving projects. There are
simply too many biotechnology companies, they say, more than 300 publicly traded
ones and about 1,000 private ones.
Moreover, some experts say, medical innovation will continue but more of the
work will shift to academic laboratories and big drug companies.
Congress has vowed to double the annual budget of the National Institutes of
Health in the next five years from last year's $ 13.6 billion. This year's
budget is already up to $ 15.6 billion. And big pharmaceutical companies, which
at first largely ignored biotechnology, have now adopted its techniques, which
involve using genetic engineering, genetics and other advanced insights into how
cells operate.
Still, small biotechnology companies, like their counterparts in electronics and
computers, can often move faster and more efficiently into new scientific areas
than can big companies.
The biotechnology industry has seen such hard times before, most recently from
1992 to 1994. Some executives and analysts think this is just another cyclical
downturn, tied to the overall volatility in the stock market. Indeed,
biotechnology stocks have rallied with the rest of the market in recent weeks.
"I've heard of gloom and doom already three or four times," said Dr. Alain
Schreiber, president of Vical Inc., a San Diego gene therapy company.
But others say that investors have permanently soured on biotechnology and that
the entire system by which biotechnology companies have been created and
financed is breaking down.
"We're trying to figure out what makes sense as a business model for this
industry," said Brian Atwood, a partner at Brentwood Venture Capital in Menlo
Park, Calif. "Nobody's figured that out yet."
It is not that the technology has failed. Although it has not produced as many
new drugs as early investors had anticipated, biotechnology is now bearing
fruit. Ten drugs developed by biotechnology companies were approved or
recommended for approval in the third quarter of 1998, and more than 280 drugs
are in middle- or late-stage clinical trials. And the unraveling of the genetic
code presents a cascade of opportunities.
The problem is the long times and huge sums required to develop these drugs. To
get money, companies must sell shares to the public years before they have
products or profits. The stock price can languish while the company conducts
clinical trials. While some drugs succeed and investors are amply rewarded, many
others fail and the stock price plummets.
Investors have pumped an estimated $ 90 billion into public biotechnology
companies since 1980, according to Vector Securities International, an
investment bank specializing in health care. Yet overall, the investment has not
paid off, with biotechnology stocks rising in only seven of 16 years, according
to Vector.
Recombinant Capital, a San Francisco consulting firm, calculated in 1995 that an
investor who put $ 100 into every biotechnology initial public offering since
1980 would have earned a return of only 1 percent a year. The figure probably
would not be much different if updated today, said Mark Edwards, the managing
director.
Stocks of the roughly 10 big biotechnology companies, which already have
products and profits and market capitalization of more than $ 1 billion, have in
general risen smartly this year, but the stocks of scores of smaller companies
have plummeted. The 298 stocks tracked by Bioworld Financial Watch, a
newsletter, are down an average 18 percent this year.
Privately held biotechnology companies have had difficulty going public, and
public ones have not been able to sell new shares.
Venture capitalists, who provide seed money, are also becoming more cautious.
The absolute amount of venture capital invested in biotechnology has remained
steady since 1995, but the industry's share of total venture investment has
shrunk, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers, the accounting and consulting firm.

Such prominent Silicon Valley venture firms as Accel Partners and Sequoia
Capital have quit investing in biotechnology to focus on software and Internet
companies, which do not face the same capital requirements and regulatory
hurdles. Others have become more cautious about starting companies.
"A lot of things that were started should have stayed in a government lab or
university lab," said Sam Colella, managing partner of Institutional Venture
Partners in Menlo Park.
He cited one of his own company's investments--Athena Neurosciences Inc., which
was founded in 1986 based on an idea a professor had about Alzheimer's disease.
Athena eventually succeeded by licensing products from other companies, and it
was acquired by a bigger company. But the idea on which the company was founded
has not led to a drug.
"Athena's original premise would not get a dollar of venture capital today,"
Colella said. "I'm going to find things that are close to the market."
In recent years, many start-ups have been companies that provided research tools
or services like gene-hunting or chemical screening to the big drug companies.
These companies can become profitable far more quickly than those trying to
develop drugs, though there is some question about how big they can ultimately
become.
 One source of financing that is growing is from big drug companies. Ligand
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of San Diego raised $ 380 million from corporate partners,
while its three public stock offerings have yielded just $ 107 million.
The big companies sometimes find it quicker and less expensive to license a drug
or technology from a biotechnology company than to develop it on their own. So
the biotechnology companies are becoming suppliers to the big pharmaceutical
companies, much like auto parts companies supply Detroit.
But to get cash, biotechnology companies often must give up the rights to sell
the products they develop, accepting royalty payments instead. That cuts into
potential future profits and can further discourage investors.
The big drug companies are more interested in drugs that have advanced partly
through clinical trials. So for earlier-stage biotechnology companies, the
outlook remains bleak. More than 50 of the 345 publicly traded biotechnology
companies tracked by Vector Securities will run out of cash within a year if
they continue spending at their current rates and are unable to raise new money.

Some analysts say companies will be forced into mergers. "The solution is either
M & A or B -- bankruptcy," the chairman of Vector Securities, D. Theodore
Berghorst, said.
The Megabios Corp. and Genemedicine Inc., two gene therapy companies, recently
agreed to merge. "It gets tougher and tougher to say there will be new investors
stepping up to the plate," said Richard A. Waldron, Genemedicine's chief
financial officer.
For all the worries, some executives remain confident that medical innovations
will still receive financing. "We know ultimately science will win," said Howard
Birndorf, chairman of Nanogen Inc., San Diego. "These products will help people,
and there will be markets for them."
Cutline:
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette/KAREN VAN DONGE
Dr. Philip Breen (left) and Dr. Cesar Compadre pore through a book of research
grants in one of the UAMS labs Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1999


                             1597 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             March 14, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. J1

LENGTH: 1518 words

HEADLINE: Decline in investment forces biotech industry to scale back

BYLINE: ANDREW POLLACK, New York Times News Service

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES -- The biotechnology industry is facing a financial reckoning.
Investors, disappointed by the financial returns the industry has provided so
far, are growing more reluctant to provide the huge amounts of money young
companies need to develop, test and sell new drugs.
The result, analysts and executives say, is that many small biotechnology
companies are cutting back on research. Some are falling by the wayside or being
acquired by bigger companies. And many others are giving up ambitions of
becoming full-fledged pharmaceutical companies and instead becoming, in effect,
subcontractors to the big drug companies.
Some executives warn that the lack of capital could also slow medical innovation
because the small biotechnology companies have often been pioneers, playing a
crucial role in quickly moving scientific discoveries from university
laboratories to the marketplace.
Although it is too early to say what the impact will be, biotechnology companies
need to spend heavily in their efforts to develop drugs and diagnostic tests for
cancer, AIDS, Alzheimer's disease and a wide range of other conditions, as well
as to develop basic drug discovery techniques like gene-hunting and chemical
screening.
The Immunex Corp. of Seattle struggled with losses for 17 years and spent
hundreds of millions of dollars on research and development before finally
introducing an important new drug for rheumatoid. But biotechnology companies
just starting out might not get the same chance.
"What it means, unfortunately--even brutally--in some cases, is that promising
areas of research will not be pursued," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization, a trade group.
Some biotechnology industry executives, however, say the elimination of weaker
companies will be healthy, freeing money for more deserving projects. There are
simply too many biotechnology companies, they say, more than 300 publicly traded
ones and about 1,000 private ones.
Moreover, some experts say, medical innovation will continue but more of the
work will shift to academic laboratories and big drug companies.
Congress has vowed to double the annual budget of the National Institutes of
Health in the next five years from last year's $ 13.6 billion. This year's
budget is already up to $ 15.6 billion. And big pharmaceutical companies, which
at first largely ignored biotechnology, have now adopted its techniques, which
involve using genetic engineering, genetics and other advanced insights into how
cells operate.
Still, small biotechnology companies, like their counterparts in electronics and
computers, can often move faster and more efficiently into new scientific areas
than can big companies.
The biotechnology industry has seen such hard times before, most recently from
1992 to 1994. Some executives and analysts think this is just another cyclical
downturn, tied to the overall volatility in the stock market. Indeed,
biotechnology stocks have rallied with the rest of the market in recent weeks.
"I've heard of gloom and doom already three or four times," said Dr. Alain
Schreiber, president of Vical Inc., a San Diego gene therapy company.
But others say that investors have permanently soured on biotechnology and that
the entire system by which biotechnology companies have been created and
financed is breaking down.
"We're trying to figure out what makes sense as a business model for this
industry," said Brian Atwood, a partner at Brentwood Venture Capital in Menlo
Park, Calif. "Nobody's figured that out yet."
It is not that the technology has failed. Although it has not produced as many
new drugs as early investors had anticipated, biotechnology is now bearing
fruit. Ten drugs developed by biotechnology companies were approved or
recommended for approval in the third quarter of 1998, and more than 280 drugs
are in middle- or late-stage clinical trials. And the unraveling of the genetic
code presents a cascade of opportunities.
The problem is the long times and huge sums required to develop these drugs. To
get money, companies must sell shares to the public years before they have
products or profits. The stock price can languish while the company conducts
clinical trials. While some drugs succeed and investors are amply rewarded, many
others fail and the stock price plummets.
Investors have pumped an estimated $ 90 billion into public biotechnology
companies since 1980, according to Vector Securities International, an
investment bank specializing in health care. Yet overall, the investment has not
paid off, with biotechnology stocks rising in only seven of 16 years, according
to Vector.
Recombinant Capital, a San Francisco consulting firm, calculated in 1995 that an
investor who put $ 100 into every biotechnology initial public offering since
1980 would have earned a return of only 1 percent a year. The figure probably
would not be much different if updated today, said Mark Edwards, the managing
director.
Stocks of the roughly 10 big biotechnology companies, which already have
products and profits and market capitalization of more than $ 1 billion, have in
general risen smartly this year, but the stocks of scores of smaller companies
have plummeted. The 298 stocks tracked by Bioworld Financial Watch, a
newsletter, are down an average 18 percent this year.
Privately held biotechnology companies have had difficulty going public, and
public ones have not been able to sell new shares.
Venture capitalists, who provide seed money, are also becoming more cautious.
The absolute amount of venture capital invested in biotechnology has remained
steady since 1995, but the industry's share of total venture investment has
shrunk, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers, the accounting and consulting firm.

Such prominent Silicon Valley venture firms as Accel Partners and Sequoia
Capital have quit investing in biotechnology to focus on software and Internet
companies, which do not face the same capital requirements and regulatory
hurdles. Others have become more cautious about starting companies.
"A lot of things that were started should have stayed in a government lab or
university lab," said Sam Colella, managing partner of Institutional Venture
Partners in Menlo Park.
He cited one of his own company's investments--Athena Neurosciences Inc., which
was founded in 1986 based on an idea a professor had about Alzheimer's disease.
Athena eventually succeeded by licensing products from other companies, and it
was acquired by a bigger company. But the idea on which the company was founded
has not led to a drug.
"Athena's original premise would not get a dollar of venture capital today,"
Colella said. "I'm going to find things that are close to the market."
In recent years, many start-ups have been companies that provided research tools
or services like gene-hunting or chemical screening to the big drug companies.
These companies can become profitable far more quickly than those trying to
develop drugs, though there is some question about how big they can ultimately
become.
 One source of financing that is growing is from big drug companies. Ligand
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of San Diego raised $ 380 million from corporate partners,
while its three public stock offerings have yielded just $ 107 million.
The big companies sometimes find it quicker and less expensive to license a drug
or technology from a biotechnology company than to develop it on their own. So
the biotechnology companies are becoming suppliers to the big pharmaceutical
companies, much like auto parts companies supply Detroit.
But to get cash, biotechnology companies often must give up the rights to sell
the products they develop, accepting royalty payments instead. That cuts into
potential future profits and can further discourage investors.
The big drug companies are more interested in drugs that have advanced partly
through clinical trials. So for earlier-stage biotechnology companies, the
outlook remains bleak. More than 50 of the 345 publicly traded biotechnology
companies tracked by Vector Securities will run out of cash within a year if
they continue spending at their current rates and are unable to raise new money.

Some analysts say companies will be forced into mergers. "The solution is either
M & A or B -- bankruptcy," the chairman of Vector Securities, D. Theodore
Berghorst, said.
The Megabios Corp. and Genemedicine Inc., two gene therapy companies, recently
agreed to merge. "It gets tougher and tougher to say there will be new investors
stepping up to the plate," said Richard A. Waldron, Genemedicine's chief
financial officer.
For all the worries, some executives remain confident that medical innovations
will still receive financing. "We know ultimately science will win," said Howard
Birndorf, chairman of Nanogen Inc., San Diego. "These products will help people,
and there will be markets for them."
Cutline:
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette/KAREN VAN DONGE
Dr. Philip Breen (left) and Dr. Cesar Compadre pore through a book of research
grants in one of the UAMS labs Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1999


                             1598 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    March 12, 1999, Friday, JOURNAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 06c

LENGTH: 484 words

SERIES: Today's News

HEADLINE: New treatment offers hope for rare genetic skin disorder

DATELINE: Augusta

BODY:


   A new treatment involving skin grafts may offer hope for parents who have
children born with a rare disorder that causes their skin to blister as though
they were burned. Between 25,000 and 50,000 people in the United States are
thought to have some form of the inherited disorder, called epidermolysis
bullosa. About one in 50,000 children is born with some form of EB, according to
the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association. One of them is
1-month-old Cole Wooten of Martinez, who began to blister from the moment he was
born. ''Just like you'd see if there had been a second-degree burn, just as if
the child had been dipped into a pot of (hot) water,'' said trauma and burn
surgeon John Dawson of Columbia-Augusta Medical Center. Doctors believe the skin
lacks a certain connective protein, causing it to blister and slough off easily.
Those born with a severe form of the disease may not survive childhood, and even
milder forms can leave children with scarring that can cost them their feet and
hands. Recently, surgeons at the Joseph M. Still Burn Center at Columbia-Augusta
have tried a new approach. Dr. Hermann Orlet grafted bioengineered tissue called
Ortec Cultured Composite Skin onto wounds on Cole's feet. The tissue, which
contains growing skin cells and growth factors derived from discarded newborn
foreskin, should help the host skin heal faster underneath. ''So far those areas
have not blistered up again,'' said Dawson, who is caring for the child. ''The
skin under that area is the only part of the baby that is not reblistering.''
Doctors will wait to see whether other blistered areas do not heal before
attempting another graft, Dawson said. The new skin under the graft should be
stronger because there will be less scarring. The source of the genetic disorder
and how it causes skin breakdown remain a mystery. Dawson said recent research
shows the illness results in the loss of a substance called plectin, ''and as a
result of this, the layers of the skin slip apart.'' The Ortec product was
designed for the skin disease but also is being studied for use on chronic
wounds and burns. Cole is the first EB child to get it at the center. Doctors at
the University of Miami/Jackson Children's Hospital in Florida recently
performed a similar operation, but Dawson does not believe it is a cure. ''The
native skin replaces the (transplanted) skin, so I don't think this will be the
final answer'' because the original disorder will return, said Dawson. The
answer may be skin grown from another person's cells or even genetic
manipulation, he said. The Florida case caused an outpouring of interest from EB
families after it received publicity earlier this year, but the research
association is waiting to see the outcome of clinical trials, said Executive
Director Miriam Feder. ''Meanwhile, we're really pushing gene therapy''
research, Feder said.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1999


                             1599 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                                March 8, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       March 8, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE FITNESS MAY MEAN PILLS, NOT PUSHUPS

BYLINE: By JOHN FAUBER; MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL

BODY:

   Is exercise on its way to becoming obsolete?

   Don't cancel your health club membership, but at an accelerating rate,
researchers are announcing breakthroughs that someday may lead to drugs and
therapies that mimic the beneficial effects of exercise.

   All you would have to do is sit back and get fit.

   In August, researchers in Texas said their recent work could lead to the
development of a drug that might mimic the health-promoting effects of aerobic
exercise such as running or swimming in sedentary people.

   Since then, there have been at least two more developments:

   In December, Science News reported on a new type of gene therapy that appears
to halt the age-related loss of muscle tissue, at least in mice. In humans, the
loss can amount to 30 percent of a person's muscle tissue between their 30s and
70s.

   So far, the only "therapy" that can slow down the loss is strength training.

   However, the Science News article reported on researchers from the University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine who have inserted DNA for a hormonelike
substance known as insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1), in a virus, which then was
injected into the right legs of young, middle-age and old mice, which were kept
sedentary for up to nine months.

   The results were startling.

   There was roughly 15 percent more muscle mass and strength in the right leg
in the younger mice. In the older mice, the effect was even more pronounced: 19
percent more mass and 27 percent more strength in the treated leg.

   A few weeks earlier, another group of researchers at the University of
Mississippi said that a new type of fat-burning drugs could revolutionize the
treatment of obesity in humans by producing a metabolic effect similar to
exercise.

   The drugs have been shown to break down fat and expend energy by mimicking
the effects of the hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine, two hormones that
prepare the body for strenuous exercise.

   A pill form of the drugs could be on the market in the next five to 10 years,
said Dennis Feller, chairman and professor of pharmacology at the university's
School of Pharmacy.

   Muscle switch

   In another development last August, researchers at the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas said they have discovered a genetic switch
that tells muscles how to behave.

   "When people go jogging, molecular events happen in the muscle they are
exercising that both enhance their capability to exercise further and improve
their health," researcher R. Sanders Williams said. "We believe it is possible
to design a drug which would have this effect."

   Initially, these developments will be used to help the truly ailing, people
with heart disease, muscular dystrophy, diabetes or the old and frail.

   But one wonders if, years down the road, healthy people will have a
dramatically different approach to exercise.

   "Genetics are promising us things," said Leon Charash, a child neurologist at
Cornell University Medical College and medical adviser to the Muscular Dystrophy
Association.

   However, he said along with the promise of these developments there needs to
be some skepticism. For instance, with the mice leg muscle experiment one big
question is, will it work in humans?

   No one knows.

   For the moment, it's probably best to keep doing things the old fashioned
way.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1999


                             1600 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         March 8, 1999 Monday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: DRILLING TINY HOLES IN HEART EASES PAIN;
NEW LASER SURGERY SAFE AND QUICK

BYLINE: By Daniel Q. Haney Ap medical editor

BODY:

   Blasting away with a laser threaded into the heart, doctors say they can
relieve crippling chest pain by drilling tiny holes into the walls of the
heart's main pumping chamber.

   The results of the experimental new technique were presented Sunday at a
meeting of the American College of Cardiology in New Orleans. The procedure is
intended to help people with heart disease so severe that it cannot be relieved
by bypass surgery or angioplasty. It combines laser energy with catheters that
are easily pushed through the arteries into the heart.

   The first laser for treating heart disease was approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration last year. However, it requires open-heart surgery, and many
doctors remain skeptical, in part because between 6 percent and 10 percent of
patients die during the procedure.

   The new approach does not require surgery, and results suggest that it is
extremely safe and effective.

   Dr. Stephen Oesterle of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston reported
about two thirds of patients treated this way appear to improve enough to resume
reasonably normal lives.

   "These are no-option patients," said Oesterle. "They are untreatable" with
ordinary procedures and medicines.

   In his study, doctors at 12 hospitals in the United States and England
randomly assigned 221 patients to have either the laser therapy or routine
medical care. All had severe angina, resulting from poor circulation to their
heart muscle.

   Angina is rated on a scale of 1 to 4. Before treatment, all were in stage 3
or 4, meaning they had chest pain while eating, brushing their teeth or even
sitting perfectly still.

   After laser treatment, two-thirds had improved at least two grades to stage 1
or 2. This meant they could walk about their homes comfortably, even though
climbing stairs might still trigger pain.

   "You can lead a normal life with class 2 angina," said Oesterle. "You cannot
with class 4 angina."

   None died during the procedure. Patients can be sent home the day they are
treated.

   The procedure involves a laser that is threaded into the left ventricle on a
catheter that is about the thickness of a cocktail straw. Doctors then burn 10
to 15 tiny holes into the walls of the heart.

   When the approach was first proposed in the 1980s, doctors theorized that the
holes acted as substitute blood vessels, carrying blood to oxygen-starved
muscle. However, experts now know that the holes themselves quickly plug up,
serving no purpose.

   Instead, it now appears that the laser damage somehow triggers the heart to
grow tiny new arteries, a process called angiogenesis. These arteries feed the
muscle that cannot be adequately nourished by the heart's clogged coronary
arteries.

   Dr. Ben McCallister of Mid America Heart Institute in Kansas City said
Oesterle's results probably will make physicians more open to the idea of using
lasers to improve heart circulation.

   "There has been a lot of skepticism about this," McCallister said. "I think
this very careful study will change the tide about how people think about this."

   Oesterle tested a laser system developed by CardioGenesis Corp., where he has
been a consultant. Similar approaches also are being tested with lasers
developed by Eclipse Surgical Technologies and Biosense, Inc.

   Dr. Patrick Whitlow of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation presented preliminary
data at the meeting on 41 patients treated with the Eclipse laser. Eighty
percent of the patients improved at least two stages in their degree of angina.

   Oesterle said the next step will be to combine the laser holes with gene
therapy, perhaps leaving behind genes that release hormones to trigger blood
vessel growth.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1999
