
                             201 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 28, 1995, Friday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: 'Suicide gene' offers hope for new cancer therapy

BYLINE: Paul Raeburn, The Associated Press

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Maine

BODY:


   Injections of viruses armed with ''suicide genes'' have eradicated brain
tumors and colon cancer in lab animals, opening the way to an entirely new kind
of cancer treatment, a researcher said yesterday.

   Similar experiments have also corrected hemophilia in dogs, when the viruses
were engineered to carry a gene to repair the blood-clotting defect, said Savio
Woo, a biologist with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Baylor College
of Medicine in Houston.

   ''The results were unbelievable,'' Woo said. ''The tumor just went away.
Every animal responded.''

   He described the work at a meeting of geneticists at the Jackson Laboratory
in Bar Harbor.

   In a new study, Woo clipped what he called a ''suicide gene'' from a herpes
virus and injected it into tumors of mice with colon cancer. He also injected a
virus carrying an immune-system stimulant to intensify the effect of the suicide
gene.

   The tumor cells absorbed the suicide gene, making the cells susceptible to a
drug called ganciclovir, which is used to treat herpes. When the mice were given
ganciclovir, Woo saw ''dramatic'' death and regression in the tumors, he said.

   Edward Birkenmeier, who is doing similar research on inherited diseases in
mice at the Jackson Laboratory, said the future for gene therapy remained
unclear.

   ''I think it's going to work, but it's not going to be that straightforward.
Each disease is going to be different. ... Which diseases will be first, which
will respond well, which may never respond well, isn't clear yet.''

   He said he believes cancer will be among the most difficult diseases to fight
with gene therapy.

   Human trials of gene therapy have begun in a few patients, but Woo said he is
worried that those trials could lead the public to expect too much. The trials
are designed merely to test the safety of the new techniques, not to determine
how effective they are, he said. Widespread use is likely to be years away.

   In every case so far, the initial success in treatment of cancer or disease
has proven to be incomplete or enormously complicated. With brain tumors,
researchers have shown they can eradicate a single tumor, but they have no way
to hunt down and destroy cancer cells that may have spread.

   Most of the research on gene therapy now revolves around the development of
viral carriers that have been stripped of their harmful genes and packed with
something intended to fight disease.

   The two most promising carriers each have problems, however. One of them,
made from a kind of virus called a retrovirus, isn't very efficient at
delivering genes to the body.

   The other, made from an adenovirus, is extremely efficient, but the suicide
or corrective genes are gradually removed from the body, because the virus
triggers the immune system to clear out the invaders.

   In the case of hemophiliac dogs, the delivery of a corrective clotting gene
with a retrovirus produced only partial correction. An adenovirus produced
complete correction, but it was only temporary, Woo said.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1995


                             202 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 28, 1995 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: 'SUICIDE GENES' OFFER CANCER HOPE

BYLINE: By PAUL RAEBURN; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, MAINE

BODY:

   Injections of viruses armed with "suicide genes" have eradicated brain tumors
and colon cancer in lab animals, opening the way to an entirely new kind of
cancer treatment, a researcher said yesterday.

   Similar experiments also have corrected hemophilia in dogs when the viruses
were engineered to carry a gene to repair the blood-clotting defect, said Savio
Woo, a biologist with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Baylor College
of Medicine in Houston.

   "The results were unbelievable," Woo said. "The tumor just went away. Every
animal responded." He described the work at a meeting of geneticists at the
Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor.

   Woo said he was "tremendously optimistic" about the new science of gene
therapy. But he tempered his optimism with a reminder that enormous scientific
obstacles remain to be overcome before the research leads to a safe, effective
treatment.

   "We need to be aware how technically challenging it is," he said. "There is
also fundamental cell biology and immunology we need to learn."

   In a new study, Woo clipped what he called a "suicide gene" from a herpes
virus and injected it into tumors of mice with colon cancer. He also injected a
virus carrying an immune-system stimulant to intensify the effect of the suicide
gene.

   The tumor cells absorbed the suicide gene, making the cells susceptible to a
drug called ganciclovir, which is used to treat herpes. When the mice were given
ganciclovir, Woo saw "dramatic" death and regression in the tumors, he said.

   Edward Birkenmeier, who is doing similar research on inherited diseases in
mice at the Jackson Laboratory, said the future for gene therapy remained
unclear.

   "I think it's going to work, but it's not going to be that straightforward.
Each disease is going to be different. ... Which diseases will be first, which
will respond well, which may never respond well, isn't clear yet."

   He said he believed cancer will be among the most difficult diseases to fight
with gene therapy.

   Human trials of gene therapy have begun in a handful of patients, but Woo
said he was worried those trials might lead the public to expect too much. The
trials are designed merely to test the safety of the new techniques, not to
determine how effective they are, he said. Widespread use is likely to be years
away.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995


                             203 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JULY 28, 1995, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 543 words

HEADLINE: Small Steps Reported In Fight Against AIDS
 Discoverers of HIV on panel in S.F.

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    Dr. Robert Gallo, co-discoverer of the AIDS virus, said yesterday that he
hopes to start gene therapy tests in people infected by the virus within a year,
but agreed with other top AIDS researchers meeting in San Francisco that no
breakthroughs are in sight.

   Gallo took part in a high-wattage panel at Moscone Center yesterday that
included Dr. Luc Montagnier, the French co-discoverer of the human
immunodeficiency virus, Dr. David Baltimore, a Nobel prize-winning immunologist
at MIT, and other luminaries in the scientific struggle to understand AIDS.

   They were in the city for the Ninth Annual Congress of Immunology, which has
attracted more than 7,000 scientists from around the world to discuss an immense
range of immunology issues, from common allergy medications to the most arcane
biochemical details of how cells fight disease.

   GALLO RESIGNING POST

   Gallo recently announced that after 30 years he is resigning his post at the
National Cancer Institute near Washington to help set up the Institute for Human
Virology at the University of Maryland in Baltimore, where gene therapy against
AIDS is high on the agenda.

   Within a year, if laboratory and animal tests go well, Gallo said he expects
to begin tests in people to try to add new genes to white blood cells that are
attacked fiercely by HIV to make them less palatable to the insidious virus.

   One strategy will be to add instructions to human cells so that, if an HIV
virus invades, antibodies are automatically produced and the virus is unable to
multiply. Another will be to give human cells the ability to manufacture large
numbers of ''decoy'' proteins, which would look like parts of the cell the virus
usually uses to reproduce itself. The decoys would thus lure the virus away from
its usual avenues of attack.

   ''There are many, many things to try,'' Gallo said. ''The list is almost
endless. The crucial thing in this research and others is to find ways to stop
the virus from replicating.''

   NO IMMINENT BREAKTHROUGH

   But Gallo, Montagnier and other panel members including Dr. Warner Greene,
director of UC San Francisco's Gladstone Institute of Virology at San Francisco
General Hospital, cautioned that there is no sign yet of an imminent
breakthrough.

   ''What is important is that treatments for HIV start immediately, as soon as
infection is known,'' said Montagnier, of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. He
typified a growing consensus that the best way to slow the virus is with fast
treatment with multiple medications, even if none is terribly good yet.

   Although many vaccine strategies are being tested, Baltimore said, ''nothing
on the horizon at the moment has the potential . . . of being a good vaccine.''
Ten years ago, he said, he organized a federal HIV vaccine review panel. It
concluded that such a preventive was five or 10 years off. ''Here we are 10
years later, and it is still 10 years away.''

   Despite the slow pace, Gallo said, steady progress is occurring. He said the
situation resembles a disease he worked with in the 1960s, childhood leukemia.
At the time, it was incurable and almost always fatal. Today, most cases are
cured. ''But there were no headlines saying one day there was a treatment,'' he
said. ''It happened gradually.''


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,'There are many many things to try. The list is almost endless'
-- DR. ROBERT GALLO, co-discoverer of HIV , BY JOHN O'HARA, THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1995


                             204 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          July 28, 1995 Friday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENE THERAPY KILLS CANCER, TUMORS IN RESEARCH ANIMALS

BYLINE: By PAUL RAEBURN AP science editor

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, MAINE

BODY:

   Injections of viruses armed with "suicide genes" have eradicated brain tumors
and colon cancer in lab animals, opening the way to an entirely new kind of
cancer treatment, a researcher said Thursday.

   Similar experiments have also corrected hemophilia in dogs, when the viruses
were engineered to carry a gene to repair the blood-clotting defect, said Savio
Woo, a biologist with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Baylor College
of Medicine in Houston.

   "The results were unbelievable," Woo said. "The tumor just went away.  Every
animal responded." He described the work at a meeting of geneticists at the
Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor.

   Woo said he is "tremendously optimistic" about the new science of gene
therapy. But he tempered his optimism with a reminder that enormous scientific
obstacles remain before the research leads to a safe, effective treatment.

   "We need to be aware how technically challenging it is," he said. "There is
also fundamental cell biology and immunology we need to learn."

   In a new study, Woo clipped what he called a "suicide gene" from a herpes
virus and injected it into tumors of mice with colon cancer. He also injected a
virus carrying an immune-system stimulant to intensify the effect of the suicide
gene.

   The tumor cells absorbed the suicide gene, making the cells susceptible to a
drug called ganciclovir, which is used to treat herpes. When the mice were given
ganciclovir, Woo saw "dramatic" death and regression in the tumors, he said.

   Edward Birkenmeier, who is doing similar research on inherited diseases in
mice at the Jackson Laboratory, said the future for gene therapy remains
unclear.

   "I think it's going to work, but it's not going to be that straightforward.
Each disease is going to be different. . . . Which diseases will be first, which
will respond well, which may never respond well, isn't clear yet."

   He said he believes cancer will be among the most difficult diseases to fight
with gene therapy.

   Human trials of gene therapy have begun in a handful of patients, but Woo
said he is worried that those trials could lead the public to expect too much.
The trials are designed merely to test the safety of the new techniques, not to
determine how effective they are, he said. Widespread use is likely to be years
away.

   In every case so far, the initial success in treatment of cancer or disease
has proven to be incomplete or enormously complicated. With brain tumors,
researchers have shown they can eradicate a single tumor, but they have no way
to hunt down and destroy cancer cells that might have spread.

   Most of the research on gene therapy now revolves around the development of
viral carriers that have been stripped of their harmful genes and packed with
something intended to fight disease.

   The two most promising carriers have staying and efficiency problems,
however.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995


                             205 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          July 28, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 380 words

HEADLINE: 'SUICIDE GENES' ERADICATE TUMORS IN LAB

BYLINE: By PAUL RAEBURN AP science editor

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, MAINE

BODY:

   Injections of viruses armed with "suicide genes" have eradicated brain tumors
and colon cancer in lab animals, opening the way to an entirely new kind of
cancer treatment, a researcher said Thursday.

   Similar experiments have also corrected hemophilia in dogs, when the viruses
were engineered to carry a gene to repair the blood-clotting defect, said Savio
Woo, a biologist with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Baylor College
of Medicine in Houston.

   "The results were unbelievable," Woo said. "The tumor just went away.  Every
animal responded." He described the work at a meeting of geneticists at the
Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor.

   Woo said he is "tremendously optimistic" about the new science of gene
therapy. But he tempered his optimism with a reminder that enormous scientific
obstacles remain before the research leads to a safe, effective treatment.

   "We need to be aware how technically challenging it is," he said. "There is
also fundamental cell biology and immunology we need to learn."

   In a new study, Woo clipped what he called a "suicide gene" from a herpes
virus and injected it into tumors of mice with colon cancer. He also injected a
virus carrying an immune-system stimulant to intensify the effect of the suicide
gene.

   The tumor cells absorbed the suicide gene, making the cells susceptible to a
drug called ganciclovir, which is used to treat herpes. When the mice were given
ganciclovir, Woo saw "dramatic" death and regression in the tumors, he said.

   Edward Birkenmeier, who is doing similar research on inherited diseases in
mice at the Jackson Laboratory, said the future for gene therapy remains
unclear.

   "I think it's going to work, but it's not going to be that straightforward.
Each disease is going to be different. . . . Which diseases will be first, which
will respond well, which may never respond well, isn't clear yet."

   He said he believes cancer will be among the most difficult diseases to fight
with gene therapy.

   Human trials of gene therapy have begun in a handful of patients, but Woo
said he is worried that those trials could lead the public to expect too much.
The trials are designed merely to test the safety of the new techniques, not to
determine how effective they are, he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995


                             206 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1708 words

HEADLINE: In the Rush Toward Gene Therapy, Some See a High Risk of Failure

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   IN the six years since the first corrective genes were injected into the
first patient, gene therapy has exploded. As many as 600 patients have been
given gene therapy in studies, for diseases ranging from rare metabolic defects
to common cancers. Nearly half of these patients were enrolled in the last six
months.

   But for all the frenzy, there has not been a single published report of a
patient who was helped by gene therapy. And technical questions have multiplied.
For example, scientists have discovered that the immune system may attack and
destroy cells that were treated with gene therapy, seeing them as foreign or,
when the genes were transferred by a virus, as infected.

    The venture capitalists who have set up small companies that are a driving
force behind this new field are presumably shrewd judges of the risks they are
taking. Yet a number of leading scientists, including the director of the
National Institutes of Health, say they worry that the field is rushing too fast
from the laboratory to the bedside, driven in part by scientists' desire to
climb aboard the bandwagon and in part by commercial interests that have little
to do with medicine.

   While others assert that it does not hurt to rush ahead with something as
exciting as gene therapy, the critics say that they fear a public backlash and a
crash of the gene therapy biotechnology industry if study after hastily planned
study is inconclusive and if, as so often happens in medicine, some patients are
injured in therapeutic disasters.

   The promise of gene therapy is that by inserting corrective genes into
patients' cells by a variety of ingenious methods, researchers will be able to
cure inborn diseases, like cystic fibrosis, that are caused by a faulty gene.
Another therapeutic technique would use genes that make a cell self-destruct.
Researchers hope to infiltrate these genes into cancer cells or cells infected
with the AIDS virus.

   Gene therapy is the most fundamental type of cure because it can correct
defects in the body's own machinery. Drugs or surgery are crude by comparison.
And so even the harshest critics of today's studies do not doubt that, some day,
gene therapy will transform medicine. But, they say, that day will be years and
maybe decades from now. In the meantime, they add, the entire enterprise is
threatened by exaggerated expectations of instant cures and by clinical trials
that have been designed so hastily that they are unlikely to be of value.

   Scientists said there were immense pressures to rush forward with gene
therapy studies. In universities, said Dr. James Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania, scientists
crave the prestige of being "the first in your university to do gene therapy."
And, he said, universities want to announce that they are part of the gene
therapy wave. "A lot of universities want to get involved," Dr. Wilson said. "It
is high visibility, something people consider the future of medicine."

   But the biggest force behind the gene therapy wave, some say, has been
biotechnology companies. Sixty-two percent of the gene therapy studies that have
begun are financed by industry.

   Dr. Harold Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health, has
appointed an outside committee of experts, none of whom would be major
beneficiaries of a change in the pattern of financing gene therapy research, to
advise him on the directions the field is taking. He said that the N.I.H. was
spending $200 million a year on gene therapy research, including very basic
science. Dr. Varmus wants to be sure the money is being put to good use. And he
is uneasy.

   "I think there's a dynamic here that's hurtful to the whole enterprise," Dr.
Varmus said. "It's driven in part by company concerns," he added, explaining
that companies want to have gene therapy studies so that they can show investors
that they are part of the new gene therapy gold rush. Companies "gain obvious
credibility in their attempts to raise money," Dr. Varmus said. "It helps in
raising capital to say they actually have something in progress."

   Dr. Stuart Orkin, a molecular biologist and hematologist at Children's
Hospital in Boston, said that the push had been to just get clinical trials
going, whether or not they were likely to have any meaningful results.  Dr.
Orkin, who is co-chairman of the panel that Dr. Varmus appointed, said that "the
general impression is that there are a very large number of clinical trials,
many of which have been approved without extraordinary oversight in terms of
scientific or clinical benefit."

   And, Dr. Orkin said, from the businesses' point of view, clinical benefit may
not be so important.

   "From the companies' standpoint, from a purely business standpoint, most are
interested in selling out," Dr. Orkin said. "They want to be bought out or taken
over. Whether they deliver a product is not germane. They just need to recoup
their venture capital."

   But others say that it is not so clear that the clinical trials are pushing
ahead too quickly.

   Dr. Malcolm Keith Brenner, a gene therapy researcher at St. Jude's Children's
Research Hospital in Memphis, said that if anything, gene therapy was not moving
quickly enough. "You've got to take what you've got and make the best of it," he
said.

   "As things improve, fine," he added, "but in the meantime, there are things
that can be done."

   Dr. M. James Barrett, chief executive officer of Genetic Therapy Inc. of
Gaithersburg, Md., said that "the best is sometimes the enemy of the good in
medicine."

   "In our view, it is certainly appropriate to proceed with what we have," he
said. This month, the Swiss drug company Sandoz announced that it was buying
Genetic Therapy for $295 million.

   Dr. John Coffin, a molecular biologist at Tufts University and a member of
Dr. Varmus's committee, took a middle ground. "There is a valid argument to be
made on both sides," he said. "There is always a range of opinions as to how
fast to push something." Pushing too slowly, he noted, can get researchers mired
in technical minutiae, while pushing too fast can waste opportunities to perfect
the method.

   Dr. Coffin added that the advantage of having companies as the driving force
in testing gene therapy was that "it's a mechanism by which research can be
advanced fairly quickly."

   So far, companies have not seemed overly worried by the risks of moving too
fast. For example, Genetic Therapy was involved from the beginning in clinical
trials of a gene therapy for glioblastoma, a deadly brain cancer. Dr. Kenneth W.
Culver and Dr. R. Michael Blaise of the National Institutes of Health got the
idea for the treatment several years ago. "As soon as the data looked good in
animals, G.T.I. wanted it," Dr. Culver said.

   On Dec. 7, 1992, Dr. Culver, Dr. Blaise and their colleagues at N.I.H. tried
the method in the first patient with glioblastoma. In the next two and a half
years, 14 more patients received the treatment. "Some didn't respond, some had
some response, and one man has gone two and a half years without evidence of a
tumor," said Dr. Culver, who has since left the N.I.H. and is currently between
jobs.

   Asked whether he thought the treatment was a success, Dr. Culver said, "My
conclusion is that this therapy had no toxic effects and some evidence of
biologic effects." He said that although it was highly unusual for a patient to
live for two and a half years after being treated for a glioblastoma, it was not
unheard of, so he could not say for sure that the treatment cured the man who
had done so well.

   Dr. Culver thinks it may be too soon to launch into a clinical trial, "It is
my opinion as a scientist and a physician that we've got a lot more we can learn
and do to optimize this type of gene delivery and destruction of tumor cells,"
he said. When a clinical trial begins, he noted, refinements of the method are
no longer of interest. "Once the decision is made the refinement issues are only
scale-up issues," he said.

   But Dr. Barrett, Genetic Therapy's chief executive, said that the initial
results were promising enough for the company to go ahead with a study of up to
30 patients. The study began last fall, Dr. Barrett said, and includes patients
who, unlike the original 15, have tumors that are operable.

   Of course, gene therapy may turn out to be a dramatic cure for brain cancer.
But more likely, said Dr. Mark Levine, a cancer specialist who is chief
executive officer of the Hamilton Regional Cancer Center in Ontario, such
treatments being tested now will, at best, shrink tumors slightly.

   A clinical effect like that "is far from saying it's better than what we do
now," Dr. Levine said. But, he added, he fears that because gene therapy "is
high tech, there will be this tremendous drive to use it without having properly
evaluated it."

   Others worry that there is still so much to be learned about getting genes
into cells that many studies are doomed. Researchers generally are not able to
transfer enough genes into cells and, in some cases, the cells that get new
genes will be destroyed by the immune system as foreign.

   Dr. Wilson, in fact, halted a gene therapy study for precisely these reasons.
He had given gene therapy to 8 out of 30 cystic fibrosis patients he had planned
to treat when he realized that he simply had to go back to the lab and work on
gene delivery.

   That was two years ago and now Dr. Wilson said he thought he had learned
enough to choose an optimal way to deliver genes within a few months.

   Some of Dr. Wilson's patients were shocked by his decision to stop his study
and begged him to give them the genes anyway, arguing that they had not long to
live and nothing to lose. But he refused.

   Dr. Wilson said he was fortunate because his work was paid for by the N.I.H.
and the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, and not by a company. Stopping a study, he
said, "is extremely expensive" and choosing a new way of delivering genes may
not be feasible when patents are involved.

   For experts in the field, difficulties such as this are reminders that the
real issue is not when, but how. Gene therapy, Dr. Varmus said, "will happen
eventually." But, he added, "the question is, do we do it right?"

GRAPHIC: Diagram

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1995


                             207 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 24, 1995 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3584 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH TRIALS - AND TRIBULATIONS VECTOR I, A GENE-THERAPY DRUG,
SHOWED PROMISE AGAINST CYSTIC FIBROSIS. VECTOR II LOOKED BETTER, BUT DEVELOPED
PROBLEMS. THEN CAME VECTOR III. /

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake and Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Dressed in a long white lab coat, the dark-haired woman came out of the
research building carrying a Styrofoam box.

   Mariann Grossman edged her way into the crowd of students rushing by the lab
building on the University of Pennsylvania campus. She was afraid a student
whizzing by on a bike would jostle her and dump the container's invaluable
contents.

   In the box was dry ice surrounding a test tube that contained one trillion
viruses.

   Grossman crossed Spruce Street, walked into the Penn Medical Center, and took
an elevator to a lab on the sixth floor.

   She donned a paper gown, bonnet, booties and gloves, and entered the
supersterile environment of the human application laboratory - HAL - of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   It was there, in a sci-fi world of hooded lab tables, freezers, petri dishes
and microscopes, that Grossman would use the viruses to produce what hopefully
would be the first gene therapy drug effective against a major genetic disease,
cystic fibrosis.

   If all went well, the drug would make medical history.

   *

   It was the spring of 1994. James M. Wilson, the principal investigator in the
gene therapy study and director of the institute, had great hopes for the
drug Grossman was about to produce.

   He thought the chances were good that it would give doctors a way to control
cystic fibrosis with treatments given every couple of months. Learning how to do
this would provide treatments, perhaps cures, for scores of other diseases as
varied as cancer, heart disease and AIDS.

   Called vectors, gene therapy drugs are radically different from conventional
medicine. Most are viruses that have been bioengineered to carry genes into a
patient's cells. The genes then force cells to make proteins that fight disease
or compensate for genetic defects.

   Wilson had reason for optimism. A first-generation version of this virus,
Vector I, had looked promising in human trials. It was an adenovirus, which
normally causes colds, but it had been disabled. Now Wilson's lab had developed
a second-generation virus that appeared even better. He had so much faith in it
that he abruptly stopped testing Vector I on patients.

   Vector II was less likely to produce dangerous immune reactions at high
doses. And it worked for at least a month, twice as long as Vector I.

   Wilson hoped Vector II would do even better in humans.

   *

   No one was following the trials more eagerly than cystic fibrosis patients
who knew that research was advancing with remarkable speed.

   More than 30,000 people in the United States have CF, the most prevalent,
lethal genetic disease. Medical advances made over the last decade have doubled
their life expectancy so most live to their late 20s. Now researchers were
dangling the hope of complete control of their disease, if not a cure.

   Particularly interested in the Penn experiment were the eight men and women
who had received Vector I. Like all CF patients, they lacked the gene that makes
CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator). CFTR enables water and
salt to pass through lung cells and dilute mucus in the airways. Without it,
bacteria-breeding mucus builds up in the lungs, ultimately causing death.

   Each time the patients came into the CF clinic for routine care, they would
ask how the research was going. They knew it was unlikely that the drug would be
developed in time to save them, but with so much progress they couldn't help
hoping.

   Seven of the patients were doing well. One was not. It was Wendy, the first
patient to enter Wilson's study, on Sept. 3, 1993. Thirty-three years old, she
was in the disease's late stages; debilitating infections were becoming more
frequent and harder to stop.

   *

   Working in rooms with elevated air pressure to prevent airborne contamination
from outside, Grossman and laboratory technicians Colleen Baker and Priya
Chandra spent 2 1/2 months developing Vector II.

   They distributed the trillion viruses among 50 petri dishes.

   The shallow plates, covered with a mixture of human cells and nutrients to
nourish the viruses, were put into incubators heated to 90 degrees Fahrenheit.
In two weeks the one trillion viruses became 10 trillion viruses.

   These were distributed among 250 petri dishes, the process was repeated, and
after two more weeks these became 50 trillion viruses - enough to treat 14
patients.

   A sampling of viruses was packed in dry ice and shipped by Federal Express to
an independent laboratory in Maryland that would test for viruses and other
contaminants.

   By early last summer, the institute was ready to seek approval from the
federal Food and Drug Administration to test Vector II in humans. The go-ahead
was given in less than a month, on July 12, pending completion of quality-
control tests.

   Knowing that other laboratories were progressing with their trials, Wilson
wanted to get his moving again.

   Patients were notified that the trials were about to resume.

   Then word came back from Maryland. A quality-control test had shown
contamination.

   Mixed in with millions of therapeutic viruses were a few wild ones. They
probably wouldn't have hurt the test subjects. At most they would have caused
colds. But the FDA is very strict about these things.

   All the work done that spring and summer would have to be repeated. It was
unlikely that the trials could resume before the end of the year.

   *

   As summer progressed, Wilson was getting even more disturbing reports from
his own laboratory.

   Although he thought Vector II was the best yet developed, it was turning out
to have problems, and the problems were getting bigger as they learned more.

   Vector II stopped working after about a month. Wilson thought it was
"leaking" viral protein, which the body saw as a threat.

   Vector I made so much protein that the immune system was quickly activated
and knocked out the CFTR-producing lung cells in less than two weeks. Vector II
produced 1/50th as much viral protein.

   This wasn't an insurmountable problem. It just meant that patients would need
repeated treatments.

   But then Yiping Yang, the postdoctoral fellow who developed Vector II,
discovered that mice became immune to the vector; it didn't work the second time
it was given.

   This would be devastating for CF patients and others requiring lifelong
treatment if the same thing happened in humans.

   Sitting at the little table in Wilson's office, the two scientists talked
about ways around the two arms of the immune system.

   The first line of defense is the antibodies, which attack viruses the moment
they enter the body and are as specific for a virus as a key for a lock. But
usually there aren't enough of a particular antibody to counteract the invasion.

   Overwhelming the antibodies, the viruses infiltrate cells and make the person
sick. Then the second line of defense springs to life, and white blood cells
called lymphocytes destroy the infected cells.

   Meanwhile the body is mass-producing the specific antibody, arming itself for
the next time the virus invades. This explains why vaccines work, and humans get
measles only once.

   Many researchers, including Wilson, hoped that because adenoviruses easily
get through the defense system of humans, but not animals, humans would be more
accepting of the vector.

   But after many hours of analyzing the new data, Wilson and Yang agreed that
this was probably wishful thinking. Both arms of the immune system had to be
neutralized.

   But how?

   *

   Wilson and Yang spent weeks poring over immunology textbooks and journal
articles, searching for ways to do this. Wilson didn't think it would work to
camouflage the virus to slip past the antibodies.

   The vector's appearance would have to be changed every time the patient was
treated, Wilson speculated, an impractical strategy in patients needing lifelong
therapy.

   Rather than doing something to the vector, the two scientists sought ways to
prevent the immune system from detecting the vectors.

   Surgeons had been doing this for years with immunity-suppressing drugs to
prevent transplanted organs from being rejected.

   Why not use the same drugs with CF? But wouldn't this be too dangerous in
patients who are constantly getting infections?

   Lifelong immune suppression wasn't possible, Wilson thought, but maybe the
patients' immunity need be suppressed for only a few minutes. Once inside the
cell, the vector is protected from antibodies.

   Back to the animal lab. Yang gave mice the anti-rejection drug OKT4 just
before administering Vector II. One month later, he treated the mice again with
the vector.

   Ordinarily it wouldn't work the second time. This time it did.

   Wilson was encouraged although he found it surprising that such an ominous
problem, one that could have stymied the whole field of gene therapy, could be
solved so easily.

   "It doesn't usually happen," Wilson said, "but sometimes in science you get
lucky."

   Now they had to wait for human trials to see if they really were lucky and
had solved this piece of the immunity problem.

   *

   The eight patients treated in the halted Vector I trial continued coming to
the clinic for checkups and getting updated on research advances.

   The reports were encouraging.

   More than 40 CF patients had received gene therapy drugs at Penn and
elsewhere, and only one, a 23-year-old woman in a New York study, suffered
serious side effects.

   Meanwhile, the drugs had prompted the production of CFTR in several patients
even though in these trials, designed only to determine drug toxicity, too small
a segment of their lungs was treated to correct disease.

   A 34-year-old male volunteer in Wilson's study responded to doses far lower
than thought necessary to produce effects.

   Ronald G. Crystal at the Cornell University Medical Center in New York City
saw a response in a 23-year-old man. Similar success was reported in Iowa and
North Carolina, where the drug was being applied to the linings of patients'
noses.

   The progress reinforced the volunteers' hopes that a drug would be developed
in time for them. But the delays were sobering.

   Wendy's condition continued to deteriorate. Breathing was becoming
increasingly difficult and chest-poundings more frequent.

   "It feels like there's paint in your lungs," she told the doctors.

   She became tired. Her joints ached.

   In September 1994, almost exactly a year after receiving Vector I, she was
back at Penn, very ill and needing antibiotics.

   Her lung function - the amount of air her lungs could move - had fallen to 21
percent of normal, barely enough to stay alive.

   She had abandoned hope that gene therapy would help her. She knew that
without definitive treatment, it was unlikely that she would live for more than
a year or two.

   All of the patients chosen for the study were in advanced stages of disease
and expected to die within three to five years, unless they could get a lung
transplant.

   Wendy started thinking about a transplant during this hospital admission and
discussed it with a transplant nurse.

   The desperate conditions of patients like Wendy spur researchers, but, Wilson
says, it can encourage bad science - attempts at quick fixes that are usually
wasteful of resources and time.

   "I've got to be a bulldog and keep my eye on the problem," Wilson says. But
it's hard not to be affected.

   "I clearly think about all the patients who've been through this and I'm
running like hell to get on to the next phase so I can call them back and say
now we're ready."

   *

   It was one thing to suppress the immune system temporarily to get the vector
past the antibodies, but Wilson and Yang knew they needed another weapon.

   This one would have to trick the body's second line of defense - the
lymphocytes. They needed the viral equivalent of a stealth bomber, which is
invisible to enemy radar.

   Wilson frequently uses this metaphor in talks and shows a slide of the
stealth bomber, which represents the future of gene therapy, paired with a slide
of the Wright brothers' plane at Kitty Hawk, which is the present.

   Wilson expected it would take years to develop a stealth vector, assuming
that it could even be done. It was a daunting challenge. To be invisible to the
lymphocytes, the vector could not make any viral protein.

   Since every gene produces a protein, the vector could have no functioning
genes, other than the one that makes CFTR.

   It was hard enough developing Vector II, with only one gene removed and
another crippled.

   Viruses denuded of their genes are like sick, skimpy plants that need rich
soil to compensate for what they lack.

   The soil in this case is a rich broth of human kidney cells - a cell line -
with genes, minerals, vitamins and other supplements the denuded virus needs to
grow.

   Yang had made Vector II by crippling what scientists think is a master gene,
E2a, which controls the 50 or so other genes in the adenovirus. If E2a was
inactivated, then the virus' other genes wouldn't make proteins.

   He changed E2a so it functioned at room temperature, but stopped working at
higher temperatures. This enabled him to grow Vector II in the laboratory, but
the gene stopped producing immunity-stimulating protein in the warmer
environment of the body.

   The problem was that Vector II still made a little viral protein, enough to
eventually be detected by the immune system.

   The obvious solution was to remove most or all of E2a, but the virus needs
that gene to multiply and the scientists need to grow a lot of virus to treat
cystic fibrosis. Theoretically, the way around this problem is to take the E2a
out of the virus and put it into the "soil" or cell line surrounding the virus.

   This would enable the virus to make protein and grow, but once inside the
patient, the virus would have no E2a and could no longer make the proteins that
drew fire from the immune system.

   Many laboratories had tried unsuccessfully to develop such a growth medium.
Wilson attempted it by essentially seeding the soil with the E2a genes, but it
didn't work. Now Wilson had another idea.

   Why not use other viruses to carry E2a into the soil or cell line to nurture
the denuded adenovirus? In effect, Wilson would be using gene therapy to solve
the problem. Yang would have to bioengineer these viruses to carry E2a, just as
the adenovirus was bioengineered to carry the cystic fibrosis gene.

   It was a long shot, but they didn't know what else to do.

   Yang attacked the problem. Working for many months, he developed a soup of
kidney cells he hoped would be rich enough to grow the stealth vector.

   After adding the new virus carrying E2a, Yang peered into a microscope,
looking for cells infected with E2a. He used a technique that identified them
with red dots. For two hours he looked for dots. Most of the slides had few if
any. But one group or clone of kidney cells, "C10," was filled with red dots. It
was making E2a, and lots of it.

   Printing out color pictures of what he had just seen, Yang went to Wilson's
office.

   "Do you have a minute?" he asked.

   It had been months since they discussed this project, and Wilson had trouble
focusing.

   With an unusual ability to compartmentalize his mind and his days, Wilson is
guarded about intrusions, but he knows Yang never says "do you have a minute?"
unless it's something important.

   "Yes," Wilson said.

   "We've got it," Yang said.

   "Got what?" Wilson asked.

   "Here," Yang said, spreading the photographs on the wooden table.

   Wilson immediately focused on C10 and the red dots.

   "My God," he said, "I can't believe that it worked."

   The stealth vector - Vector III - was within reach.

   Maybe they should forget about Vector II, Wilson thought, and go straight to
Vector III in the human trials. But this would mean additional delays. Wilson
was under self-imposed pressure to restart the trials as soon as possible. He
knew how desperate the patients and doctors were for an effective CF drug.

   But would it make sense to move ahead with Vector II if Yang was able to make
one that was probably better?

   All of the pieces were dropping into place. With immune-suppression drugs
they should be able to get past the antibody problem, Wilson thought. And if
they were right about E2a being the master gene, Vector III should be able to
outfox the immune system's second line of defense.

   This might be all that's needed to control or cure cystic fibrosis.

   But there was no telling how long it would take Yang to get Vector III
growing in the cell line. And it would take even longer to show that the virus
was producing CFTR.

   Wrestling with the decision he had to make, Wilson dropped by Yang's
cluttered lab table every day for updates.

   After only two weeks, Yang told Wilson that Vector III was growing in the
cell line. Three weeks after that, he announced that it was making CFTR.

   *

   Wilson's internal debate continued.

   It would still take months to grow Vector III and check its purity, let alone
test it on patients. If he stuck with Vector II, he could be testing patients
much sooner.

   But Vector III might be the drug that controlled cystic fibrosis.

   Then again, more delays would drop his laboratory further back in the race.

   Last December, Wilson sought the advice of Robert J. Beall, president of the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   The science-trained executive was in close touch with the CF community of
patients, caregivers and researchers.

   The excitement of successfully completing toxicity trials with Vector II
would be greatly diminished if patients and doctors were then told they had to
wait for another drug to be developed. Beall thought Wilson should delay the
trials until Vector III was ready.

   Beall also was concerned about exhausting the pool of test subjects. Few CF
patients are willing to endure the discomfort of treatment and lengthy
hospitalizations to test a drug that has no chance of being used.

   Sitting in the quiet of his home after his wife and three children had gone
to bed, Wilson made his decision. He would wait for Vector III, unless Vector II
was ready to go right away.

   A few days later, Wilson huddled with his team.

   He started the meeting by asking Grossman when Vector II would be ready.

   Thirty-five days, she said.

   Wilson asked Yang how long it would take to get Vector III ready for
production.

   Four months, Yang said, sometime in April.

   Wilson asked nurse coordinator Susan Vonnessen, who keeps in touch with
volunteers, how they'd feel about another delay.

   They're very sophisticated about the research, she said. She didn't think
they'd be disappointed, especially if they knew a better vector was being made
ready.

   "I don't want to be in a position of using one virus when we have another
virus in our hands that may be better," Wilson said. "I have a real concern
about moving ahead with something that is flawed."

   Vector III might be "the real McCoy," he said, the drug that controls cystic
fibrosis.

   Wilson was greeted with concerned expressions. Grossman looked sad. For most
of the year she had been working hard to develop a vector that now might never
be used.

   Wilson saw the disappointment.

   "Let's give ourselves a couple of weeks before deciding definitely," Wilson
said.

   The meeting broke up, and everyone returned to their labs. Two weeks later it
was definite. They would go with Vector III.

   *

   Yang rushed to make Vector III, a complicated process with many different
steps, each of which took weeks to complete.

   He spent last December and January growing a prototype Vector III in the cell
line he had just made.

   By the end of January, the vector was making protein, showing that it was
alive and working even though it didn't have an E2a master gene.

   The first part of February was spent growing the vector with the CF gene in
place.

   The rest of February, March and part of April went to purifying vectors and
making sure that they were not contaminated with wild viruses or other
microorganisms.

   As this was going on, another young researcher, Guang-ping Gao, came to
Wilson and told him that he had developed two cell lines that could grow viruses
with still other genes deleted.

   It was an embarrassment of riches. Two years ago, they had only one cell
line. Now they had four with the potential of making hundreds of vectors.

   Wilson attributed the success to his team learning how to work together and
achieving a critical mass of information so discoveries could start pouring out
of the lab.

   If they were wrong about E2a being a master gene and other genes also had to
be deleted, Gao's work could be vital.

   Wilson had great hopes for Vector III, but he also had had great hopes for
Vector II and Vector I, only to discover problems that limited their
effectiveness.

   Rather than placing all trust in Vector III, he told Gao to make four more
vectors with different genes deleted. They would be put into comparative animal
trials with Vectors I, II, III and the best of the lot would be chosen for the
human trials.

   Last April, vectors one through seven were put into monkeys. Everything was
being developed simultaneously so the trials, now expected to start by the end
of the year, would not be delayed.

   With the new cell lines, Wilson had the capability of making 384 different
vectors. He was betting that the stealth vector - the one destined to control
cystic fibrosis - would be found among the seven he had chosen for the animal
studies.

   It would be several months before he knew for sure which was the best vector.

NOTES: THE QUEST: SEEKING AN ULTIMATE CURE
Second of two parts
* In this occasional series, The Inquirer will continue
to follow developments in the quest for the ultimate cure.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;

PHOTO (4)
1. Researcher Mariann Grossman prepares lung tissue samples, from the
bronchioscopy of a cystic fibrosis patient, for analysis. (The Philadelphia
Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
2. During their weekly meeting to discuss progress on their research, James
M. Wilson and his staff members at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy
look at some of the test results. Eight people have received the institute's
first cystic fibrosis drug. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
3. The virus carrying the cystic fibrosis gene is kept frozen at the human
applications laboratory until it is placed in a patient.
4. A technician checks one of the vector vials. Seven vectors are now being
tested on monkeys. The best will be chosen for human trials.
CHART (1)
1. The Evolution of a Gene Therapy Vector (SOURCE: Institute for Human Gene
Therapy; The Philadelphia Inquirer)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             208 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 24, 1995, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 1649 words

HEADLINE: Liver cells injected into patient;
New procedure may preclude need for liver transplants for some.

BYLINE: Byron Spice, Science Editor, Post-Gazette

BODY:


   In a last-ditch effort to save a 5-year-old boy with a rare enzyme
deficiency, Dr. Jorge Reyes infused a billion liver cells into the boy's
bloodstream Monday in Children's Hospital in Oakland.

   Billy, whose family asked that his real name not be used, was given cells
obtained from the liver of a child who died in a traffic accident.

   So far, most of the transplanted cells seem to be functioning within Billy's
liver, producing an enzyme that he has had trouble making himself.

   The enzyme, called ornithine transcarbamylase, or OTC, is essential for
eliminating ammonia from the body. Without OTC, ammonia could have built up to
lethal levels in Billy.

   Since the cell transplant, though, ''his ammonia levels have rapidly
diminished,'' Reyes said, dropping from a high of 80 milligrams per deciliter to
a normal reading of 8.

   Although Pittsburgh is the world's leading liver transplant center, last
week's procedure was the first time doctors here have attempted to transplant
only liver cells, rather than a whole organ.

Less traumatic than transplant

   It also may be the first time that doctors anywhere have attempted to use
liver cell transplants to cure a genetic defect.

   If the operation proves successful, it may provide a new, less traumatic way
to treat liver disorders that otherwise would have required a complete liver
transplant.

   That could have several beneficial effects. It could help ease the demand for
livers that are in short supply. It could provide a way to treat genetic
disorders until doctors learn how to repair genetic defects directly. And it
could even provide a less controversial way to treat patients with diseases like
alcoholic cirrhosis, rather than giving them scarce donated livers.

   The ultimate cure for such patients as Billy may be replacing the defective
gene itself. The patient's own liver cells might be removed, genetically altered
to include a working copy of the gene, and then infused back into the patient.

   Such gene therapy would avoid the need for the anti-rejection drugs that
Billy has to take because the donated cells came from another person. But it
could be at least five to 10 years before gene therapy is perfected, said Dr.
Stephen Strom, a pathologist at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

   ''Right now, the only game in town is cell therapy,'' Strom said.

Inborn errors or metabolism

   It will be several more weeks, and maybe months, before doctors know if the
cell transplant has cured Billy. But if further clinical research shows liver
cell transplants are effective, they might be used for children with a variety
of rare genetic disorders known as inborn errors of metabolism, said Dr. John
Barranger, a Pitt geneticist.

   Besides OTC deficiency, those diseases include such rare illnesses as
oxalosis, which causes the kidneys to shut down, and glycogen storage disease,
which causes carbohydrates to build up in tissues. Each of these disorders
occurs in only one out of every 10,000 or 50,000 births, Barranger said, but
together they account for a sizable number of patients who require expensive,
high-level medical care.

   Liver transplants also can cure these diseases, but the cell transplants are
much less invasive. In Billy's operation, doctors inserted a catheter through a
narrow incision in his abdomen and injected the cells into the portal vein that
enters his liver.

   Cell transplants eventually might even be done in the womb if a disorder
could be diagnosed prenatally, Barranger said.

   But its biggest benefit might be to stretch the meager supply of livers
available for transplant. The United Network for Organ Sharing lists 4,850
people nationwide who are waiting for donor livers. Each year, 8 or 9 percent of
all patients placed on waiting lists die before a liver becomes available, the
agency says.

   The liver is the body's largest gland, and has so many important functions
that few people clearly understand what it does. It produces several enzymes and
other substances essential for digestion, excretion and other functions. Much of
the organ is composed of vessels and connective tissue, but it is the liver
cells, called hepatocytes, that do the organ's real work.

Liver cell bank envisioned

   Strom, who came to Pitt two years ago from the Medical College of Virginia,
began paving the way for hepatocyte transplants in the early 1980s. That's when
he developed a method of isolating hepatocytes from the rest of the liver's
tissues.

   He would tie off the liver's vessels and them pump them full of digestive
fluids, which would melt away the connective tissue in the liver, leaving a soup
of hepatocytes.

   Later, Strom found he could freeze the cells without killing them if they
were treated with various concentrations of the solvent DMSO.

   Each year, between 100 and 150 donor livers prove unsuitable for
transplantation and usually are discarded, Strom said in an interview last week.
His vision is to salvage the hepatocytes from these livers and freeze them,
creating a cell bank that can be used as needed.

   In March 1993, Dr. Robert Fisher, a Medical College of Virginia liver
transplant surgeon, was the first to use Strom's cells to sustain a woman dying
of liver failure.

   ''She turned around completely in about 12 hours,'' Strom said, after Fisher
infused her spleen with hepatocytes. She received a liver transplant three days
later when an organ became available.

   Two more Virginia patients have since received liver transplants after
undergoing this bridge procedure. But three others, including one who received a
hepatocyte transplant July 14, have died.

   ''Some of them work, some of them don't,'' said Dr. John Ham, who performed
the July 14 procedure. ''These are pilot studies, so it's hard to tell if it's
working or not.

   ''I think it's a promising thing,'' Ham added. ''I'm still reserving my
judgment on it.''

   Strom, who continues to provide hepatocytes for his Virginia colleagues, has
been trying to convince Pitt doctors to attempt hepatocyte transplants since
arriving here two years ago.

   The opportunity came with the Billy's desperate case.

Billy hospitalized 25 times

   Billy had been diagnosed with OTC deficiency when he was about 2 1/2 years
old, said Dr. Wendy Rubenstein, a Children's Hospital geneticist. That's when he
suffered intractable seizures and fell into a coma because high ammonia levels
caused his brain to swell.

   Ammonia is produced, along with water and carbon dioxide, when the body
digests protein. Normally, the enzyme OTC helps to incorporate ammonia into
urea, which is then excreted in the urine.

   Some babies have such profound OTC deficiencies that they die immediately
after birth. Billy had only a partial deficiency. Still, by the time the
condition was diagnosed, he had suffered brain damage that has left him mentally
retarded.

   Billy was treated with a strict low-protein diet and with drugs that lower
ammonia levels. But periodically his ammonia levels would shoot up anyway,
necessitating hospital stays so he could undergo dialysis to remove the ammonia.
In the last three years, he was hospitalized 25 times for weeks or months at a
time.

   But repeated dialysis, which requires inserting large catheters into veins,
has taken its toll. One by one, his large veins have collapsed; in their place
grew small collateral vessels -- numerous enough to maintain his blood flow, but
too small to accommodate a catheter. By the time he was hospitalized last
Christmas, doctors realized that they would soon be unable to dialyze him at
all.

   A liver transplant might have cured him. But liver transplant surgery
requires multiple intravenous lines to carry blood products and medicines. By
the time he was evaluated for transplant, Reyes said, Billy didn't have enough
viable veins left for all of the IVs that would be needed.

   With Billy's options quickly disappearing, doctors sought approval from the
hospital's review committees last spring to try a hepatocyte transplant. When a
damaged liver with a compatible blood type became available just over a week
ago, all the preparations were in place.

More questions than answers

   Strom and his lab assistants, Liubomir Pisarov and Ken Dorko, spent 20 hours
in their lab, isolating 6 billion hepatocytes. A billion were prepared for
infusion, and 10 percent of them were labeled with tiny radioactive isotopes so
doctors could later find where they had migrated in Billy's body. The remaining
cells will be frozen and kept available if Billy or another patient needs them.

   A nuclear scan following the infusion showed that most of the hepatocytes had
lodged within the liver, as doctors had hoped. Liver cells can survive elsewhere
in the body, Strom said, but they only prosper in the liver and the spleen.

   Although the initial results look good, Rubenstein said doctors probably will
wait a month before trying to wean Billy off the drugs and the diet that have
helped control his disease.

   Reyes said Billy is being treated with standard anti-rejection drugs, just as
a regular liver transplant recipient would be. It's not clear, however, just how
doctors will be able to detect rejection of the individual cells if it occurs,
he said. Rejection usually shows up in connective and vascular tissues, not
hepatocytes, so no one can be sure what will happen to the hepatocytes alone.

   Questions abound.

   Will the cells function indefinitely? Animal studies suggest that they can,
Strom said. Were enough cells infused to keep ammonia levels in check? If not,
more could be infused later, he said. Will Billy require anti-rejection drugs
for the rest of his life? No one knows.

   Even a small improvement may be enough, Strom said. ''If we can restore 10
percent of the normal OTC level, we might be able to save this kid.''

   And that was an option he didn't have before.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center and Children's Hospital; Knight-Ridder Tribune; Daniel
Marsula/Post-Gazette: (Liver cell transplant)

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1995


                             209 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 23, 1995 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 4822 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH IS YIELDING A REASON TO HOPE CYSTIC FIBROSIS COULD BE THE
FIRST DISEASE CONQUERED BY GENE THERAPY. IF THAT HAPPENS, MANAGING OTHER
DISEASES IN THAT WAY COULD FOLLOW. SCIENTISTS, INCLUDING SOME AT PENN, ARE
MOVING CLOSER TO THAT GOAL.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake and Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Six scientists sat patiently as Yiping Yang, a young researcher at the
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, prepared to show color slides of
mouse lung and liver tissue.

   The slides involved a complicated study of a new type of cystic fibrosis
drug, but no scientific training was needed to interpret them:

   Pink was bad; blue was good.

   Pink meant that the scientists had no idea why the drug stopped working after
a few weeks. Blue meant they had just found out why. This would be a
breakthrough in their quest to wipe out disease with a new type of treatment
called gene therapy.

   Yang turned on the slide projector and a huge picture of mouse tissue,
stained with dye, appeared on the screen at the end of the conference table. It
was fuzzy. Even before Yang focused the projector, it was obviously pink. He
showed another slide, again pink.

   James M. Wilson, his boss, looked at the slides without comment. He knew it
was unlikely they would easily solve a problem fundamental to the entire field
of gene therapy.

   Yang explained that the pink slides were of tissue taken from normal
laboratory mice. Now he wanted to show slides from mice that were identical,
with one exception. They had no immune systems.

   Yang flashed the first one onto the screen. It was blue. So was the next. And
the next. They were all blue.

   Yang snapped off the machine and sat down. His colleagues at the Institute
for Human Gene Therapy went on with the meeting, taking turns to report on their
own research. But Wilson was no longer listening.

   He was stunned. His mind was filled with the implications of the blue slides.
Yang's finding would alter the course of his laboratory's research. Wilson was
now convinced that he knew how to make gene therapy work.

   As Wilson left the meeting that day last December in elation, his mind kept
coming back to one word:

   Cure.

   *

   The age of gene therapy has dawned.

   More than 80 trials involving almost 600 patients have started or will soon
begin in the United States amid predictions that wondrous things are about to
happen.

   "Gene therapy will create a revolution in the practice of medicine and
substantially alter the pharmaceutical industry," said Kenneth W. Culver, a gene
therapy pioneer and executive director of the Human Gene Therapy Research
Institute in Des Moines, Iowa.

   "Medicine stands on the verge of a brave new world" with a score of companies
poised to translate the research breakthroughs into lifesaving drugs, said
Jeffrey R. Swarz, biotechnology analyst for CS First Boston.

   It's the stuff of science fiction.

   What medical science has done is find a way to go into the body, genetically
repair cells and force them to work the way they should.

   This is done by redesigning viruses and using them to sneak healthy genes
into the cells. The cells, in turn, use the new genes as blueprints for
producing varied proteins the body needs.

   Since malfunctioning cells are the basis of all disease, fixing cells that
cause a major disorder would be a profound achievement.

   The most obvious first targets of gene therapy are the 4,000 known human
genetic disorders, one of which is cystic fibrosis.

   The potential for the new science is so broad that genetic diseases are not
the only ones being studied. Three quarters of current trials involve cancer.

   Some researchers think AIDS can be controlled with gene therapy, and AIDS
trials have started at Penn, the University of Southern California, the
University of California/San Diego and the University of Michigan Medical
Center.

   Scientists are trying even to improve on nature by genetically altering cells
in blood vessel walls to reduce hypertension, cells in joints to counteract the
inflammation of arthritis, and cells in the heart to get around blood vessel
blockage that causes heart attacks.

   Despite the expectations, gene therapy has yet to fulfill its promise. Many
scientists think this is about to happen, and the first success could be with
cystic fibrosis.

   *

   Cure wasn't a word James Wilson dared think 22 months ago when he and his
research team gathered outside the hospital room of their first volunteer to
test a gene therapy drug for cystic fibrosis.

   The goal of the trial was to determine whether the treatment was too toxic to
use; no one expected that the first attempts to use such a revolutionary
drug would help the patient, let alone cure the disease. Even if the treatment
worked, animal tests already had suggested that it wouldn't for long.

   The plan was to give 20 volunteers increasingly larger doses until dangerous
side effects developed.

   Dressed in a blue checkered gown, the patient was sitting up in bed when the
researchers walked into her room. An open copy of Dean Koontz's novel Night
Chills was on a table by her bed.

   Wendy was small and spunky - 5 feet 1 and 108 pounds - with blond hair to
just below her shoulders. For someone so sick, she looked surprisingly healthy.

   Wendy's physician, Robert Kotloff, explained once more the details of the
procedure. Adenoviruses were going to deliver the genes to Wendy's lung cells.
Normally adenoviruses cause colds, but these had been modified to prevent that.
The treatment would be delivered through a tube they would insert down her
throat. Kotloff told Wendy the bronchoscopy wouldn't hurt.

   "It's the gagging that worries me," she said.

   "We're all ready," Wilson said cheerfully.

   "I know you are," she said.

   Wendy was born with a small defect in a single gene - the gene that directs
production of cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator or, as scientists call it,
CFTR. This is the protein that enables water and salt to pass through lung cells
and dilute mucus.

   Undiluted, mucus collects in the lungs and interferes with breathing,
provides a breeding ground for bacteria and eventually destroys the lungs. Even
with the best care, most cystic fibrosis patients die before 30. Wendy was 33.

   The drug Wendy was getting would deliver healthy CF genes to her cells,
which, at least in theory, then would manufacture CFTR the way nature intended.

   Followed by the anxious scientists, Wendy was taken to the bronchoscopy
suite. Doctors inserted the tube, inspected her lungs with a fiberoptic scope,
took scrapings of lung tissue and infused 700,000 viruses.

   Theoretically, each virus would penetrate one lung cell and transfer the CF
gene. Wilson would be happy if one out of 10 viruses transferred a gene.

   The bronchoscopy took 30 minutes and went without incident.

   The date was Sept. 3, 1993. If the drug turned out to be safe and subsequent
trials showed researchers how to develop an effective treatment, it would mark
the start of a revolution in medical care.

   But no one was talking revolution yet. They knew a lot of problems had to be
solved and a lot more would turn up. They had no idea how fast genetic therapy
was moving.

   *

   Ninety miles north, at Cornell University Medical Center on Manhattan's
bustling Upper East Side, Ronald G. Crystal also was pressing ahead with human
trials.

   A few months ahead of Wilson, Crystal already had treated three patients. For
three years, Crystal and Wilson had been leap-frogging each other with
discoveries as they raced toward human trials.

   In September 1990, Wilson showed that gene therapy could correct cystic
fibrosis in test-tube studies. Seven months later, Crystal demonstrated that the
adenovirus, with its affinity for lung cells, would be best for cystic fibrosis
and tried it on rats.

   Wilson expanded on this with more animal experiments and reported that gene
transfer probably could be done safely in humans, but that high doses inflamed
lungs in baboons.

   Crystal received approval from the federal Food and Drug Administration on
April 16, 1993, to begin human trials.

   He started them the next day, and a 23-year-old man became the first cystic
fibrosis patient to receive a gene drug. Wilson's approval came three months
later, and Wendy was treated two months after that.

   Crystal started thinking about using gene therapy for this disease in late
1988 - about a year before Wilson. At the time, Crystal was at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., alongside W. French Anderson, a pioneer
in the field.

   Crystal and Wilson both are athletic - Crystal jogs and Wilson works out with
weights - but otherwise the two are very different.

   Wilson, 40, is tall with sharp, angular features. He wears gold wire-rim
glasses. He answers questions with brief replies, always to the point.

   Crystal, 14 years older, is shorter with graying hair and rounder features.
Questions tend to prompt the longer answers of a teacher putting information in
context.

   Crystal's first two volunteers - men 23 and 33 - were given 20 million
viruses. Neither positive nor negative effects were seen.

   The third patient, a 24-year-old woman identified as Patient 2A, was given a
dose 100 times stronger - two billion viruses. She developed a fever lasting
several days, her blood pressure dropped, her heart rate rose, and her lungs
became inflamed.

   Crystal phoned Wilson, knowing that he was about to start trials, to report
on Patient 2A. Her response, to Wilson, was disturbingly similar to what he had
seen in baboons.

   Gene therapists worry constantly that a miscalculation will hurt or kill test
subjects and bring research to a halt before the new field has proven itself.

   What happened to Crystal's patient was a danger sign. Wilson and the FDA
sharply cut the starting dose in Penn's trial. Wendy received only 700,000
viruses, well under 1 percent of the dose given to Patient 2A.

   Three hundred times more drug would be needed to have an effect, according to
animal studies. This level wouldn't be reached until Penn's 11th volunteer.

   Having been a test subject many times, Wendy realized it was unlikely that
gene therapy would be perfected in time to save her life. Still she hoped.

   "I'm always hoping for the cure, for a magic wand," she says. That's one
reason she volunteered, despite admonitions of friends.

   " 'Let other people take the risks,' " they said.

   "I want to be the first to get it, if I can," she said. "It's definitely for
me. I want to benefit."

   She already owed her life to research advances. When Wendy was born, CF
victims rarely reached adulthood.

   "This is absolutely the most exciting time for cystic fibrosis," says Robert
J. Beall, president and CEO of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which has
promoted research and encouraged rapid and frank exchange of new data among
competing scientists.

   Since 1983, Beall says, the foundation's research budget "exploded" from $3
million in grants to almost $26 million this year.

   "Everyone wants to back a winner," he said.

   With government and industry joining, more than $150 million a year is being
spent, one third of that on gene therapy.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common, fatal genetic disease. More than 30,000
Americans have it, and 12 million others are carriers.

   Wendy's older sister and younger brother also were born with CF. She and her
sister used to take turns pounding each other's chest to loosen mucus. When
Wendy was 14, her sister died of CF. She was 17.

   Wendy graduated from Moorestown High School in New Jersey, studied drafting
at Burlington County Community College and works for an engineering firm.

   Although she tries to contain her optimism, she grasps at straws. Even the
date for the start of her gene therapy - Sept. 3, 1993 - was reason for
optimism. It was the 18th anniversary of her sister's death.

   "I feel like it's a good omen," she said. "I feel like she's there putting in
a good word for me with God."

   *

   This wasn't the first time that gene therapy was being used to treat disease.

   In 1990, W. French Anderson announced successful treatment of two girls with
a rare immune disorder. Two years ago Wilson reduced deadly cholesterol levels
in patients with another rare genetic condition.

   Those trials had involved taking defective cells from patients, repairing the
cells and giving them back - a cumbersome and costly method, with limited
application.

   But the cystic fibrosis trials would use viruses to repair the cells inside
the body. The viruses, known as vectors, would do this by "infecting" the cells
and inserting the gene the patients lack. It would be a more practical
treatment, more like conventional drugs.

   The current trials were designed only to determine the maximum safe dose.
They would not answer two questions gnawing at Wilson:

   Why does the therapy work only for a week or two?

   And why do high doses cause lung inflammation?

   Wilson suspected the two problems were linked. He thought the immune system
attacked the virus, caused inflammation and the death of genetically repaired
cells, which had been producing CFTR.

   Wilson was particularly disturbed by the inflammation seen in baboons and in
Crystal's Patient 2A. He was afraid that life-threatening side effects would
come before effective doses were reached, making gene therapy too dangerous to
use.

   Wilson worried about these things every morning when he made rounds. He would
check Wendy's chart, afraid that he would see a fever spike, an early sign of a
drug reaction. Later, after Wendy's daily chest X-ray, he would look for signs
of lung inflammation.

   The follow-up period passed without incident. Four days after getting the
vector, Wendy was given another bronchoscopy to retrieve fluid and lung cells,
which theoretically could now be producing CFTR. Enough cells were retrieved to
cover 80 microscope slides, which were put in a freezer at 4 degrees Fahrenheit
for later testing.

   Five days later, Wendy was released from the hospital. Everything had gone
fine. Wilson had made it past the first patient.

   *

   Wilson remembers clearly the day he decided to find a cure for cystic
fibrosis. It was in October 1989, when he addressed the annual meeting of the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in Florida.

   Wilson knew little about CF. He had been invited to give a general talk on
the promise of gene therapy.

   When Wilson arrived, everyone was talking about how the cystic fibrosis gene
had just been identified.

   To Wilson, "It was electrifying." He remembers walking to the lectern as
2,000 physicians, scientists, nurses and patients suddenly became quiet. All
eyes were on him.

   Using an overhead projector, he flashed five words onto the screen:

   GENE

   CELL?

   REGULATION?

   ANIMAL?

   CLINICAL?

   Only the word GENE did not have a question mark beside it.

   Wilson explained that scientists now had to determine which cells to put the
gene into and how to regulate the process. Then animal and human studies would
have to be conducted.

   Cystic fibrosis, he said, would be controlled only when all of the question
marks were replaced by answers.

   How long would that be? He didn't know but, he said, research was moving
rapidly.

   The audience roared approval as Wilson finished. Some people were crying.

   "I almost felt as though I had been given the responsibility to carry this
through," Wilson recalled, describing what moved him as a person.

   What excited him as a scientist was the challenge of answering the four
questions. Cystic fibrosis was the perfect disease for gene therapists to attack
first. Only one gene defect had to be corrected - and the gene already had been
identified.

   Wilson left the meeting determined to find an effective treatment, if not a
cure.

   *

   As the human trials got under way, half a dozen young scientists were busy
across Spruce Street in Wilson's laboratory trying to find answers to the two
questions their boss was asking.

   One was Yiping (pronounced E-ping) Yang, 30, a postdoctoral fellow from
Beijing.

   Yang reasoned that if Wilson was right and gene therapy was being thwarted by
the animal's immunity, then the drug should work better in animals with no
immune system. To test this, Yang injected the adenovirus vector into a breed of
mice that has no hair, and, more important, no immune system.

   After a month, Yang took liver and lung cells from the so-called nude mice
and put a stain on them. If the drug was still working and the cells were still
producing protein, the stain would turn the cells blue. If protein production
had stopped, Yang would be left with pink cells. The cells turned blue.

   Yang couldn't have asked for more exciting results. It proved that the immune
system had been the culprit. If they could outfox it, long-term disease control
if not cures would be possible.

   Because the drug was still working on Day 28, it meant the vectors could
permanently repair the cells. Until then, scientists had feared that the
transplanted genes would be inherently unstable and lose effectiveness after a
week or two, requiring repeated gene treatments.

   Yang could have burst into Wilson's office to tell him the important
finding. The quiet-mannered Yang instead presented his data at the weekly lab
meeting in the small library off Wilson's office. He let the colors of the
slides speak for themselves.

   Not one to pass up an opportunity for drama, he saved the exciting blue cells
for last.

   After the meeting, after Yang had stunned Wilson, the two rushed to find ways
to keep the immune system from undermining therapy. A new vector was obviously
needed - one that wouldn't stimulate the immune system. And it was clear that
the vector being used in the patients across Spruce Street must be replaced as
soon as a better one could be developed.

   Just by chance, Wilson and Yang had been experimenting with another vector,
Vector II, which had fewer functioning genes and theoretically should be slower
to stimulate the immune system. It should last longer and have fewer side
effects at higher doses.

   But all of this was theoretical. Animal studies would have to be done to
prove it.

   *

   In a little more than two years, the University of Pennsylvania has become
one of the world's biggest gene therapy research centers.

   The Institute for Human Gene Therapy started with Wilson's arrival from the
University of Michigan in March 1993, and grew from one person and no budget to
a facility with 90 scientists, 20 support personnel, 40,000 square feet of labs
and offices, and a budget of $14 million in grants and other support.

   Sixty-nine faculty from the Wistar Institute, Children's Seashore House and
Children's Hospital have signed up as members of the institute, meaning they are
or intend to become involved with gene therapy projects.

   Cystic fibrosis is only one of several diseases the institute is working on.

   Before the end of this year, human trials are to begin with gene drugs to
treat brain tumors, an unusual type of lung cancer (mesothelioma), and a fatal
genetic liver disease (ornithine-transcarbamylase deficiency).

   Wilson is extending his work on inherited forms of high cholesterol.

   Other researchers are working on hepatitis, the eye disease retinitis
pigmentosa and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Wilson also is gearing up to go after AIDS. He is hiring specialists in
infectious diseases, hematology and immunology to form the nucleus of a research
effort that will draw together AIDS experts already at Penn. He hopes to raise
$15 million, mostly in federal grants, for five years of AIDS research.

   Jokingly referred to as "Johnny Appleseed," Wilson is constantly going about
the campus spreading the seeds of gene therapy and learning whatever he can from
the many experts on campus.

   He is always pushing the boundaries of his own training.

   "To move in new directions you have to learn. You have to go this way or that
way. You can't say this is what I am so this is what it's going to be. You need
the cumulative intellectual resources of those people out there. You ask probing
questions. Tell me about this. Give me some papers. . . . You're constantly
leaping into black holes, going after conceptual challenges. . . . The key is to
ask the critical question that will help you decide if you are going in the
right direction."

   *

   Other volunteers arrived at Penn and were given the CF drug, which Wilson was
hoping to replace.

   Four of them were men: a 27-year-old man from Allentown whose sister had died
of CF; a 30-year-old from Brandamore, Pa., whose twin brother had died of CF, a
22-year-old from Elmhurst, Pa., who hoped that the trial would lead to a cure,
and a 34-year-old from Beachwood, N.J., who didn't expect to outlive his mother
but did and carries in his wallet a card that says "still alive."

   Diverse as they were, they remembered trips to doctors when they were young
and anxious parents trying to find out why they weren't thriving and why they
were having so many pulmonary problems.

   They had the same medical regimes - handfuls of pills with every meal and
daily chest poundings to rid airways of suffocating mucus. And all had assumed
they would die young, at an age most people start families.

   "No one ever expected me to get married and have three children," said an
auto supply store employee who had reached 35.

   "It was rough, really rough, it was too much," said the Allentown man,
recalling his sister's death at 9 from cystic fibrosis.

   Remembering the many times CF almost killed him, a 32-year-old man from
Prospect Park, Delaware County, said of the gene therapy experiments: "I'm very
lucky. God wants me for something, maybe this."

   It was a difficult study they had volunteered for. It required 21 days in the
hospital, many in isolation, and four suffocating bronchoscopies, each lasting
20 minutes.

   Many knew they would lose income during their hospital stays, having used up
sick leaves at work. Still they volunteered.

   "I don't look at this selfishly for myself," said the Beachwood volunteer. "I
say that if it works, those coming up behind us won't have to experience what we
went through."

   *

   The driving force behind Penn's aggressive entry into gene therapy is William
N. Kelley, dean and CEO of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.

   Kelley made it clear when he arrived six years ago that he saw this and
molecular biology as the future of medicine and was determined to make Penn a
world leader.

   He went after Jim Wilson.

   Kelley knew Wilson from when he was ambitiously pursuing M.D. and Ph.D.
programs at the same time at Michigan. Kelley had been Wilson's Ph.D. thesis
adviser.

   "What an incredible talent," Kelley says of Wilson. "He is incredibly smart.
He has tremendous insight. He has an incredible ability to think in a logical
sequence." And, says Kelley, he has an unusual ability to make things work.

   Wilson recalls the day Kelley recruited him.

   "It was Sunday morning, about 9, and Lisa and I were lounging around reading
the newspaper, when the phone rang," he said. Wilson never answers his phone at
home because he dislikes the intrusion.

   "It's Bill Kelley," his wife, Lisa, said.

   The conversation lasted only five minutes, long enough for Kelley to say that
Penn was making a major commitment to gene therapy and he wanted Wilson to lead
the effort. Kelley would give him five floors of lab space and the authority to
hire 25 science faculty.

   Wilson would be made a full professor, chairman of a department and director
of a new Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which Wilson would set up.

   At 36 and barely 3 1/2 years out of postdoctoral studies, Wilson couldn't
believe what Kelley was proposing. Hanging up, he turned to Lisa and said, "I
just got the offer of a lifetime."

   As wonderful as Kelley's proposal sounded, Wilson did not accept immediately.
Characteristically, he weighed his options and considered his goals.

   He and his wife had just built a house in Ann Arbor. His research at Michigan
was going well. His love was science, but much of his time at Penn would be
spent on administration. He didn't know if he was capable of managing such a big
operation.

   But as chairman of a department and director of an institute, he'd have
sweeping powers to move an idea swiftly from the laboratory through animal
testing to clinical trials - without the tedious delays that impede projects
passing through academic fiefdoms.

   It was very heady. Wilson was being given a chance to become a world leader
in gene therapy.

   In September, four months after Kelley's call, Wilson accepted.

   Since arriving at Penn, he's been driven. He gets up at 5 a.m., often writing
grant proposals before he leaves for work, then spends a full day in the lab,
and gets home at 7:15 p.m. He reads journals or works on grants from 7:30 to
9:30. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays he exercises at home for two hours
with a personal trainer.

   "I've never worked harder," he says. He's lost 45 pounds, down to 190 on his
six-foot, two-inch frame.

   Part of his energy and that of his staff comes from the excitement of doing
good science and possibly saving lives.

   They also are driven by their race with other laboratories for the first
significant gene therapy cure.

   *

   Slides from Wendy and a second volunteer were analyzed in December, three
months after the study began.

   As expected with such a low dose, no evidence could be found of gene
transfer.

   Two months later, lab technician Lorita Dudus was analyzing a second batch of
slides when she saw something in her microscope that amazed her. She looked at
more slides. There could be no doubt what she was seeing.

   She wanted to share her excitement, but couldn't. It was Feb. 11, 1994, the
day of a terrible ice storm, and she was alone in the lab. Wilson was at Penn
but in a meeting, and she was afraid to interrupt.

   For over an hour, Dudus waited for the meeting to end, tense but delighting
in being the only person who knew. Finally Wilson came down the hall. Dudus
called to him.

   "You've got to come here and look at this," she said, pointing toward her
microscope.

   "What are you looking at?" Wilson asked, his mind elsewhere.

   Something from a CF patient, she said. It was a microscopic slide covered
with lung cells taken from CF5, the fifth volunteer. The slide was designed to
show whether the cells had been infiltrated by the vector.

   Negative slides look like a night sky with a thousand tiny stars. On positive
slides the sky is bright with white blotches of exploding stars, supernova,
indicating the cells are making CF protein - that gene transfer has occurred.

   Still preoccupied, Wilson sat down at Dudus' microscope. She watched from the
doorway. He peered at the slide.

   Supernova.

   He asked Dudus for another slide.

   Supernova.

   He checked a third slide.

   Supernova.

   There must be a mistake, he thought. It should have taken at least 70 times
more drug than patient CF5 had gotten to produce slides like these.

   Wilson asked Dudus for the control slides, which should have no supernovas if
everything is done correctly.

   Wilson bent again to the microscope. He saw only little stars. He looked at
two more control slides. Only stars, no supernova.

   His face filled with a grin. Dudus waited. He turned to her.

   "Do you know what this means?" he said.

   "Oh, my God, yes," Dudus said. "I know."

   The patient's body was making CFTR. Because only a small segment of lung had
been treated, not enough CFTR was being produced to help the patient, but there
could be no doubt. CFTR was being made.

   Crystal got similar results with one of his patients in Manhattan.

   The treatment didn't work in the next three patients, even though they
received as much drug or more than was given to CF5.

   That didn't discourage Wilson.

   For unknown reasons, CF5 was particularly responsive to low doses of the gene
drug; the concept was valid.

   The gene therapy was working.

   *

   For seven months Yang worked to find out if Vector II was as good as it
looked theoretically.

   First he looked to see if he had stopped production of viral protein by
disabling an important gene. He had.

   He looked for lymphocytes, white blood cells that fight disease, which would
mean that the immune system was killing the infected cells. He saw none.

   He examined cells from the test animals' airways to see if they had been
damaged by an immune reaction or some other adverse response to the vector. The
cells weren't damaged.

   He checked to see if Vector II would be as effective in producing CFTR as
Vector I. It was.

   He checked to see if Vector II produced the protein for as long. Production
of CFTR didn't start to drop off until the 35th day - more than twice as long as
Vector I.

   Finally, he tested for safety. In each of four baboons, he put Vector I in
one lung and Vector II in the other.

   At high doses the lung treated with Vector I developed inflammation and
pneumonia. Those treated with Vector II did not.

   Wilson immediately stopped testing Vector I on patients, alerted Crystal and
other scientists to these findings and told Yang to get Vector II ready for
human testing.

NOTES: THE QUEST: SEEKING AN ULTIMATE CURE
First of two parts
Tomorrow: Racing to resume human trials.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;

PHOTO (7)
1. Researcher Yiping Yang made the immune-system finding that spurred a new
phase in gene-therapy research at the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at
Penn. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
2. Researcher Cynthia Robinson stands over a patient who has just undergone a
bronchoscopy. During the procedure, which has been performed on cystic
fibrosis patients, the virus-wrapped gene is delivered through a tube inserted
in the throat. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
3. James M. Wilson, head of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, left a 1989 meeting determined to
find a treatment for cystic fibrosis.
4. Ronald G. Crystal of Cornell University Medical Center received approval
in 1993 to begin human trials of a gene therapy drug. He and Wilson have been
leap-frogging in the race for a CF cure.
5. James Wilson addresses his staff at a weekly meeting. He and his research
team performed their first human trial on a cystic fibrosis patient in
September 1993.
6. Yiping Yang's slides provided a clue about why a drug sometimes stopped
working, as in the slide on the right. The slide on the left shows it kept
working.
7. Colleen Baker, manager of the Human Applications Laboratory at Penn, shows
samples from participants in the cystic fibrosis study to Alan Davis. (The
Philadelphia Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
CHART (2)
1. Attempting Gene Therapy: The Theory
2. The Immune System at Work: The Reality (SOURCE: Institute for Human Gene
Therapy; The Philadelphia Inquirer)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             210 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 19, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 2511 words

HEADLINE: High-tech firms riding investor wave;
EMERGING BUSINESS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    High technology companies continue to catch the wave of Wall Street investor
enthusiasm, while biotechnology struggles to get in the water and budding retail
chains remain stranded on the beach.

   Despite a slow start earlier this year, initial and secondary public
offerings of software, communications, electronic components and integrated
circuit-making firms have taken off.

   Wall Street analysts point to an upward shift in sales and earnings growth in
semiconductors and semiconductor equipment, software, wireless communications
equipment, distributed computer hardware and wireless communications firms.

   "We're seeing companies in industry sectors that are experiencing strong
growth rates, so other mundane or mature areas - retailing, textiles - seem less
exciting to initial public offering investors," said Forbes Tuttle, director of
research at IPO Value Monitor, a New York-based independent research firm.

   "We are also seeing a very strong after market for IPO issues as big
investors, like mutual funds and some sophisticated investors have found the
Internet, which they see as having a big future. All this is happening with an
overall economy that is cooperating," said Tuttle.

   Earlier this month, Standard & Poor's reported that while investors
nationally spent $ 10.8 billion to bring 177 companies public in the first half
of this year, the dollar volume was 50 percent below the $ 21.8 billion raised
in the first half of 1994 when 295 companies went public.

   Masking the drop in total IPOs is a more robust market for high technology
stocks, excluding biotech issues, over last year. Health care issues are also
up. Hardest hit are retail and consumer products companies, such as the Great
American Back Rub Store in New York, which experienced a 60 percent stock price
drop since its IPO.

   The lackluster demand for equities in general during the first three months
of the year was due, in part, to concern over interest rates and investor
concern about adding to their mutual fund holdings.

   In January, only eight companies went public, followed by 27 in February and
26 in March, according to Monday's S&P Emerging and Special Situations report.

   Only in the second quarter did IPOs begin to take off with 116 companies (55
of them in June alone). And for the second half of the year, 110 private
companies await Securities and Exchange Commission clearance to launch IPOs,
according to S&P.

   Another sign of the times: The average gain for all the deals that went
public in the first half of this year was 32.6 percent.

   "This is a momentum-driven market," noted Robert S. Natale, editor of S&P's
Emerging & Special Situations report.

   He warns, however, that the hot IPO market with its speculative market swings
is starting to create an environment reminiscent of the time just before the
1987 stock market crash.

   "Equity players are paying less attention to stock values versus the
historical average and more to potential stock gains over the short term while
interest rates remain low and earnings growth revives.

   "A lot of money can still be made but it will get increasingly important to
understand when the music is about to stop and the last chair is about to
disappear."

   Last year, Cascade Communications of Westford, a developer of computer
communication network switches, saw its IPO share price more than double from $
15 a share. A stock split followed last month.

   This year, the market is watching VideoServer Inc., a Lexington-based
developer of networking equipment and software, for its development of
multimedia video conferencing product. The company's shares have climbed nearly
160 percent, despite yesterday's report by a Goldman Sachs & Co. analyst that
rated the company to "moderately outperform," which was lower than expected. The
stock dropped 3 1/4 points to close at 44.

   "Our appeal is that we make the plumbing in the form of networking products,
a labor-saving technology that also improves the quality of the work being done
and there are hard and soft dollar cost justifications for our products," said
Robert L. Castle, president of the 4-year-old VideoServer.

   Originally planning to sell 2 million shares at $ 11 to $ 13 a share, the
company's underwriters, prompted by the strong market for new communications
issues, boosted the offering to $ 17 a share May 24. Since then the stock has
soared.

   VideoServer is among 14 New England companies - 12 in Massachusetts and two
in Connecticut - that went public in the first six months of this year. The
largest IPO was American Radio Systems, a Boston broadcast and media company,
that raised $ 82.5 million in its IPO early last month. The smallest was
TranSwitch, a Shelton, Conn., developer of semiconductor components that raised
$ 22.5 million.

   But not everyone is prospering.

   Young biotechnology companies, who drove the IPO market in the early 1990s,
remain out of favor with large investors, who have shifted their focus to
high-tech stocks that provide a faster return on their money.

   In the first half of this year, 16 biotech companies raised $ 274 million -
less than one-third the $ 864 million from 36 firms in the first half of last
year, according to Feinstein Partners, a Cambridge consulting and investor
relations firm that tracks the industry.

   One of those 16 firms was OraVax Inc., which is testing a treatment and an
oral vaccine to treat peptic ulcers and a nose drop medication designed to
prevent viral pneumonia in children. It recently signed a joint venture deal
with Pasteur Merieux Serums & Vaccins S.A. of France.

   The Cambridge firm is still the only New England biotech firm to launch an
IPO this year, selling 2.3 million shares at $ 10 each. Its shares, which had
dipped to around $ 7 a share, have climbed back to their $ 10 IPO price
yesterday.

   "Some people thought we were either dumb or we might lead the way," said
Robert B. Rombauer, OraVax vice president of development, sales and marketing.
"We thought we could differentiate ourselves from the usual biotech company that
is selling futuristic technology such as using gene therapy as a treatment
modality that will not come to fruition for a while."

   Nationally, 91 high-tech companies - including biotech, health care and
medical products companies - raised $ 4.37 billion, an average of $ 48 million
per IPO. The average IPO price was $ 14.29 per share in the first half of this
year, according to Technologic Partners, a New York market research firm that
tracks venture capital industry and IPOs.

   That was significantly higher than the first half of 1994, when 70 high-tech
firms raised nearly $ 2.68 billion, an average of $ 38.2 million per deal with
an average stock price of $ 12.58 per share.

   This year there were a dozen software applications companies that sold their
first public shares, raising a total of $ 550 million compared with the first
half of last year, when seven firms raised $ 170.8 million. Some analysts say
continued interest remains high because of Windows 95, the new operating system
from Microsoft due out next month.

   There were similar dollar gains for engineering and design software and
network communications software companies over last year. However, there were
fewer health care services and medical products transactions this year compared
with last year, according to Technologic Solutions.

   Of the 14 New England companies, only one, Concentra Corp., an 11-year-old
Cambridge developer of sales and engineering automation software, has
experienced a decline from its $ 12 a share IPO price to 9 1/4 yesterday, a 23
percent drop.

   "We still feel this was the right time for us to go public," said Lawrence
Rosenfeld, founder and president of Concentra.

 High technology initial public offerings in New England

   January to June 1995. Description Stock IPO Amount Date Pct. chg price price
raised of since yesterday (per share) (millions) offer offer Company/Location
ACT Manufacturing, Hudson Electronic components 16 1/4 $ 12 $ 31.2 3/30 +35.4
American Radio Systems, Boston Broadcast media 23 13 16 $ 16.50 $ 82.5 6/8 +44.3
Brooks Automation, Lowell Chip-making equipment 20 $ 8.00 $ 2.3 2/1 +150.0
Chicago Miniature Lamp, Canton Electronic components 14 $ 12.50 $ 27.5 6/15
+12.0 Concentra, CambridgeSoftware engineering & design 9 1/4 $ 12.00 $ 31.2 2/6
-23.0 CP Clare, Lexington Electronic components 23 3/8 $ 16.00 $ 50.64 6/20
+46.0 CRA Managed Care, Boston Health care services 24 $ 16.00 $ 35 5/3 +50.0
Number Nine Visual Technology, Lexington Hardware-computer systems 22 3/4 $
15.00 $ 39.75 5/25 +51.7 Open Environment, Boston Software 20 3/4 $ 15.00 $
41.25 4/13 +38.3 OraVax, Cambridge Biotechnology 10 $ 10.00 $ 23 6/8 -
Renaissance Solutions, Lincoln Computer services 15 1/4 $ 13.00 $ 29.7 4/4 +17.3
TranSwitch, Shelton, Conn.  Integrated circuits 10 5/8 $ 9.00 $ 22.5 6/13 +18.0
Uniroyal Chemical, Middlebury, Conn. Chemicals, rubber products 10 $ 12.00 $
13.35 3/20 -16.7 VideoServer, Lexington Video conferencing 44 $ 17.00 $ 44.62
5/24 +158.8 SOURCE: Technologic Partners, New York and Renaissance Capital,
Greenwich, Conn.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART, 1. LAWRENCE ROSENFELD / Right time to go public 2. GLOBE
STAFF CHART

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1995


                             211 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    July 19, 1995, Wednesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business briefs; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs

BYLINE: Staff, wire reports

BODY:

   Report on Enron deal

    BOMBAY, India - An Indian state government, threatening to
cancel a $ 920 million power contract awarded to Houston-based
Enron Corp., received its review committee's report amid
speculation it recommends scrapping the project.

   Gopinath Munde, deputy chief minister of the western state of
Maharashtra and chairman of the committee, presented his
report to the state's chief minister but refused to say what
the committee recommended.

   In Houston, a spokeswoman for Enron said the company hasn't
seen the report and can't comment on its contents.

   HMO proposals

   AUSTIN - Gov. George W. Bush and Insurance Commissioner Elton
Bomer announced proposals Tuesday that they said will protect
doctors and patients at a time when health insurance is
changing to try to contain costs.

   The proposed rules apply to managed care programs.  They
include requirements that basic information be made available
to people shopping for managed-care plans, emergency medical
treatment be paid for at least until a patient's condition is
stable and that doctors be given a written reason if they are
being kicked out of a plan network.

   The proposed rules are subject to a 30-day public comment
period and will be discussed in a public hearing, Bomer said.

   Final rules should be in place within 90 days, he said.

   Survey finds lending bias

   WASHINGTON - Mortgage lenders still reject black applicants
more than twice as often as whites with similar incomes,
though minorities are being helped by low-income home-loan
programs, a government report said Tuesday.

   A survey by five federal regulatory agencies said that banks,
savings institutions and credit unions last year turned down
33.4 percent of mortgage applications received from blacks,
31.6 percent from American Indians, 24.6 percent from
Hispanics, 16.4 percent from whites and 12 percent from
Asians.

   ""The extent to which racial discrimination may account for
these differences is not known,'' said the Federal Financial
Institutions Examination Council.

   GeneMedicine venture

   GeneMedicine, a Woodlands-based biotech firm, has reached a
multiyear deal with Bermuda-based Corange International to
develop gene therapy products to treat cancer.

   Under terms of the pact, Corange initially could pay up to $ 25
million for research and development at GeneMedicine.  In
addition, Corange will make a $ 20 million equity investment in
GeneMedicine.

   Venture restructuring

   Venture Stores plans to revamp its stores to become a
""value-priced'' retailer of family apparel, home and leisure
products.  The stores will carry fewer types of merchandise,
but will improve assortments for the goods they carry.

   The restructuring will include 950 job cuts, the closing of
three stores and a significant slowdown of future expansion.

   The company has 12 Houston stores, none of which are slated to
be closed.


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1995


                             212 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 18, 1995 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 10E

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: ENZYME MAY BE A KEY TO HAIR LOSS

BYLINE: JOE GRAEDON and TERESA GRAEDON

BODY:

   It's amazing what people will do to grow hair on balding heads. Horse manure,
horseradish and pigeon droppings are just a few of the unlikely concoctions
desperate men have tried. Cleopatra reportedly rubbed Caesar's scalp with bear
grease mixed with deer marrow, horse teeth and burned mice.

   Dermatologists once believed that male-pattern baldness was hereditary and
irreversible. The Food and Drug Administration considered baldness remedies
bogus.

   But Rogaine (minoxidil) changed that. For the first time, scientific studies
proved it possible to stimulate hair growth.

   On the downside, Rogaine is expensive (up to $700 a year) and the results are
temporary. When Rogaine is stopped, new hair falls out.

   Now researchers are focusing on an enzyme that may play a key role in the
development of baldness. Certain men in the Dominican Republic almost never lose
their hair. The reason is thought to be a lack of dihydrotestosterone (DHT), an
end product of the male hormone testosterone.

   Blocking the enzyme that converts testosterone to DHT offers a new approach
to preventing male-pattern hair loss. Proscar (finasteride), a drug designed to
shrink enlarged prostate glands, may have as a secondary benefit the ability to
battle baldness.

   Merck, developer of Proscar, is completing tests to see how well this oral
medication will work. Preliminary reports are encouraging. One spokesman says
the response rate is 60 percent, potentially better than that seen with Rogaine.

   Proscar has a few unwelcome side effects. A small percentage of men complain
that impotence and decreased sex drive are bothersome. Whether that will
discourage desperate men who are afraid their receding hairline will diminish
their sex appeal remains to be seen.

   Perhaps one of the more exciting developments for the future in the quest for
more luxuriant locks is gene therapy. Scientists have discovered a way to get
hair follicles to incorporate melanin, the pigment that makes hair dark. This
has produced dark hair on white mice. If these researchers could identify the
gene that controls baldness, they might be able to correct the defect with a
topical preparation that penetrates follicles.

   Until then, one way people may counteract premature hair loss is to be aware
of drugs that might accelerate this condition. A surprising number of medicines
can sometimes contribute to thinning, including the allergy medicine Seldane,
blood pressure pills such as Calan, Corgard, Inderal, Lopressor and Vasotec, and
rarely with ulcer drugs such as Pepcid, Tagamet and Zantac.

   Establishing causes and creating cures for hair loss is complicated. But
research now offers new hope for the hairless.

   Q. I have noticed that over the past several years my eyebrows have thinned
considerably. The outer part is nearly gone. Would Rogaine work on the eyebrows?

   A. Before you try Rogaine, check with a doctor. You may need a thyroid test.
Loss of the outer third of the eyebrow may indicate hypothyroidism.

COLUMN: PEOPLE'S PHARMACY

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995


                             213 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 17, 1995, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Gene tool may offer answer to hair loss;
Scientists can fire "bullets' at follicles

BYLINE: TIM HILCHEY; New York Times

BODY:

   In a promising step in studies of hair growth, researchers at
a biotechnology company in California have found a way to fire
genetic ""bullets'' at hair follicles, the tiny hair-making
factories in the skin.

   ""We think this delivery system opens the whole hair-loss
field to the possibility of gene therapy,'' said Dr. Robert M.
Hoffman, the founder and president of Anticancer Inc., a
biotechnology company in San Diego.  He and the company's senior
scientist, Dr. Lingna Li, reported their findings in the July issue
of the journal Nature Medicine.

   But another expert in the field cautioned that the results in
laboratory experiments might not carry over to human tissue.

   The researchers encased marker genes in liposomes --
microscopic man-made spheres of fatty material.  Three days after
spreading the liposomes on the skin of shaved laboratory mice, the
researchers found that the genes had been deposited in the cells of
the hair follicles.

   ""We have an enemy, hair follicle disease, and Dr. Hoffman
has invented a gun with which to fight that enemy,'' said Dr.
Leonid B. Margolis, an expert on liposomes who is a visiting
researcher at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   ""He has demonstrated that the gun works by firing blanks at the
hair follicles.  What remains for us to do is to develop the
ammunition that will make the gun useful in the fight against hair
loss. ''

   Hoffman said that the liposome delivery system grew out of
unrelated research on cancer cells that were being grown on
sponge-gel matrices in his laboratory.  ""We asked ourselves whether
we could grow normal human skin on these gel matrices,'' Hoffman
said, ""and when we tried, we found that the skin growing in
culture produced hair.  This was a big breakthrough. ''

   The ability to grow hair-bearing skin in the lab provided the
researchers with a means for screening ""molecules that could
modify hair growth,'' he said.

   ""Almost as an aside, we asked what happens if you put
liposomes on the skin cells,'' he said.  ""So we put a fluorescent
dye inside liposomes and applied them.  To our great surprise we
found that the liposomes were selectively delivering their cargoes
to the hair follicles, almost to the exclusion of all the other
cells in the skin. ''

   The researchers then found that they could use liposomes to
deposit melanin, a pigment that occurs naturally in animal tissue,
inside follicles and ""color hair from the roots up. '' The next
step was to test whether the liposome delivery system could be used
for gene therapy.

   First in laboratory tissue cultures and then in shaved mice,
the researchers demonstrated that liposomes containing the
so-called lacZ gene deposited the gene in the hair follicles near
the base of the hair shaft.  Without a liposome jacket, lacZ genes
applied to skin tissue did not appear in the follicles.

   The lacZ gene was chosen because it produces galactosidase,
an enzyme that is easy to detect in tissue because it turns blue
when treated with the proper chemicals.

   Dr. Gerald G. Krueger, a dermatologist at the University of
Utah Health Sciences Center in Salt Lake City, said his research
team has performed similar experiments ""and we've been pleasantly
surprised at what can be done with liposomes via the hair
follicle. ''

   But Krueger cautioned that extensive research has shown that
mouse skin tissue appears to absorb chemicals more readily than
does human tissue, so what works for one may not work for the other.

   Products based on liposomes could be in use within 10 years,
Hoffman predicted.  The first products would most likely be used to
restore color to gray hair by delivering pigments to the hair
follicles.

   He said his lab is also making progress using liposomes
containing drugs to prevent hair loss caused by cancer chemotherapy.

   Liposome-based gene and drug therapies for the 80 million
American men and women who have hereditary alopecia, the most
common kind of baldness, will probably take more time to develop,
partly because scientists do not understand what makes hair
follicles tick.


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1995


                             214 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      July 17, 1995, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

HEADLINE: A HEALTHY DOSE OF COMPASSION;
MEDICINE: DOCTOR WHO TRIUMPHED OVER POLIO IS WORKING ON AN EXPERIMENT AIMED AT
HALTING GROWTH OF THE AIDS VIRUS. PATIENTS SAY HE HAS A UNIQUE UNDERSTANDING OF
THEIR PLIGHT.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ARKUSH, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Dr. Jeff Galpin is an expert on epidemics. He almost died in one.

   And now he's out to save people from another.

   It was the early 1950s, the disease was polio, and Galpin's doctor warned
that he might not make it to the next morning. But Galpin has seen a lot of
sunrises since then. And now he'd like to see the sun set on AIDS.

   Today, Galpin is a field investigator for a federally approved experiment
aimed at interrupting the growth of the deadly virus. He believes a cure is
possible; in his unexpected life, everything else has been possible.

   This epidemic isn't much different from the one that attacked Galpin. He too
learned to live like a pariah. The paranoia over polio was so deep that in the
hospital, his toys were burned for fear of contamination.

   Galpin says his struggle gave him empathy, and his patients believe him.

   "He understands what it is to be different," says Michael O'Keefe, a Palm
Desert resident who was diagnosed as HIV-positive nine years ago. "A lot of
doctors, especially AIDS doctors, are not concerned about the person. He cares
how I feel. He's compassionate."

   Or as John Booker, another HIV patient, says: "You know that he knows you
don't feel good. He's gone through the same thing. I had a flare-up with my
sinuses lately, and he had the same thing. It's comforting to know your doctor
understands."

   Every few weeks, in his Tarzana office, Galpin metes out shots to a pool of
27 volunteers. The genes are culled from an HIV strain at the lab of Viagene, a
San Diego biotechnology firm, whose gene therapy program is based on the idea
that an AIDS patient's immune system can be reactivated and even strengthened
with an injection of the virus' own genetic material.

   Galpin doesn't treat his patients differently because they are living on
borrowed time. All of us, he says, are living on borrowed time.

   And he believes a lot of doctors become too protective. "They maximize the
disease instead of minimizing it," he says. "They create the worst possible
scenario. I want people to be in control, to understand that life goes on, that
they should do as much, or more. They should look into a future even if there is
no future."

   He is optimistic without being a Pollyanna. "I may not save them, but I'll
help them die better, or live better, and that's important."

   The effects of Galpin's own encounter with an epidemic are evident. He uses
crutches to get around the office. When he's not working out, his body becomes
especially vulnerable to injury. Pain is a frequent companion.

   He's not worried about dying, but he is scared to death of growing more frail
than he already is. He just turned 50, and sometimes feels like 100. He falls
often and has broken many bones. When he gets sick, he becomes concerned about
his breathing, which isn't very smooth to begin with.

   "My biggest fear has always been that I would become dependent on other
people," Galpin says. "Could I remain my own person? The fears I have now are
that I'm having such a good time, I'd hate to be more immobilized. I have too
much to do. I have lots of things to do before I'm finished."

   Pain, for him, is "my Olympics," another game to conquer, another opportunity
to prove that his mind remains more powerful than his body. "In being weaker
physically," he says, "I have to prove I'm tougher mentally. That doesn't make
it right. It's not what I recommend to my patients."

   As an 8-year-old in Chicago, he became a prisoner of polio and realized he
would never play for the Cubs. That left him two choices: surrender or survival.

   He chose survival. He went about it by erecting a fantasy world that couldn't
be compromised by physical limitations. His body was a bust, but his mind burst
with activity.

   "I could escape into some other place," Galpin says. "I made my rocking bed
into a roller-coaster, my iron lung into a rocket ship, and it all didn't seem
as scary that way."

   He always came back to the real world, though, spending years in rehab to
give him as much mobility as possible. He decided he would have a normal life,
and that included sports.

   Wheelchair basketball, wheelchair football, wheelchair anything -- Galpin was
game. If he couldn't be a Cub, then he'd be a stud among his peers, whoever they
were. He won all kinds of titles at the University of Illinois, but his greatest
athletic achievement was winning a table-tennis tournament against people with
no disabilities.

   "The other stuff was great, but it wasn't like beating the normal kids," he
says.

   He became such a jock, in fact, that he was put on academic probation for a
semester.

   Then he decided he'd go to medical school.

   "No one thought I was in the right mind," recalls Galpin. "They had never
accepted a severely handicapped medical student in the Big 10."

   These days, he lives with his second wife and their 2-year-old son in a big
house in exclusive Hidden Hills. "I wouldn't give it all up to start over
again," Galpin says. "I've been very lucky to get to where I am."

   When he isn't working, he knows how to play. He goes to countless Dodgers and
Kings games.

   He also likes to write. Among his finished projects are a science fiction
novel and a semi-autobiographical project. But mostly, Galpin is a detective
tracking down a killer. Jeff Galpin the doctor is determined to do what Jeff
Galpin the child couldn't. He was helpless then. He's not now.

   "Now I have the tools to play the game."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Dr. Jeff Galpin works with patient John Casey at medical
clinic in Tarzana.  DAVID BLUMENKRANTZ / Los Angeles Times; Photo, COLOR, 'I
want people to be in control, to understand that life goes on, that they should
do as much, or more. They should look into a future even if there is no future.'
-- DR. JEFF GALPIN DAVID BLUMENKRANTZ / Los Angeles Times; Photo, (A2) SURVIVOR:
Dr. Jeff Galpin survived the polio epidemic of the '50s and now works as a field
investigator studying the AIDS virus.  DAVID BLUMENKRANTZ / For The Times

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1995


                             215 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     July 17, 1995, Monday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1

LENGTH: 1109 words

HEADLINE: A SPECIALIST IN BEATING THE ODDS;
HEALTH: AS A CHILD, JEFF GALPIN HAD A BOUT WITH POLIO, AND STILL BATTLES ITS
EFFECTS. NOW, AS A DOCTOR, HE'S FIGHTING THE KILLER HAUNTING THIS GENERATION:
AIDS.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ARKUSH, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: TARZANA

BODY:

   Dr. Jeff Galpin is an expert on epidemics. He almost died from one, and now
he's out to save people from another.

   It was the early 1950s, the disease was polio and Galpin's doctor warned that
he might not make it to the next morning. But Galpin has seen a lot of sunrises
since then, and he'd like to see the sun set on AIDS.

   Today, Galpin is a paid field investigator for a federally approved
experiment aimed at interrupting the growth of the deadly virus. He believes an
eventual cure is possible. He should believe it. Everything else has been
possible in his life.

   Sponsored by Viagene, a San Diego biotechnology firm, the gene therapy
program is based on the idea that an AIDS patient's immune system can be
reactivated and actually strengthened if he or she is injected with the virus's
own genetic material.

   The genes are culled from an HIV strain at Viagene's labs, and every few
weeks, internist Galpin metes out the would-be booster shots in his Tarzana
office to a pool of 27 volunteers. If Viagene's theory works, patients' bodies
will be given more ammunition, or killer cells, to track down infected cells.

   The first phase of the study, Galpin says, took more than a year and
determined that the procedure is safe -- no patients suffered side effects.

   Now it is time to see if the treatment can prolong their lives, though Galpin
still isn't rushing things.

   "Up till now, no genetically engineered material has been allowed into the
body," he says. "That is why the amount of safety precautions, blood work and
test work on each patient is enormous." The FDA, he said, has allowed Viagene to
test the procedure for research, though approval for commercial use could be
years away.

   This generation's epidemic isn't much different from the one that attacked
Galpin. He, too, learned to live like a pariah. The paranoia over polio, in
fact, was so extensive that his toys in the hospital were burned for fear of
contamination.

   Galpin says his struggle gave him empathy, and his patients believe him.

   "He understands what it is to be different," says Michael O'Keefe, a Palm
Desert resident who was found to be HIV-positive nine years ago. "A lot of
doctors, especially AIDS doctors, are not concerned about the person. He cares
how I feel. He's compassionate."

   Or as John Booker, another HIV patient, says: "You know that he knows you
don't feel good. He's gone through the same thing. I had a flare-up with my
sinuses lately, and he had the same thing. It's comforting to know your doctor
understands."

   Galpin doesn't talk down to his patients. He doesn't treat them differently
because they are living on borrowed time. He says we're all living on borrowed
time.

   He believes a lot of doctors become too protective. "They maximize the
disease instead of minimizing it," he says. "They create the worst possible
scenario. I want people to be in control, to understand that life goes on, that
they should do as much, or more. They should look into a future even if there is
no future."

   He is positive, yet no Pollyanna. "I may not save them, but I'll help them
die better, or live better, and that's important."

   Even today, the effects of Galpin's battle with polio are evident. He uses
crutches to get around the office. His body, especially when he's not working
out, becomes particularly vulnerable to injury. Although he has been spared the
debilitating post-polio syndrome now surfacing in many survivors, pain is a
frequent companion.

   He's not worried about dying, but he is scared to death of growing more frail
than he already is.

   Galpin just turned 50, and sometimes feels like 100. He falls often and has
broken many bones. When he gets sick, he becomes concerned about his breathing,
which isn't very smooth to begin with.

   "My biggest fear has always been that I would become dependent on other
people," Galpin says. "Could I remain my own person? The fears I have now are
that I'm having such a good time, I'd hate to be more immobilized. I have too
much to do. I have lots of things to do before I'm finished."

   Pain, for him, is "my Olympics," another game to conquer, another opportunity
to prove that his fertile mind remains more powerful than his flawed body. "In
being weaker physically," he says, "I have to prove I'm tougher mentally. That
doesn't make it right. It's not what I recommend to my patients."

   When, as an 8-year-old growing up on the North Side of Chicago, he became a
prisoner of polio and realized he would never play baseball for the Cubs, Galpin
had two choices: surrender or survival.

   He chose survival. He went about it by erecting a fantasy world that couldn't
be compromised by physical limitations. His body was a bust, but his mind burst
with activity.

   "I could escape into some other place," Galpin says. "I made my rocking bed
into a roller coaster, my iron lung into a rocket ship, and it all didn't seem
as scary that way."

   He always came back to the real world though, spending years in rehab to give
him as much mobility as possible. He decided he would have a normal life, and
that included sports.

   Wheelchair basketball, wheelchair football, wheelchair anything -- Galpin was
game. If he couldn't be a Cub, then he'd be a stud among his peers, whoever they
were. He won all kinds of titles at the University of Illinois, but his greatest
athletic achievement was winning a table tennis tournament against people with
no disabilities.

   "The other stuff was great, but it wasn't like beating the normal kids," he
says.

   He became such a jock, in fact, that he was put on academic probation for a
semester.

   Then he decided he'd go to medical school.

   "No one thought I was in the right mind," Galpin recalls. "They had never
accepted a severely handicapped medical student in the Big Ten."

   These days, his life is as normal as he could have ever expected. He lives
with his second wife and their 2-year-old son in a big house in exclusive Hidden
Hills.

   "I wouldn't give it all up to start over again," Galpin says. "I've been very
lucky to get to where I am."

   When he isn't working, he knows how to play. He goes to countless Dodgers and
Kings games.

   He also likes to write. Among his finished projects are a science fiction
novel and a semi-autobiographical project. Neither has been published, but he
isn't giving up. No big surprise, huh?

   But most of all, Galpin is a detective tracking down a killer, and it's not
just because it's his job. It's no accident he went into immunology.

   Jeff Galpin, the doctor, is determined to do what Jeff Galpin, the child,
couldn't. He was helpless then. He's not helpless now.

   "Now I have the tools to play the game."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1995


                             216 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 17, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg.  F01

LENGTH: 1409 words

HEADLINE: A Technological Breakthrough; Innovative Work of Fledgling Start-Up
Firms Ups the Ante for Venture Capital Investments

BYLINE: Peter Behr, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Ken Wilcox, an executive of California's Silicon Valley Bank, has had his eye
on the Washington region for three years. He's been watching the progress of the
area's start-up technology firms the way a baseball scout checks his hot
prospects in the minors.

   Now Wilcox said he is ready to make his move. Later this year he will open a
Washington area branch of his bank, which lends to high-risk, high-potential
technology firms shunned by most conventional bankers.

   "We saw there was a huge opportunity" in the Washington area, said Wilcox,
who heads the bank's East Coast division from Wellesley, Mass.

   The flow of capital to Washington area technology firms is expanding in other
ways, too. It marks a coming of age for the region, which has long been
dismissed by outside investors as an entrepreneurial backwater because of the
insular, specialized Washington area government contractors that dominated the
business scene.

   Drawn by recent commercial success stories, such as America Online Inc., the
computer on-line company in Vienna, venture capital funds from outside the
region are beginning to invest more money in this area.

   The funds, a critical source of growth capital for entrepreneurs, make
strategic investments in start-up companies in exchange for a sizable stake of
ownership. Between 1992 and 1994, venture firms raised more than $ 500 million
for 92 companies in the region encompassing the District, Northern Virginia,
suburban Maryland and Baltimore, according to VentureOne Corp., a San Francisco
research firm.

   In just the first three months of 1995, $ 89.6 million in venture funds was
invested here.

   Area firms specializing in telecommunications, biotechnology, medical devices
and computer software got most of the money.

   "All that research and technology, all the intelligence and talent those
companies have attracted is starting to get attention," said Thomas Smith, who
heads the Washington office for the New Jersey-based Edison Venture Fund.

   Venture fund investment here is still peanuts compared with the $ 1.9 billion
raised last year for California companies. And while venture funds take care of
one segment of companies -- the mid-size firms with proven products or services
-- they aren't interested in small companies still trying to perfect their
inventions.

   "There's a tremendous shortage of early-stage capital and it's stunting the
growth of [local] companies," said securities attorney John S. Stoppelman in
Arlington.

   But while venture capital managers acknowledge these drawbacks, they say they
like a lot of what they see here.

   The Washington-Baltimore area is home to three of the most important new
technologies of the 1990s, said Charles Newhall, general partner of New
Enterprise Associates, a venture capital firm based in Baltimore that has
invested about $ 750 million in start-up companies since 1978, mostly outside
the region.

   One is information networking services, led by America Online and neighboring
firms. The second is the development of medicines and therapies derived from the
exploration of human genes. Two area firms are leading this search -- Human
Genome Sciences Inc. in Rockville and Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg.

   The third hot area is "subacute" medical care for patients who don't require
more costly hospitalization, pioneered by Integrated Health Services Inc. in
Owings Mills.

   "We've gone from nowhere to being a major factor" in some key new
technologies, Newhall said.

   The money is increasing because the opportunities for venture capitalists are
better and more numerous, said Edward H. Bersoff, chief executive of BTG Inc. in
Vienna, a developer of computer systems and software for government and
commercial clients.

   "The fact is that our business foundation is changing and evolving," Bersoff
said.

   Representatives of investment funds from Japan, the Persian Gulf and
Switzerland are examining the region's companies more closely, said William H.
Washecka, director of a Northern Virginia high-tech services group at the
accounting firm Ernst & Young.

   Last month venture fund managers looked over a new batch of prospects at a
"beauty contest" in McLean, where entrepreneurs from about 30 start-up companies
told their stories to a roomful of investors and advisers.

   The sponsors included a cross section of the area's financial support system
for entrepreneurs: Alex Brown & Sons Inc., a Baltimore investment banking firm;
Allied Capital Corp., a group of District-based investment funds; Calvert Social
Venture Partners, a Bethesda fund that supports young, "socially responsible"
companies; Ernst & Young; the Edison Venture Fund; the Pittsburgh-based CEO
Venture Fund; and technology councils from Northern Virginia and suburban
Maryland.

   They heard from entrepreneurs such as Day Shelmire and Fred Bennett, who have
a system that uses satellite technology to map exact locations of telephone
poles, guard rails and other highway features, which would be very helpful to
utility companies and highway departments.

   "Bell Atlantic has half a million telephone poles in West Virginia, but it
can't tell you where they are," said Shelmire, whose Herndon-based company is
called Global Vision Inc.

   With their process, a phone company technician could drive down a road,
recording pole locations on videotape and precisely fixing the geographic
position through satellite signals, he said.

   Former NASA consultants, Shelmire and Bennett have licensed and adapted space
technology for this earthly application and hope to raise $ 350,000 to expand
their system.

   Linda C. Ambrus heads Hemex Inc., a new Springfield company formed to
commercialize a patented device used to remove lead and other toxic materials
from the blood. It needs $ 5 million to begin production.

   That's a big step for Ambrus, who got $ 200,000 in seed money from friends
and a venture fund backer five years ago that enabled her to open her Pies on
the Run store in Fairfax, which sells fresh dinner and dessert pies to commuters
too busy to cook.

   Greenbelt entrepreneurs Nader Modanlo and Michael Ahan, founders of Final
Analysis Inc., have designed a low-earth orbiting satellite and launched their
first model in January using a Russian rocket.

   Once a network of such satellites is in orbit, a host of commercial uses
would exist -- the location of trucks or ships equipped with transmitters could
be monitored regularly, for instance. But other, much larger companies also hope
to build low-earth satellite systems and Modanlo wants to move quickly. "We have
a lot of risk. That's what innovation is about," he said.

   Each of the entrepreneurs said they were encouraged by venture capitalists in
the audience. "The conference provided an opportunity to network in one day with
scores of people," Shelmire said. "To do that by ourselves might take months. We
have a couple of hot leads we're following up."

   The reality is, for each prospect that gets venture capital funding, 99 do
not.

   But hit or miss, the region's economy will be increasingly dependent upon the
expansion of start-up companies, Newhall said.

   Over the past decade, venture capital funds in the mid-Atlantic region have
invested in more than 50 small and mid-size Maryland companies, he said. Today,
the successful companies on that list have more than $ 2 billion in annual
revenue. At a time when big companies are cutting jobs, these companies have
created more than 30,000 jobs, he said.

   "The thing that hurts us is, we don't look at ourselves as a region," Newhall
said.

   The high-tech areas of Northern Virginia, Route 270 in Maryland and Baltimore
are no farther apart than the technology centers of the Boston area. But
Virginia and Maryland insist on playing rivals, he said, diluting the region's
national impact.

   Although his venture capital firm has many clients in Gaithersburg and
Rockville, it's not always welcomed in Montgomery County because it is based in
Baltimore, he said.

   "It would be nice if it were just one state," said Wilcox of Silcon Valley
Bank, which has not decided where it will set up its new branch.

   "We get wooed by Virginia and Maryland to the point where it's almost
embarrassing," he said. "We appreciate the attention, but it really doesn't make
much difference from a business basis. In the end, regardless of where we plop
down, we're going to do our best to be involved in both states." *


GRAPHIC: Illustration, jodi schneider; Photo, joel richardson;ph,,james m.
thresher; Chart, john foster jr., Entrepreneurs Day Shelmire, left, and Fred
Bennett of Global Vision Inc. in Herndon created a system to map highway
features using satellite technology.  Nader Modanlo, co-founder of Final
Analysis Inc. in Greenbelt, displays a model of his company's satellite.
Charles Newhall, New Enterprise Associates, a Baltimore venture capital firm. It
has invested about $750 million in start-up companies nationwiiide since 1978.
Thomas Smith, the Edison Venture Fund, which has raised $160 million for
start-up firms nationally since 1986.  VENTURE CAPITAL IN THE WASHINGTON AREA:
Investments in area companies by venture capital firms (This chart was not
available) Investments in area firms by industry (amounts raised since 1993)
High Tech: $17% Biotech: 14% Retail: 9% Medical: 20% Communications: 33% Other:
7%

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             217 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 17, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg.  F27

LENGTH: 1329 words

HEADLINE: Wall Street's Spotlight Shines on Biotech Firms

BYLINE: Stan Hinden , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   The big news in the Washington area biotech community last week was the offer
by Sandoz AG, the giant Swiss pharmaceutical and health care company, to pay $
21 a share for Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg.

   The $ 295 million buyout was seen by industry analysts as the latest in a
series of strategic and financial alliances that are enabling small biotech
firms with cutting-edge technology to pursue their scientific goals.

   But the Genetic Therapy deal wasn't the only interesting action in the
Washington biotech community last week. On Friday, the stock of Human Genome
Sciences Inc. of Rockville suddenly took flight. It climbed $ 3 a share and
closed at $ 26.25 in heavy trading on the Nasdaq stock market. For the week,
Human Genome stock was up $ 5 or 23.5 percent.

   Looking back over recent trading in Human Genome shares reveals an
interesting pattern. The stock had been just meandering along for months in the
range of $ 12 to $ 15. But at the beginning of June it moved into the $ 16-to-$
17 area and stayed there for a while. The stock closed at $ 16.75 a share on
June 30.

   The buying pressure, however, did not go away. In fact, the stock began a new
rally. And within the past two weeks, Human Genome stock has gone up $ 9.50 a
share -- for a gain of 56.7 percent.

   I called the company's chairman, William A. Haseltine, to ask about the
surging stock price, but he said it was his company's policy not to comment on
stock movements.

   Some interesting events at Human Genome Sciences recently may account, in
part, for some of the feverish buying. One significant development occurred on
June 8 when Reliance Financial Services Corp. of New York announced it had
bought a 6.1 percent stake in Human Genome Sciences for "investment purposes."

   Reliance is a unit of Reliance Group Holdings, an insurance company run by
brothers Saul and Robert Steinberg. Those kinds of "investments" tend to attract
attention on Wall Street.

   Reliance said that from April 6 to June 7 it bought 796,000 shares of Human
Genome at $ 11.50 to $ 17.25 a share. That purchase boosted Reliance's total
holdings to 901,000 shares. And, of course, it is possible that the Steinbergs
are still buying. Their investment was revealed in a filing with the Securities
and Exchange Commission.

   Human Genome Sciences, which is less than three years old, describes itself
as a company that "develops products to predict, prevent, detect, treat and cure
dis ease based on its leadership in the discovery and understanding of human
genes." Scientists believe that by knowing the codes of human genes, they can
develop treatments for inherited genetic defects and a wide variety of diseases.

   Human Genome collaborates with SmithKline Beecham PLC, the British
pharmaceutical firm, which had paid Human Genome a total of $ 63 million in fees
as of Dec. 31, 1994.

   One other recent and significant event was the June 23 announcement of a
formal agreement between Human Genome and Takeda Chemical Industries Ltd. of
Japan. The pact granted Takeda the right to license a number of future Human
Genome products for development and sale in Japan.

   There also was a companion agreement between Takeda and SmithKline Beecham,
which gives Takeda access to SmithKline's gene database. And that includes data
acquired through Human Genome Sciences and its ally, the Institute for Genomic
Research.

   At a biotech forum in Gaithersburg last week, sponsored by Koonce Securities
Inc., Haseltine said his company's goal is to use its expertise in gene
discovery to develop proprietary pharmaceutical products and to eventually build
a fully integrated pharmaceutical company.

   Some of the investors at the meeting must have liked what they heard.

   Citizens Bancorp's Bullishness

   In the world of banking, the next best thing to being acquired by a bigger
bank is for investors to think you are going to be acquired. It does wonders for
your stock.

   That seems to be the case with Citizens Bancorp of Laurel, which has branches
in Maryland, Virginia and the District. Every once in a while, the bank's shares
go for a real ride. That happened again Friday on the heels of a strong
financial report -- which showed Citizen's net profit and earnings per share
both up more than 11 percent for the second quarter, which ended June 30.

   Citizens shares closed Friday in heavy Nasdaq trading at $ 33, a one-day gain
of $ 1.75. For the week, the stock rose $ 3, or 10 percent.

   The buying attracted considerable attention in the investment community and
created lots of speculation about who might want to buy Citizens. The
speculation is not unwarranted given the number of big bank mergers that have
been occurring almost every week. Nevertheless, a spokesman for the bank said
there was nothing going on.

   One knowledgeable observer of the Washington bank scene suggested that a
merger deal with Citizens would require a price of about $ 43 a share -- the
figure is about two times the bank's book value, or intrinsic value. The deal
also would require a stock swap in order to avoid taxes. And it would have to be
a deal with a prominent bank, so that the owners of Citizens could feel the
stock they got in return would hold its value and increase over the years.

   In other words, the folks at Citizens, if they were ever to agree to a
buyout, would be rather fussy about the terms of the deal.

   Admittedly that is all speculation. But when investors get together these
days, that's the way the talk goes.

   Transaction Network's Upswing

   The breezes were cool at the Wheat First Butcher Singer investor conference
in Nantucket last week -- but the news from John J. McDonnell Jr., president of
Transaction Network Services Inc., was hot. Based on preliminary figures, he
said, the company's second-quarter profit would exceed the Wall Street consensus
estimate of 13 cents a share. The reason: The company's business is booming.

   McDonnell didn't say exactly how much better the profit would be -- he didn't
have to. Analysts went to the phones, called their offices and said, "Buy."

   And buy they did. Transaction Network shares closed Friday at $ 22.56, for a
one-week gain of $ 6.56, or 41 percent. The firm went public at $ 10 a share in
April 1994.

   Transaction Network, which trades on the Nasdaq stock market, has its
headquarters in Herndon. The company provides the communications links that
carry data from credit cards, debit cards and checks to processing centers for
confirmation and validation.

   The rise in the stock was aided by yet another favorable announcement: The
company had extended its network services contracts with two of its largest
customers, First Data Corp. and MasterCard International Inc.

   American Safety Razor Nicked

   Lest you think all our stocks went up last week -- well, they didn't. The
folks at American Safety Razor Co., in Verona, Va., shaved their profit
estimates for the second quarter on Friday and their stock was quickly trimmed
as well.

   The shares lost $ 1.87 1/2 to close Friday at $ 10 in heavy Nasdaq trading.
That was about equal to its low for the year. The stock had been as high as $
14.50 last fall.

   The company, which makes shaving blades and razors, cotton swabs and cotton
balls, soap bars and other products, said it expects second-quarter sales to
reach $ 58 million, up from $ 47 million a year ago. But higher costs and the
settlement of a lawsuit will eat into its profits.

   These higher costs include expenses involving American Safety's recent
purchases of Megas Beauty Care Inc. and Absorbent Cotton Co. The company also
blamed higher interest rates and higher raw material costs for the earnings
decline.

   The company said it expected to earn about 19 cents to 21 cents a share,
before the charge of 5 cents related to the lawsuit. It had earned 27 cents a
year ago. And Wall Street analysts had expected the firm to earn 32 cents for
the quarter ending June 30.

   No such luck.  *

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             218 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      July 16, 1995, Sunday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS, Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 1393 words

HEADLINE: THE COMING MILLENIUM;
COUNTDOWN TO THE YEAR 2000;
Watch that odometer! It's not just another year; it's a milestone.;
Experts expect a rise in angst, doomsday cults . . . and spirituality.

BYLINE: Bill Hendrick; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Math never was one of George Marlow's best subjects, but he can tell you in a
flash how old he'll be when the ball drops in Times Square on New Year's Eve
1999, ringing in the year 2000. Fifty-one.

So can civil rights leader Hosea Williams. He'll be 73.

   "New Year's Eve 1999 will be a milestone we'll always remember," Marlow says,
"like that day in '63 in 10th-grade English when a trembling voice on the
intercom said President Kennedy had been shot. Like when I got my draft notice
in '68.

   "Like the night before I left for 'Nam, the radio was on about men going to
the moon and I was out in the yard with a friend, Bob Dendy. It was a great
thing, but I had tears in my eyes. I was on my way to war, and other guys were
on their way to the moon."

   Williams also expects a memorable 2000 - as vivid as March 18, 1945, when he
was shot by a German soldier. Or the night of April 4, 1968, when Martin Luther
King Jr. was murdered just a few feet away in Memphis.

   "I was in Room 102, and his was 202," Williams says. "The limo driver was
named Jones. Martin's last words were, 'Jonesey, I'll get my topcoat,' and the
bullet was fired."

   No matter when you were born, odds are you know how old you'll be in the year
2000 - just 1,629 days away and counting. There's something weird, even
mystical, about such milestones. Most are intensely personal. A few, like the
murders of Kennedy and King and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, are seared
into the collective memory, as scholars say the year 2000 will be.

Why?

   Why will what's really just another new year take on added significance,
making us remember what we were doing, where we were, with whom, maybe even what
we were thinking in the first few seconds of the year?

Talk about your even numbers . . .

   Part of the answer lies in superstition and religion, and part in a human
fascination with numbers, says Edward Cornish, president of the World Future
Society, a Bethesda, Md.-based group of philosophers that is holding its annual
convention in Atlanta this week.

   "The end of the century, and the beginning, have a psychological impact,"
Cornish says. "People are suddenly more aware that time is changing, and the
times. Now we're about to have three even digits: zeroes. This has never
happened to any of us born in this century."

   Brooks Holifield, theology professor in Emory's Candler School of Theology,
says mysticism revives at such times. At the turn of the last millennium - the
year 999 - millions were convinced the end of the world was nigh because of a
reference in the New Testament to "1,000 years of peace," he says. As the year
2000 nears, he adds, "you'll see a rise in doomsday cults, even in mainstream
religions, and they'll be a lot more vocal."

   Other religions have attached special significance to the number 1,000 since
long before the modern era, he says, and many fundamentalist sects can be
expected to "prepare for the end" as the year 2000 nears.

Who's afraid of Nostradamus?

   And don't forget Nostradamus, the 16th-century astrologer whose disciples
through the ages claimed he predicted the French and Russian revolutions, AIDS,
space shuttles and a cataclysmic world-ending war around the end of this
century.

   Most scientists pooh-pooh Nostradamus, but there's a consensus that the
coming of the millennium is causing widespread angst, says prominent futurist
Arnold Brown, chairman of Weiner Edrich Brown, a business consulting firm.

   There's a lot of foreboding in society now, not just due to the massive
downsizings and loss of job security of the past few years, but also about the
future, he says. People must have forecasts to make decisions, Brown says, but
even the most basic questions about what's just ahead haven't yet been answered.

   Such as: What will the next decade be called? The Naughties? Or the Aughties?
Or maybe just the Ohs? Or the two-thousands? Or the 20-ohs? And should the year
2001 be called two-thousand-one, two-thousand-and-one or twenty-oh-one? Or
aught-one? Or naught-one? Or just oh-one?

   Such questions aren't at all trivial, Brown says. A lot is at stake, like
time. It doesn't take as long to say oh-one as twenty-oh-one, and the cliche
that time is money will be even more true as the Information Age speeds up
everything we do.

   Plus, Cornish says, people correctly fear that discoveries and lifestyle
changes ahead will be far greater - and greater in number - than in the 20th
century, which gave rise to fast cars and computers, electrical appliances,
nuclear power, spaceflight, television, cellular phones, space satellites, CNN
and medical tools not even dreamed of a century ago.

   Although the turn of a century isn't quite as scary as a new millennium, the
end of the 19th was characterized by optimism, while the 20th is ending on a
note of pessimism, Cornish says.

   In the 1890s, a catastrophic depression hit early, then ended, America won a
quick war with Spain and progress - industrial, medical and technological - was
everywhere. Railroads were expanding in every direction. Cities were growing and
bustling. The quality of life in much of America had been improving since the
Civil War.

   "They had not yet begun to realize that technology could be bad,'' he notes.

   Though the economy seems healthy now and unemployment is low, things are lot
different, Brown says. People seem baffled by the pace of change.

   Millions of women have entered the workforce, many not by choice. Divorce
rates have soared. Inner cities are falling apart, murder rates are
skyrocketing, drug abuse is rampant and new and frightening diseases such as
AIDS have popped up.

No holding back tide of change

   "People feel much more alienated," Brown says. "Our inclination always has
been to be horrified by change."

   And the pace of change, Brown says, will be as dizzying as it's been in the
past decade, thanks to new and more powerful computers, forcing people to learn
how to cope.

   Dr. Max North, a scientist at Clark Atlanta University, also foresees radical
changes in the health care and entertainment industries. He's a specialist in
virtual reality, recently participating in a project designed to cure people of
phobias, such as fear of heights, by fitting them with helmets that simulate -
via tiny cameras and sensors - new, if unreal, worlds.

   In the movie "Disclosure," VR machines were portrayed as being so real that
people could see and feel the exact sensations they would if transported to a
different world. VR is just five to 10 years away from that level of
sophistication, North says. He feels VR will also be used to treat people with
mental disorders, help pilots fly better and rehabilitate soldiers who've
experienced trauma.

   Scientists in general are upbeat about the Third Millennium. Cornish says it
won't be long before cures are found for now-fatal diseases; we'll have more
leisure time; religions will strengthen as interest in science wanes; and
families, now disintegrating, should become stronger.

   As scientific research continues to expand, Cornish also believes, "the world
gets a little bit smarter," with scholars at prominent institutions already
"having a field day."

In Atlanta, this new scientific renaissance is already under way.

   At Emory University, Dr. Elliott Chaikof is working on what he calls an
"organoid," combining both biological and artifical elements into artificial
limbs and body parts.

   Dr. Ned Witkin of Emory's Low Vision Laboratory is developing VR technology
he says will allow legally blind people to do things like read menus with a
hand-held optical scanner that allows a person to see digitized words through a
headband-mounted display.

   And at Georgia Tech, Drs. Visarath In and William Ditto are developing an
electronic device to help control irregular heart rhythms by altering patterns
in the electrical circuits of the brain. Their "chaos" pacemaker, they say,
could detect rhythm disorders that cause fatal palpitations, shortness of
breath, weakness, stroke and blood clots.

   Ironically, futurists say excitement about the Third Millennium is a tad
premature. It won't actually start until Jan. 1, 2001.

   But most people will observe it on New Year's Eve 1999, and many hotels -
including all the major ones close to Times Square - already are booked for big
parties.

GRAPHIC: Chart: Some events, discoveries that marked changing civilization
4000 B.C. - Basic counting systems devised.

3000 B.C. - Early indication of superstition. People in Mesopotamia
already were tossing salt over their shoulders to prevent bad luck.
- Simple plows used in Egypt.
1000 B.C. - Height of Greek civilization.
0 - Chinese build first suspension bridges of cast iron.
1000 - English monk builds glider that flies 600 feet before crashing.
1452 - Johann Gutenberg invents printing press.
1492 - Columbus discovers New World.
1500 - First recorded Caesarean section.
1829 - Gas lighting introduced in Paris.
1876 - Alexander Graham Bell patents telephone.
1895 - X-rays discovered.
1896 - Eastman Kodak introduces Brownie camera for $ 1 each.
- Henry Ford builds his first automobile.
1903 - Wright brothers launch first successful airplane at Kitty Hawk,
N.C. 1940 - TV programs transmitted in New York City.
1945 - U.S. drops atomic bombs on Japan.
1963 - President Kennedy assassinated.
1975 - Vietnam War ends.
1981 - IBM introduces its personal computer.
1986 - Shuttle Challenger blows up.


1995-2000

Medicine: First gene therapy techniques.
Technology: Internet and computer use become the new vehicle for
communication and global marketplace of ideas.
Economy: Industry shifts further away from manufacturing-based service to
information-based service.
Entertainment: Virtual reality and interactive media replacing video,
audio and television.

Source: "Technology Handbook"

Photo: mug of George Marlow

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             219 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     July 15, 1995, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Baboon-human transfer of marrow recommended

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:


   BETHESDA -- At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters,
government advisers recommended yesterday that the man be allowed to get a bone
marrow transplant from a baboon -- even though they fear it will kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother, Jeff, at his San Francisco home.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration weren't so
optimistic. They warned that the experiment not only will likely kill Mr. Getty
but must be carefully controlled to ensure that diseases the baboons carry don't
spread to humans.

   "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Mr. Getty, who is 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel said, the operation should go forward to prove whether
baboons, who don't get AIDS, hold a key to fighting the fatal disease.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. Officials
indicated a decision could be made in several weeks.

   "This is a unique opportunity to actually study the risks" of cross-species
transplants, or xenotransplantation, said FDA biologics chief Dr. Philip
Noguchi.

   Baboons do not get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United
States. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of Pittsburgh plans to inject
baboon bone marrow into Mr. Getty.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Mr. Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. This experiment was tried once
before and failed. Dr. Ildstad thinks that she will succeed because she has
discovered "facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from destroying
transplanted marrow.

   She was ready to go in April when the FDA told her federal law required prior
government clearance for an experiment that could be dangerous to the patient or
the public. Thirty days ago, she filed the proper application.

   Mr. Getty's family and AIDS activists attacked the FDA yesterday for the
delay. "Don't take this hope away from him," pleaded his mother, Susan Getty.
"Unless you do something now, he will be dead."

   But the FDA acted properly, gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson told
fellow panel members. The oversight forced Dr. Ildstad to strengthen her trial
and increase safety precautions, he said, and since that has happened, the
experiment "should be approved now."

   Of particular concern is whether xenotransplants could spread dangerous
animal viruses to humans. After all, AIDS itself is believed to have jumped from
certain monkeys into humans, and some flu strains come from pigs.

   In fact, the two baboons slated for Mr. Getty's marrow donation have five
known viruses. They possibly could infect Mr. Getty outright or merge with each
other or a germ already in his body to form a virulent hybrid.

   Nobody knows how likely that is, FDA advisers said. But the panel insisted
that Dr. Ildstad look for healthier baboons, proceeding only if there are none
or Mr. Getty's condition worsens. Searching scientific baboon colonies will take
about two weeks.

   Regardless, Mr. Getty, 38, and his doctors will be repeatedly tested for
disease.

   But some panelists' biggest fear is that Mr. Getty will die before Dr.
Ildstad can tell if baboon marrow could possibly manufacture blood cells that
work in people.

   The reason: The baboon's immune cells will be removed from his marrow before
the transplant to prevent graft-vs.-host disease, a leading killer of transplant
patients. That is risky because AIDS has killed almost all of Mr. Getty's own
immune cells -- and Dr. Ildstad admits that her only proof the transplant will
manufacture new ones is from studies of laboratory mice.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             220 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     July 15, 1995, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: GOVERNMENT PANEL URGES RISKY BABOON TRANSPLANT;
AIDS PATIENT COULD GET ANIMAL BONE MARROW

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD; Associated Press

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:


   At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters, government
advisers recommended Friday that the man be allowed to get a bone marrow
transplant from a baboon -- even though they fear it will kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother Jeff at his San Francisco home.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration weren't so
optimistic. They warned that the experiment not only will likely kill Getty but
must be carefully controlled to ensure that diseases the baboons carry don't
spread to humans.

   "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Getty, who is 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel said, the operation should go forward to prove whether
baboons, who don't get AIDS, hold a key to fighting the fatal disease.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. Officials
indicated a decision could be made in several weeks.

   "This is a unique opportunity to actually study the risks" of cross-species
transplants, or xenotransplantation, said FDA biologics chief Dr. Philip
Noguchi.

   Baboons do not get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United
States. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of Pittsburgh plans to inject
baboon bone marrow into Getty.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. This experiment was tried once
before and failed. Dr. Ildstad thinks she will succeed because she has
discovered "facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from destroying
transplanted marrow.

   She was ready to go in April when the FDA told her federal law required prior
government clearance for an experiment that could be dangerous to the patient or
the public. Thirty days ago, she filed the proper application.

   Getty's family and AIDS activists attacked the FDA Friday for the delay.
"Don't take this hope away from him," pleaded his mother, Susan Getty. But the
FDA acted properly, gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson told fellow
panel members. The oversight forced Dr. Ildstad to strengthen her trial and
increase safety precautions, he said, and since that has happened, the
experiment "should be approved now."

   Of particular concern is whether xenotransplants could spread dangerous
animal viruses to humans. In fact, the two baboons slated for Getty's marrow
donation have five known viruses. They possibly could infect Getty outright or
merge with each other or a germ already in his body to form a virulent hybrid.

   Nobody knows how likely that is, FDA advisers said. But the panel insisted
Dr. Ildstad look for healthier baboons, proceeding only if there are none or
Getty's condition worsens. Searching scientific baboon colonies will take about
two weeks.

   But some panelists' biggest fear is that Getty will die before Ildstad can
tell if baboon marrow could possibly manufacture blood cells that work in
people.

   The reason: The baboon's immune cells will be removed from his marrow before
the transplant to prevent graft-vs.-host disease, a leading killer of transplant
patients. That is risky because AIDS has killed almost all of Getty's own immune
cells -- and Dr. Ildstad admits her only proof the transplant will manufacture
new ones is from studies of laboratory mice.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995


                             221 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               July 15, 1995, SATURDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Man-Baboon Bone Marrow Transplant Sparks Fears

BYLINE: BY LAURAN NEERGAARD

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters, government
advisers recommended Friday that the man be allowed to get a bone marrow
transplant from a baboon -- even though they fear it may kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother, Jeff, at his Oakland home.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration weren't so
optimistic. They warned that the experiment not only may kill Jeff Getty but
must be carefully controlled to ensure that diseases the baboons carry don't
spread to humans.

   "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Getty, 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel said, the operation should proceed to prove whether
baboons, who don't get AIDS, hold a key to fighting the fatal disease.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. A decision could
be made in several weeks.

   It is a unique opportunity to study the risks of cross-species transplants,
said FDA biology chief Dr. Philip Noguchi.

   Baboons do not get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United
States. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of Pittsburgh plans to inject
baboon bone marrow into Getty.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. This experiment was tried once
before and failed. Ildstad predicts that she will succeed because she has
discovered "facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from destroying
transplanted marrow.

   She was ready to go in April when the FDA told her that federal law required
government clearance for an experiment that could be dangerous to the patient or
the public.

   Getty's family and AIDS activists attacked the FDA on Friday for the delay.
"Don't take this hope away from him," pleaded his mother, Susan Getty. "Unless
you do something now, he will be dead."

   But the FDA acted properly, gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson told
fellow panel members. The oversight forced Ildstad to increase safety
precautions for her trial, he said.

   Some panelists' biggest fear is that Getty will die before Ildstad can tell
whether baboon marrow could possibly manufacture blood cells that work in
people.

   The reason: The baboon's immune cells will be removed from its marrow before
the transplant to prevent graft-vs.-host disease, a leading killer of transplant
patients. That is risky because AIDS has killed almost all of Getty's own immune
cells -- and Ildstad admits her only proof that the transplant will manufacture
new ones is from studies of laboratory mice.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             222 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY BRIEFS

BODY:


   CACI INTERNATIONAL INC., Arlington, Va., an information systems producer,
signed a letter of intent to buy the closely held Automated Sciences Group for
$5.3 million in cash, payable over three years.

GENELABS TECHNOLOGIES INC., Redwood City, Calif., formed a joint pharmaceutical
venture under which the Government of Taiwan will invest about $12 million for a
35 percent stake in Genelabs' unit there.



   NEWMONT GOLD CO., Denver, a gold mining company, said it would take a
second-quarter charge of $15 million, or 16 cents a share, because property in
which it had invested did not produce adequate-grade gold ore.

TARGETED GENETICS CORP., Seattle, which develops gene therapy products,
announced it had raised $11.7 million through the sale of 778,598 stock units at
$15 apiece.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995


                             223 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                   July 15, 1995 Saturday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 02

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: BABOON MARROW TEST ADVISERS OK TRANSPLANT TO AIDS PATIENT

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, Associated Press

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters, government
advisers recommended yesterday that the man be allowed to get a bone marrow
transplant from a baboon - even though they fear it will kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother Jeff at his San Francisco home.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration weren't so
optimistic. They warned that the experiment not only will likely kill Getty but
must be carefully controlled to ensure that diseases the baboons carry don't
spread to humans.

   "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Getty, who is 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel said, the operation should go forward to prove whether
baboons, who don't get AIDS, hold a key to fighting the fatal disease.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. Officials
indicated a decision could be made in several weeks.

   "This is a unique opportunity to actually study the risks" of cross- species
transplants, or xenotransplantation, said FDA biologics chief Dr. Philip
Noguchi.

   Baboons do not get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United
States. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of Pittsburgh plans to inject
baboon bone marrow into Getty.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. This experiment was tried once
before and failed. Ildstad thinks she will succeed because she has discovered
"facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from destroying
transplanted marrow.

   She was ready to go in April when the FDA told her federal law required prior
government clearance for an experiment that could be dangerous to the patient or
the public. Thirty days ago, she filed the proper application.

   Getty's family and AIDS activists attacked the FDA for the delay. "Don't take
this hope away from him," pleaded his mother, Susan Getty. "Unless you do
something now, he will be dead."

   But the FDA acted properly, gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson told
fellow panel members. The oversight forced Ildstad to strengthen her trial and
increase safety precautions, he said, and since that has happened, the
experiment "should be approved now."

   Of particular concern is whether xenotransplants could spread dangerous
animal viruses to humans. After all, AIDS itself is believed to have jumped
from certain monkeys into humans, and some flu strains come from pigs.

   In fact, the two baboons slated for Getty's marrow donation have five known
viruses.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (1)
1. AIDS patient Jeff Getty's mom Susan (left) with his sisters Kim, Jennifer
and Carrie, at FDA hearing (ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             224 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 15, 1995, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: Baboon-to-man transplant OK;
FDA panel backs Pitt-based marrow procedure for AIDS patient

BYLINE: Pat Griffith, Post-Gazette Washington Bureau

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:


   A U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory committee yesterday endorsed an
experimental transplant of a baboon's bone marrow to a man dying of AIDS, to be
conducted by researchers in Pittsburgh and San Francisco.

   The favorable recommendation virtually guarantees final FDA approval, which
could come within a few weeks.

   Dr. Jay F. Siegel, acting director of the FDA office of therapeutics, said it
is ''not unrealistic'' to think the breakthrough transplant could occur by Labor
Day.

   In backing the project directed by Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of
Pittsburgh, committee members made clear that while they don't think it poses
much threat to public health, they also don't expect it to prolong the life of
the recipient, AIDS patient Jeff Getty. ''This is probably the safest
(cross-species transplant) from a public health standpoint I can imagine,'' said
Dr. Hugh Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

   But its chances of success in generating new AIDS-immune blood cells in
Getty's bloodstream are ''extraordinarily small,'' Auchincloss said, and there
is a ''high likelihood it will hasten his death.''

   Baboons, whose systems are remarkably similar to humans, are not affected by
the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, that causes AIDS. Ildstad and other
researchers hope that baboon cells, transplanted into an AIDS patient, will
reproduce and provide antibodies to attack HIV.

   Ildstad, who endured a morning of grueling questions and often skeptical
comments from panel experts, expressed relief later that the project can
proceed. ''I was afraid that if they had major concerns, it might be put on hold
for years,'' she said. ''I thought we might become embroiled in the same kinds
of questions that came up with gene therapy and wind up with endless delays for
more and more studies.''

   Ildstad and her colleague on the project, Dr. Marian Michaels of Children's
Hospital in Pittsburgh, aim to show that the transplanted bone marrow will be
tolerated by Getty and adapt to his system. The best-possible outcome -- a very
long shot -- would be evidence weeks or months after the transplant that Getty's
body was producing blood cells resistant to the HIV virus that causes AIDS.

   Ildstad said the procedure will involve removing ''millions of cells,''
equivalent in volume to a 500cc unit of blood, from the donor baboon in
Pittsburgh. The marrow will undergo 12 hours of processing to enhance its
prospects for acceptance by Getty's body.

   Then Ildstad will fly it to San Francisco, where Dr. Steven Deeks of the
University of California will have Getty ready for the transplant at San
Francisco General Hospital. Getty will be in a special isolation room when the
marrow is injected into his veins. He will then be subjected to extensive tests
for as long as he lives to track what happens to his immune system and spot
signs of viral or bacterial infections the transplant might induce.

   Lab specimens taken from Getty will be archived for more research, as new
testing is perfected and more is known about cross-species transplants.

   Ildstad estimated it would take two weeks to comply with the panel's request
that her research team make a last-minute search for a donor baboon free of a
virus found in almost all adult baboons. If there is no acceptable alternative,
the committee recommended that the transplant proceed. But the panel said it
would prefer that only animals without the so-called foamy virus be used in the
future.

   While there is no evidence that foamy virus is a danger to humans, ''once
you've clunked (transplanted) baboon marrow, it's there for good,'' said Dr.
Jonathan Allan, virologist and AIDS researcher at the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research in San Antonio, Texas. Allan, a sharp critic of any
baboon-to-human transplant, acknowledged later that only young baboons are apt
to be free of foamy virus. Because of the volume of bone marrow and other
requirements, Ildstad and Michaels said only adult baboons have been considered
as donors.

   Ildstad said the Pitt research group has spent $ 100,000 testing 30 baboons
at its laboratory to find the two healthiest candidates for the procedure. She
estimated a cost of $ 2.5 million to bring the research project to readiness for
the transplant. Funding has come mainly from the National Institutes of Health,
whose university-research funding is targeted for cutbacks in next year's
federal budget.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995


                             225 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   July 15, 1995, Saturday, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: BABOON MARROW URGED FOR AIDS CASE IMPLANT; FDA PANEL GUARDEDLY
APPROVES EXPERIMENT

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:


   At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters, government
advisers recommended Friday that the man be allowed to get a bone marrow
transplant from a baboon - even though they fear it will kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother, Jeff, at his home in San Francisco.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration warned that the
experiment not only would probably kill Getty but also must be carefully
controlled to ensure that diseases that the baboons carry do not spread to
humans. "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Getty, who is 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel of advisers said, the operation should go forward to
prove whether baboons hold a key to fighting the fatal disease. Baboons do not
get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United States.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. Officials
indicated that a decision could be made in several weeks.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the
University of Pittsburgh thinks she will succeed because she has discovered
"facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from killing transplanted
marrow.

   She was ready to proceed in April, when the FDA told her that federal law
required government approval for an experiment that could be dangerous to the
patient or the public.

   Getty's family and AIDS activists criticized the FDA on Friday for the delay.
"Don't take this hope away from him," pleaded his mother, Susan Getty. "Unless
you do something now, he will be dead."

   But the FDA acted properly, Dr. W. French Anderson, a gene therapy pioneer,
told fellow panel members. It forced Ildstad to strengthen her trial and
increase safety precautions, he said, and since that has happened, the
experiment "should be approved now."

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             226 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         July 15, 1995 Saturday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: AIDS PATIENT MAY GET BABOON BONE MARROW

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press writer

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:

   At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters, government
advisers recommended Friday that the man be allowed to get a bone marrow
transplant from a baboon - even though they fear it will kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother Jeff at his San Francisco home.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration aren't so optimistic.
They warned that the experiment probably will kill Getty, and that it must be
carefully controlled to ensure that diseases the baboons carry don't spread to
humans.

   "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Getty, 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel said, the operation should go forward to prove whether
baboons, who don't get AIDS, hold a key to fighting the fatal disease.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. Officials
indicated that a decision could be made in several weeks.

   "This is a unique opportunity to actually study the risks" of cross-species
transplants, or xenotransplantation, FDA biologics chief Dr.  Philip Noguchi
said.

   Baboons do not get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United
States. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of Pittsburgh plans to inject
baboon bone marrow into Getty.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. This experiment was tried once
before and failed. Ildstad thinks she will succeed because she has discovered
"facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from destroying
transplanted marrow.

   She was ready to proceed in April when the FDA told her federal law requires
government clearance for an experiment that could be dangerous to the patient or
the public. Thirty days ago, she filed the application.

   Getty's family and AIDS activists attacked the FDA for the delay. "Don't take
this hope away from him," said his mother, Susan Getty. "Unless you do something
now, he will be dead."

   But the FDA acted properly, gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson told
fellow panel members. The oversight forced Ildstad to strengthen her trial and
increase safety precautions, he said, and the experiment "should be approved
now."

   Of particular concern is whether xenotransplants could spread dangerous
animal viruses to humans. AIDS itself is believed to have jumped from certain
monkeys into humans, and some flu strains come from pigs.

   The two baboons slated for Getty's marrow donation have five known viruses.
They could infect Getty outright or merge with each other or a germ already in
his body to form a virulent hybrid.

   Nobody knows how likely that is, FDA advisers said. But the panel insisted
that Ildstad look for healthier baboons, proceeding only if there are none or
Getty's condition worsens. Searching scientific baboon colonies will take about
two weeks.

   Regardless, Getty will be repeatedly tested for disease.

   But some panelists' biggest fear is that Getty will die before Ildstad can
tell if baboon marrow could possibly manufacture blood cells that work in
people.

   The baboon's immune cells will be removed from the marrow before the
transplant to prevent graft-vs.-host disease, a leading killer of transplant
patients. That is risky because AIDS has killed almost all Getty's own immune
cells, and Ildstad concedes that her only proof the transplant will manufacture
new ones is from studies of laboratory mice.

   But Getty's family said he is an eager guinea pig. "This is what he really
wants to do, to push the science forward for this disease," his sister Jennifer
said.

   If the experiment works, the FDA pledged to move quickly to allow further
testing on several more AIDS patients.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995


                             227 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         July 15, 1995 Saturday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: BABOON MARROW MAY FIGHT AIDS

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press writer

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:

   At the tearful behest of an AIDS patient's mother and sisters, government
advisers recommended Friday that the man be allowed to get a bone marrow
transplant from a baboon - even though they fear it will kill him.

   "This is wonderful," said Kim Getty, as she raced to telephone the news to
her brother Jeff at his San Francisco home.

   Scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration aren't so optimistic.
They warned that the experiment probably will kill Getty, and that it must be
carefully controlled to ensure that diseases the baboons carry don't spread to
humans.

   "This probably will hasten his death, not prevent it," said Dr. Hugh
Auchincloss Jr. of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But if Getty, 38, accepts the risks and the doctors follow strict
precautions, the panel said, the operation should go forward to prove whether
baboons, who don't get AIDS, hold a key to fighting the fatal disease.

   The FDA usually follows advisory committee recommendations. Officials
indicated that a decision could be made in several weeks.

   "This is a unique opportunity to actually study the risks" of cross-species
transplants, or xenotransplantation, FDA biologics chief Dr.  Philip Noguchi
said.

   Baboons do not get HIV-1, the type of AIDS virus most prevalent in the United
States. Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of the University of Pittsburgh plans to inject
baboon bone marrow into Getty.

   AIDS destroys blood cells, particularly immune cells. Bone marrow
manufactures new blood cells. The theory is that the transplant could resupply
Getty's bloodstream with HIV-resistant blood cells.

   It is usually impossible to transplant bone marrow between genetically
dissimilar people, much less different species. This experiment was tried once
before and failed. Ildstad thinks she will succeed because she has discovered
"facilitating cells" that appear to prevent the body from destroying
transplanted marrow.

   She was ready to proceed in April when the FDA told her federal law requires
government clearance for an experiment that could be dangerous to the patient or
the public. Thirty days ago, she filed the application.

   Getty's family and AIDS activists attacked the FDA for the delay. "Don't take
this hope away from him," said his mother, Susan Getty. "Unless you do something
now, he will be dead."

   But the FDA acted properly, gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson told
fellow panel members. The oversight forced Ildstad to strengthen her trial and
increase safety precautions, he said, and the experiment "should be approved
now."

   Of particular concern is whether xenotransplants could spread dangerous
animal viruses to humans. AIDS itself is believed to have jumped from certain
monkeys into humans, and some flu strains come from pigs.

   The two baboons slated for Getty's marrow donation have five known viruses.
They could infect Getty outright or merge with each other or a germ already in
his body to form a virulent hybrid.

   Nobody knows how likely that is, FDA advisers said. But the panel insisted
that Ildstad look for healthier baboons, proceeding only if there are none or
Getty's condition worsens. Searching scientific baboon colonies will take about
two weeks.

   Regardless, Getty will be repeatedly tested for disease.

   But some panelists' biggest fear is that Getty will die before Ildstad can
tell if baboon marrow could possibly manufacture blood cells that work in
people.

   The baboon's immune cells will be removed from the marrow before the
transplant to prevent graft-vs.-host disease, a leading killer of transplant
patients. That is risky because AIDS has killed almost all Getty's own immune
cells, and Ildstad concedes that her only proof the transplant will manufacture
new ones is from studies of laboratory mice.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995


                             228 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     July 15, 1995, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg.  A03

LENGTH: 833 words

HEADLINE: Advisers Back Baboon-Human Cell Transplant; FDA Urged to Approve AIDS
Patient Experiment

BYLINE: John Schwartz, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   A federal advisory panel yesterday recommended allowing researchers to
proceed with a controversial AIDS experiment that calls for transplanting a
baboon's bone marrow into a human patient.

   The procedure involves taking marrow cells from a baboon and injecting them
into the patient. Researchers hope that the simian cells, specially treated to
reduce the chance of rejection by the recipient, will provide the immune
response that the patient's body cannot. Baboons are not infected by HIV, the
virus that causes AIDS. Citing safety concerns, the Food and Drug Administration
blocked the experiment earlier this year.

   The experiment would be conducted in San Francisco by University of
California AIDS specialist Steven G. Deeks. This week's two-day meeting of the
FDA's Biological Response Modifiers Advisory Committee at the Bethesda Holiday
Inn was held to discuss the concerns in a public forum.

   Panel members seemed moved by the impassioned testimony of friends and family
of Jeff Getty, the 38-year-old San Francisco AIDS activist who is the most
likely subject of the test. Physicians have estimated that he has less than a
year to live; his health is too precarious to allow travel.

   Getty's family went to the meeting ready to face down a room full of dilatory
bureaucrats. Getty's sister, Kim, barely holding back tears, said, "If I don't
do my job fast enough, I lose customers. If you don't do your job fast enough,
people die. . . . What if you are sitting on a solution to my brother's life,
and he dies?"

   But the members of the advisory panel, while insistent that strong
precautions be taken to ensure that the potential for cross-species infection do
not introduce new diseases into the human population, were unanimous in
supporting the preliminary experiment.

   After the panel's vote, Getty's mother, Susan, said, "I'm so happy . . . we
never dreamed this would happen."

   The panel, however, did not share the family's optimism about the
experiment's potential benefits to Getty. Although several members said it would
provide valuable information for future attempts to bolster the human immune
system, panel member Hugh Auchincloss Jr., of the Massachusetts General
Hospital, grimly predicted that "the likelihood that this will work is extremely
small." He added that the difficult procedure "will probably hasten his death
and not prevent it."

   FDA officials warned that many potential risks of cross-species transplants,
known as xenotransplants, should be better understood before more patients
undergo similar treatments. Some voiced worries about viruses that could pass
from animals into humans: "xenozoonoses." They noted that because AIDS patients
already have defective immune systems, and because the treatment calls for
further immunosuppression to keep the body from rejecting the baboon cells, the
risk of bringing new diseases into the human population could be increased.

   The agents of several human diseases are believed to have evolved from
viruses that first infected other species, including some strains of influenza,
AIDS and the Ebola virus. Researchers said the two baboons that have been
selected for the transplantation experiment are known to have five viruses that
theoretically could infect the patient, and that breeding completely "clean"
baboons would take several years and would be prohibitively expensive. The
patient and researchers working with him will have to submit to regular
screenings for disease.

   Members of the panel discussed safety precautions at length, including a
strong recommendation that the patient be required to sign a pledge that he will
engage in safe sexual practices for the rest of his life in order to minimize
the chance of transmitting of any potential new pathogens. (In an interview
earlier this week, Getty said he has already volunteered to sign such a pledge.
"I don't have that great a sex life anymore," he said. "To tell you the truth,
it's shot.")

   W. French Anderson, a gene therapy pioneer and member of the advisory
committee, said that the time required by the FDA for extra consideration paid
off in an improved, safer plan for the experiment. "This is the way pioneering
science ought to be done," Anderson said. "I believe it should be approved now."

   Although the agency is not bound by advisory panel recommendations, it
usually follows them, and in this case agency officials were careful to
underscore the point. "It's most unusual that we would overrule such a
suggestion," said Jay P. Siegel, director of the FDA's division of therapeutics
in the Center for Biologics.

   If the FDA decides to let the experiment go forward -- a decision could be
made within weeks -- and if Getty still meets the physical criteria, then the
injections could begin by the end of the summer.

   Getty's mother said her son was aware of the risks, but wanted the chance to
be part of a possible cure for AIDS. "He doesn't want to die in a hospice; he
wants to go out fighting."


GRAPHIC: Photo, ap, Susan Getty, left, and daughters Kim, Jennifer and Carrie,
at FDA advisory panel session with poster of Jeff Getty, 38, an AIDS patient and
the most likely transplant recipient.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995


                             229 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 14, 1995, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A13

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: Pitt doctor urges baboon marrow treatment for AIDS

BYLINE: Pat Griffith, Post-Gazette Washington Bureau

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:


   A University of Pittsburgh surgeon on the front lines of transplant research
will go before a federal Food and Drug Administration advisory committee this
morning to urge approval for the experimental transfer of a baboon's bone marrow
to a San Francisco man dying of AIDS.

   Dr. Suzanne T. Ildstad, chief of Pitt's division of cellular therapeutics,
will try to overcome concerns about the experiment's possible public health
risks that were raised by the FDA earlier this year in blocking the surgical
procedure.

   The rationale for the proposed transplant lies in the fact that baboons,
whose systems are most similar to humans, are not affected by the human
immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, that causes AIDS. Ildstad and other researchers
see the potential that baboon cells, transplanted into a person with AIDS, will
reproduce and provide the patient with some immunity and antibodies to attack
HIV.

   If the cross-species transplant of bone marrow were to prove successful, it
would increase research interest in ''xenotransplantation,'' the use of animal
organs in humans. Because of a continued shortage of human organs available for
transplant, many researchers see this as the most promising new source for
replacement organs if rejection problems can be dealt with and there are no
unexpected adverse public health consequences.

   Pitt's Transplantation Institute, under the direction of Dr. Thomas Starzl,
performed two transplants of baboon livers to humans in 1992 and 1993. Both
patients died. Starzl has held off another transplant until he is more confident
of success.

   The FDA plans to issue guidelines early next year to cover conditions under
which animal-to-human transplants may be conducted.

   Ildstad is among researchers worried that the FDA is moving into new
regulation for pioneering medical research that until now has been the
responsibility of academic peer review committees.

   While her proposed marrow transplant probably could go forward under broad
guidelines, ''if there are flat regulations, we could not proceed,'' she said.
''We'd have research on promising treatments delayed because they would be
cost-prohibitive.''

   Dr. Philip D. Noguchi, director of the FDA division of cellular and gene
therapies, said yesterday that the agency may decide to let Ildstad's project
proceed even before final guidelines are issued.

   But the FDA feels it is important to get involved now, he said, ''precisely
because we see xenotransplantation as inevitable. ... What we want to do is to
get local people to understand this is not just an experiment in the normal
sense. ... There are public health issues here.''

   The FDA advisory committee, a group of experts in diverse medical and public
health fields, yesterday reviewed possible guidelines after hearing several
scientists raise concern that transplants of living animal tissues might harbor
undetected viruses that could spread to the public.

   Dr. Louisa Chapman, director of the CDC's xenotransplant working group, said
researchers are, of course, unable to screen potential donor animals for viruses
that haven't yet been recognized. She and others promoted a national registry to
track donor animals' health and closely monitor human patients for unexplained
illnesses.

   Dr. Jonathan S. Allan, a veterinarian with the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research in San Antonio, Texas, said baboons ''are not clean animals
as such, and they may harbor any number of organisms we have not yet seen.''

   Allan noted that some viruses take a long time to appear, as is true with
HIV, and that may mandate that a transplant patient be quarantined for a period
of two to 10 years.

   But Dr. Marian Michaels, an infectious diseases specialist at Children's
Hospital in Pittsburgh who is working with Ildstad on transplant research, said
that while baboons used in research experiments can be screened for viruses
known to be harmful to humans, they should not necessarily be eliminated from
consideration if they have a virus not believed to be transferable to people.

   Paying particularly close attention at yesterday's meeting was Susan Getty of
Waterford, Conn., whose son, Jeff, is in line to receive the transplant of bone
marrow from a baboon if the FDA permits the operation to proceed. She said her
son, 38 today, was infected with HIV 15 years ago, making him one of the
longest-living AIDS patients.

   ''I think the FDA has lost sight of what it ought to be doing,'' she said
during a break in the proceedings. ''What would have happened if they had
delayed use of the Salk vaccine (for polio) like this? What about the little
kids who have AIDS? This experiment is for them, too.''

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1995


                             230 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      July 14, 1995, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: FDA debates baboon-to-man transplant

BYLINE: Anita Manning

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

    An experiment to transplant bone marrow from a baboon into a man with
advanced AIDS could move ahead or be derailed, perhaps permanently, based on a
vote taken today by a Food and Drug Administration advisory panel.

   The panel heard testimony on the public-health concerns of animal-to-human
transplantation Thursday and will continue today. Proposed guidelines for such
procedures, including a national registry, also were presented.

   The panel's job is to advise the FDA on the safety of cross-species
transplantation, says Philip Noguchi of the FDA's division of cellular and gene
therapy.

   "I don't think they're going to say, 'no, never,' and I don't think they're
going to say, 'why are you waiting?' " he says. "It will be something in the
middle."

   "The potential for human infection extends beyond the individual into the
community," says Louisa Chapman of the National Center for Infectious Diseases,
at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, because along with
transplanted tissue, the recipient gets the donor's viruses.

   Scientists can screen for known viruses and reject infected animals, but "how
do you prepare for . . . the unknown?" Chapman asked.

   You can't, says virologist Jonathan Allan of the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research. "Baboons are not clean animals and may harbor any number of
viruses we have not seen," he says. Only when a virus jumps species do new viral
diseases become known.

   Any cross-species transplant carries that risk, says biologist John Coffin of
Tufts University. The two likeliest species to be used as donors, pigs and
baboons, carry viruses known to infect humans. Transplanting tissue from animal
to man is "tantamount to infecting humans with these viruses," he says. The
viruses don't make the animal sick, but "whether they'll cause disease (in
humans) is not known."

   It is a gamble, says virologist Stephen Morse of New York's Rockefeller
University. "We'll never be able to eliminate every bit of risk," he says. But,
"There's a potential for real gain. We need to make the gamble as small as
possible."

   Doctors Steven Deeks, San Francisco General Hospital, and Suzanne Ildstad,
University of Pittsburgh, have spent the last several years working to minimize
the risks of the transplant they are prepared to do if they get the go-ahead
from the FDA.

   In Pittsburgh, the donor baboon, whose marrow is immune to AIDS, has been
selected and screened for other diseases. In San Francisco, the patient,
37-year-old AIDS activist Jeff Getty, waits.

   Getty believes he contracted HIV in 1980 but has kept relatively healthy by
using experimental AIDS drugs.

   If allowed to proceed with the transplant, Deeks says, it will "restore lost
immune function" in Getty, but "won't get rid of HIV. This is not a cure."

   However, he says, if the advisory panel requires more basic research --
development of new techniques to screen for unknown viruses, for instance -- it
could take years and more financing. "That," he says, "could effectively kill
the trial."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995


                             231 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     July 13, 1995, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg.  A15

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: FDA Reviews Baboon Cell Experiment; Transplant May Help Humans Fight
HIV

BYLINE: John Schwartz, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Could cells from a baboon save Jeff Getty?

   The San Francisco AIDS activist has survived with the HIV virus for 15 years,
but now his doctors say he has less than a year to live. Getty is a likely
candidate for an experimental therapy that some researchers believe might help
to rescue a patient's immune system: transplanting bone marrow from baboons into
humans.

   Today the Food and Drug Administration will begin two days of hearings in
Bethesda to determine whether the experiment, which it blocked earlier this year
on safety grounds, should go forward.

   Baboons are not susceptible to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the
organism that causes AIDS by attacking the cells of the immune system that fight
infections. Transplanting bone marrow from healthy humans into AIDS patients has
little effect because the transplanted cells simply become infected with the
virus. Some researchers believe that specially treated baboon cells, when
transplanted into a person with AIDS, will produce infection-fighting cells and
antibodies to attack HIV. If the cells do their work successfully, the
researchers hope that the patient's immune system could eventually take over the
job again.

   Other scientists warn that the risks of such a procedure are unknown, and the
benefits speculative at best. The transplant might have no effect, or might
cause medical complications for the already frail subjects. Worse, some worry,
the transplant could set the stage for the transfer of new disease-causing
organisms into the human population -- some of which might survive undetected
for years.

   "We don't want to hold up a promising new therapy, but we do want to be safe
about it," said Philip Noguchi, the director of the FDA's division of cellular
and genetic therapies. "That's the function of the Public Health Service -- to
prevent the spread of infectious diseases throughout the United States." The FDA
is drawing up broad guidelines for experiments involving transplanted tissues
that officials hope to have in place by the end of the year, Noguchi said.

   But the proposed baboon-human experiment will not have to wait for the
guidelines, Noguchi said. An advisory committee will help the agency determine
whether proper precautions are being taken to prevent the spread of disease. "We
realize that this is a real human on the line here and we are obligated to make
a decision," Noguchi said -- but because of the complexity of the issues, he
added, "we can't predict how long that will take."

   Suzanne Ildstad, a researcher at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
who has done experiments with baboons leading to the proposed human trial,
discounts the trans-species disease risk. "It's all speculative," she said,
noting that the animal subjects have been specially bred to be as disease-free
as possible. "I wouldn't be doing this if I thought it would endanger the world.
I have two young children."

   The researchers working on the project contend that the FDA is being
unnecessarily cautious about allowing an experimental treatment for patients
whose lives are at stake. Ildstad points out that some 50 lung transplant
patients died before surgeons figured out how to perform the procedure
successfully. "If we stop innovative research because of fear of the unknown and
there is a tiny, tiny risk, I don't see how we can have progress in the field."

   Steven Deeks, an AIDS specialist at the University of California at San
Francisco who would perform the transplant, said, "This is actually unlike
anything that's ever happened in the history of science. We're having the FDA
potentially put a stop to an entire line of scientific endeavor."

   Implanting organs from other species, or "xenotransplantation," has been
attempted by researchers for decades, often with disappointing results. Baboon
organs have been experimentally transplanted for other conditions in recent
years. In 1992, a 35-year-old man lived 71 days after receiving a baboon's liver
at the University of Pittsburgh. In 1984, doctors gave a baboon heart to a
newborn girl who died in less than three weeks.

   But some scientists believe that once perfected, "xenotransplantation," as
the practice is called, could buy time for critically ill patients until human
organs become available.

   More than 40 other AIDS patients have volunteered to take part in the
experiment, which at this stage would involve only a single patient. If the
experiment is blocked in the United States, other countries have offered to host
it, Ildstad and Deeks said.

   For his part, Getty says he has nothing to lose; the biggest risk is waiting.

   "Don't tell me I've got to wait months and months, because I'm not going to
live that long," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995


                             232 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    July 12, 1995, Wednesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1986 words

HEADLINE: Venture capitalists find new hub in Houston area

BYLINE: JANE BAIRD; Staff

BODY:

   Venture capitalist Jack Gill sees Texas as virgin territory,
ripe with promise.

   ""It looks and smells like California in the 1960s,'' says the
Texas native.

   Gill moved to the West Coast in 1965 in time to witness the
birth of thousands of high-tech companies, but now he's back
in Texas - one of a number of venture capitalists being lured
here by promising technology.

   This ""is validation that Texas is undercapitalized and has
significant opportunity'' for venture capitalists, said Lloyd
M. Bentsen III, of Triad Ventures Ltd. in Houston.

   Texas has lost businesses in the past because it did not have
enough of a venture capital market to fund them.

   For example, Geron, a biotech company born out of Texas
technology, moved from Dallas to California in 1992.  ""Texas
lost Geron because of lack of financial support,'' said founder
Mike West.

   Geron is in the early stages of working on research to
understand how cells age, which has potential for curing a
wide range of illnesses from cancer to cardiovascular disease.

   The company has raised more than $ 30 million in California,
where investors are ""more forward-thinking and
future-oriented,'' he said.

   But the California market is maturing now, Gill said.  ""There
is too much money chasing too few quality deals. ''

   Gill's Vanguard Venture Partners is among more than 100
venture capital firms in Silicon Valley, a high-tech mecca
just south of San Francisco.

   Until a few years ago, if he had to drive more than an hour
from his office in Menlo Park to check out a proposal, he
might not bother, he said.  In Silicon Valley's heyday, ""you
are in line in the grocery store, and two guys behind you are
cooking up a deal. ''

   In recent years, however, Gill has been spending much of his
time on airplanes, as Vanguard funds companies as far afield
as Minnesota, Kentucky, Illinois, Washington, Massachusetts
and New Jersey.

   He decided to relocate to Houston not only because it serves
as a middle-of-the-country springboard with a good airport but
also because of the potential for deals here, he said.

   ""Houston has big-time, virgin-quality opportunities in high
tech, and it is a world-class city.  What's not here is
critical mass in any one location, and there is a lack of
experience,'' Gill said.

   An annual survey by Deloitte & Touche found that venture
capitalists raised a total of $ 204.7 million for 49 Texas
companies last year, up from $ 119 million in 1993.

   Of the 1994 total, $ 59.7 million was invested in Houston
companies, $ 116.5 million in Dallas and $ 13.9 million in
Austin.

   While these numbers are growing, they still are paltry
compared to the nearly $ 5 billion in venture capital raised
nationwide.

   A Coopers & Lybrand survey found that Texas companies got $ 67
million in private equity capital in the first quarter of this
year, most of it going to fund buyouts or companies in the
later stages of developing technology.  Austin companies got
$ 30 million, Dallas $ 28 million and Houston only $ 9 million.

   Austin, in particular, has attracted a handful of venture
capitalists recently, including Thomas Winter, of Onset
Ventures.

   Winter hopes to find two early-stage companies a year in
Austin, mostly in the computer industry, although he plans to
visit Houston, Dallas and San Antonio as well.

   In Houston, another latecomer is Carl Stutz, partner in
Denver-based Columbine Ventures, who opened an office here
about three years ago.

   ""There is a lot of technology coming out of the Texas Medical
Center,'' he said.  ""We needed to be close to see things
earlier. ''
 Stutz spends about half his time in Houston and the other half
traveling in Colorado and Arizona.  His partners are located in
Denver and Phoenix.

   At Vanguard, Gill expects another partner, Robert Ulrich, to
join him in Houston in August.  The two other partners remain
in California.

   Gill was one of Vanguard's founding partners in 1981.  It so
far has raised four funds from insurance companies,
endowments, pension funds and rich individuals amounting to
more than $ 100 million and invested seed capital in 68
companies.  Its first fund showed an average annual rate of
return of 17 percent per year and its second fund 31 percent.

   The third fund and fourth, only partially distributed, are
expected to return three to five times their investments, Gill
said.  Vanguard is now raising a fifth fund of $ 60 million.

   ""It is a plus for the venture capital market in Houston to
have Jack Gill,'' said Walt Cunningham, managing general
partner with the Genesis Fund in Houston.

   ""He brings a lot of credibility to the high-tech industry in
Houston,'' added Sid Andrews, Coopers & Lybrand Houston high
technology partner.  The venture capital business ""is very
cliquish.  Whenever you have a major player move into an area,
it sets a trend.  You couldn't have a better individual lead
the charge than Jack Gill. ''

   Houston's small group of home-grown venture capitalists says
it welcomes newcomers.

   ""We don't look at Columbine or Vanguard as competitors as much
as potential partners,'' said Martin Sutter, general partner of
The Woodlands/Essex Management Partners fund in Houston.  ""We
wish there were more of them. ''

   Houston venture capitalists have been struggling to raise
money here for years, and several of them are more reserved
than Gill in their views of the future of Houston's venture
capital market.

   Houston is at a disadvantage because it is known for biotech
and biomedical ventures coming out of the Texas Medical
Center, while Austin has focused more on computer-related
business and Dallas more on the electronics industry.

   Raising money for biotech companies is now so difficult
nationwide that the development of Houston's venture capital
market is being hurt, Stutz said.

   ""From my perspective, Houston venture capital support has
gotten a little tougher,'' as venture capitalists around the
country have backed away from biotech and biomedical deals,
said Steve Banks, president of BCM Technologies, the
technology transfer arm of Baylor College of Medicine.  He now
looks to wealthy individuals to help fill the gap left by
venture capitalists.

   But in the last few weeks, there are signs that biotech stocks
have finally bottomed and may start to recover after two and a
half years in the doldrums, predicted Cynthia Robbins-Roth,
editor of BioVenture View magazine, in a speech last month to
Houston's Bio/Medical Technology Club.  ""The market is ready to
be positive about us. ''

   If so, Texas has been ""an amazing source of entrepreneurial
activity.  You have accomplished an incredible lot under tough
conditions,'' she said.

   ""Things feel like they are loosening up out there.  If they
are, you will benefit,'' she said.

   Whether or not Robbins-Roth proves to be right, Cunningham
does not see the downturn in biotech as a problem either for
him or for Houston, because ""there are a lot of sources of
technology here. '' Only two of the 12 Houston companies he has
funded so far have been biotech companies.

   Cunningham expects Houston to generate deals in
telecommunications, robotics and artificial intelligence based
on NASA-developed technology and in managed health care and
computer systems for health care delivery.

   Gill agrees that biomedical deals are out of favor around the
country.  ""That is both the problem and the opportunity.  There
needs to be greater diversification of businesses out of
Houston. '' Vanguard invests in a variety of industries, including
computer and telecommunications companies, but Gill's emphasis
is on biotech, medical devices and other kinds of medical
companies.

   His one investment in Houston so far is LifeSpex, which is
developing a device that uses tissue
spectroscopy to diagnose
cervical cancer and has the potential to diagnose cancers of
the esophagus, lung and bladder.

   When Gill got involved, there were no founders, no employees
and no business plan.  Vanguard started by funding three
incubator projects at the Sandia National Labs in New Mexico
and spun out LifeSpex as the one with major business
potential.

   Gill sponsored further research and testing at the University
of Texas in Austin and recruited M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
as a partner in pre-clinical and clinical testing, he said.  He
hired three consultants to put together a business plan.

   While he could have located the company anywhere, he chose
Houston, because both he and M.D. Anderson are here and UT is
not far away, he said.

   Holding back the company now, however, is the need for a chief
executive officer.  Gill said he has hired a national executive
search firm with offices in Boston and Silicon Valley to find
that executive.

   Another long-term drawback to doing business in Texas is
finding managers with experience in taking companies from the
entrepreneurial stage to being publicly traded, Bentsen said.

   ""Of our 25 portfolio companies in Texas, more than half of our
CEOs we had to bring from outside the state. ''

   ""There aren't a lot of businesspeople putting together small
companies and coming to us,'' Stutz said.  ""We still have to
recruit someone to come in from outside. ''

   As a result, ""there is such a wealth of technology at the
Medical Center, but a lot ends up being licensed to larger
companies outside of Texas,'' Stutz said.

   Eric Tomlinson was recruited from San Francisco to be the
chief executive officer of GeneMedicine in The Woodlands.

   ""I wanted to build the best gene therapy company and felt the
science at the Texas Medical Center was the best way to do
that,'' he said.  Entrepreneurial managers are a mobile market,
he said.

   In Austin, venture capitalists should have little trouble in
finding managers, Winter said.  ""Could I recruit management
talent from Silicon Valley?  Absolutely.  Austin is like Palo
Alto, a big university town. ''

   Another problem for Houston, Bentsen said, is that smaller
venture capital firms have had a harder time raising money
recently.  The pension funds and insurance companies that
invest in venture capital have been getting larger while
cutting back on their money management staffs, he said.

   These investors prefer to place larger chunks of money, which
leads them to the larger venture capital funds on the two
coasts, Bentsen said.  ""Funds in the Southwest are getting more
and more out of scale to East and West Coast megafunds,'' he
said.

   The larger funds, in turn, tend to finance larger deals, he
said.  ""The $ 1 million to $ 5 million deals are harder to do. ''

   Gill agrees that the market has become more difficult for
small firms.  ""That's why it's very opportune for a large firm
like Vanguard to move in here,'' because it has access to
greater resources and investors on the two coasts, he said.

   Sutter expects Houston's venture capital market to grow, but
slowly over a long period of time.  ""For many years to come,
there is still going to be less money than deals,'' he said.

   For GeneMedicine, Houston's scanty supply of biotech analysts,
investment banks or other public biotech companies is a
hurdle, Tomlinson said.  ""It doesn't feed on itself.  That is
the biggest weakness in the region. '' Even so, ""we're
staying. ''

   But as Texas attracts more players, ""there is a sense that
critical mass is beginning to take shape,'' Gill said.



   Texas venture capital projects

   The total invested in venture capital projects in Houston more
than doubled from 1993 to 1994, while all Texas cities saw a
72 percent jump.

   Total financings in Texas 1994 - $ 204,721,000.

   Total companies financed 1994 - 49.


    Financings reported by Texas cities

   San Antonio - $ 200,000.

   Austin - $ 13,862,000.

   Other - $ 14,500,000.

   Houston - $ 59,689,000.

   Dallas/Ft.  Worth - $ 116,470,000.


GRAPHIC: Graph: Texas venture capital projects (color, TEXT); Houston Chronicle,
Source: Deloitte & Touche

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995


                             233 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                            July 12, 1995, Wednesday

SECTION: CHEMICALS, Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: COMMODITY / ENERGY BRIEFS

BYLINE: Wire and Staff Reports

BODY:


   SANDOZ AG TO ACQUIRE

   US GENE THERAPY FIRM

   TOKYO - Sandoz Pharmaceutical Ltd. said Tuesday its parent firm in
Switzerland will acquire U.S. gene therapy firm Genetic Therapy of Maryland for
$ 295 million.

   The company is the Japanese subsidiary of Swiss drug maker Sandoz AG.

   The company said negotiations for the acquisition were under way between the
two firms. The U.S. firm is known for advanced research on gene therapy for
cancer and AIDS.

   The U.S. company will continue operating under its current name even after it
is absorbed by the Swiss maker, the company said.  CONSTRUCTION BEGINS

   ON HYDROGEN PLANT

   ALLENTOWN, Pa. - Air Products and Chemicals Inc. has begun construction on a
new hydrogen production plant that the company and Kinetics Technology
International Corp. will design, engineer and build adjacent to Air Products'
chemicals manufacturing complex in Pasadena, Texas.

   The new plant is slated to open in the fall of 1996.

   Daily, the plant will produce 80 million cubic feet of high-purity hydrogen
for use in chemical and refinery applications.

   About half the plant's capacity will be supplied by pipeline to Lyondell-
Citco Refining Co. Ltd.'s Houston refinery.

   Additional capacity will be fed into Air Products' hydrogen pipeline along
the Greater Houston Ship Channel for distribution to customers in the area.
TURKEY'S CONSUMPTION

   OF OIL PRODUCTS RISES

   ISTANBUL, Turkey - Turkey's consumption of refined oil products increased
about 6.5 percent in the first five months of this year from the same period in
1994, indicating a recovery from last year's economic crisis was well under way,
official sources said Tuesday.

   Official data showed usage of refined products at 9.8 million metric tons
from January to May, although officials said smuggled gas oil from Iraq, largely
diesel fuel, continued to undermine registered, legal sales.

   Registered consumption of gas oil fell by about 2.9 percent during the first
five months, to 2.8 million metric tons, said the sources.

   The Iraqi gas oil smuggled in tankers across the border in defiance of U.N.
sanctions is sold cheaply and mainly in Turkey's southeast, where it has
undercut output from a refinery operated at Mersin jointly by Shell, British
Petroleum and Mobil.

   Over the same period, gasoline consumption rose by 2 percent, to 1.5 million
metric tons.

   Jet fuel consumption was up by 31 percent.

EDITOR-NOTE:
COMMODITY / ENERGY BRIEFS

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996


                             234 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 12, 1995, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. C1

LENGTH: 795 words

HEADLINE: He's unofficial curator of veterinary history

BYLINE: Diana Nelson Jones, Post-Gazette Staff Writer

BODY:


   From clinic architecture to advances in the fight against dog breath, doctors
in town for the American Veterinary Medical Association convention could not
want for a happening topic.

   If they want to know what used to happen, though, there's one source: Fred
Smithcors. Late one morning at the David L. Lawrence Convention Center where the
veterinary association's annual meeting wraps up today, all five chairs in
Smithcors' booth were full.

   It was a faithful thing, to offer that many chairs in a display of yellowed
photos when even he acknowledges that ''few people are interested in veterinary
history.''

   Some of the attraction might have been to Smithcors himself. An elder
statesman of veterinary knowledge, he looks like the soft-spoken sidekick of
Hollywood classics. Like someone you wouldn't hesitate handing your beloved pet
to.

   ''I actually never practiced,'' he said, with what sounded like a trace of
surprise. He had always intended to teach instead, which he did at Michigan
State. More recently, for 25 years, he edited Modern Veterinary Practice, a
magazine based in Santa Barbara, Calif., where he lives.

   His timing was perfect. On the brink of American veterinary history's most
giant step, he was poised to become its chronicler.

   Smithcors emerged from veterinary school at Cornell in 1945, when horses were
still being anesthetized through an ether cone over their nostrils: ''When I
graduated, things weren't a whole lot different than they were before World War
I.''

   People have been caring for animals for 5,000 years, but the care was
managerial, he said. The human medical profession of 50 years ago may seem
primitive by today's standards, but the practitioners almost always had formal
schooling. Few veterinarians more than 50 years ago had such. They were
farriers, whose fathers had been farriers.

   ''You could be a veterinarian by hanging out a shingle,'' he said. With
methods limited to poultices, purgatives and bloodletting, ''Sometimes animals
died from the treatment they got.

   ''There was relatively little attention paid to any animals but the horse,''
he said. At a time when people didn't live long lives, though, the death of an
animal didn't merit special concern.

   Veterinary history has had its greatest momentum since World War II, but the
field wasn't stagnant before that: In the late 1800s, veterinarians discovered
remedies that virtually wiped out hog cholera, Texas fever in cattle, and foot
and mouth disease, Smithcors said. These triumphs coincided with the earliest
formal veterinary educations: the first U.S. school, the Boston Veterinary
Institute, graduated six students in 1850. Between then and 1918, 30 veterinary
colleges were established in the United States.

   The pioneers on the wall of Smithcors' display include the man who started
the Boston institute, George Dadd, a somber-looking man with compassionate eyes.
Another is D.E. Salmon: Salmonella was named for his discovery of the organism
that causes salmonellosis.

   The strides veterinarians made to save livestock led indirectly to the
human-animal bond, Smithcors said. Our emotional attachment to animals has
pushed the sophistication of veterinary medicine, while the advancements in
veterinary medicine have given us more reasons to grow attached to animals,
knowing that the quality of their care parallels the quality of our own.
Companion-animal medicine is the main reason doctors now do laser surgery and
hip replacements in everything from dogs and cats to rabbits and parakeets. In
fact, hip-replacement surgery was pioneered by veterinarians, Smithcors said.

   Pioneering continues. Doctors at the conference have discussed gene therapy
and blood vessel transplants. And in another advancement, it is likely more than
half those doctors are women: the predominance of women graduating from
veterinary schools has jumped from 50 percent in 1984 to 67 percent, Smithcors
said.

   ''Before 1960, veterinary medicine was not considered an appropriate career
for women -- by men, of course,'' he said.

   Over the years, Smithcors amassed historical information at the same time he
was receiving information for his publication about the latest techniques. With
his collection of old photos, turn-of-the-century cartoons depicting crude
remedies, farrier signs and advertisements -- one for Dr. Coultaus' Universal
Galen's Liniment, for rheumatism, toothache, lumbago and deafness -- Smithcors
wrote a book. In a box under the table in his display are copies of ''The
Veterinarian in America 1625-1975.''

   Of the 3,000 veterinarians at the conference this week, scores have happened
by Smithcors' booth, visited and chatted.

   ''In some cases,'' he said, ''they come away surprised to know we have a
history.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Robin Rombach/Post-Gazette: At his booth at the David L.
Lawrence Convention Center, Fred Smithcors offers modern veterinarians a glimpse
of animal-medicine history.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                             235 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     July 11, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 896 words

HEADLINE: Swiss giant Sandoz to buy Genetic Therapy

BYLINE: Kevin L. McQuaid, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   In the latest example of the consolidating biotechnology industry, Genetic
Therapy Inc. agreed yesterday to be acquired by a Swiss pharmaceutical and food
conglomerate for roughly $ 295 million.

   The purchase of the Gaithersburg-based genetic research firm by Sandoz AG is
expected to provide Genetic Therapy with not only an immediate infusion of cash,
but the resources for future research and development activities.

   Most immediately, the Sandoz investment will provide Genetic Therapy with the
necessary capital -- estimated at between $ 400 million and $ 600 million --
required to develop, test and market a new treatment used in the treatment of
malignant brain tumors in children.

   "Developing any pharmaceutical product, as we have found, takes vast amounts
of capital," said M. James Barrett, Genetic Therapy's chairman and chief
executive. "As an independent public company, financing was always uppermost in
our minds. With Sandoz, decisions can now be made on the merits of a program,
instead of being made on the basis of financing."

   The brain tumor treatment, which Genetic Therapy is developing in conjunction
with Sandoz, involves injecting cells into patients with tumors following
surgery. It is undergoing clinical trials at three American universities.

   Genetic Therapy had previously received an exclusive license to commercialize
the treatment from the National Institutes of Health. About 8,000 infants and
children are affected by brain tumors in the United States and Europe each year.

   In addition to capital, the Swiss firm is expected to provide Genetic Therapy
with marketing, product development, regulatory and international sales
expertise.

   "This transaction reflects the realities of the biotech industry today," said
Charles W. Newhall III, a Genetic Therapy board member and general partner of
venture capitalist firm New Enterprise Associates Inc., which owns nearly 5
percent of the company's outstanding shares. "The model for fund-raising in the
industry has changed."

   Sandoz last year had $ 12.3 billion in sales and operations in more than 60
countries, and purchased baby food manufacturer Gerber Products Co. for $ 3.7
billion.

   For Sandoz, the Genetic Therapy acquisition establishes an immediate entry
into both the evolving and growing genetic research industry and the U.S.
market. It hopes to complete the transaction by Aug. 10.

   "As science evolves, so does judgment," said Dr. Daniel Vasella, chief
executive of Sandoz Pharma Ltd., in an interview yesterday from Switzerland.
"And we believe genetic therapy will become an increasingly important practice
in the next century."

   Sandoz is willing to wait at least that long. The Swiss company said it
doesn't expect Genetic Therapy to contribute to its revenues until at least
2000, when it may begin manufacturing and marketing of its brain tumor
treatment.

   "There is no question this is a long-term investment," Mr. Vasella said. "The
relevant question for us is, 'Where is the technical know-how?' "

   Sandoz expects to complete the Genetic Therapy takeover by buying its 12.6
million outstanding shares of stock for $ 21 per share. Thus far, Sandoz has
reached agreement to purchase 4.2 million shares, which will raise its stake in
Genetic Therapy to 35.6 percent.

   The news of the acquisition sent Genetic Therapy shares skyrocketing, closing
up 37 percent to $ 20.87 per common share from last week. The $ 5.62 per share
increase, on a volume of 1.57 million shares traded, was the largest in Genetic
Therapy's nine-year history.

   Sandoz has had a relationship with Genetic Therapy since November 1991, when
it invested $ 10 million through a stock purchase and pledged millions for
research. In 1993 and 1994, Sandoz granted Genetic Therapy $ 8 million for
research.

   "This comes as little surprise, because Sandoz has been involved with them
for years," said R. Brandon Fradd, a Montgomery Securities Inc. analyst who
tracks Genetic Therapy.

   "I think it's a great move. It provides them with marketing muscle, and
resources to develop products internationally."

   Like most emerging biotechnology companies, though, Genetic Therapy has
maintained a less than impressive balance sheet. Last year, for instance, the
company posted a net loss of $ 5.5 million, or 42 cents per share, its best year
since 1991.

   Still, analysts noted that its sales of $ 14.1 million in 1994, a threefold
jump from the previous year, combined with a strong asset base of $ 80 million,
made Genetic Therapy one of the nation's leading biotechnology firms.

   In addition to the brain tumor treatment, Genetic Therapy is also working on
ways to combat cancer, cystic fibrosis, HIV and hemophilia. The company has been
issued 50 patents for its work.

GENTIC THERAPY INC.

   Headquarters: Gaithersburg, Md.

   Employees: 150

   Businesses: Gene therapy research and development

   Chief executive: M.. James Barrett

   1994 Revenues: $ 14.1 million

   1994 Earnings (Loss): ($ 5.5 million)

   Facilities: Headquarters and research laboratory

SANDOZ AG

   Headquarters: Basel, Switzerland

   Employees: 50,000 worldwide

   Businesses: Pharmaceuticals, nutrition, agriculture, construction and
environment

   Chief executive: Marc Moret

   1994 Revenues: $ 12.3 billion

   1994 Earnings: $ 1.49 billion

   Facilities: Operations and joint ventures in 64 countries

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, SUN STAFF PHOTO/1992, M. James Barrett is chairman and CEO of
Genetic Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                             236 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY:  HEALTH CARE

BYLINE: By Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   Swiss Pharmaceutical Firm to Buy Genetic Therapy: Sandoz said it plans to
acquire the Gaithersburg, Md. -based company for $295 million to enter the
growing gene therapy industry. Genetic Therapy Inc. had sought an alliance to
help fund research for treating cancer, cystic fibrosis, Gaucher disease,
hemophilia and HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Genetic Therapy's board has
approved Sandoz's offer and amended its shareholder rights plan to allow the
transaction to be completed. Sandoz said it has agreements with unnamed
shareholders to buy 4.22 million Genetic Therapy shares for $21 each, boosting
its stake in Genetic Therapy to 35.6%.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                             237 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   S.& P. Lowers Rating On New York City Debt
Standard & Poor's lowered its rating of New York City's long-term debt,
attributing the downgrading to the sluggish local economy and rebuking Mayor
Rudolph W. Giuliani for what it called financial gimmickry in balancing the
city's budget.

   The decision reduced the city's bond rating from A-minus, where it has been
since 1987, to BBB-plus, among the lowest ratings of any major city in the
country. [Page A1.]


   F.B.I. Investigates Archer, And Its Shares Fall 10.5%
Federal investigators had a senior executive of Archer-Daniels-Midland secretly
record conversations with other executives and companies as part of an
investigation into possible price collusion. The company's stock was the most
heavily traded on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, falling $1.875 a share,
or 10.5 percent, to $15.875. [D2.]

Sandoz in $295 Million Deal
Sandoz plans to acquire Genetic Therapy for about $295 million, or $21 a share.
Genetic Therapy shares soared $5.625, to $20.875. [D4.]

The acquisition by Sandoz is the latest part of the Swiss company's strategy to
concentrate on its pharmaceutical business. [D4.]

Chrysler to Take a Charge
Chrysler will take a $143 million after-tax charge against second-quarter
earnings to cut one shift at a plant in Newark, Del. The 36-cent-a-share charge
will take Chrysler's earnings 32 percent below analysts' estimates. [D7.]

Funeral Home Acquisition
Service Corporation, the world's largest chain of funeral homes and cemeteries,
agreed to buy the funeral operations of Lyonnaise des Eaux of France for $423
million. [D6.]

Dollar Shows Strength
The dollar climbed to 86.88 yen and 1.3949 marks, continuing to benefit from the
intervention on Friday by the United States and Japan. [D15.]

Microsoft Stock Hits Record
Microsoft's stock surged $4.125 to a record high after the company said it would
begin shipping an updated collection of its top-selling software applications on
Aug. 24, the same day it is scheduled to release Windows 95. [D2.]

Plan Dropped for Jumbo Jet
Boeing and its prospective European partners have decided not to produce a
"super jumbo" jet because of a lack of demand. [D2.]

MCA Appointment Sends Message
Ron Meyer, president of the Creative Artists Agency, is widely respected, liked
by movie stars and directors and has a reputation for being street-smart. By
naming him to run the movie and film business of MCA, Edgar G. Bronfman Jr. has
signaled to Hollywood and Wall Street that he wants to quickly revive a studio
that has been sluggish in recent years. [D6.]

Music Battle to Intensify
MCA's plan to start a new record label under Doug Morris, who was dismissed last
month as chairman of Warner's domestic music business, underscores MCA's
intention to gain market share, in part by benefiting from the turmoil at
Warner. [D6.]

Transports Turn Bullish
The Dow transportation average has risen more than 100 points in the last two
trading sessions, moving it into record territory. It took a while, but the
index has finally joined the Dow industrials in turning bullish. Floyd Norris:
Market Place. [D8.]

GRAPHIC: Table: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials                4,702.39          -0.34
30-yr. Treasury yield             6.52%      Unchanged
The dollar                    86.88 yen          +0.12

Chart: "TODAY"

Motorola

    2d-quarter earnings due after the markets close

    Expected: 73 cents a share

International Paper

    2d-quarter earnings due during the day

    Expected: $2.44 a share.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995


                             238 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: Sandoz Buying Genetic Therapy for $295 Million

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Sandoz Ltd. said yesterday that it would acquire Genetic Therapy Inc. of
Gaithersburg, Md., for about $295 million, or $21 a share.

   Since 1991, Sandoz, based in Basel, Switzerland, has owned 3.6 percent of
Genetic Therapy, a leading gene-therapy company working on treatments for
cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and Gaucher's disease, an inherited
enzyme deficiency disorder.

    Following close on the acquisition in April of Viagene by the Chiron
Corporation for about $95 million, the deal underscores the strategic importance
of gene therapy to pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies alike. By treating
disease with the body's own genetic material, gene therapy holds the potential
to correct genetic defects and, in theory at least, treat almost every disease
known.

   Sandoz plans to pay for Genetic Therapy with cash, according to its chief
financial officer, Raymund Breu. Dr. Daniel Vasella, president of Sandoz's drug
division, said the company did not expect revenue from Genetic Therapy for five
years, when its first treatment was expected to be ready for sale.

   Shares in Genetic Therapy soared on the news yesterday to close at $20.875,
up $5.625, in Nasdaq trading. The deal helped lift the stocks of other
gene-therapy companies including Vical Inc., up 62.5 cents, to $9.375; Somatix
Therapy, up 50 cents, to $4.625, and Applied Immune Sciences, up 81.25 cents, to
$6.5625.

   Dr. Vasella, who is president of the Sandoz Pharma division, said in a
telephone interview: "We have come to the conclusion that gene therapy will play
a major role in medicine in the next century. Genetic Therapy is a company we
know very well, a company that is a world leader in gene therapy."

   Sandoz Pharma has worked with Genetic Therapy since 1991 on research and
development projects, including one in clinical trials in the United States to
treat glioblastomas, fast-growing brain tumors. Sandoz is now initiating trials
in Europe. Sandoz also owns 60 percent of Systemix Inc., a cell-therapy company
in Palo Alto, Calif.

   "Obviously Sandoz is very committed to Genetic Therapy," said Paul Boni, an
analyst with Mehta & Isaly. "They could have gotten a lot of other gene therapy
companies for a lot less money," he said. He noted that Genetic Therapy had the
broadest base of academic collaborators of any gene therapy company, an asset
difficult to quantify but of value to Sandoz.

   In March, Genetic Therapy was awarded an exclusive license to a patent
received by the National Institutes of Health for a type of gene therapy called
ex vivo. Ex vivo gene therapy involves taking cells out of the body, treating
them with altered genes and replacing them in the body, typically to make up for
deficient or defective genes. To date, all successful gene therapy treatments
have been of the ex vivo type.

   But Dr. Vasella said that the patent was not a determining factor in Sandoz's
decision to buy Genetic Therapy. "We believe the long-term future of gene
therapy is "in vivo," he said, referring to gene-therapy treatments performed in
the body, without the need to harvest cells. Although Genetic Therapy is known
to be developing in vivo treatments, it has said little about them publicly.

   M. James Barrett, Genetic Therapy's chief executive, said in a statement:
"The combination of Genetic Therapy Inc.'s cutting-edge technology in gene
therapy and Sandoz's clinical development, regulatory, marketing and sales
expertise will give us a solid platform for further development." Mr. Barrett
will continue to lead Genetic Therapy after the acquisition, the companies said.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Sandoz Ltd. of Switzerland is acquiring Genetic Therapy Inc., a
gene-therapy company that is working on treatments for cancer, AIDS, cystic
fibrosis and other diseases. At a Genetic Therapy laboratory in Gaithersburg,
Md., Susan Thomas lifted human cells from a tank of liquid nitrogen. (Marty Katz
for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995


                             239 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words

HEADLINE: Sandoz Sharpens Its Focus on the Drugs of Tomorrow

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE

DATELINE: BASEL, Switzerland

BODY:

   The acquisition of Genetic Therapy Inc., a small American biotechnology
company, by Sandoz Ltd. is the latest part of the big Swiss company's strategy
to remake itself by concentrating on its pharmaceutical business, including
biotech therapies that it believes will be the treatments of tomorrow.

   The Sandoz approach is to stand firmly on two legs in the health care
business: One is drugs, where the company is weaving a web of alliances with
small, fast-growing research companies in biotechnology; the other is nutrition,
where Sandoz hopes to catch the growing markets for infants and the elderly and
for specialized products for hospital patients. Part of this included a $3.7
billion acquisition last year of the Gerber Products Company, the American
baby-food producer.

    For decades, Sandoz ran with the pack of big chemical and drug manufacturers
in Europe, investing in everything from pharmaceuticals to fertilizers.

   "It was the fashion back then to diversify and we were part of it," said Marc
Moret, 71, the company's chairman, musing during a recent interview on the years
since he joined Sandoz in 1968. "Slowly, we began to realize it was just too
much for us."

   Last month, in one of the largest divestitures in Europe, Sandoz sold its
chemicals division, Clariant A.G., on the Zurich stock exchange in a deal valued
at $1.3 billion.

   Analysts say what most prompted Sandoz's shift in strategy was Wall Street's
appreciation for focus and expertise.

   "In the American and British world of finance, there's a desire to purchase
pure players, with clearly defined businesses," said Claudio Werder, who follows
chemicals at a Zurich investment bank, J. Vontobel.

   Raymund Breu, Sandoz's chief of finance, does not disagree.

   "Time and again," he recalled, "investors would say, 'What are you doing in
all these businesses? That's the way of the 1960's.' "

   Mr. Moret knows there are risks. For one, Sandoz's hospital nutrition
business will need money and attention to compete with bigger companies like the
American Abbott Laboratories. Moreover, without the countercyclical advantage
provided by sales of industrial chemicals, Mr. Moret will have to figure out how
to ride out the dry spells in Sandoz's core drug business.

   With the spinoff of Clariant, drugs and nutrition now account for about 75
percent of the Swiss company's $11.8 billion in annual sales, compared with 60
percent previously. And the process of focusing is not finished.

   Mr. Moret says Sandoz will probably sell other businesses like its remaining
agricultural or construction chemical operations, or Gerber's children's wear
and life insurance divisions.

   Moreover, analysts expect Sandoz to use some of the proceeds from the
Clariant sale for more acquisitions, and Mr. Moret does not argue with that
opinion. Mr. Werder of Bank Vontobel said one possible area for acquisitions
would be on the medical side of the nutrition business, to meet the competition
from giants like Abbott. Samuel Isaly of the Wall Street research firm Mehta &
Isaly says that Sandoz could acquire the Searle drug division of Monsanto,
either by a purchase or a swap against Sandoz's remaining agricultural chemicals
business.

   So while Sandoz is not in an identity crisis, Mr. Moret realizes that staying
in the race has become more complicated than it used to be if Sandoz is to
successfully face the challenges of the growing cost of drug research, health
care cost-cutting pressures, and the rise of new competition from a wave of
industry mergers.

   Sandoz releases no quarterly earnings figures, but sales in the first three
months of 1995 amounted to $3.9 billion, 7 percent more than in the
corresponding period last year. Net earnings for all of 1994, though, climbed
only 2 percent, to $1.5 billion, on total group sales of $13.8 billion, and Mr.
Breu said the sale of businesses was in part intended to increase earnings.

   "Partly the decision for the spinoff came from the imperative to focus on
portions of our business that are highly profitable, and with high growth
rates," he said. Last year, for instance, Sandoz's drug and nutrition activities
generated 79 percent of pretax income, though accounting for only 68 percent of
total sales.

   According to Dr. Daniel L. Vasella, who took over in May as head of Sandoz's
drug division, the acquisition of Gerber is part of the plan to increase profit
and growth. Sandoz wants to harness Gerber's marketing skill in the United
States for its own products, while at the same time helping Gerber sell baby
food outside North America.

   Moreover, the nutrition business will provide Sandoz activities outside the
drug business, including the sale of specialized nutritional products for
hospital patients that are administered intravenously or by tube.

   "These give Sandoz allied lines that are a hedging of risks," said Dr.
Vasella, a 42-year-old physician who joined Sandoz in 1988. "What would be
diversification elsewhere is for us a further focusing."

   Despite the emphasis worldwide on containing health care costs, Sandoz will
continue research on innovative products, even though these tend to be costly,
he said.

   One of Sandoz's most successful drugs in recent years has been Sandimmun,
whose patent is about to expire and is being replaced by a similar product
called Neoral. By subduing the body's rejection mechanisms, these drugs help
keep the cost of treatment down in cases of kidney, liver and heart transplants.

   Down the Rhine River, Germany's three chemical giants -- Hoechst, BASF and
Bayer -- generally seem set for now to remain classic conglomerates, sprawling
across dozens of business lines.

   Here in Basel, one of Sandoz's big Swiss competitors, Ciba-Geigy, reaffirms
its policy of diversification. "Our portfolio of activities is well balanced,"
said Alex Krauer, Ciba-Geigy's chairman, in a recent statement to shareholders.

   At Hoechst, a top official has expressed skepticism about the Sandoz strategy
of shedding its chemical expertise and trying to increase the nutritional side
of the business, saying that diversification is essential in the pharmaceuticals
business.

   Yet Hoechst has sold its cosmetics and other businesses to concentrate on
drugs and chemicals.

   Officials at Roche Holdings, Sandoz's other big Swiss competitor, say Sandoz
is merely playing catch-up. Roche shed assets in the chemical, electronics and
cosmetics businesses to concentrate about 90 percent of its effort on drugs and
other health care products.

   Mr. Breu, though, predicts that the Sandoz focus will catch on.

   "In continental Europe, the conglomerate idea has always been the thing, but
in 10 years' time that will be different," he said. "What today is a solitary
move could become a trend."

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995


                             240 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 8;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: Stocks Post Some Big Gains, but Dow Eases 0.34

BYLINE: By LEONARD SLOANE

BODY:

   A casual investor looking at just the Dow Jones industrial average might have
assumed that the stock market was generally lackluster yesterday. After all, the
Dow eased fractionally at the close after completing its best week in about 11
months, topping both the 4,600 and the 4,700 levels.

   But beneath the surface, there was quite a bit of rumbling in active trading.
Some stocks soared and others plummeted as traders moved their funds into groups
that they considered undervalued.

    "There certainly were irregular patterns during the day," said Bernard
Spilko, senior vice president of Bank Julius Baer. "The market should see the
same patterns on Tuesday and Wednesday before some of the major economic
statistics are reported at the end of the week."

   The big movement of the session came among the transportation stocks, with
the Dow Jones transportation average gaining 51.47 points, to 1,890.98 --
surpassing the previous high set on Feb. 2, 1994. This average also had a
51-point-plus gain last Friday, pushed up after the Federal Reserve cut interest
rates to head off a recession.

   Analysts attributed much of yesterday's jump in the transportation average to
the upgrading by Morgan Stanley of its ratings for railroad companies.
Burlington Northern was up 3 1/8, to 68 1/2; Santa Fe Pacific was up 1 3/8, to
27 3/4, and Conrail was up 1 1/8, to 62 1/4.

   Still, all 20 stocks in the Dow transports posted gains, with Roadway
Services jumping 4 3/8, to 52 7/8, and UAL, the parent of United Airlines,
picking up 3, to 148.

   Of the three key market averages, only the Dow industrials slipped 0.34
point, to 4,702.39. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index inched to a record of
557.19, up 0.82 point, and the Nasdaq composite index also reached a record of
976.63, up 6.87 points.

   Advances exceeded declines on the New York Stock Exchange by 1,384 to 985.
Volume on the Big Board, while lower than Friday's 467.6 million shares -- the
fourth largest in history -- was still strong at 409.7 million shares.

   Banking company stocks were generally higher, following the announcement that
Midlantic Bank had agreed to be acquired by PNC Bank. Midlantic rose 6 1/4, to
47 5/8; UJB Financial gained 2 5/8, to 35; BankAmerica increased 3/8, to 55 7/8,
and Chase Manhattan advanced 1 3/8, to 49 1/4. However PNC fell 1 3/4, to 25
1/8.

   Paper issues were also one of the favored groups yesterday on signs that
rising demand was pushing up profits. Champion International jumped 3 1/8, to
59; the company exceeded Wall Street's expectations with earnings of $1.93 a
share, compared with a loss of 41 cents a share a year earlier. Bowater surged
4, to 53 1/2, while Weyerhaeuser gained 1 1/2, to 50.

   With anticipation high for positive earnings results in the second quarter,
technology stocks were up for the fourth consecutive session. Microsoft
increased 3 1/4, to 98 7/8; the company said it would begin shipping an updated
collection of its top-selling software applications on Aug. 24, the same day it
is scheduled to release Windows 95. Meanwhile, Intel advanced 21/64 , to 7017/64
; Microchip Technology rose 1 1/2, to 38 1/4, and Dell gained 1 5/8, to 65 7/8.

   On the other hand, the so-called Baby Bell telephone companies were lower,
after County NatWest downgraded USWest . For example, U S West dropped 5/8, to
41 1/4; SBC Communiations declined 1, to 45 7/8, and Pacific Telecom fell 1/16 ,
to 29 3/4.

   Some of the health care issues also wound up the day on the down side. Amgen
closed at 78 1/2, off 1 3/8, and Alza, closed at 23 5/8, off 3/8.

   Among the special situations, Genetic Therapy, which reached an agreement to
be acquired by Sandoz for $21 a share, surged 5 5/8, to 20 7/8.  After receiving
an unsolicited $32-a-share offer from Danaher, Joslyn soared 9 1/2, to 34 1/4.
And Aydin, which said that it was considering putting itself up for sale, rose 2
3/4, to 17 3/4.

   Losers for the day included Diametrics Medical, which declined 1 1/8, to 8
7/8, after projecting that its second-quarter results will be below analysts'
expectations. And DSG International, whose management withdrew a buyout offer
amid weaker-than-expected earnings, slumped 6 1/2, to 11 1/2.


GRAPHIC: Table: "The Favorite Stocks" shows performance of the 15 issues with
the most shareholders.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995


                             241 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

HEADLINE: Gene Gun Could Treat Hair Loss

BYLINE: By TIM HILCHEY

BODY:

   IN a promising step in studies of hair growth, researchers at a biotechnology
company in California have found a way to fire genetic "bullets" at hair
follicles, the tiny hair-making factories in the skin.

   "We think this delivery system opens the whole hair-loss field to the
possibility of gene therapy," said Dr. Robert M. Hoffman, the founder and
president of Anticancer Inc., a biotechnology company in San Diego. He and the
company's senior scientist, Dr. Lingna Li, reported their findings in the July
issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

    But another expert in the field cautioned that the results in laboratory
experiments might not carry over to human tissue.

   The researchers encased marker genes in liposomes -- microscopic man-made
spheres of fatty material. Three days after spreading the liposomes on the skin
of shaved laboratory mice, the researchers found that the genes had been
deposited in the cells of the hair follicles.

   "We have an enemy, hair follicle disease, and Dr. Hoffman has invented a gun
with which to fight that enemy," said Dr. Leonid B. Margolis, an expert on
liposomes who is a visiting researcher at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md. "He has demonstrated that the gun works by firing blanks at the
hair follicles. What remains for us to do is to develop the ammunition that will
make the gun useful in the fight against hair loss."

   Dr. Hoffman said that the liposome delivery system grew out of unrelated
research on cancer cells that were being grown on sponge-gel matrices in his
laboratory. "We asked ourselves whether we could grow normal human skin on these
gel matrices," Dr. Hoffman said, "and when we tried we found that the skin
growing in culture produced hair. This was a big breakthrough."

   The ability to grow hair-bearing skin in the lab provided the researchers
with a means for screening "molecules that could modify hair growth," he said.

   "Almost as an aside, we asked what happens if you put liposomes on the skin
cells," he said. "So we put a fluorescent dye inside liposomes and applied them.
To our great surprise we found that the liposomes were selectively delivering
their cargoes to the hair follicles, almost to the exclusion of all the other
cells in the skin."

   The researchers then found that they could use liposomes to deposit melanin,
a pigment that occurs naturally in animal tissue, inside follicles and "color
hair from the roots up." The next step was to test whether the liposome delivery
system could be used for gene therapy.

   First in laboratory tissue cultures and then in shaved mice, the researchers
demonstrated that liposomes containing the so-called lacZ gene deposited the
gene in the hair follicles near the base of the hair shaft. Without a liposome
jacket, lacZ genes applied to skin tissue did not appear in the follicles.

   The lacZ gene was chosen because it produces galactosidase, an enzyme that is
easy to detect in tissue because it turns blue when treated with the proper
chemicals.

   Dr. Gerald G. Krueger, a dermatologist at the University of Utah Health
Sciences Center in Salt Lake City, said his research team has performed similar
experiments "and we've been pleasantly surprised at what can be done with
liposomes via the hair follicle."

   But Dr. Krueger cautioned that extensive research has shown that mouse skin
tissue appears to absorb chemicals more readily than does human tissue, so what
works for one may not work for the other.

   Products based on liposomes could be in use within 10 years, Dr. Hoffman
predicted. The first products would most likely be used to restore color to gray
hair by delivering pigments to the hair follicles.

   He and Dr. Li are studying the tyrosinase gene, which plays a role in making
melanin, to see whether it can be used to reactivate pigment production in the
follicles of people with gray hair. He said his lab is also making progress
using liposomes containing drugs to prevent hair loss caused by cancer
chemotherapy.

   Liposome-based gene and drug therapies for the 80 million American men and
women who have hereditary alopecia, the most common kind of baldness, will
probably take more time to develop, partly because scientists do not understand
what makes hair follicles tick.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995


                             242 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 11, 1995, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12C

LENGTH: 163 words

HEADLINE: SANDOZ DEAL TAKES IT INTO GENE THERAPY

DATELINE: GAITHERSBURG, MD.

BODY:


   Sandoz AG, a large Swiss pharmaceutical company, said Monday it plans to buy
Genetic Therapy Inc. for $ 295 million to enter the growing gene therapy
industry.

   Genetic Therapy, based in Gaithersburg, has been seeking an alliance to help
it fund research for treating cancer, cystic fibrosis, Gaucher disease,
hemophilia and AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).

   Genetic Therapy's board has approved Sandoz's offer.

   Sandoz said it has deals with unnamed shareholders to buy 4.22 million
Genetic Therapy shares for $ 21 each, boosting its stake in Genetic Therapy to
35.6 percent. Sandoz already had a 3.6 percent stake, which it bought for $ 10
million in 1991.

   After Sandoz completes the purchase, it intends to get at least 50 percent
ownership of Genetic Therapy through a tender offer for the company's remaining
shares that begins July 14. The $ 295 million offer represents a 38 percent
premium over the stock's closing price of $ 15.25 on Friday.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                             243 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     July 11, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 159 words

HEADLINE: Company combos keep rolling in

BYLINE: David Craig

BODY:

    This year's steady stream of mergers and acquisitions continued flowing
Monday as several small to medium-size deals surfaced or neared completion.
Among them:

   -- Corn and tobacco processor American Maize Products agreed to a sweetened,
$ 40-a-share, $ 430 million bid by French agricultural company Eridania
Beghin-Say. American Maize class A shares rocketed 5 to $ 38 3/4.

   -- Funeral services giant Service Corp. International bought two divisions of
French funeral service provider Lyonnaise des Eaux for $ 423 million. Service
Corp. shares gained 1/4 to $ 31 1/8.

   -- Biotech company Genetic Therapy was acquired by Swiss chemical and drug
giant Sandoz for $ 21 a share, or $ 295 million. Genetic shares surged 5 5/8 to
$ 20 7/8.

   -- Industrial products maker Danaher offered to buy electrical equipment
maker Joslyn for $ 32 a share, or $ 229 million. Joslyn shares jumped 9 1/2 to $
34 1/2 on speculation the bid will be sweetened.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995


                             244 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg.  D01

LENGTH: 811 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Agrees to Buyout By Swiss Firm; Sandoz to Pay $295
Million For Md. Biotech Company

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   One of the region's leading biotechnology companies, Genetic Therapy Inc. of
Gaithersburg, has agreed to be purchased for $ 295 million in cash by Swiss
pharmaceutical and health care giant Sandoz AG, the companies announced
yesterday.

   Sandoz's offer of $ 21 a share for an eight-year-old company that has yet to
make a profit -- and by its own forecasts won't for several years at best --
underscores the value that big drugmakers place on emerging genetic engineering
technology, health care analysts and industry executives say.

   The deal is the latest in a series of alliances that are reshaping the $ 8
billion a year biotech industry. Biotech firms, often strapped for cash to
develop their products, are increasingly teaming with large drug firms to
survive, either through partnerships on individual products, major stock
purchases or simple buyouts such as the Sandoz-Genetic Therapy deal.

   "This is part of consolidation of the health care industry, and biotech is
definitely playing the role of providing the technology for cash-rich,
technologically mature drug companies," said Meirav Chovav, biotech analyst for
the investment banking firm of Salomon Brothers Inc.

   Sandoz said it plans no major changes at Genetic Therapy.

   But whether the turn toward alliances will ultimately help or hurt Maryland's
status as a national biotech center -- it has roughly 100 companies -- remains
uncertain, some industry watchers say.

   Such alliances could help the state by focusing money and talent in Maryland,
as Genetic Therapy chief executive M. James Barrett says the Sandoz deal will.
Or they could move jobs to the facilities of out-of-town drug companies, which
in Sandoz's case are mostly in the New York City area.

   "The jury is still out on how these big mergers will play out," said John
Hawkins, managing director of Russell Reynolds Associates Inc., an executive
search firm. But, he said, "there certainly will be over time a concentration of
the very top executive jobs at the acquiring company's headquarters."

   One of the first major purchases of biotech firms occurred in 1990, when
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. of Switzerland bought a 60 percent stake in Genentech
Inc. of South San Francisco, Calif. Earlier this year Ceiba-Geigy Ltd., also of
Switzer land bought 49 percent of Chiron Inc., based in Emeryville, Calif.

   Sandoz, which had revenue of $ 13.4 billion in 1994, has collaborated for
several years with Genetic Therapy to develop brain cancer products. It already
owns 3.6 percent of Genetic Therapy stock, which it bought for $ 10 million in
1991, and has an options to buy 32 percent more, mostly from management and
major investors.

   Starting Friday, Sandoz will offer $ 21 a share for the remainder of the
company's stock. The offer is 38 percent higher than Genetic Therapy's
market-closing price last Friday of $ 15.25 a share. The companies hope to
complete the deal by fall.

   Yesterday, in response to the offer, Genetic Therapy's stock rose by $ 5.62
1/2 to close at $ 20.87 1/2 in trading on the Nasdaq stock market.

   In biotechnology, companies try to make new products such as foods, drugs and
materials by altering the genetic makeup of living cells. Genetic Therapy is
among the nation's leading developers of one of biotech's newest and most
experimental applications, gene therapy. In this field, scientists attempt to
insert new genes into cells to correct disease-causing defects or to make sick
cells more responsive to treatment.

   In March, Genetic Therapy made headlines when it received rights to
commercialize a gene therapy technique in which doctors take cells out of the
body, insert new genes, then reintroduce them into the body. The National
Institutes of Health had won a patent on the technique, and then gave Genetic
Therapy exclusive rights to take it into the market. Many biotech executives
have questioned, however, whether such a broad patent will stand up in court.

   Daniel Vasella, chief executive of Sandoz Pharma AG, the Swiss company's
pharmaceutical division, said the patent played a "minor" role in Sandoz's
interest in Genetic Therapy.

   "It was more the know-how and the quality of the people," he said. Now Sandoz
will "bring to the party our know-how in the development, marketing and
regulatory" areas of drug development.

   Genetic Therapy also is working on drugs for cystic fibrosis and AIDS, among
other illnesses, work that analysts say fits well with the research focus of
Sandoz.

   Having a large and prosperous parent is good news for Genetic Therapy, chief
executive Barrett said.

   "There's a lot of emotion built into a company you helped start eight years
ago," Barrett said. Selling it, he said, "is a little sad but there's a great
deal of optimism because we won't have to keep thinking about where the next
round of financing will come from."


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post, GENETIC THERAPY IN PROFILE * Headquarters:
Gaithersburg * Employees: 150 * Business: Genetic Therapy develops ways to treat
various diseases with gene therapy. Their process involves inserting genes into
cells. The gene therapy is being used in human tests to treat malignant melanoma
and trials are planned for leukemia and liver disease.  * Developments: Swiss
pharmaceutical giant Sandoz makes a $295 million takeover bid.  * 1994 revenue:
$14.1 million * 1994 loss: $5.5 million GENETIC THERAPHY (This chart was not
available)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995


                             245 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 9, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Personal Health; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: Early detection doesn't account for increased incidence of brain
tumors

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY; New York Times

BODY:

   Brain tumors are on the rise and no one knows why.

   Since most brain tumors produce symptoms, like headaches, that
are commonly caused by far less devastating disorders, they
are often ignored or dismissed as unimportant.  As a result, a
correct diagnosis is not made until the tumor reaches a size
that may make definitive treatment impossible.

   Dramatic improvements in diagnosis and new and improved
treatments, including the use of a noninvasive radioactive
""knife'' and chemotherapy and still-experimental immunotherapy
and gene therapy, offer hope for cure or at least long-term
control in patients who just a decade ago would have been
doomed.

   Although brain scans are costly, they are safe and readily
available and may reveal a tumor - or some other hazard in the
brain - early enough for cure.  It is important to remember
that even when a growth is technically classified as benign it
is not; although it may not be malignant, any growth in the
brain is trapped in an unyielding skull and can press on and
ultimately destroy vital brain tissue.

   In the mid-1980s, about 55,000 Americans were found to have
brain tumors.  Experts expect the number this year will exceed
100,000, including about 17,000 primary brain tumors (those
that arise in the brain) and at least 80,000 metastatic
cancers that have spread to the brain from elsewhere in the
body.

   Tumors that originate in the brain are the second most common
cancer in infants and young children, occurring about as often
as acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

   In adults, primary brain tumors are as common as ovarian
cancer.  About half of primary brain tumors are benign; they
grow slowly, do not invade surrounding tissues and usually can
be treated successfully.  The rest are malignant: aggressive
and invasive but often treatable, although usually incurable.

   To be sure, modern imaging techniques like computerized
tomography, better known as a CT scan (a cross-sectional X-ray
of the brain), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have
greatly improved diagnosis, but better detection does not
appear to account for most of the rise in brain tumors.

   For metastatic brain tumors, an important factor is likely to
be the growing success oncologists have had in controlling
cancers elsewhere in the body, allowing patients to live long
enough to experience a recurrence in the brain years later.

   Drugs that kill cancer cells often fail to cross the so-called
blood-brain barrier, and cancer cells that have escaped to the
brain may survive there and grow.

   The real challenge of brain tumors is finding them when they
are still small and amenable to treatment.

   One of the most common symptoms is persistent headaches,
especially those that occur at night or are present upon
awakening in the morning or, particularly in children,
headaches accompanied by nausea and vomiting.

   Other common symptoms include personality changes; vision or
speech difficulties; behavioral disorders; weakness, numbness
or paralysis on one side of the body or unsteadiness in
walking that gets progressively worse; epileptic-like
seizures; and sensory disorders, like a sensation of smelling
something burning.

   The trick in treating brain tumors is to remove or destroy the
tumor without damaging adjacent normal brain tissue.  The usual
methods of treatment are surgery or surgery combined with
radiation.

   Nearly half of primary brain tumors can be cured, says Dr.
Edward R.Laws Jr., a neurosurgeon at the University of
Virginia in Charlottesville.

   Seeking help

   The American Brain Tumor Association, at (800) 886-2282,
and the National Brain Tumor Foundation, at (800) 934-CURE
(934-2873), can provide information and referrals to support
services for brain tumor patients and their families.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1995


                             246 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                       July 9, 1995, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1490 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH BLUES;
FIRMS GO BEGGING FOR MONEY TO TEST NEW DRUGS

BYLINE: By BARBARA MARSH, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: TUSTIN

BODY:

   The road to riches in biotechnology has never been easy. But now Southern
California companies with experimental drugs are finding it especially
difficult.

   Consider ImmunoTherapy Corp., a tiny Tustin company with a vaccine intended
to combat cancer.

   Jeff Lillard, the company's chairman, wants to raise $3.5 million to fund
tests in cancer patients. He's talked with more than 100 venture capital firms,
investment bankers and big drug firms, but Lillard has nothing to show for it.

   His odds of landing capital from traditional sources? About as good, Lillard
says, as those of Reggie Jackson coming out of retirement to hit "four home runs
in one World Series game."

   While the number of companies like ImmunoTherapy seeking money to test their
drugs in the doctor's office is growing, capital appears increasingly scarce,
observers say.

   The high failure rate of drugs in clinical trials has always made it hard to
raise money from venture firms and public investors. Now there is the added
concern that even successful new drugs won't sell in today's cost-conscious
health care industry.

   Industry sources estimate that the total investment in biotech firms
nationally dropped to $1.8 billion last year from almost $2.7 billion the
previous year.

   The companies have been forced to get smarter about drug development.

   "They've had to get pretty creative about keeping themselves going," said
Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor in chief of BioVenture View, a newsletter that
tracks the industry.

   Among other strategies, biotech firms are striking alliances with large drug
companies, testing inventive stock offerings, raising capital overseas and even
concentrating on drugs that cost less to develop.

   It generally takes six to nine years and an investment of $50 million to $120
million for an experimental drug to clear human tests and gain regulatory
approval for marketing. Three out of four drugs don't make it, so small,
struggling biotech firms must fight to stay on track.

   "Many of these biotech companies are primarily funded by existing investors,
and it's extremely difficult for them to get new investors to jump on," said
Howard Wachtler, managing director of Medical Venture Holdings Inc., which
manages two health care investment funds.

   Gyrating stock values have done little to ease investors' concerns. Shares of
Cephalon Inc., for instance, soared in the week after the West Chester, Pa.,
firm announced its drug Myotrophin slowed the advance of Lou Gehrig's disease in
clinical tests.

   But shares of Cor Therapeutics, in South San Francisco, tumbled on news that
its anti-clotting drug Integrin didn't do much better than a placebo in
preventing death or other adverse outcomes in angioplasty patients.

   Such clinical disappointments have forced companies to slash their
research-and-development budgets. Earlier this year, San Diego-based Gensia
Inc., faced with disappointing results for a cardiovascular drug, cut 35
headquarters jobs -- laying off four corporate officers, among others.

   Yet with a record number of drugs in the human testing phase, the pressure on
such companies to prove themselves in clinical tests is only intensifying,
analysts say.

   Frederick Dorey, president of the Bay Area Bioscience Center, a regional
clearinghouse for companies and researchers, predicts that the number of
experimental drugs failing in late-stage tests will increase as the huge number
of companies started in the 1980s get ready to test their ideas on human
subjects.

   "The odds are daunting," said Mark Edwards, managing director of Recombinant
Capital, a San Francisco consulting firm. "They will fail more often than they
will succeed."

   Facing such odds, some companies are taking pains to make themselves more
attractive to public investors.

   Ligand Pharmaceuticals Inc. in San Diego and its larger partner, Irvine-based
Allergan Inc., launched a company to develop drugs using their combined
technology for naturally occurring hormones called retinoids. The new company,
dubbed ALRT, or Allergan Ligand Retinoid Therapeutics, went public June 3 with
an initial offering of 3.25 million rights priced at $10 each. The rights, which
include a share of ALRT stock and two warrants to purchase Ligand stock in five
years, closed Friday at $15.75.

   The deal gives Ligand the right to buy the new company's stock back for
$120.7 million, or $37.13 a share, in five years -- a prospect that gives
investors the chance to earn a substantial return on their money. The offering,
which sought to raise $32.5 million, was so popular that it attracted $90
million from the public, said Jeff D'Eliscu, an Allergan spokesman.

   "We had to give $60 million back," he said.

   Other companies are scouring foreign markets for investors.

   "We are very close to coming out with some major therapies for cancer, and
the funding has gotten pathetic," said Alan Epstein, director of scientific
research at Techniclone in Tustin. So Dr. Epstein, who is also a USC professor
of pathology, turned last year to a company in Shanghai to fund clinical trials
for his technology for fighting cancerous tumors. He hopes to start clinical
trials there this fall.

   Many firms, meanwhile, are trying to line up partnerships with big drug
firms.

   Viagene Inc., a San Diego gene therapy company, recently announced plans to
be acquired by its large stake holder, Chiron Corp., a well-financed biotech
firm in Emeryville, Calif.

   With lots of drugs in the pipeline, Viagene expects to spend $10 million on
clinical trials and related activities this year -- double its 1993 budget --
and it couldn't wait for the capital markets to improve, said Dr. Robert Abbott,
president and chief executive.

   "We don't expect the availability of capital over the next several years is
going to improve a lot," he said.

   Careful stretching of resources is key to many biotech companies' survival in
these capital-short times.

   Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Carlsbad, Calif., which has attracted
multimillion-dollar commitments from major pharmaceutical companies, has done so
partly by carefully managing which drug uses it chooses to pursue, said Chairman
and Chief Executive Stanley T. Crooke.

   By deliberately targeting treatments that require only limited quantities of
drugs, Isis has kept its developmental costs down. Able to produce adequate
quantities of drugs at its modest, 1,200-square-foot plant, the company has not
had to make the kind of costly manufacturing investments that have handicapped
other biotech firms.

   Isis pushed ahead with treatments for genital warts and cytomegalovirus
retinitis, an eye condition common in AIDS patients that can cause blindness.
Both diseases can be treated with small amounts of drugs injected locally. In
contrast, Isis postponed pursuing applications for treatment of such conditions
as arthritis, which require large quantities of drugs administered throughout
the body.

   Next year, if clinical tests proceed as hoped, Isis aims to seek approval to
market its retinitis treatment; the wart treatment will follow six months later.

   A small number of biotech companies prosper enough to fund their own
research. Thousand Oaks-based Amgen, the largest independent biotech company,
with sales last year of $1.6 billion, is one of the fortunate few.

   "We actually generate cash," said Gordon Binder, chairman and chief
executive.

   Amgen, with five new drugs now in clinical tests, faces its own challenges.
It relies on sales of its two blockbuster drugs, Epogen and Neupogen, to fund
those tests.

   Amgen plans to increase its overall sales and marketing budget by 10% this
year to about $370 million. Its sales force of 300 will be calling on more
health professionals and visiting them more frequently, attending more medical
conferences and developing marketing material that shows the attributes of its
drugs.

   Also, Amgen is experimenting for the first time with marketing directly to
patients. Among other things, Binder said, the company will start running ads in
women's magazines promoting Neupogen as a treatment to avoid infections
associated with chemotherapy.

   These days, "it's a tougher sell," the executive said.

   Indeed, the typical biotech firm must struggle just to survive.

   ImmunoTherapy Chairman Lillard, whose mother died of breast cancer, cites
results of a study last year that suggested the company's vaccine may help stop
the spread of various cancers. Of 15 cancer patients given the drug, he said,
two had tumors shrink or disappear and five had tumors stop growing; cancers
continued to spread in the other patients.

   But ImmunoTherapy has exhausted most of the $1.5 million in past investment
on which it has been running for several years. And if it can't raise a fresh
$3.5 million to get into more extensive trials, said Lillard, "we'll have to cut
an already thin program back even further -- and that will hurt our ability to
advance the vaccine into the clinic."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Jeff Lillard, chairman of ImmunoTherapy Corp. in Tustin, with
vial of vaccine intended to combat cancer.  ALEXANDER GALLARDO / Los Angeles
Times

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1995


                             247 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 8, 1995 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO and CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Royale Energy of San Diego says it has completed Pinheiro 2, a joint venture
natural gas well drilled in June in developing last year's discovery well in the
Sacramento Basin.

   Pinheiro 2 was completed with a producible flow rate of 4 million cubic feet
per day.

   Pinheiro 1 was put on line last October, producing 5 million cubic feet per
day. Neighborhood Bancorp, a holding company for Neighborhood Development Bank,
is seeking approval from the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public
stock offering of 500,000 shares at $10 a share.

   The bank's service area is the southeast section of San Diego, a commercially
underserved area primarily inhabited by low- and moderate-income residents.

   The bank aims to spur economic development by meeting the credit needs of
small businesses. Alliance Pharmaceutical began a second phase of testing with
adult patients for LiquiVent, an agent for the treatment of acute respiratory
failure. Viagene has received a worldwide, nonexclusive license from Ajinomoto
of Tokyo for the use of the Interleukin-2 gene in gene therapy treatments for
cancer and other diseases.

   The company will pay Ajinomoto an undisclosed license fee and royalties.
Pacific Southwest Mortgage, a mortgage banking and real estate management firm,
has changed its name to Pacific Southwest Realty Services and established a
commercial real estate brokerage, according to Daniel F. Mulvihill, chairman.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             248 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 6, 1995, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 452 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme gets OK on joint treatment

BYLINE: By Larry Tye, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The US Food and Drug Administration last night gave a temporary green light
to a promising new transplant procedure that a Cambridge biotech firm is using
to grow cartilage cells.

   For several months the FDA has been trying to decide which of its divisions
should regulate the operation and whether further safety reviews are needed. But
in a statement last night, the agency said no such reviews will be needed, at
least for now.

   The FDA announced it will hold a public hearing in November on a range of
transplant processes involving fat cells, skin cells and cartilage cells, trying
to decide whether there are any health risks.

   "We're saying here that we need more information, we need to approach this
very carefully," said FDA spokesman Lawrence Bachorik. For now, he added, there
is no evidence of danger and additional cartilage transplants may be done.

   That's good news for Genzyme, the Cambridge company that grows the cartilage
cells, and for tens of thousands of people hobbled by cartilage damage. Genzyme
already has been working with doctors in Boston and elsewhere to treat 13
patients with injured knees. It removes healthy cells from the damaged joint,
feeds them nutrients that make them multiply in a laboratory, and returns the
cells to doctors who transplant them back to the injured joint.

   The procedure has been used on 150 or so patients in Sweden and was tried for
the first time in the United States in March on a patient at Massachusetts
General Hospital. Results in Sweden have been impressive, with patients
sidelined by cartilage woes returning to bowl, play hockey and do other rigorous
activities.

   Injuries to cartilage lining the joints are the most vexing in sports today,
having forced athletes like Cam Neely of the Bruins to have major surgery and
pushed former Bruin Gord Kluzak into early retirement.

   Genzyme declined to comment last night on the FDA action, saying it will
release a formal statement today. In the past, officials of the Cambridge firm
have insisted their cartilage procedure is safe and similar to one it has used
since 1988 to grow new skin cells for burn victims.

   FDA, in its statement last night, said a policy it adopted in 1993 requires
gene therapies to undergo controlled tests of a sort that haven't been conducted
for the cartilage process, but it added that "FDA also recognizes the potential
for evolving technologies and scientific advances to require modifications to
its approach."

   Its public hearing on cell transplant processes will be held Nov. 16 and 17
at the Hilton Hotel in Gaithersburg, Md. Comments are being solicited from
scientists, trade groups, commercial enterprises, medical researchers and
consumers.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1995


                             249 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;   Page 9;   Column 4;   National Desk;   Health Page

LENGTH: 1240 words

HEADLINE: Personal Health

BYLINE: By Jane E. Brody

BODY:

   BRAIN tumors are on the rise and no one knows why. It would be hard to find a
family in which at least one member or friend has not had a brain tumor. Since
most brain tumors produce symptoms, like headaches, that are commonly caused by
far less devastating disorders, they are often ignored or dismissed as
unimportant. As a result, a correct diagnosis is not made until the tumor
reaches a size that may make definitive treatment impossible.

   Many brain tumors, if caught early, are curable. And even those that cannot
be cured can often be treated in a way that gives patients years of quality
life. Dramatic improvements in diagnosis and new and improved treatments,
including the use of a noninvasive radioactive "knife" and chemotherapy and
still-experimental immunotherapy and gene therapy, offer hope for cure or at
least long-term control in patients who just a decade ago would have been
doomed.

    Thus, lay people and doctors alike are being urged to be alert to the
symptoms of brain tumors and to pursue a proper medical work-up when such
symptoms have no obvious explanation. Although brain scans are costly, they are
safe and readily available and may reveal a tumor -- or some other hazard in the
brain -- early enough for cure. It is important to remember that even when a
growth is technically classified as benign it is not; although it may not be
malignant, any growth in the brain is trapped in an unyielding skull and can
press on and ultimately destroy vital brain tissue.

Mysterious Rise

    In the mid-1980's, about 55,000 Americans were found to have brain tumors.
Experts expect the number this year will exceed 100,000, including about 17,000
primary brain tumors (those that arise in the brain) and at least 80,000
metastatic cancers that have spread to the brain from elsewhere in the body.

   Tumors that originate in the brain are the second most common cancer in
infants and young children, occurring about as often as acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. In adults, primary brain tumors are as common as ovarian cancer. About
half of primary brain tumors are benign; they grow very slowly, do not invade
surrounding tissues and can usually be successfully treated. The rest are
malignant: aggressive and invasive but often treatable, although usually
incurable.

   To be sure, modern imaging techniques like computerized tomography, better
known as a CT scan (a cross-sectional X-ray of the brain), or more often these
days magnetic resonance imaging, better known as an M.R.I., have greatly
improved diagnosis, but better detection does not appear to account for most of
the rise in brain tumors. For metastatic brain tumors, an important factor is
likely to be the growing success oncologists have had in controlling cancers
elsewhere in the body, allowing patients to live long enough to experience a
recurrence in the brain years later.

   Drugs that kill cancer cells often fail to cross the so-called blood-brain
barrier, and cancer cells that have escaped to the brain may survive there and
grow. In treating breast cancer, for example, chemotherapy given after surgery
and radiation can often eradicate cancer cells everywhere in the body except the
brain, and cancer cells that reached the brain before treatment could result in
a relapse.

   Improper function of the immune system is believed to account for part of the
rise in brain tumors. Among those affected are patients who have undergone organ
transplants and require lifelong treatment with immunosuppressive drugs, those
who years earlier underwent cancer treatments that suppress the immune system,
people with AIDS, which causes immunological failure, and the growing numbers of
elderly people whose immune functions gradually decline with age.

   Although some researchers have suggested that environmental factors like
exposure to electromagnetic fields may contribute to the rise in brain tumors,
none of those theories have been established as fact. Workers in the rubber
industry have been shown to face an unusually high risk of developing a brain
tumor, perhaps from exposure to an occupational chemical.

Be Alert to Symptoms

    The real challenge of brain tumors is finding them when they are still small
and amenable to treatment. Symptoms depend on the size of the tumor and where in
the brain it occurs. A benign tumor may grow very slowly for years before it
causes enough pressure on the brain to produce a recognizable symptom.

   One of the most common symptoms is persistent headaches, especially those
that occur at night or are present upon awakening in the morning or,
particularly in children, headaches accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Other
common symptoms include personality changes; vision or speech difficulties;
behavioral disorders; weakness, numbness or paralysis on one side of the body or
unsteadiness in walking that gets progressively worse; epileptic-like seizures,
and sensory disorders, like a sensation of smelling something burning. Too
often, symptoms like personality or behavioral changes are attributed to a
psychological disorder or to the aging process and are not taken seriously until
it is too late to cure the tumor.

   In addition to CT scans and M.R.I., which is even more precise than a CT scan
and does not involve any radiation, another diagnostic technique sometimes used
is positron emission tomography, or the PET scan. This technique can pinpoint
small areas of active tumor and can help to distinguish recurrent tumor from
tumor tissue destroyed by previous treatment.

Treating Brain Tumors

    The trick in treating brain tumors is to remove or destroy the tumor without
damaging adjacent normal brain tissue. The usual methods of treatment are
surgery or surgery combined with radiation.

   Dramatic advances have occurred in surgical techniques in recent years that
enable neurosurgeons to remove tumors that were previously considered inoperable
or that could not be completely removed. Radiation therapy is also improving,
allowing a more precise zeroing in on tumor tissue, including tumors deep in the
brain, without harm to surrounding tissue. The Gamma Knife (see the accompanying
article), technically known as stereotactic radiosurgery, is revolutionizing the
treatment of once inoperable or incurable tumors.

   Nearly half of primary brain tumors can be cured, says Dr. Edward R. Laws
Jr., a neurosurgeon at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. The
remaining half either recur despite treatment or are in areas of the brain that
cannot be treated. Further progress in treatment will depend on referring
patients to clinical trials that assess potential therapeutic advances.

More Help

   The American Brain Tumor Association, at (800) 886-2282, and the National
Brain Tumor Foundation, at (800) 934-CURE (934-2873), can provide information
and referrals to support services for brain tumor patients and their families.
The foundation can also refer patients to treatment centers. To obtain the
foundation's comprehensive 56-page booklet, "Brain Tumors: A Guide," send $6 to
the organization at 785 Market Street, Suite 1600, San Francisco, Calif., 94103.

   A booklet listing more than 100 support groups and other helpful resources
around the country costs $2. Patients or family members can get single copies of
both booklets free. Those who join the organization's mailing list will receive
its free 16-page newsletter, Search, four times a year.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1995


                             250 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 3, 1995, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A6, NOTEBOOK

LENGTH: 179 words

HEADLINE: Fashion gene therapy

BYLINE: From local and wire dispatches

BODY:


   Gene therapy like that used to treat disease may be able to bring back the
lustrous color and robust hair growth of youth, a team of California
biotechnologist says.

   Robert M. Hoffman, founder and president of the San Diego biotech firm
AntiCancer Inc., and a colleague turned white mice black, they reported last
week, by delivering a missing pigment called melanin right into their hair
follicles. And they showed, in laboratory tests, that they also can deliver
genes to hair follicles -- where hair growth originates -- by covering skin with
a cream made of liposomes, or small fat bubbles, into which genes have been
inserted.

   No one knows yet whether their system, which they explain in the journal
Nature Medicine, will work on the balding pates and graying manes of living
humans. If it does, it will probably be used first for restoring hair color,
because scientists already have the gene that helps the body make melanin. Gene
therapy also should work to restore hair growth, in principle, but the genes
that control balding have not been determined.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1995


                             251 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 03, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F22; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 2098 words

HEADLINE: Midyear Update: High-Tech Firms Move the Market

BYLINE: Stan Hinden , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   As bull markets go, they don't get much better than this. What began as a
modest rally back in January -- seemingly just a bounce-back from the sluggish
days of 1994 -- has turned into a stampede by investors who want to get in, stay
in and cash in.

   The results for the first six months of this year are quite astonishing,
really. The closely watched Dow Jones industrial average climbed a remarkable
18.8 percent. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index ran a close second with an
18.6 percent gain. And the New York Stock Exchange composite tallied a rise of
16.3 percent.

   But the most dramatic performance came from the Nasdaq Stock Market
composite, which soared 24.5 percent. Hard to believe -- but true. If you wonder
why, the answer is that Nasdaq is home to many small companies -- especially
technology companies -- and this is their year to beep, buzz, whistle, blink and
otherwise celebrate the fact that computer chips are everywhere.

   Fortunately, Washington area investors did not miss the party. Of 206 stocks
listed in the Washington Business stock table, 158 turned in gains, 44
registered losses and four showed no change of price. Among the winners, about
two-thirds showed gains of 20 percent or more.

   The Washington Business area stock index, charted below, rose 19.9 percent in
the first half of the year.

   One unexpected result came from the Johnston, Lemon & Co. index, a group of
30 regional blue-chip stocks. The index, after rising 6.4 percent in the first
quarter of the year, dropped 2.1 percent in the second quarter for a net gain of
4.2 percent. The index apparently was adversely affected by losses in the shares
of Hechinger Co., Crown Books Corp. and several real estate investment trusts.

   Here are the regional stocks, selling for $ 2 or more, that did the best and
worst in the first half of the year. The name of each company is followed by its
stock symbol. Symbols with three letters or less generally belong to companies
that trade on the New York or American stock exchanges. Four letters or more
indicate companies traded on Nasdaq.

   The Winners

   * Atlantic Coast Airlines Inc.  (ACAI) Sterling; gain: 365.4 percent. A
relatively young regional airline, Atlantic Coast operates commercial flights in
the Northeast under the name United Express. After suffering heavy losses, the
company shut down its Florida operations and reorganized. Atlantic Coast shares
soared recently after the company said its second-quarter earnings would beat
analysts' expectations.

   * MedImmune Inc.  (MEDI) Gaithersburg; gain: 310.9 percent. A lucrative
partnership with Baxter International Inc., was just what the doctor ordered for
MedImmune stock. Baxter, a global health care firm, agreed to commercialize
MedImmune's RespiGam drug outside North America. The drug, currently in clinical
trials, is used to prevent respiratory disease in infants. Baxter also agreed to
buy 826,536 MedImmune shares for $ 9.5 million -- a big help to the Gaithersburg
biotech firm.

   * Data Measurement Corp.  (DMCB) Gaithersburg; gain: 215.8 percent. After a
financial slump last year, Data Measurement has experienced a growing demand for
its products and services. The company makes computerized thickness measuring
systems for the global metals industry. Data Measurement shares got a strong
push when the company reported that first-quarter earnings moved up to 23 cents
a share from 8 cents a year earlier. Sales grew to $ 6.5 million from $ 5.3
million.

   * Microlog Corp.  (MLOG) Germantown; gain: 201.2 percent. A maker of
voice-mail equipment, Microlog fell on hard times in recent years. The company's
losses turned Microlog shares into a penny stock; at the start of the year, they
were selling for only 81 cents. However, business seems to have picked up and
the company recently reported it earned $ 303,000 in its second quarter --
compared with a $ 949,000 loss a year earlier.

   * USAir Group Inc.  (U) Arlington; gain: 173.6 percent. If you can believe
it, USAir once was a $ 33 stock. That was before turbulence in the airline
industry and heavy losses at USAir helped send its stock skidding to a low of $
3.88. Since then, the skies have been brightening for USAir, which won
significant financial concessions from its major employee groups as part of an
effort to cut costs by $ 500 million. The stock has returned to $ 11.63.

   * QuesTech Inc.  (QTEC) Falls Church; gain: 122.4 percent. On June 1, a $ 300
million smile from Uncle Sam sent QuesTech shares rocketing to $ 9.75 -- a long
way up from the $ 3.88 price at which the year began. But, shortly afterward,
QuesTech said a competitor filed a protest about the contract award and the
stock moved back down. Such is life in the government contracting business.
Under the Army contract, QuesTech would provide engineering work at the Vint
Hill Farms Station in Warrenton, Va.

   * Genetic Therapy Inc.  (GTII) Gaithersburg; gain: 112.6 percent. Biotech
investors like positive news and that's what Genetic Therapy has offered. It
recently won exclusive rights to commercialize an innovative gene-therapy
process that it developed with the National Institutes of Health. The
development could means millions of dollars in royalties to the company if the
process is used successfully to treat diseases.

   * Coherent Communications Systems Corp.  (CCSC) Leesburg; gain: 106 percent.
Coherent, which makes products that take those nasty echoes out of voice
communications systems, is coming through loud and clear to its shareholders.
Spun off from Safeguard Scientifics Inc. at $ 2.50 a share, adjusted for a
recent 2-for-1 stock split, Coherent soon began to turn in rapid profit gains.
Those gains helped propel the stock to a high of $ 20.25 a share.

   * American Mobile Satellite Corp.  (SKYC) Reston; gain: 105.9 percent.
American Mobile's $ 120 million satellite is in orbit and working smoothly --
even if its stock is still waiting for a big liftoff. Selling at $ 20 on the day
of the launch in April, the shares recently crept up to $ 30.25. Not long
afterward, the stock fell back to about $ 25 to $ 26. The slide accompanied news
that Orbital Sciences Corp. of Sterling was forced to destroy a $ 12 million
spacecraft minutes after it was launched. The incident undoubtedly raised
questions in investors' minds about satellite technology.

   * Microdyne Corp.  (MCDY) Alexandria; gain: 82.3 percent. With its financial
slump well behind it, this computer networking products company is perking
along. With the acquisition of Eagle Technology, profits are accelerating. And
Microdyne stock continues to rise steadily.

   * Penril DataComm Networks Inc.  (PNRL) Gaithersburg; gain: 80 percent. An
agreement by AT&T Corp. to buy Penril's telecommunication products set off a
rash of buying of Penril shares. Volume expanded six-fold and traders speculated
that some investor was building a major position in the stock, which reached $
6. But buying pressure soon abated and the stock has returned to $ 4.50 a share.

   * Resource Mortgage Capital Inc.  (RMR) Richmond; gain: 80 percent. A real
estate investment trust, Resource Mortgage securitizes and invests in
residential mortgage loans. Its stock has climbed steadily this year because the
drop in long-term interest rates has raised the market value of the company's
mortgages and otherwise improved its financial condition.

   The Losers

   * Cosmetic Center Inc.  (COSCA) Savage; loss: 45.5 percent. The sweet smell
of stock market success has been eluding this specialty retailer, which operates
68 stores that sell cosmetics, fragrances and beauty aids. Although Cosmetic
Center's sales have been up, profits have been down because of the costs of
opening new stores. The company hopes to open another 13 stores this year.

   * Government Technology Services Inc.  (GTSI) Chantilly; loss: 44.2 percent.
After years of solid growth, the company's profit dropped 70 percent in 1994
because of inventory and other problems. Recently, the company, which resells
computer products to the government, reported that the Justice Department was
asking questions about the firm's sales contracts with the General Services
Administration. None of this has helped Government Technology's stock price.

   * Infodata Systems Inc.  (INFD). Fairfax; loss: 38.8 percent. The company is
changing its business strategy and moving into electronic document management.
Infodata recently reported a first-quarter loss, but said that its electronic
document business was improving steadily. A turnaround in sales and profits is
expected later this year, the company said.

   * Hechinger Co.  (HECHA) Landover; loss: 38.2 percent. This venerable
do-it-yourself company, founded in 1911, is a Washington institution. And it's
still a growing company -- it now operates 70 Hechinger stores and 50 Home
Quarter stores in 21 states. Unfortunately, its sales and profits have been
sliding recently and investors have marked down its stock quite severely. The
company attributed the recent falloff in sales to poor weather, a drop in home
sales and growing competition from Home Depot Inc.

   * Smithfield Foods Inc.  (SFDS) Smithfield, Va.; loss: 33.4 percent. The
price of Smithfield's stock fluctuates with the prices of hogs, corn and other
meat products. And when things get tight, as they did recently, Smithfield's
profits tend to slide a bit. But even when times are tough, the company can
still earn $ 28 million on sales of $ 1.5 billion -- as it did in fiscal 1995.

   * Micro-Integration Corp.  (MINT) Frostburg, Md.; loss: 27.8 percent. This
small company sells software and hardware for computer networks. It recently
reported a net loss for fiscal 1995 of $ 1.1 million, which included a
restructuring charge. The company said the loss was caused by, among other
things, higher marketing costs and the closing of its Belgium operations. A
company official said the firm hoped to return to profitability in fiscal 1996.

   * Crown Books Corp.  (CRWN) Landover; loss: 27.4 percent. It's not easy these
days to figure out what's happening to the companies in the Haft family empire.
But what is known is that Crown's business was down for the 13-week period that
ended on April 29. Sales fell to $ 61 million from $ 65.6 million and the
company reported a net loss of $ 384,000, compared with a profit of $ 415,000 a
year earlier.

   * Allied Research Corp.  (ALR) Vienna; loss: 25 percent. Once a prosperous
munitions company, Allied saw its profit slide as orders from Middle East
clients dried up. The stock, of course, also took a hit. That sent the company
in search of business in the fields of environmental cleanup work and home and
business security systems. Recently, the company said it received a $ 36 million
order from an unidentified country for munitions. But, so far, the order hasn't
helped the stock much.

   * Cryomedical Sciences Inc.  (CMSI) Rockville; loss: 20.7 percent. The
company makes hypothermic (low temperature) medical devices. One system is used
to freeze and destroy cancer of the prostate, liver and other organs with a
minimally-invasive procedure. Although its shares haven't done much recently,
the company continues to pursue its new technology by obtaining patents and
applying to the Food and Drug Administration for approval to market its
products.

   * Mental Health Management Inc.  (MHM) McLean; loss: 19.9 percent. The
company owns or leases seven psychiatric hospitals, located in various parts of
the country. A Maryland hospital concentrates on substance abuse problems. The
company recently sold its stake in a mental health services joint venture for $
9.7 million and has been making efforts to improve its financial performance.

   * Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc.  (MME) Rockville; loss: 19.1 percent.
One of the largest managed health care organizations in the Washington area, Mid
Atlantic has grown rapidly and, for a time its stock was one of the fast
climbers. However, the health maintenance sector has cooled off and Mid Atlantic
recently failed to pass a voluntary examination by a national quality control
rating organization. The episode hurt the stock price, which has continued to
drift down.

   * Monarch Avalon Inc.  (MAHI) Baltimore; loss: 16.7 percent. Once in a while,
over the years, this game-creating company latches onto a big idea and its
earnings and stock price take off. But this hasn't happened for a while and the
stock has been lagging. The company has started a new magazine, Girls Life, and
the firm has high hopes for its success.


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post, WINNERS AND LOSERS FIRST HALF WINNERS PRICE
PRICE PCT.  STOCK (12/31) (6/30) GAIN Atlantic Coast Air $1.88 $8.75 365.4%
MedImmune 3.50 14.38 310.9 Data Measurement 4.75 15.00 215.8 Microlog .81 2.44
201.2 USAir Group 4.25 11.63 173.6 QuesTech 3.88 8.63 122.4 Genetic Therapy 7.00
14.88 112.6 Coherent Comm.  8.13 16.75 106.0 Amer. Mobile Sat.  12.75 26.25
105.9 Microdyne 10.63 19.38 82.3 Penril Datcm. Net.  2.50 4.50 80.0 Resource
Mort Cap.  10.63 19.13 80.0 FIRST HALF LOSERS PRICE PRICE PCT.  STOCK (12/31)
(6/30) LOSS Cosmetic Center A $13.75 $7.50 -45.5% Govt. Tech. Serv.  10.75 6.00
-44.2 Infodata Systems 6.75 4.13 -38.8 Hechinger A 11.63 7.19 -38.2 Smithfield
Foods 32.00 21.31 -33.4 Micro-Intergration 4.50 3.25 -27.8 Crown Books 15.50
11.25 -27.4 Allied Research 5.00 3.75 -25.0 Cryomed. Sciences 3.00 2.38 -20.7
Mental Hlth. Mgmt.  2.81 2.25 -19.9 Mid Atl. Med. Serv.  22.88 18.50 -19.1
Monarch Avalon 3.00 2.50 -16.7

LOAD-DATE: July 03, 1995


                             252 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1432 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Pioneering treatment helps to fight cancer;
 Cancer victim Earlene Scruggs, the first patient to receive a new gene therapy,
enjoys a renewed lease on life

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: LOWELL, Ark.

BODY:

   LOWELL, Ark. -- The setting sun gilds the faces of the girls
in red and white uniforms as they surround Earlene Scruggs just
outside the dugout.

   Most of them do not know that she is the first patient to
undergo a new kind of gene therapy designed to give her a better
chance at beating her ovarian cancer.

   Few of them glance at the name of the Earlene Scruggs
Activity Center located on the edge of the ball field.

   It is the summer softball season, and Earlene Scruggs is
their coach, as she has been the coach of numerous slow-pitch
softball teams over the years.  That, along with her other civic
activities, is why the activity center bears her name.

   She also is the commissioner at this field, located a block
from her home.

   She spends her days on the telephone, negotiating for
umpires, pairing up teams and organizing tournaments.

   In between, she takes care of the small store and video
rental shop next door to the garage that her husband, Tommy
Scruggs, runs.

   The only visible sign of her illness is the straw hat she
wears to cover the head left bare by chemotherapy.  Except for a
numbness in her feet caused by the therapy's effects on nerve
endings, she says she feels pretty good -- when she talks about her
condition at all.

   The numbness has left her unable to play softball herself,
the first time in many years that she has not been on a team.

   It is one of the few infringements that Earlene Scruggs
allows her medical condition to make on her personal life.

   Few of her fellow townspeople know that when Scruggs went to
the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center last October,
she helped forge a new path of medical treatment.

   In Houston, she met Drs.  Albert Deisseroth and John
Kavanagh.  She was the ideal first patient for their gene therapy
against ovarian cancer.

   Scrugg's cancer had recurred twice.  The second time,
conventional treatment had little to offer her.  When Deisseroth and
Kavanagh asked her to be the first patient in their study, she was
hesitant but finally agreed.

   Deisseroth had devised a method of putting a piece of
genetic material called the multidrug resistance gene into her bone
marrow.

   The gene confers protection against chemotherapy.  If the
marrow is protected, doctors are able to give higher doses of
Taxol, a potent drug against ovarian cancer, over a longer period
of time.  Without the protection, the amount of Taxol a patient can
receive is limited because the anti-cancer drug kills needed bone
marrow cells.

   Scruggs and the five other women in the study, along with
three breast cancer patients, have become a cadre of pioneers
helping to take medicine into a new era.

   Scruggs led the way.  She began the complex treatment in
October.

   In January, she received her first dose of Taxol.

   Since then, she has returned to M.D. Anderson every three
weeks for more Taxol.  Last week, for the first time, she received
her Taxol at home.

   Within a few months, studies of her marrow cells showed that
the majority carried the multidrug resistance gene.

   Researcher Dr. Elie Hananai checks for the gene by examining
a culture of Scruggs' cells under a microscope.  Those with blue
stains contain the gene.  And the blue-stained cells outnumber all
the others.

   Hananai presents these favorable results at weekly lab
meetings.

   The effect has taken place more quickly than he or
Deisseroth had imagined.

   Deisseroth is cautiously optimistic about the treatment.

   ""In all our patients, the disease reduction is going as planned,''
he said.  ""For the first patient, the treatment appears to show a
positive pattern. ''

   If the genetic treatment continues to protect normal tissue
from the powerful chemotherapy, then the cost to patients in pain
and dollars will be reduced while the effectiveness of their
therapy is increased, he said.

   Eventually, Deisseroth hopes to use gene therapy techniques
to make tumor tissues more sensitive to anti-cancer treatments
while protecting normal tissue.

   In the future, he said, the chemoprotection may be used in
breast cancer patients undergoing their first round of chemotherapy.

   It is impossible to predict whether Scruggs will be cured.

   The study in which she is enrolled is called a phase I trial.

   Officially, it is designed to determine if the treatment is toxic.

   Doctors could promise nothing about a cure.

   As Tommy Scruggs sat in front of his service station,
watching cars and trucks zoom by on a June morning, he wrestled
with that concern.

   The M.D. Anderson doctors reduced the last dose of Taxol
Earlene Scruggs received there because they were worried about the
effects on her nerve endings.

   Taxol damages the nerves.  That's why Scruggs' feet are numb
in cold weather.  The summer heat improves things a bit, but her
steps are halting in the morning when she first wakes up.

   Kavanagh worried that she eventually would be unable to
walk.  That would be hard on Scruggs, whose days are filled with a
variety of activities.

   Doctors have told them, Tommy Scruggs said, that the
disability will probably be temporary.

   The doctors raised the dosage last week because Scruggs'
CA-125 -- a measurement of whether her disease has progressed --
went up 10 points last time.  It may be a testing anomaly, but it
worried Tommy Scruggs and the doctors.

   Only five treatments of Taxol remain, and half of those can
be taken at home, if Scruggs wishes.  She does.

   She can continue to take Taxol after the Deisseroth study is
completed.  But she and her husband have not made that decision yet.

   She was most concerned about the bone marrow sampling she
underwent in Arkansas before receiving the Taxol.

   Her doctor there usually puts patients under general
anesthesia for the procedure, but Scruggs hates to be put to sleep.

   She asked for and received only local deadening.

   She did not have general anesthesia at Anderson, and she
said the procedure in Arkansas went well.

   But she put those concerns behind her as she set up the
weekend tournament.  Much of that requires making sure people follow
the rules, even when her decisions make coaches and players angry.

   That is part of being a coach, and Scruggs is a good one.  She coached Mike
Watkins' daughter last year, and he said it
was no surprise when the community decided to name its new activity
center after her two years ago.

   ""Earlene has always been here,'' he said.  ""She has kept up
the ball fields, mowed the grass.  I don't think there would be a
park here without her. ''

   If you ask Scruggs about it, she just laughs it off.

   But Cathy Ford knows how important the work is.  Her daughter
Christie Fairchild, 16, is a member of Scruggs current team.

   ""She's a good coach,'' said Ford.  ""The girls play a
different game when she's here. ''

    Scruggs' Rogers High School team and the opposing Angels
were slated to play a double-header.  As they took the field at 8
p.m., the evening breeze was just beginning to ruffle the edges of
the blanket of heat over the crowd.

   Scruggs coached third base.  Her assistant Gary Phillips
stood near first.

   Quickly, it became clear that the girls from Rogers would
dominate.  By 8:50 p.m., the score was 14-0.

   But Scruggs detected a bit of slacking off, and her lips
tightened.

   She yelled to one girl who had struck out twice.  ""Don't
look at that third strike this time.  I'd rather see you swing and
miss than just look at it. ''

   The second game was tougher.  In the final inning, her team
was behind.

   The Angels batted first, and the Rogers team took the field
in grim determination.  Suddenly, they reverted to a well-honed team.

   One caught a fly ball.  Two batters hit grounders, and were
put out at first.

   When Scruggs' team took the field, they evened the score
quickly.  Then they made the winning run.

   ""I'd rather we win that way,'' said Scruggs.  ""It makes us
tougher for the next game. ''

   The girls on the team played tough but with grace.  Their
congratulations of the losing team were short but sincere.

   Earlene Scruggs keeps them to the straight and narrow.  They
do not boo the umpire, even when he makes a bad call.  When she
tells them to do something, they do it.  She never tells anyone
twice.

   But there is a rare camaraderie.  They bring her their
problems and their joys.  She gives them back love and consistency.

   The girls count on her being there.

   One girl walked up with her niece in her arms.  The infant
grinned as Scruggs tickled its chin.

   ""Here is the next generation for you, Earlene,'' the girl
said.

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Earlene Scruggs begins the process of receiving experimental
gene therapy for ovarian cancer earlier this year. (color); 2.Earlene Scruggs
displays the unflagging spirit that makes her an inspiring coach of girl's
softball. (color); 3. The girls of the Rogers High School softball team surround
coach Earlene Scruggs after winning both games in a double-header. (b/w, p. 18);
4. Earlene and Tommy Scruggs share a rare quiet moment outside the store they
operate in Lowell, Ark. (b/w, p.18); 5. Earlene Scruggs watches as lab
phlebotomist Becky Gisler prepares a syringe to clean the implanted catheter
through which Scruggs receives her anti-cancer medications.(b/w, p. 18); 6.
Earlene Scruggs jokes with the domino regulars at the store she and her husband
operate. (b/w, p. 18); 2.-6. Carlos Antonio Rios / Chronicle

TYPE: Series; Biography

NOTES: One in an occasional series. A special section called ""The Gene
Doctors,'' published in April, spotlighted Scruggs, the first patient ever to
undergo a new kind of gene therapy for ovarian cancer.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1995


                             253 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 266 words

HEADLINE: Gene helps to tolerate tough anti-cancer drug

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   The experimental gene therapy that is helping Earlene Scruggs
fight ovarian cancer is a complicated, sometimes painful process.

   She was the first of six patients to receive the treatment so far.

   In late October, Scruggs received chemotherapy that killed
off her bone marrow cells.  Bone marrow produces the white blood
cells that fight infection and are the main components of the
body's immune system.  The killing of the marrow cells stimulated
the production of the ""stem cells'' that repopulate the marrow.

   These divide rapidly and are more receptive to the agent,
called a retrovirus, used to carry a new gene into Scruggs' marrow.

   Two weeks after the chemotherapy, with Scruggs under general
anesthesia, doctors removed bone marrow from her hip.

   In the lab, the harvested marrow with its new stem cells was
combined with a retrovirus containing the multidrug resistance
gene.  Cells containing this gene are more resistant to the powerful
anti-cancer drug Taxol, so the patient can tolerate higher doses of
it.

   Once in the stem cells, the gene became part of their
genetic code.  As the stem cells gave rise to more mature cells of
the blood system, these new ""daughter'' cells carried the
protective gene as well.

   A few days Christmas last year, Earlene Scruggs underwent
another round of chemotherapy, then received an infusion of her
gene-altered marrow.

   By late January, her bone marrow had recovered, and she
received her first dose of Taxol.

   She has received seven since then, and is scheduled to get
five more during the course of the experiment.

TYPE: Series

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1995


                             254 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 229 words

HEADLINE: WEDDINGS;
Katherine Glick, Andrew D. Cocks

BODY:

   Katherine Anne Glick, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs. John H. Glick of Swarthmore,
Pa., was married yesterday to Andrew Douglas Cocks, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Douglas L. Cocks of Indianapolis. The Rev. James R. Squire, an Episcopal priest,
officiated at the Chapel of the Episcopal Academy in Merion, Pa. The Rev. Dr. A.
Howard Lindquist, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.

   The bride and the bridegroom are graduates of Vanderbilt University.

    Mrs. Cocks, 23, is a teacher of computer sciences at the Episcopal Academy,
a day school. Her father is the Leonard and Madlyn Abramson Professor of
Clinical Oncology and a professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania
and is the director of the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center, both in
Philadelphia. He is also the president of the American Society for Clinical
Oncology. Her mother, Jane Glick, is the director of education for the Institute
for Human Gene Therapy at Penn.

   Mr. Cocks, 24, is a mechanical engineer with the Kling Lindquist Partnership,
an architectural and engineering firm in Philadelphia. His father is an
economist in the corporate affairs department of Eli Lilly & Company, the
pharmaceuticals concern in Indianapolis. The bridegroom's mother, Donna Cocks,
is a nurse in the radiation oncology department at the Indiana University
Medical Center in Indianapolis.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Katherine Glick, Andrew D. Cocks

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995


                             255 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 1, 1995, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: Some call gene therapy for balding wrong-headed

BYLINE: By Art Kramer, Contributing Reporter

BODY:

    Some follicly challenged Bostonians poked fun at efforts by biotechnologists
to develop a miracle hair cream yesterday, proudly defending bare pates, bald
spots and silvering manes.

   "I like my dome. I call it my circle of earth," said Junior Ramos, 44, of
Salem. "I believe God will restore what is taken away." This avenue researchers
have yet to explore.

   But the announcement Thursday by a team of California biotechnologists that
gene therapy may someday reverse hair loss and graying had others stroking their
heads and talking.

   "That's messing with nature. I think that's going too far," said
salt-and-pepper coiffed Julie Owen, a Cambridge music teacher. "They ought to
leave our genes alone."

   She tried hair dye once several years ago, after the first gray appeared. But
when her newly brown hair turned green in the swimming pool, Owen came to
accept, and eventually like, the natural change in her hair color.

   But 40-something Greg Morell celebrated the news that he may someday be able
to "get off the bottle" - Nice and Easy No. 117 or 118, depending on the season.

   The Northampton special events producer said his mother first dyed his
prematurely graying hair when he was 19 years old and he's been hooked ever
since, applying the dye with a toothbrush at the appearance of gray intruders.

   "It makes me feel youthful," said Morell of the reddish-brown shade he
shampoos in. "Gray had a damaging effect on my psyche. Gray just doesn't fit my
personality."

   For mime troupe ringleader Bizy Backson, 24, premature baldness on top led
him to shave the rest of his head, a look popularized by Michael Jordan and
Charles Barkley, among others. But at the suggestion of a former girlfriend, he
attached about a dozen braids to a small patch of hair just above his neckline
in back.

   Backson's braids-below-bald look moved his friend Tarleton to run her fingers
over his smooth crown and say "I just want to touch it. I can't keep my hands
off it."

   Actors like Yul Brynner, Telly Savalas, and Patrick Stewart have paved the
way for bald men to hold their heads high. But many of the estimated 35 million
men and 21 million women who are losing hair continue to resort to treatments
from science to snake oil.

   Coverups include transplants, hair weaves, toupees and wigs, and the
scalp-paint-in-a-can hawked on late night television by Ron Popeil. And of
course, the old grow-it-long-on-one-side-and-comb-it-over gambit - a favorite of
former Boston Mayor Kevin White - endures.

   In recent years, thousands of mostly unproven topical solutions and ointments
have been joined by minoxidil - a prescription drug that stimulates at least
some hair regrowth for about half its users.

   Now the California researchers have shown in laboratory tests, reported in
yesterday's issue of the journal Nature Medicine, that they can deliver genes to
hair follicles - turning a white mouse black. And the method they use to carry
the genes - through a cream containing small fat bubbles called liposomes -
raises the possibility of stimulating new hair growth as well.

   But not for B. D. Sammich, 31, who vows not to use the miracle hair cream
even if it survives testing and makes it to the market.

   "Women love to rub this head. I'm not giving that up," said Sammich, who
sells watches at Downtown Crossing and plays bass for Atomic Cafe after dark.

   Sammich - the B.D. stands for "Big Daddy" - said the highlight of a recent
gig in Fort Lauderdale came when he auctioned the rights to shave what little
natural hair growth remains atop his pate.

   "Maybe it's the Buddha thing. Women love my head," he said.

   "It's an excellent head," agreed Elaine Burns, 22, of Malden. "It takes a
strong man to be bald."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Junior Ramos of Salem (left) and B. D. Sammich of Boston say
science won't cause them to alter their hairless pates. "Women love to rub this
head," Sammich says.  GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/JOHN TLUMACKI

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1995


                             256 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 30, 1995, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy system aims to restore youthful hair

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Gene therapy like that used to treat disease may be able to bring back the
lustrous color and robust hair growth of youth, a team of California
biotechnologists is announcing today.

   Robert M. Hoffman, founder and president of the San Diego-based biotech firm
AntiCancer Inc., and a colleague, Lingna Li, turned white mice black, they
report, by delivering a missing pigment called melanin into their hair
follicles. And they showed in laboratory tests that they also can deliver genes
to hair follicles - where hair growth originates - by spreading onto skin a
cream made of liposomes, or small fat bubbles, into which genes have been
inserted.

   No one knows yet whether their system, which they explain in today's issue of
the journal Nature Medicine, will work on the balding pates and graying manes of
living humans. If it does, it will likely be used first for restoring hair color
because scientists already have the gene that helps the body make melanin. Gene
therapy should also work to restore hair growth, in principle, but the genes
that control balding have not been determined.

   Even so, cosmetics companies are eager to help test the new system, Hoffman
said yesterday.

   And others are greeting the news with open minds as well.

   "I don't know at the science level, but as a clinician," said Dr. Robert
Stern, a Beth Israel Hospital dermatologist, the Hoffman model is "not
completely out to lunch. It's interesting. And it may have some real relevance."

   In standard gene therapy, the idea is to get the desired gene into a cell by
piggybacking onto inactivated viruses, which are known for their prowess at
penetrating cells. But because Hoffman believes this approach carries risks, he
puts genes into liposomes, which also slip easily through the cell membrane.

   In the current experiments, his team first set out to prove that they could
grow rodent and human skin - and hence hair, which grows from follicles inside
skin tissue - in an artificial system. As a structure to hold skin in place,
they used surgical sponges, which are made from pigskin and are rich in
collagen, connective material that supports many tissues in the body.

   Hoffman's team shaved the skin, placed it on top of the sponges, flooded the
sponges with a nutrient-rich broth, then sat back to watch the hair grow.

   The next step was to see whether they could deliver substances right to the
hair follicle. They put dye into liposomes to help track them and spread the
mixture on the skin. The dye, for reasons that are still mysterious, went
straight to the follicle and almost nowhere else.

   To prove genes could be delivered this way, the researchers inserted a marker
gene called B-galactosidase into liposomes and found that the gene, too, headed
straight to the follicle. The gene did nothing to the follicle itself in this
operation, which was just a demonstration that a gene can be delivered to a
follicle by liposomes.

   Hoffman's team then set out to show it could alter hair color by delivering a
protein-like pigment called melanin to the follicle. First on the sponges, then
on living mice, team members found that as soon as the melanin was delivered to
the follicle, hair that had been white started growing in black.

   "It looked like normal, dark hair," Hoffman said. Humans have not been
tested, but once-white mice produced black hair continuously when the
melanin-containing liposomes were applied every few days.

   The next step is to deliver not melanin itself but a gene called tyrosinase,
which converts a precursor substance already in the body into melanin.

   Combating baldness with gene therapy may prove trickier because it is not
clear what genes are involved.

   "But I think we will find the genes for hair growth," Hoffman said, and they,
too, can be delivered to follicles by liposomes.

   Stern believes the gene therapy model may work better - assuming it works at
all - at slowing balding, not reversing it. "It's one thing to keep a factory
going . . . to block whatever it is that keeps hair follicles from going out of
business," he said. It may be quite another "to bring back ones that have been
out of business a long time."

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1995


                             257 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      June 30, 1995, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS CALL GENE THERAPY A POSSIBLE BALDNESS CURE;
MEDICINE: TEAM REPORTS SUCCESSFULLY PUTTING A GENE INTO A MOUSE FOLLICLE. BUT
KEY TO HAIR GROWTH REMAINS ELUSIVE.

BYLINE: By TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Working with bits of mouse skin growing in plastic dishes, researchers have
used genetic engineering to inch closer to a goal that has eluded sorcerers,
cosmetologists and scientists throughout history: a cure for baldness.

   "We think this opens the field for gene therapy of the hair process," said
biochemist Robert M. Hoffman, head of AntiCancer Inc., a biotechnology firm here
that is doing the work.

   To be sure, no such gene-therapy product for restoring long-lost hair exists.
And Hoffman and co-workers are cautious, acknowledging that the road to medical
ignominy is paved with fleeting discoveries hyped as the greatest thing since
the plastic comb.

   But a report of their study, which appears today in the journal Nature
Medicine, encourages optimism about a problem that has bothered mankind and even
womankind about as long as there have been mirrors.

   "This is very exciting," said Dr. Michael A. Huie, a molecular biologist and
a dermatology resident at UC San Francisco. "It immediately suggests some novel
approaches to treating male pattern baldness."

   Typically, a person every day sheds dozens of scalp hairs that return if
hair-growing cells are healthy and active. The shiny pate characteristic of male
pattern baldness, which has long been known to be genetically inherited, happens
when those cells become dormant.

   For years, legitimate hair researchers and back-room pharmacologists alike
have sought the precise reason that some scalps are genetically programmed to
slip into metabolic winter. Theoretically, once researchers solve that puzzle,
they might be able to reawaken hair growth by replacing a defective gene, for
instance, or supplying a missing one.

   In the new study, Hoffman and Dr. Lingna Li, also of AntiCancer Inc., showed
for the first time that a human gene can be selectively delivered to cells in
the root of a living hair follicle. The transplanted gene had nothing to do with
hair growth but instead served as a sort of molecular crash dummy, allowing the
researchers to test whether their gene-delivery system worked.

   The vehicle for the dummy gene was a tiny, frothy vesicle of lipid, or fat,
known as a liposome. The "fat bubbles," as Hoffman called them, were applied to
bits of mouse skin the size of match heads that rested atop postage-stamp-sized
pink sponges in a plastic dish. When follicle cells in the skin were later
probed for the dummy gene, it was not only present, but was much more abundant
there than in other skin cells.

   "Often in gene therapy, the obstacle is getting the gene where you want it to
go," Huie said. "This opens the door."

   A next step, Li said, is to find out if a liposome can shuttle a dummy gene
into human hair cells. She added that her lab has devised a technique for
sustaining bits of human scalp -- harvested during plastic surgery -- in a dish
for up to 10 days.

   For now, the Holy Grail of hair research remains the gene or genes that
control hair growth. Once researchers pinpoint the key gene, the thinking goes,
it might someday be inserted into dormant hair cells in a liposome-based cream.
Alas, no scientist predicted when that day will be.

   AntiCancer Inc., one of about two dozen firms located in a part of San Diego
known as Biotech Beach, is a private company that was started primarily to test
drugs against cancer.

   In fact, it was an interest in testing drug toxicity on hair cells -- hair
loss is a common and dreaded side effect of chemotherapy -- that led the
researchers into the baldness spotlight, which usually calls to mind cheesy
infomercials for shaggy cover-ups rather than sober papers in a prestigious
scientific journal.

   Dr. Peter M. Goldman, a Los Angeles dermatologist who has conducted research
on hair replacement therapy, is deeply skeptical of the new finding.

   "I think it's a lot of basic science poppycock that won't have any
applicability to patients for years, if ever," Goldman said. "Experiments
involving animals rarely translate to humans, especially with a complex organ
like hair. It may be exciting to scientists, but I wouldn't be too excited about
it."

   Anthony Saintangelo, president of the American Hair Loss Council, a trade
group in Chicago, said wig makers and hair weavers fear no competition from gene
splicers. "I don't see anyone getting nervous," he said.

   Recalling the hubbub several years ago over the federal Food and Drug
Administration's approval of Rogaine as a hair-stimulating drug, Saintangelo
said, "People were going crazy to get their hands on it, but now we know it's
not a miracle drug."

   Saintangelo said he tried Rogaine, to no avail, and now sports a "hair
addition." If genetic hair therapy ever became available, he said he would give
it a shot, adding, "How else are you going to learn?"

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1995


                             258 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      June 30, 1995, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: CONSUMER BRIEFS:  HAIR-COLORING TESTS HOLD PROMISE

BYLINE: By Times Wire Services

BODY:

   If experiments by a San Diego biotech company live up to their promise, the
hair dye of the future may be a merger of gene therapy and cosmetology. And the
same high technology used to deliver pigment right into the hair cells holds
promise for treating cancer patients with a protein that would block hair loss
from chemotherapy, a scientist at privately held AntiCancer Inc. said. In
research published in the July edition of the journal Nature Medicine,
AntiCancer reported it had developed a gene therapy delivery system capable of
carrying genetic material directly into the cells that produce a hair shaft.
AntiCancer biologist Robert Hoffman said that by placing the natural
hair-coloring pigment, or melanin, into the hair cells itself, it would hide the
gray from the roots up as the hair grows. The company is also experimenting with
a protein that could be applied to patients before they start chemotherapy.
Experiments suggest that patients might be able to keep up to 80% of their hair,
Hoffman said.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1995


                             259 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JUNE 30, 1995 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1374 words

HEADLINE: BALDING? GRAYING? GENETIC HOPE FOR HAIR

BYLINE: Michael Vitez, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Imagine a world in which no one ever goes bald, not even accountants. In
which 50-year-old hair is as colorful and bountiful as it was the evening of the
high school prom.

   The end to baldness and gray hair, scientists say, may be only a shampoo
away.

   Cancer scientists in San Diego have experimented with a new form of gene
therapy that could rejuvenate hair and color by shampooing new healthy genes
into your scalp.

   Lather up, rinse, and you can look like Elvis even if you're 80.

   Here's how scientists think it would work:

   The new genes, tucked inside microscopic bubbles of fat, would slide right
down your hair like firemen down a pole. The new genes would be absorbed by the
hair follicles and boot the old, broken-down ones aside.

   Then your hair would grow again. Or revert to its original color.

   In theory, of course. None of this has made it out of the laboratory.

   Scientists have made white-haired mice look like Dalmatians, with spots of
black hair. They have experimented on pieces of human scalp in a lab. But the
new experiments - reported in today's issue of Nature Medicine - have yet to be
done on people.

   Philadelphians are ready to volunteer.

   Bernadette Miller was leaning back in her chair at Image Hair Salon on
Chestnut Street, her head - even her eyebrows - slathered with goop, like glaze
on a doughnut, when news of the scientific advance reached her.

   "Sounds marvelous! Yes! I'm volunteering," she gushed. "I've been coloring my
hair for 30 years. If I don't have to do this every month - oh, yes! Sign me
up!"

   Curtis D. Morris, a hair-impaired social worker with the Department of Human
Services, was walking down 15th Street, carrying a fruit salad, when he was
alerted to this potential medical breakthrough. He reflexively rubbed his hand
across his scalp, an expression of wonder on his face.

   "You mean this hockey pond will come back?" he questioned. "My daughter calls
it 'daddy's ice rink' because it's so smooth. . . . If this works, this is going
to change America."

   Yes, hockey ponds around the world could be disappearing, but don't put away
your skates just yet. Scientists have yet to identify exactly which genes cause
baldness, though researchers with this project don't see that as a major hurdle.
The possibility of using genes to restore original hair color - or of sending in
artificial colors - is more likely, but still perhaps years away.

   Andrew Perry, president of the consumer products group of AntiCancer, the San
Diego company that performed the research, said a product that restores hair
color could be made within a year.

   He was speaking with the optimism of an inventor, and also a man, gray and
balding, who said he would be first in line.

   "The most important thing is we've developed a way to deliver the gene
safely," he said. "Until now there has been no way to get into the hair
follicle. You don't want to inject the genes or use a pill."

   A hair researcher at the University of Pennsylvania, while impressed with the
results, was much more cautious.

   "To do it in a mouse is very different than doing it in a human,
unfortunately," said George Cotsarelis. "The barrier is enormous."

   But Cotsarelis noted that some skin cancers begin in the hair follicle, and
the research by AntiCancer could help combat them.

   In short, the folks in San Diego figured out a way to make the liposome, or
bubble of fat, lock in on the hair follicle like a Patriot missile. "It won't be
absorbed by the skin or scalp," Perry said. "It's like the Federal Express of
the hair follicle."

   Perry and his colleagues set out to look for a way to "put hair to sleep," so
it wouldn't fall out during chemotherapy.

   Chemo drugs attack the body's most rapidly dividing cells, which are cancer
cells and, unfortunately, hair cells.

   The idea, Perry said, was to find a vehicle - a liposome - that would
directly target the hair follicle and nothing else.

   So these researchers, working with mice and cultures of human skin left over
from cosmetic surgeries, figured out how to send these fat bubbles to the hair
follicle. They hope in the near future to make a product that will put hair to
sleep. In theory, a person could shampoo in these liposomes, filled with
sleep-inducing proteins, in the morning before chemo, and hair cells would
escape attack by the chemo drugs. When you're done with chemo, just stop using
the shampoo.

   Then these scientists got to thinking.

   What if they put color in the bubbles?

   Melanin is the substance in the human body that colors hair. Gray hair simply
has no melanin. Each strand of hair has little holes, like Swiss cheese, and the
color of hair is determined by how big the holes are on each strand of hair and
how much melanin fills the holes. Everyone's body produces one of two types of
melanin - red or black-brown.

   "We found that in the graying hair," said Perry, "if we deliver the melanin
to the hair follicle, it is absorbed in the hair. As the hair grows, it comes
with the color in it.

   Hence the black hair on white-haired mice.

   "The color is sealed inside," he said. "It won't wash out or bleach out."
Perry estimated one might have to shampoo twice a week with a melanin shampoo to
keep the hair growing its new color.

   Now synthetic colors - a raspberry or a computer-screen green - could be
slipped in via the liposome. This could be wonderful news for Dennis Rodman, the
basketball star and former Madonna consort who wears his hair different shades
of the rainbow each game. In theory, he could grow his hair green for a month,
purple for another, and then blue, and have candy-colored curls.

   The scientists took their thinking even further. Rather than just enclosing
proteins or melanin in the fat bubbles, why not enclose actual genes?

   "Making the gene is relatively easy," said Perry. "Delivery has always been
the problem."

   So again they experimented with mice, and sent a "nonsense gene," lacZ, which
serves no other purpose other than to leave a trail, into the hair follicles of
the mice. Bingo.

   "These results demonstrate that highly selective, safe gene therapy for the
hair process is feasible," they wrote.

   But gene therapies require much more research and study, and could take many
years to market. And while scientists have identified the gene - tyrosinase -
that produces melanin and colors hair, Perry said, the identity of the genes
that cause hair to grow still eludes them.

   Perry, however, said he expected these genes to be pinpointed relatively
soon.

   And why not let Philadelphians dream.

   Jamie Ricks, 32, a prematurely graying room service employee at the
Rittenhouse Hotel, was getting his hair cut in Center City and was eager to
learn more.

   "Yeah, I'd try it," he said. "The gray bugs me. Especially when I go out and
I'm meeting girls a lot younger. I can't say I'm 25 anymore."

   Robert Derr, who owns Hair Craft in Gilbertsville, Montgomery County, and is
an area spokesman for the National Cosmetology Association, immediately saw the
pros and cons. "It sounds exciting if they can grow hair - especially since I'm
balding," he said. "But from a business point of view it could be scary. If it
is that simple or that safe, it could go right to the general public and that
could be trouble. (The city's top salons charge as much as $100 to color hair.)

   "It would be the biggest thing to hit the hair industry ever," Derr said.

   Maybe. But not everyone was excited. One gray-haired woman on Walnut Street
brushed off a reporter's request for an interview, saying indignantly, "Forget
it! Hair color is not how I measure myself. . . . God bless those little
Dalmatian mice."

   Even the hockey pond man, Curtis Morris, became more philosophical as the
interview progressed.

   I'm 37 now," he explained. "When my hair first started falling out, when I
was 29, I wore hats all the time. I was like Richie Ashburn. You never see him
without a hat. But I'm older now. I've come to grips with it. Now that I'm
married with children, it doesn't matter. In fact, now that I'm bald, I have
more women coming after me. I say, 'Back off, I'm married.' "

   But then he paused again.

   "I guess I would want to see how I look again with hair.

   "Then I'd shave it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (1)
1. Curtis D. Morris reflects: "If this works, this is going to change
America." Personally, he says, he'd prefer to remain bald. (The Philadelphia
Inquirer, MICHAEL S. WIRTZ)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             260 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 30, 1995 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:2,4,5,7,8; B-2:1,6

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Gene treatment for baldness may be in works

BYLINE: KIMBERLY PETERSON, Special to the Union-Tribune, Kimberly Peterson is an
intern from Boston University.

BODY:

   People discouraged by balding or graying hair may one day have a way to
jump-start those hair cells that seem to close up shop as the body ages,
according to a San Diego researcher. Gene therapy to treat baldness could be
possible using a simple and direct technique applied directly to the scalp, said
Robert Hoffman, president of AntiCancer Inc., a biotechnology firm in Kearny
Mesa. Hoffman's team enclosed a blue-staining gene in tiny pockets of fat and
spread them on mouse skin.

   The gene was taken up by hair cells in the skin, which soon produced blue
hair. While the experiment does not confirm a treatment for baldness, it shows
that genes can be transmitted directly from the skin into hair-making cells in
mice, and this may be the first step toward treating dormant hair cells in
humans. There were no side effects from the process, and other parts of the cell
did not appear to be affected by the gene, according to Hoffman, who published
his results in the July issue of Nature Medicine. The discovery is "tremendously
exciting" for Hoffman's team and took five years to come about, said researcher
Andrew Perry.

   "We couldn't believe it when we saw it," he said.

   "This is cutting-edge technology; it takes abstract science into something
everyone can understand." The most common form of hair loss, called male pattern
baldness, is thought to be an inherited trait, said Stacy Thompkins, a UCSD
dermatology professor.

   There are other types of baldness caused by diseases and chemotherapy
treatment.

   Perry said the team's next step is to tackle hair loss caused by
chemotherapy.

   Because chemotherapy targets the fastest-reproducing cells in the body, such
as hair cells, the best way to prevent hair loss may be by adding a cell cycle
inhibitor that "puts the hair to sleep" during treatment, he said. Hoffman's
team has added the inhibitor to mouse skin and found that about 75 percent of
the hair stays intact during chemotherapy, Perry said. Gene therapy might be
used on people with gray hair to reactivate a protein called tyrosinase that
helps to add color to hair. Production of tyrosinase decreases with age, but
there may be a way to reverse the action of genes involved in this process,
Perry said, adding that he has been approached by nearly every cosmetics company
in the country about this technique.

   The race is on now to find the genes that directly influence baldness.

   Perry said that one key to the solution may be that while men lose hair on
top of their head as they age, beard growth usually remains steady or even
increases. "By extracting gene particles from these two types of hairs we hope
we might find the difference between the two genes," Perry said.

   "But we don't really mind whether we find the right gene or someone else
finds it; you still need our method to deliver it."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             261 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          June 30, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY REINVIGORATE HAIR

BYLINE: The Boston Globe

BODY:

   Gene therapy like that used to treat disease may be able to bring back the
lustrous color and robust hair growth of youth, a team of California
biotechnologists says.

   Robert Hoffman, founder and president of the San Diego biotech firm
AntiCancer Inc., and a colleague, Lingna Li, turned white mice black, they
report today, by delivering a missing pigment called melanin right into their
hair follicles. And they showed, in laboratory tests, that they can also deliver
genes to hair follicles - where hair growth originates - by spreading onto skin
a cream made of liposomes, or small fat bubbles, into which genes have been
inserted.

   No one knows whether their system, which they explain in the journal Nature
Medicine, will work on the balding pates and graying manes of living humans.  If
it does, it will likely be used first for restoring hair color, because
scientists already have the gene that helps the body make melanin. Gene therapy
should also work to restore hair growth, in principle, but the genes that
control balding have not been determined.

   Even so, cosmetics companies are falling all over themselves for the chance
to help test the new system, Hoffman said Thursday.

   And others are greeting the news with open minds as well.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1995


                             262 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     June 29, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 20C, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: Bank Md. takeover advances

BODY:


   Bank Maryland Corp. and Mason-Dixon Bancshares Inc., parent of Carroll County
Bank and Trust Co., said yesterday that their stockholders approved the pending
acquisition of Bank Maryland by Mason-Dixon. The previously announced
transaction, which awaits final regulatory approval, is expected to be complete
in mid-July.

   Under terms of the agreement, shareholders of Towson-based Bank Maryland are
due to receive $ 12.81 a share, payable either in cash or Mason-Dixon common
stock -- though at least half must be paid in the form of stock. Mason-Dixon,
based in Westminster, would have about $ 700 million in assets after the merger.


Bell Atlantic loses out on Czech bid

   Bell Atlantic Corp. lost out on its bid for a foothold in the Eastern
European telecommunications market yesterday as the Czech government announced
it would sell a 27 percent stake in the national phone company, SPT, to a joint
venture of the Dutch and Swiss phone companies.

   TelSource, owned by Royal PTT Nederland NV and Swiss Telecom and backed by
AT&T Corp., bid $ 1.45 billion for the SPT stake. That offer prevailed over bids
by Telfar, a joint venture of Bell Atlantic and France Telecom, and Cetel, a
partnership of Ameritech Corp. and the German and Danish national phone
companies.

Yields fall on 5-year Treasuries

   Yields on five-year Treasury notes fell in yesterday's auction to the lowest
level in 16 months.

   The high yield was 5.91 percent, down from 6.25 percent at the last auction
on May 24. It was the lowest rate since five-year notes sold for 5.61 percent on
Feb. 24, 1994.

   The notes will carry a coupon interest rate of 5 7/8 percent with each $
10,000 in face value selling for $ 9,987.20.

Tumor therapy in clinical trials

   Genetic Therapy Inc. said yesterday that it has begun a Phase I/II clinical
trial using gene therapy to treat malignant brain tumors in children.

   This study is part of the worldwide HS-tk product development program
undertaken by the Gaithersburg company and Sandoz Pharma Ltd., under a June 1994
agreement between the companies. The trial is being conducted at St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital and LeBonheur Children's Medical Center, both in
Memphis, Tenn.

Monsanto to buy Calgene stake

   Monsanto Co. signed a letter of intent yesterday to acquire a 49.9 percent
stake in Calgene Inc., an agricultural biotechnology firm.

   Monsanto said it will provide Calgene $ 30 million, certain research on fresh
produce and oilseeds and its current equity interests and options in Gargiulo
LP, a produce grower and shipper with expertise in tomato breeding in Naples,
Fla.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1995


                             263 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                 June 27, 1995, Tuesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 5; View Desk

LENGTH: 584 words

HEADLINE: R S V P / ORANGE COUNTY;
ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING;
CYSTIC FIBROSIS GUILD DRAPES NOGUCHI GARDENS TO DRAMATIC -- AND BENEFICIAL --
EFFECT

BYLINE: By KATHRYN BOLD

BODY:

   Inspired by the artist Christo, known for his massive public artworks such as
the recent wrapping of the Reichstag in Berlin, organizers of the Cystic
Fibrosis Guild's 12th annual gala turned their benefit into a grand-scale art
installation.

   With the California Scenario/Noguchi Gardens in Costa Mesa as their backdrop,
guild supporters installed tall black-and-white-striped columns and canopies of
sheer white fabric to create an artistic environment for more than 300 guests
Saturday. The $150-per-person ticket sales, combined with proceeds from silent
and live auctions and generous underwriting, netted more than $250,000 for the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

Art Lives

   "We chose the 'Love Vivant' theme because we'd be in the Noguchi Gardens --
where love lives and art lives," said Sue Hook, event chairwoman, dressed in a
polka-dot blouse and full skirt that matched the black and white decor.

   Guests were surrounded by art, from the garden's contemporary sculptures to
the sheets of fabric that billowed overhead.

   "It's the same material you find underneath mattress boxes," said artist Dean
Gerrie, guild vice president. "Christo, eat your heart out."

   During the reception, guests bid on masks created by children with cystic
fibrosis and artists from the Orange County Center for Contemporary Art.

   Later, they sat at tables artfully decorated with black ribbons draped over
white cloths and bowls filled with colorful gladioli and live goldfish.

   Some guests thought the fish looked nervous at the sight of the entree --
rolled salmon with sun-dried tomato and pesto tomato vinaigrette.

   The gourmet dinner, prepared by the catering division of the Westin South
Coast Plaza, also featured filet of beef in port wine sauce and an array of
desserts, from long-stemmed strawberries wearing "tuxedos" of white and dark
chocolate to chocolate chip cookies.

Hopes for a Cure

   The guild supports the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which raises money for
research to find a cure for the disease, a fatal genetic disease that results in
clogged lungs, infection and damaged organs.

   "We didn't know what cystic fibrosis was. We learned the hard way," said Paul
Motenko, past guild president, whose 8-year-old daughter, Stacy, has CF. "It's a
constant nightmare. You can't tell my daughter is sick. She looks normal; she
acts normal. But at home she might be up coughing all night.

   "It's a lung disease, and when she gets a cold she gets very sick. We go into
high alert. It's hard to describe the feeling when your child is sick and it's
more than a passing thing."

   Motenko and other guild members are hopeful that a cure for the disease is
just a few years away. In 1989, researchers identified the cystic fibrosis gene,
and in 1993 the first experimental gene therapy treatment was given to an
individual with CF.

   "They're actually testing a cure. It could happen within my daughter's
lifetime," Motenko said.

   Marshall Fant received the Breath of Life award for his contributions to the
guild.

   "What enticed us was the optimistic view that families and children with
cystic fibrosis have," Fant said. "They see hope for the future, and they're
going to make the most out of life."

   Others attending were Kevin and Sophia Woodbridge, Barry and Jan Grumman,
Ralph and Eva Mann, Pat Anderson, Joyce Topping, Mickey and Gail Isen, Barry and
Myra Ross, Garth Blumenthal, Billur Wallerich, Myron and Carol Kanofsky, Bob and
Nancy Myers, Anne Butcher and Karen Miller. KATHRYN BOLD

GRAPHIC: Photo, "What enticed us was the optimistic view that families and
children with cystic fibrosis have," said Marshall Fant, right, who received the
Breath of Life award for his contributions to the guild, with his wife, Candace,
and Paul Motenko, a past guild president. ; Photo, "We chose the 'Love Vivant'
theme because we'd be in the Noguchi Gardens," said Sue Hook, with artist Dean
Gerrie.  GLENN KOENIG / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1995


                             264 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             June 26, 1995, Monday
                       Correction Appended, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS & FINANCE, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 2219 words

HEADLINE: 10 Home Run Investments;
Financial advisers recommend five winning stocks and five winning mutual funds.

BYLINE: REX HENDERSON; Tribune Staff Writer

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:


   Seligman Communication and Information A hit the biggest mutual fund
investment home run of the decade. A $ 10,000 investment in Seligman
Communications in 1985 is today worth more than $ 75,000.

   Don't sweat it if you missed it. Seligman makes for great highlight films,
but it is irrelevant to today's investment players.

   That 1985 home run is just an entry in the record books. The trick is seeing
the home run pitches coming. The investment game is played on a field that
begins in the present and extends to the future.

   Anticipating home run pitches is trickier than recognizing them after they're
in the catcher's mitt.

   But a dozen or so Tampa Bay area investment advisers - plus a few players
just passing through town - were bold enough step into the batter's box and take
a couple of big swings.

   In a tribute to the Boys and Girls of Summer, we present 10 Home Run
Investments for the Next 10 Years. Five are mutual funds. Five are stocks.

   A few themes emerged from these many discussions.

   First, two 1990s trends will dominate the stock market for at least another
decade. They are one, technology, and two, the growth of emerging markets in the
Pacific Basin, Latin America and (someday) Eastern Europe. They will serve the
fattest home run balls for at least 10 more years.

   Our batters proposed multiple ways to swing at these pitches. Some stocks,
like Intel, are direct approaches. Funds offer diversified approaches to the
emerging markets.

   But there are indirect approaches. Heavy construction companies offer a play
on emerging markets through U.S.-managed companies. Peripherals companies and
retailers offer a more easily understandable approach to high technology.

   And don't get stuck only in computer technology. Biotechnology, relegated to
the minor leagues earlier in the 1990s, is due for a comeback.

   Second, many of our stock pickers were reluctant to offer their choices
without reminding players that they should not be swinging for the fences on
every pitch. Take the doubles and triples. And occasionally, take a walk.

   The point of baseball is to score runs. The point of investing is to make
money, no matter what the strategy.

   How will we do?

   Check the record books in 10 years.    STOCKS

   American Power Conversion:  This company is the largest supplier of
uninterruptible power supply products in the world. The firm's primary products
are designed for use with personal computers, work stations and other electronic
devices.

   Think of it an entry into the technology sector, but easier to understand
than the chip or software businesses. The uninterruptible power supply (UPS in
technobabble) is a high-tech battery pack that powers your home computer when
the lights go out.

   "This is a cheap way to enter technology stocks," said Harold J. Ireland,
manager of the ABT Fund. It has great export potential.

   "This product is needed outside the United States more than inside," Ireland
said. Computer market penetration lags far behind the United States in Europe,
Japan and the rest of the world. The power systems in some of those countries
are also less reliable.

   The company operates plants in Florida, Rhode Island and Ireland. Sales grew
50 percent in 1994. Value Line expects continued growth at 30 percent per year.

   APCC-Nasdaq  - June 16 price: $ 20.625 (52-week high)  - P/E: 25  - 1995
projected EPS: $ 1  - 1995 projected cash flow: $ 1.10  - Yield: No cash
dividend    Templeton Dragon Fund:  One word: China. Two words: Mark Mobius.
Three more words: 13 percent discount.

   That says it all.

   Templeton Dragon gives investors a position in the largest emerging market in
the world and a piece of one of the world's sharpest investment minds (Mobius) -
at a discount.

   The Templeton Dragon is a closed-end investment company specializing in China
and the Pacific Rim - anywhere Chinese businesses thrive.

   Templeton Dragon is selling below net asset value.

   Tampa investment manager Alston "Mac" Barrow suggests Japanese investors, who
are big Dragon holders, are selling because of domestic problems.

   Fund manager Mobius is a pioneer in emerging markets.

   "You should be investing worldwide, and you might as well go with someone
with a proven track record," Barrow said.

   TDF-NYSE  - June 16 price: $ 12.50  - P/E: N/A  - Premium (discount): ?? 13.9
percent  - Yield: 1.8 percent  - Dividend: 23 cents    Intel:  No company stands
to benefit more from the technological revolution than Intel, the dominant maker
of the silicon chips that are at the heart of every high-tech application.

   "We are at the beginning of a major revolution," said Les Hirsch, a Robert W.
Baird & Co. broker. "This is the best-positioned company. Chips are going into
more things than we ever thought about. Not just telecommunications and
computers and autos. Soon, every major appliance will have chips.

   "Intel is a slam dunk."

   Of course, none of that is a secret. Intel has surged this year from a low of
$ 31.50 (reached during the depths of controversy over Pentium flaws) to $ 61.75
(adjusted for a 2-1 split on June 19).

   But even at the high valuations, it remains the premier high-tech buy.

   "I would be a big buyer in any pullback, but I would own some, no matter
what," Hirsch said.

   Yes, it's pricey. No, it won't matter to the long-term investor.

   INTC-Nasdaq  - June 16 price: $ 116.125 (52-week high, pre-split)  - P/E: 39

 - 1995 projected EPS: $ 8  - 1995 projected cash flow: $ 11.65  - Yield: 0.2
percent.    Chiron:  Biotechnology stocks have been in a coma for three years -
and have recently shown signs of renewed life. That may be the best reason to
buy now. Chiron is among both the most promising and the most established.

   Biotechnology has a future. The potential for biomedical and bioengineered
agricultural products is immense. Biotech gobbled up venture capital in the
1980s, but the slow pace of product development and the absence of sustained
profitability at these companies soured investors in the 1990s.

   At Chiron, "The research pipeline is really full," said Elizabeth Howarth, a
Raymond James broker. Chiron has important products in the market. A rarity in
the biotechnology industry, it is expected to be profitable this year. It
markets treatment for multiple sclerosis, and is developing a vaccine for HIV,
the virus that causes AIDS.

   It is trying to buy up Viagene, a gene therapy company, and is involved in
research on cancer, vaccines and diagnostics.

   CHIR-Nasdaq  - June 16 price: $ 65.75 (52-week high, pre-split)  - P/E: N/A
- 1995 projected EPS: $ 0.65  - 1995 projected cash flow: $ 2.35  - Yield: N/A
   Office Depot:  With all the whiz-bang in the rest of the list, this is our
nod to the Warren Buffett school of investing, focusing on simpler businesses we
understand. It is also the only Florida company on the list.

   Office Depot is the most successful of the office superstore chains. It still
has ample room to grow. This could be the Wal-Mart of the 1990s and beyond, and
got recommendations from both Baird broker Les Hirsch and ABT Fund manager
Harold J. Ireland.

   Same-store sales are growing at 15 percent per year. (Same-store sales, or
sales at stores open more than a year, are an important measure of repeat
business.) The company continues to expand the chain, and is entering a new
delivery channel to communities and businesses located in communities too small
to support a full-size store. Those customers soon will have access through
telephone orders and delivery service.

   The company is experiencing some margin pressure because of price competition
in personal computers.

   Nonetheless, earnings per share are growing at 30 percent per year, a pace
that analysts say will continue for years to come.

   ODP-NYSE  - June 16 price: $ 28.50  - P/E: 39  - 1995 projected EPS: $ 0.90
- 1995 projected cash flow: $ 1.35  - Yield: N/A    MUTUAL FUNDS

   Fidelity Select Technology:  Fidelity Select Technology is a premier fund in
the hottest of hot sectors.

   There are other candidates for this slot on the Home Run Hit Parade, notably
T. Rowe Price's Science and Technology Fund. Fidelity Select Technology made the
list because it got recommendations from such diverse names as Arnold Moskowitz,
a New York City institutional money-management adviser, and J. Michael Pinson, a
technical analyst who writes an investment newsletter in Clearwater.

   The fund holds big positions in big technology companies, including Intel,
IBM and Hewlett-Packard.

   Technology stocks have been flying high this year. Through June 16, the fund
was up 26.1 percent year to date. Some market watchers expect a sector
correction. Pinson is recommending a short-term sell, but a long-term buy.  -
NAV June 14: $ 50.15  - Load: 3 percent, front end  - Minimum initial
investment: $ 2,500  - Telephone: (800) 544-8888  - 5-year return through 3/31:
21.41 percent    Putnam Health Sciences A:  Clinton's health-care reform plans
and a weak market weighed on the health sector It has been a laggard sector for
two years.

   But in the big picture, health will be as big a growth industry in the next
10 years as it has been in the past 10, said Ann F. Cody, senior investment
officer at Invest Financial Corp. For one, baby boomers are aging, demanding
more health services as they do so.

   But the future growth will include a big international component. Emerging
countries also will be demanding more and better health care, she said. Putnam
Health Sciences A was selected because it was up 15.2 percent, outperforming its
peers by 13.9 percentage points, in 1994.

   Abbott Labs, Johnson & Johnson and Merck & Co. Inc. make up the top three
holdings. It also holds some exposure to biotechnology issues, such as Amgen
Inc.  - NAV June 16: $ 33.80  - Load: 5.75 percent, front end  - Minimum initial
investment: $ 500  - Telephone: (800) 225-1581  - 5-year return through 3/21:
15.5 percent    Heartland Value Fund:  Amid all these aggressive,
edge-of-the-envelope investments, a fund run by a couple of Milwaukee-based
value investors finds an unlikely spot.

   Why? It's the returns, silly.

   Chip Morgan, an investment adviser with Baybridge Associates in Tampa, said,
"It's a combination of the managers and their style. They're just quite good at
what they do."

   The fund invests in small companies selling at low valuations, relative to
earnings and book value. The results are impressive. The fund is up 16.8 percent
a year over the past three years, besting its peer group by 7.9 percent,
according to Value Line Mutual Fund Survey.

   Top holdings in February included ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., Best Power
Technology Inc. and Trak Auto Corp.

   Another advantage: Managers William Nasgovitz and Hugh Dennison "have their
own retirement money in it, so they are eating their own cookin'," Morgan said.

   One warning: If you want to invest in Heartland, do it quickly. The fund is
closing to new investors Friday.  - NAV June 16: $ 26.84  - Load: none. 3
percent redemption fee for one year  - Minimum initial investment: $ 1,000  -
Telephone: (800) 432-7856  - 5-year return through 2/28: 18.7 percent    AIM
Aggressive Growth Fund:  This fund combines a number of themes: technology,
health care, small-capitalization companies and growth.

   It has been a strategy that has produced stunning results over the past five
years. Raymond James broker Elizabeth Howarth said she expects it to continue to
generate superior returns. In 1994, a year that hurt small-cap stocks badly, AIM
Aggressive Growth was up 17.2 percent.

   This is not a fund for the faint of heart. But for those with a taste for
risk and a diversified portfolio, this roller coaster ride of a fund could be a
home run. It carries a Value Line Mutual Fund Survey rating near the top for
growth, but at the bottom for risk.

   Holdings include small technology issues such as Cypress Semiconductor and
LSI Logic, and health-care issues including Watson Pharmaceuticals.  - NAV
6/16/95: $ 34.73  - Load: 5.5 percent, front end  - Minimum initial investment:
$ 500  - Telephone: (800) 347-1919  - 5-year return through 2/7: 23.5 percent
   SoGen International Fund:  Fund manager Jean Marie Eveillard gives investors
a pinch of this and some of that, and a big dollop of reliability and long-run
returns.

   The French-born money manager has been running SoGen since 1979, which may be
a longevity record for international managers. His recent performance has been
off (it was flat last year and is up 8.4 percent year to date). He has a stellar
long-term record, averaging 16.2 percent a year over the past 15.

   This is an international asset allocation fund, diversified in bonds and
equities, both foreign and domestic. That accounts for the fund's low
volatility.

   His value-oriented style leaves him at a disadvantage during growth-driven
bull markets. He outperforms during weaker periods.

   Half the holdings are in the United States.

   He recently has reopened the fund. It was closed in 1994 because Eveillard
had too much cash.  - NAV 6/16/95: $ 24.51  - Load: 3.75 percent, front end  -
Minimum initial investment: $ 1,000  - Telephone: (800) 334-2143  - 5-year
return through 2/7: 10.7 percent

CORRECTION-DATE: June 27, 1995

CORRECTION:
Raymond James broker Elizabeth Howarth recommends AIM Global Aggressive Growth.
A story in Monday's Tribune said she recommended AIM Aggressive Growth, a fund
which has a great record and which she also likes, but is now closed to new
investors.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING(C),
 (C) (Drawing of baseball batter.)

NOTES: PROFILE; COVER STORY

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995


                             265 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       June 25, 1995 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 1546 words

HEADLINE: Facing down the quiet killer; The dilemna of diagnosing prostate
cancer

BYLINE: By Sandra Sardella

BODY:

   Eight years ago, when a doctor told Manny Hamelburg of Braintree that the
slight pains he reported were due to prostate cancer, he could hardly believe
the diagnosis. He was only 47 and, like many American men, he assumed that
prostate cancer was a disease of old men.

   Hamelburg was unaware that prostate cancer was the most common form of cancer
among men. He assumed it was a slow-moving disease; in fact, it was once thought
that men might die with prostate cancer -- but not from it.

   "I was really just the opposite of what I want people to be today. I was
uninformed," said Hamelburg, now 55.

   Hamelburg underwent radiation therapy -- and after the cancer reoccured --
chemotherapy. He also began attending prostate cancer support groups and, with
Maurice Childs of Brookline, formed a group for men with aggressive forms of the
cancer.

   Mostly, he educated himself about the often unpredictable disease that
annually claims the lives of 38,000 American men, but has only recently started
to receive the attention and research dollars granted other health issues.

   "Even as recently as five years ago, prostate cancer was dismissed as a
disease of old men. The attitude was, 'Everybody has to die of something,' "
said Dr. Peter Scardino, who chairs both the Task Force on Prostate Cancer for
the American Urological Society and the Prostate Health Council for the American
Foundation for Urological Diseases.

   "Years ago, when we used to go to the leaders of the National Cancer
Institute, they would tell us, 'Honestly, you're the only ones pushing for this.
We've got women beating down our door for breast cancer and others for
leukemia.' "

   Yet prostate cancer strikes one out of every 10 men and one out of three men
over age 50. The American Cancer Society estimates 200,000 men will learn they
have prostate cancer this year.

   The prostate is a walnut-sized gland located below the bladder. During
ejaculation, the prostate secretes seminal fluid. If a tumor is detected during
a rectal exam, it can be treated with surgery, radiation or hormones. But even
successful treatments often have serious side effects, striking right to the
core of what it means to be a man.

   "A man faces a strong likelihood of becoming impotent, depending on
treatment, and a possibility of incontinence," said Childs, who was diagnosed in
1989. "You're talking about an area that's not just humiliating and potentially
embarassing and impinging on people's marital relationships, but underneath it
all, there's a real sense of losing control."

   Within the last few years, prostate cancer has increasingly garnered
attention as a health risk. Sen. Robert Dole (R-Kansas), who underwent surgery
for prostate cancer in 1991, has become a self-described "poster boy"; he's
repeatedly discussed his case publicly and has been an avid advocate for
research.

   Heightening visibility further were the deaths of musician Frank Zappa, Time
Warner chief executive Stephen Ross and actors Bill Bixby and Telly Savalas, all
from prostate cancer. Former junk bond dealer Michael Milken, who was diagnosed
with it two years ago, has devoted $ 25 million to establishing a non-profit
group committed to finding new treatments.

   Concern has been reflected in federal funding. In 1990, the National Cancer
Institute devoted just $ 13.2 million dollars for prostate cancer research. That
number has more than quadrupled, to $ 59 million this year, a figure some
contend is still low, compared to the hundreds of millions in federal dollars
devoted to research in areas such as breast cancer.

   Yet more research is needed to solve the many mysteries surrounding prostate
cancer. One of the most perplexing is its unpredictable growth. In many cases,
the tumor grows so slowly and painlessly that many men who are diagnosed after
the age of 65 usually live long enough to die from something else; they might
never have known they had it.

   But in at least 20 percent of the cases, particularly among those who are
diagnosed at a younger age, like Zappa, who died at age 52, the tumor
metastasizes and spreads into the lymph nodes or bones.

   Thus, men's health advocates are promoting early detection by encouraging men
to have a prostate specific antigen (PSA) test, which may detect the cancer, as
part of a routine medical examination.

   But the uncertain course of a prostate tumor puts men who are diagnosed with
it in on the horns of a dilemma, in which the burden of deciding on treatment is
placed squarely on their shoulders.

   A radical prostatectomy, which involves removal of the prostate gland, may
eliminate the cancer if performed before the cancer spreads beyond the prostate.
But it usually causes impotence and, at a minimum, short-term incontinence.
Urologists may also recommend radiation, hormone therapy or what is often dubbed
"watchful waiting."

   "It's defensible to make a case that there is no clear standard of care for
the disease," said Dr. John Long, urologist at the New England Medical Center.
"If you ask a 100 different urologists you might get a hundred different
answers."

   "Patients are almost unwillingly drawn into being prime decision makers much
more so than they would be for other medical decisions," he said.

   Researchers are hoping to develop a test to let physicians examine the tumor
tissue to determine how dangerous the cancer is.

   "A major area of work is going into the development of tissue markers, which
will help us judge the progressiveness of prostate cancer," said Scardino, who
is also chairman of the urology department at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston.

   Such tests, however, are perhaps 10 years away from the market, he added. So
for now, doctors must weigh known treatments with unknown factors.

   "The general tendency is that any cancer is a bad cancer and you better treat
it," he said. "But I've recommended watching and waiting (for some patients),
although there is no way to tell them for sure that it won't be metastasized and
full blown in a year."

   That can be a nervewracking option. "I try to convince people that watching
and waiting is not doing nothing. It depends on their situation," Hamelburg
said.

   Researchers are also focusing on developing medication that would prevent
prostate cancer. They hope a drug called Proscar, manufactured by MIRC
Pharmaceuticals, will alter the metabolism of a male hormone that stimulates the
growth of precancerous cells. A seven-year clinical trial is underway on 15,000
American men who are at risk for prostate cancer. Locally, trials are being
conducted through Boston University Medical Center.

   New treatments are also on the horizon. At Baylor, gene therapies are being
developed, said Scardino.

   "This would be an entirely new way of treatment," he said. "With gene therapy
you are essentially getting a gene into the cancer and having it insert a
biological effect. A so-called suicide gene would kill the cancer. This has
clearly been shown to work in animals and now it's time to test it on people."

   A new form of surgery that decreases the probability of side affects
associated with prostatectomy is being offered to patients at the New England
Medical Center.

   Cryoablation, performed on 133 men in the last two years, is proving to be an
effective alternative, Long believes. Under ultrasound guidance, up to five cold
probes are inserted through the perineum, into the prostate, to freeze and
destroy the cancer. The procedure affords the physician more flexibility and
precision than traditional surgery because ice has a distinct appearance under
ultrasound, which provides a real time image of the subject.

   In addition to diminished risk of incontinence, cryoablation also eliminates
bleeding and recovery is quicker than with traditional surgery. Long
acknowledged the procedure is still considered experimental, but he believes
that it, perhaps in combination with other therapies, will become proven as
another tool in the arsenal against prostate cancer.

   Who's at risk: Men who are middle-age and older. African-American men and men
with a family history of prostate cancer are at higher risk.

   Warning signs: A weak, interrupted, painful or difficult flow of urine; blood
in the urine; continuing pain in lower back, upper thighs and pelvis. These
symptoms are also associated with benign prostate enlargement, a treatable
condition that is not life threatening.

   The American Cancer Society encourages every man over 40 to undergo a digital
rectal examination. Men over 50 should have a PSA (Prostate Specific Antigen)
blood test.

   Support Groups: The Prostate Cancer Support Network may be reached locally
through Manny Hamelburg at 843-2211; the New England coordinator is Bill
Whitmore, (413) 665-7741; Support groups also meet at St. Elizabeth's Hospital,
Newton-Wellesley Hospital, Dedham Medical Center, Quincy Hospital and Waltham
Hospital, among others.

   National groups include: Us Too, based in Chicago, (800) 808-7866; American
Foundation for Urological Disease, Baltimore, (800) 828-7866; Patient Advocates
for Advanced Cancer Treatment, Grand Rapids, Mich. (616) 453-1477.

   For more information, contact the American Cancer Society at (800) 227-2345
or the National Cancer Institute's Cancer Information Services at (800)
422-6237.


LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1995


                             266 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1592 words

HEADLINE: AS SOME PRODUCTS GET CLOSER TO MARKET,;
INVESTMENT DOLLARS ARE HARDER TO FIND

BYLINE: By BARBARA MARSH, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The road to riches in biotechnology has never been easy. But now Southern
California companies with experimental drugs find it especially hard.

   Consider ImmunoTherapy Corp., a tiny Tustin company with a vaccine intended
to treat cancer. Jeff Lillard, the company's chairman, wants to raise $3.5
million to fund tests in cancer patients. He's talked with more than 100 venture
capital firms, investment bankers and big drug firms, but has nothing to show
for it.

   He fancifully likens his odds of landing capital from traditional sources to
former Yankee slugger Reggie Jackson coming out of retirement to hit "four home
runs in one World Series game."

   While the numbers of companies seeking money to test their drugs in the
doctor's office are mounting, capital appears increasingly scarce, market
observers say.

   Venture firms and public investors who traditionally speculate in
experimental drugs are oftentimes reluctant to invest in new drugs because of
the naturally high failure rate of drugs in clinical trials.

   Also, there is concern about new drugs not selling in today's cost-conscious
health-care industry.

   Industry sources estimate that, nationally, total investment in biotech firms
dropped to $1.8 billion last year from almost $2.7 billion the previous year.

   As a result, local companies have been forced to get smarter about drug
development. It generally takes six to nine years and an investment of $50
million to $120 million for an experimental drug to clear human tests and gain
regulatory approvals to be marketed.

   Three out of four drugs don't make it to market. So, small struggling biotech
firms must figure out new ways to attract the enormous investments to keep them
on track.

   "They've had to get pretty creative about keeping themselves going," said
Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor-in-chief of BioVenture View, a newsletter that
tracks the industry. Among other strategies, biotech firms are striking
alliances with large drug companies, testing out inventive stock offerings,
raising capital overseas, and even concentrating on drugs that cost less to
develop.

   "Many of these biotech companies are primarily funded by existing investors
and it's extremely difficult for them to get new investors to jump on," adds
Howard Wachtler, managing director of Medical Venture Holdings Inc., which
manages two health-care investment funds.

   Gyrating stock values haven't eased investors' concerns either. Shares of
Cephalon Inc. of West Chester, Pa., soared in one week after it announced its
drug Myotrophin slowed the advance of Lou Gehrig's disease in clinical tests.

   But shares of Cor Therapeutics, in South San Francisco, tumbled on news that
its anti-clotting drug Integrin didn't do much better than a placebo in
preventing death or other adverse outcomes in angioplasty patients.

   *

   Such clinical disappointments have forced companies to slash their research
and development budgets. Earlier this year, San Diego-based Gensia Inc., faced
with disappointing results for a cardiovascular drug, cut 35 jobs at its local
research and development center.

   Yet, the pressure on such companies to prove themselves in clinical tests is
intensifying, industry observers say. Record numbers of drugs are in the human
testing phase now.

   Frederick Dorey, president of the Bay Area Bioscience Center, a regional
clearinghouse for companies and researchers, predicts that the number of
experimental drugs failing in late-stage tests will increase as the huge number
of companies started in the 1980s get ready to test their ideas on human
subjects.

   "The odds are daunting," said Mark Edwards, managing director of Recombinant
Capital, a San Francisco consulting firm. "They will fail more often than they
will succeed."

   Some companies are taking pains to make themselves more attractive to public
investors.

   Ligand Pharmaceuticals Inc. in San Diego and its larger partner, Irvine-based
Allergan Inc., launched a new company to develop drugs using their combined
technology for naturally occurring hormones called retinoids. The new company,
dubbed ALRT, or Allergan Ligand Retinoid Therapeutics, went public June 3 with
an initial offering of 3.25 million rights, priced at $10 each. Each right
includes a share of ALRT stock and two warrants to purchase Ligand stock in five
years.

   What's more, the deal gives Ligand the right to buy the new company's stock
back for $120.7 million, or $37.13 a share, in five years -- a prospect that
gives investors the chance to earn a substantial return on their money. The
offering, which sought to raise $32.5 million, was so popular that it attracted
$90 million from the public, says Jeff D'Eliscu, an Allergan spokesman.

   "We had to give 60 million back," he noted.

   *

   Other companies are scouring foreign markets for investors.

   "We are very close to coming out with some major therapies for cancer, and
the funding has gotten pathetic," said Alan Epstein, director of scientific
research at Techniclone in Tustin. So, Dr. Epstein, who is also a USC professor
of pathology, turned last year to a private company, in Shanghai, China, to fund
clinical trials for his technology for fighting cancerous tumors. He hopes to
start clinical trials there this fall.

   Of course, many firms are trying to line up partnerships with big drug firms.

   For instance, Viagene Inc., a San Diego gene therapy company, has lots of
drugs in the pipeline. It expects to spend $10 million on clinical trials and
related activities this year, double its 1993 budget, and it can't wait for the
capital markets to improve, says Dr. Robert Abbott, its president and chief
executive.

   "We don't expect the availability of capital over the next several years is
going to improve a lot," he said.

   Viagene recently announced plans to be acquired by its large stake holder,
Chiron Corp., a well-financed biotech firm in Emeryville, Calif.

   *

   Meanwhile, with capital scarce, biotech companies must find ways to stretch
their resources.

   Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc., in Carlsbad, has attracted multimillion-dollar
commitments from major pharmaceutical companies to help fund its clinical tests.
It's done so partly by carefully managing which drug uses it chooses to pursue,
says Stanley T. Crooke, its chairman and chief executive.

   Isis has kept its developmental costs down, he says, by deliberately
targeting disease treatments that require only limited quantities of drugs. That
way, the company has been able to produce drugs in commercial quantities out of
its modest 1,200-square-foot plant in Carlsbad.

   It thus avoided having to build a multimillion-dollar manufacturing plant to
pump out huge quantities of its drugs for test purposes -- something that's
proven a costly problem for other biotech firms.

   "That meant we could move much more rapidly," Crooke said.

   Isis pushed ahead with treatments for two diseases: genital warts and
cytomegalovirus retinitis, an eye condition common in AIDS patients that can
cause blindness. Both diseases can be treated by small amounts of drugs injected
locally. In contrast, Isis postponed pursuing applications for conditions such
as arthritis, which require large quantities of drugs administered throughout
the body.

   Next year, if clinical tests proceed as hoped, Isis aims to seek regulatory
approval to market its retinitis treatment. And it aims to follow that six
months later with the wart treatment.

   A small number of biotechnology companies prosper enough to fund their
research out of profits. Thousand Oaks-based Amgen, the largest independent
biotechnology company, with sales last year of $1.6 billion, is one of the
fortunate few.

   "We actually generate cash," noted Gordon Binder, its chairman and chief
executive officer.

   Amgen, with five new drugs in clinical tests now, faces its own challenges.
It relies on sales of its two blockbuster drugs, Epogen and Neupogen, to fund
those tests. And like most drug companies, it faces rising pressures to persuade
providers of managed health care that its medicines are superior.

   These days, "it's a tougher sell," Binder said. As a result, the company is
stepping up its efforts to educate the marketplace.

   Amgen plans to hike its overall sales and marketing budget by 10% this year
to about $370 million. Its sales force of 300 will be calling on more health
professionals and visiting them more frequently, attending more medical
conferences, and developing marketing material that shows the financial and
medical attributes of its drugs.

   Also, for the first time, Amgen is experimenting with marketing directly to
patients. Among other things, Binder says, it will start running ads in women's
magazines for Neupogen as a treatment to avoid infection associated with
chemotherapy.

   *

   Meanwhile, the typical biotech firm struggles to just keep going.

   ImmunoTherapys Chairman Lillard, whose mother died of breast cancer, cites
results of a study last year that suggests the company's vaccine may help treat
and stop the spread of various cancers. Of 15 cancer patients given the vaccine,
he says, two had tumors shrink or disappear and five had tumors that stopped
growing, though cancers continued to spread in the other patients.

   But ImmunoTherapy has exhausted most of the $1.5 million of past investment
it has been running on for several years. And if it can't raise the $3.5 million
now just to get it into more extensive trials, Lillard said, "We'll have to cut
an already thin program back even further, and that will hurt our ability to
advance the vaccine into the clinic."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Jeff Lillard with the cancer treatment drug he wants to
test. He needs to raise $3.5 million to begin trials on cancer patients, but
concedes that his chances appear to be slim. ; Photo, Of 15 cancer patients
tested with drug developed by ImmunoTherapy of Tustin, seven saw tumors shrink,
disappear or stop growing, the firm says.  ALEXANDER GALLARDO / Los Angeles
Times; Chart, COLOR, Capital Decline; KIRK CHRIST / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1995


                             267 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     June 24, 1995, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: ISOLATION OF RARE GENE MAY BOOST CANCER RESEARCH;
MEDICINE: SCIENTISTS HAIL DISCOVERY OF MUTATION THAT CAUSES FATAL CHILDHOOD
DISEASE. THEY SEE IT HAVING BROAD IMPLICATIONS.

BYLINE: By Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Isolation of a gene mutation that causes a rare and devastating childhood
disease may help scientists learn the fundamental processes that cause normal
cells to turn into cancers, experts say.

   Scientists announced at the National Institutes of Health that a mutated gene
responsible for an inherited killer disease called ataxia-telangiectasia, or AT,
plays a key role in the internal machinery of all cells and may hold the key to
basic puzzles about cancer.

   A study published Friday in the journal Science said the AT gene has been
isolated through a collaboration of 30 international researchers. Experts hailed
the discovery as an advance that goes far beyond a single disease.

   "Because a mutation in this gene affects the nervous system, also the immune
system, and susceptibility to cancer, it has broad implications in advancing our
understanding of the fundamental process of life," said Zach W. Hall, director
of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes, one of the NIH
agencies.

   A Tel Aviv University team led by Yoshef Shiloh is credited with the actual
discovery.

   Shiloh said at a news conference that finding the gene offers the first real
hope of treatment for AT. He said it also provides a new approach to learning
how cells divide, grow, correct genetic errors and die. The AT gene is thought
to be involved in each of those processes, he said.

   Dr. Francis S. Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research, said the discovery should help researchers find a drug or a gene
therapy for AT. It also should enable development of diagnostic tests to
identify people who are carriers of the mutated gene.

   About 500 children in this country have AT. Worldwide, the disease strikes
about one in every 40,000. About 2.5 million Americans are carriers of one copy
of the AT mutation.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995


                             268 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 23, 1995, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: Scientists isolate gene implicated in fatal illness

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- A defective gene has been isolated that some experts suggest
could be "the medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone" in solving the puzzles of
cancer.

   By studying the effects of the gene, researchers hope to learn what goes
wrong, on a molecular level, in cancer, scientists said yesterday at the
National Institutes of Health.

   "Because a mutation in this gene affects the nervous system, also the immune
system, and susceptibility to cancer, it has broad implications in advancing our
understanding of the fundamental process of life," said Zach W. Hall, director
of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes, one of the NIH
agencies.

   In a study published today in the journal Science, an international team of
researchers reports on the decade-long search for the mutated gene that causes
ataxia-telangiectasia, or AT. A group led by Yoshef Shiloh of Tel Aviv
University in Israel is credited with the actual discovery, but 30 researchers
are named as co-authors of the study.

   Mr. Shiloh, who has studied AT for 18 years, said finding the gene offers the
first real hope for treatment of the devastating disease. It also offers a new
approach to learning how cells divide, grow, correct genetic errors and die. The
AT gene is thought to be involved in each of those processes, he said.

   "This is a turning point in our understanding of AT, but also in our
understanding of cell growth and cancer," said Mr. Shiloh.

   In an analysis of the discovery, Rachel Nowak of Science said the gene is
"the medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone." Just as the Rosetta Stone helped
scientists decipher ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, she said, the AT gene may
allow researchers to decipher how cells work on a molecular level.

   Dr. Francis S. Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research, said the discovery should help researchers find a drug or a gene
therapy for AT. It should also enable development of diagnostic tests to
identify people who are carriers of the mutated gene.

   About 500 U.S. children have AT. Worldwide the disease strikes about one in
every 40,000. About 2.5 million Americans are carriers of one copy of the AT
mutation.

   Children who inherit two copies of the defective AT gene -- one copy from
each parent -- are affected at an early age. They develop an unsteady gait,
slurred speech and poor control of eye movements. Later, their immune systems
weaken, respiratory infections are frequent and there is a profound sensitivity
to radiation, such as X-rays. They often develop leukemia or lymphomas and most
die by their 20s of infection or cancer.

   "It is a brutal disease," said Brad Margus of Boca Raton, Fla. Two of his
sons, Jarrett, 6, and Quinn, 4, have AT.

   "In a few years, they will go down that path that all AT kids follow," said
Mr. Margus. "Usually by their teens, muscle coordination gets so bad that they
can't read, control their bowels or feed themselves."

   He said Jarrett will probably be in a wheelchair by age 10.

   On July 1, the Johns Hopkins Children's Center will open a special clinic for
kids with AT. The clinic, the only one in the country specifically devoted to
the disease, was established with the support of the AT Children's Project,
which was started by Mr. Margus.

   For women carriers, some researchers say the risk of breast cancer is
increased fivefold, and that the mutated AT gene may be the primary cause of
inherited breast cancer predisposition.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995


                             269 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 23, 1995, Friday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: DEFECTIVE GENE MAY REVEAL HOW CANCER CELLS WORK

BYLINE: PAUL RECER; Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A defective gene has been isolated that some experts suggest could be "the
medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone" in solving the puzzles of cancer.

   By studying the effects of the gene, researchers hope to learn what goes
wrong, on a molecular level, in cancer, scientists said Thursday at the National
Institutes of Health.

   "Because a mutation in this gene affects the nervous system, also the immune
system, and susceptibility to cancer, it has broad implications in advancing our
understanding of the fundamental process of life," said Zach W. Hall, director
of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes, one of the NIH
agencies.

   In a study published today in the journal Science, an international team of
researchers reports on the decade-long search for the mutated gene that causes
ataxia-telangiectasia, or AT. A group led by Yoshef Shiloh of Tel Aviv
University in Israel is credited with the actual discovery, but 30 researchers
are named as co-authors of the study.

   Shiloh, who has studied AT for 18 years, said finding the gene offers the
first real hope for treatment of the devastating disease. It also offers a new
approach to learning how cells divide, grow, correct genetic errors and die. The
AT gene is thought to be involved in each of those processes, he said.

   "This is a turning point in our understanding of AT, but also in our
understanding of cell growth and cancer," said Shiloh.

   In an analysis of the discovery, Rachel Nowak of Science said the gene is
"the medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone." Just as the Rosetta Stone helped
scientists decipher ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, she said, the gene may allow
researchers to decipher how cells work on a molecular level.

   Dr. Francis S. Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research, said the discovery should help researchers find a drug or a gene
therapy for AT. It also should enable development of diagnostic tests to
identify people who are carriers of the mutated gene.

   About 500 U.S. children have AT. Worldwide the disease strikes about one in
every 40,000. About 2.5 million Americans are carriers of one copy of the AT
mutation.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995


                             270 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 30;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: Scientific Research Depends on Federal Largess

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   The idea floating about Washington that corporate America and private
foundations can provide sufficient monies to offset the cuts in Federal funding
of scientific research is preposterous and absurd. The horizon for return on
investments by corporations is a few years, while the horizon for return on
investment by the Government is decades. A case in point is my own experience as
an academic scientist.

    I was instrumental in generating a transgenic mouse model for a rare genetic
blood disease called chronic granulomatous disease. Children affected are
immunocompromised and suffer from opportunistic infections. Left untreated, they
usually die by the age of 5. C.G.D. affects about one in a million individuals.
So at any one time, there are about 250 Americans affected by the disease. Few
companies would have spent the money to make such an animal. There isn't any
profit from such a small market.

   However, this animal model may help in the development of therapies for
atherosclerosis, arthritis, stroke and Alzheimer's disease as well as in
development of gene therapies for inherited blood diseases. In each of these
disorders the immune system plays a significant role. The molecules in the
immune system that mediate these diseases are not well understood.

   The ability to generate specific mutations in mice may help in identifying
those molecules. The identification of the molecules will lead to better
therapies that are more cost-efficient. When the molecules are identified, drug
companies will make money from results that are published in the public domain.

   My ability to generate such a mouse is the result of the efforts of hundreds
of scientists supported by Federal funds over the past four decades. Techniques
developed in culturing cells, manipulating embryos, cloning DNA and injecting
foreign DNA all made transgenic mouse models for genetic diseases possible.

   Up until a few years ago, the idea of making such mice was pure science
fiction. Since there was little immediate return on any of the discoveries
leading to the development of transgenic animals, it is unlikely that the
research would have found a corporate sponsor. Consequently, the technology
would never have been invented. It is not surprising that the discoveries were
made mostly at a research university supported by funding from the National
Institutes of Health.

   Federal support of my training also made this mouse model for C.G.D.
possible. The Government invested between $250,000 and $500,000 in my graduate
education and postdoctoral training. Federal funding from grants supporting the
research programs of my mentors provided the necessary training environment.

   I doubt that a corporate sponsor, foundation or my family could have
supported my training. With my current salary of a little less than $30,000 a
year, loans totaling half a million dollars would have bankrupted me. Without
Government funding, there would be few scientists to make discoveries either in
academia or industry. After all, most doctoral-level scientists in industry got
their training at research universities.

   The policy of government-sponsored research is as brilliant and relevant now
as it was 50 years ago when first articulated by Vannevar Bush. This policy has
spawned a revolution in communications, computers, molecular biology and
medicine. America's competitiveness in global markets is heavily dependent on
long-term government investments. This is not the time to disinvest.

JONATHAN D. POLLOCK
Research Asst. Prof. of Biology
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Ind., June 16, 1995

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1995


                             271 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 June 23, 1995, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS HOPE GENE GIVES CLUES ON CANCER ; STUDY OF ITS EFFECTS
COULD SHOW WHAT GOES WRONG IN THE DISEASE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A defective gene has been isolated that some experts suggest could be "the
medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone" in solving the puzzles of cancer.

   By studying the effects of the gene, researchers hope to learn what goes
wrong, on a molecular level, in cancer, scientists said Thursday at the National
Institutes of Health.

   "Because a mutation in this gene affects the nervous system, also the immune
system, and susceptibility to cancer, it has broad implications in advancing our
understanding of the fundamental process of life," said Zach W. Hall, director
of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes, one of the
agencies of the National Institutes of Health.

   In a study published today in the journal Science, an international team of
researchers reports on the decade-long search for the mutated gene that causes
ataxia-telangiectasia (ay-TACK-see-uh teh-LAN-jick-TAY-sha), or AT. A group led
by Yoshef Shiloh of Tel Aviv University in Israel is credited with the actual
discovery, but 30 researchers are named as co-authors of the study.

   Shiloh, who has studied AT for 18 years, said finding the gene offered the
first real hope for treatment of the devastating disease. It also offers a new
approach to learning how cells divide, grow, correct genetic errors and die. The
AT gene is thought to be involved in each of those processes, he said.

   In an analysis of the discovery, Rachel Nowak of Science said the gene was
"the medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone." Just as the Rosetta Stone helped
scientists decipher ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, she said, the AT gene might
allow researchers to decipher how cells work on a molecular level.

   Dr. Francis S. Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research, said the discovery should help researchers find a drug or a gene
therapy for AT. It should also enable development of diagnostic tests to
identify people who are carriers of the mutated gene.

   About 500 U.S. children have AT. Worldwide the disease strikes about one in
every 40,000. About 2.5 million Americans are carriers of one copy of the AT
mutation.

   Children who inherit two copies of the defective AT gene - one copy from each
parent - are affected at an early age. They develop an unsteady gait, slurred
speech and poor control of eye movements. Later, their immune systems weaken,
respiratory infections are frequent and there is a profound sensitivity to
radiation, such as X-rays.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995


                             272 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   June 23, 1995, Friday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: GENE MAY BE CLUE TO CANCER ; STUDY OF ITS EFFECTS COULD SHOW WHAT GOES
WRONG IN THE DISEASE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A defective gene has been isolated that some experts suggest could be "the
medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone" in solving the puzzles of cancer.

   By studying the effects of the gene, researchers hope to learn what goes
wrong, on a molecular level, in cancer, scientists said Thursday at the National
Institutes of Health.

   "Because a mutation in this gene affects the nervous system, also the immune
system, and susceptibility to cancer, it has broad implications in advancing our
understanding of the fundamental process of life," said Zach W. Hall, director
of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes, one of the
agencies of the National Institutes of Health.

   In a study published today in the journal Science, an international team of
researchers reports on the decade-long search for the mutated gene that causes
ataxia-telangiectasia (ay-TACK-see-uh teh-LAN-jick-TAY-sha), or AT. A group led
by Yoshef Shiloh of Tel Aviv University in Israel is credited with the actual
discovery, but 30 researchers are named as co-authors of the study.

   Shiloh, who has studied AT for 18 years, said finding the gene offered the
first real hope for treatment of the devastating disease. It also offers a new
approach to learning how cells divide, grow, correct genetic errors and die. The
AT gene is thought to be involved in each of those processes, he said.

   In an analysis of the discovery, Rachel Nowak of Science said the gene was
"the medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone." Just as the Rosetta Stone helped
scientists decipher ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, she said, the AT gene might
allow researchers to decipher how cells work on a molecular level.

   Dr. Francis S. Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research, said the discovery should help researchers find a drug or a gene
therapy for AT. It should also enable development of diagnostic tests to
identify people who are carriers of the mutated gene.

   About 500 U.S. children have AT. Worldwide the disease strikes about one in
every 40,000. About 2.5 million Americans are carriers of one copy of the AT
mutation.

   Children who inherit two copies of the defective AT gene - one copy from each
parent - are affected at an early age. They develop an unsteady gait, slurred
speech and poor control of eye movements. Later, their immune systems weaken,
respiratory infections are frequent and there is a profound sensitivity to
radiation, such as X-rays. They often develop leukemia or lymphomas, and most
die by their 20s of infection or cancer.

   "It is a brutal disease," said Brad Margus of Boca Raton, Fla. Two of his
sons, Jarrett, 6, and Quinn, 4, have AT.

   "In a few years, they will go down that path that all AT kids follow," said
Margus. "Usually by their teens, muscle coordination gets so bad that they can't
read, control their bowels or feed themselves."

   He said Jarrett probably would be in a wheelchair by age 10.

   For women carriers, some researchers say, the risk of breast cancer is
increased fivefold and the mutated AT gene may be the primary cause of inherited
breast cancer predisposition.

   Carriers are extremely sensitive to radiation, often developing welts and
wounds from radiation therapy for cancer. This sensitivity creates a serious
problem for women carriers because they are at added risk of breast cancer and,
yet, can be affected by mammography, the X-ray technique for detecting small
breast tumors.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995


                             273 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          June 23, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 367 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS DISCOVER POSSIBLE CANCER GENE

BYLINE: By PAUL RECER AP science writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A defective gene has been isolated that could be "the medical equivalent of
the Rosetta Stone" in solving the puzzles of cancer.

   By studying the effects of the gene, researchers hope to learn what goes
wrong, on a molecular level, in cancer, scientists said Thursday at the National
Institutes of Health.

   In a study published today in the journal Science, an international team of
researchers reports on the decade-long search for the mutated gene that causes
ataxia-telangiectasia, or AT. A group led by Yoshef Shiloh of Tel Aviv
University in Israel is credited with the actual discovery, but 30 researchers
are named as co-authors of the study.

   Shiloh, who has studied AT for 18 years, said finding the gene offers the
first real hope for treatment of the devastating disease. It also offers a new
approach to learning how cells divide, grow, correct genetic errors and die.
The AT gene is thought to be involved in each of those processes, he said.

   In an analysis of the discovery, Rachel Nowak of Science said the gene is
"the medical equivalent of the Rosetta Stone." Just as the Rosetta Stone helped
scientists decipher ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, she said, the AT gene may
help researchers decipher how cells work on a molecular level.

   Dr. Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research, said the discovery should help researchers find a drug or gene therapy
for AT.

   About 500 U.S. children have AT. Worldwide the disease strikes about one in
every 40,000. About 2.5 million Americans are carriers of one copy of the AT
mutation.

   Children who inherit two copies of the AT gene - one from each parent - are
affected at an early age. They develop an unsteady gait, slurred speech and poor
control of eye movements. Later, their immune systems weaken, respiratory
infections are frequent and there is a profound sensitivity to radiation, such
as X-rays. They often develop leukemia or lymphomas and most die by their 20s of
infection or cancer.

   For women carriers, some researchers said the risk of breast cancer is
increased fivefold, and that the mutated AT gene may be the primary cause of
inherited breast cancer predisposition.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995


                             274 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              June 19, 1995 Monday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1685 words

HEADLINE: AGAINST ALL ODDS

BYLINE: BRIAN T. MEEHAN, of the Oregonian Staff<

DATELINE: STANFORD, Calif.

BODY:

   Monday, June 19, 1995 AGAINST ALL ODDS

   Summary:

   Tough Kirsten Frohnmayer shows her grit, collects diploma at Stanford after
harrowing fight for life

   In the north corner of the Stanford Quad, 165 human biology graduates sit on
folding chairs under elegant stone arches and await their diplomas.

   Their degrees reflect an unusual curriculum: the study of the human organism.
``It is anything, and it is everything,'' one of the speakers, former Stanford
President Donald Kennedy, told the parents of the ``hum bio'' majors.

   And who better to fathom the sweep of human biology than the Phi Beta Kappa
graduate seated in the fifth chair from the right.

   By all rights, Kirsten Frohnmayer, wearing a floppy straw hat, should not
have been at Sunday's commencement. Too many things have happened to her, too
many deadly things.

   But shortly after 2 p.m., Kirsten, the 22-year-old daughter of University of
Oregon President Dave Frohnmayer, rose with her classmates and took the walk she
had promised herself. The one for her diploma, the short walk in the Stanford
sun that kept her going through six terrible months of leukemia, a bone marrow
transplant and a disastrous medical mistake that caused a stroke and nearly
killed her.

   But the transplanted marrow engrafted, and she survived. And, on Sunday,
Kirsten graduated with honors along with 1,668 others in Stanford University's
centennial class of 1995.

   ``This is the best Father's Day present anybody could ever have,'' said her
father, Dave, as he jockeyed for the best camera angle to record the graduation.
He couldn't stop thinking about how lucky they were to be here.

   ``All these parents here are really proud,'' said Kirsten's mother, Lynn.
``For us there is something else there, too -- wonder, joy and amazement.''

   - -

   The start of her senior year seemed so far away Sunday. The year had started
well enough for a young woman who has grown up under the shadow of a deadly
disease. She skied with her family during the Christmas holidays and shared in
the thrill of the University of Oregon football team's trip to the 1995 Rose
Bowl.

   But when she returned from Pasadena, the terrible reality of Fanconi anemia
erased her hopes for gene therapy treatment. Scientists were rushing to complete
a treatment protocol that could help Kirsten deal with the rare genetic blood
disease, which afflicts about 2,000 people in the United States. In 1991, the
puzzling disease led to the death of Kirsten's sister Katie, who was 12.

   The Frohnmayer family always has rallied around the idea of not becoming
victims. The Frohnmayers have prodded the medical community to pay more
attention, published a handbook for families, started an international support
group and raised more than $2.5 million for research.

   None of this, however, made the news any less devastating when it came. Blood
tests in January showed Kirsten's bone marrow had betrayed her. Her body was
producing blast cells, primitive white cells that add up to a deadly word:
leukemia. It is a common progression of Fanconi anemia.

   Her mother gave her the grim news after picking her up at South Eugene High
School. Kirsten had just finished teaching a course she designed, as part of her
senior thesis, on preventing acquaintance rape. Stanford would have to wait;
there was medical business at hand. A bone marrow transplant was her only hope.

   The family had searched in vain for years for a matching donor. A new
protocol at the University of Minnesota seemed the chance. A doctor there had
found a new way to screen T-cells, a type of white blood cell associated with
graft vs. host disease, one of the most threatening complications of a bone
marrow transplant. In graft vs. host disease, the new immune system created by
the donated marrow attacks the body of the host.

   On Feb. 9, doctors at the University of Minnesota Hospital and Clinic
strapped Kirsten into a chair and fired 450 rads of radiation at her. It was a
fatal dose. Basically, the idea behind a marrow transplant is to kill all of the
patient's marrow, then rescue the patient with healthy marrow from the donor. If
the new marrow engrafts, the patient has a chance. If it does not, death comes
quickly.

   Lynn and Dave Frohnmayer stayed in Minneapolis with their eldest daughter. A
close family friend, Jane Gary, moved into their house in Eugene to look after
younger siblings Jonathan, 10, and Amy, 8. Gary never doubted Kirsten's ability
to make it.

   ``She is the crown jewel for grit in the family,'' Gary said. ``There is no
holding her back, and she has been that way her whole life.''

   Early on, it became clear the transplant was a success. The new marrow was
performing its vital function of making red cells, platelets and white cells in
numbers Kirsten hadn't generated before.

   But then disaster struck. A Hickman catheter, a line used to take blood and
administer medication, had been incorrectly placed in an artery rather than in a
vein. Catheters are never intentionally inserted into arteries, because blood is
under much higher pressure as it is squeezed out of the heart.

   Doctors waited until Kirsten had recovered from the transplant to remove the
errant catheter. But a diagnostic test triggered a stroke and paralyzed
Kirsten's right side. Doctors then had to perform major chest surgery to remove
the catheter.

   She developed pneumonia and landed in the intensive care unit. The 2 1/2
weeks she spent on a respirator was the low point. She could hear people talking
about her, but she could not communicate with them.

   Kirsten began to think about all she was missing: her senior year at
Stanford, the capstone to the four best years of her life. She longed for
dinners with her friends and the speed walks she would take into the foothills
above the campus. She missed bicycling up to the oval and the lovely painted
facade of Memorial Church.

   ``When I came off the respirator, I had an opportunity to feel how weak I
was, and I had never, ever been that weak in my life,'' she said. ``I started to
think about what I was missing out on. It was a bad idea. . . . I started to
feel sorry for myself, which I hadn't done until then.''

   But she began to feel better emotionally as she grew stronger physically.
Before too long, she was planning to return home.

   Life on the bone marrow transplant ward was often heartbreaking. While the
patients were isolated in their rooms, the families got to know one another
well.

   ``People like to say things like, `We were confident Kirsten would make it
because she is so tough,' '' Lynn Frohnmayer said. ``Well, there are lots of
very tough kids on that bone marrow transplant ward, and tough sometimes is just
not enough. It was a bittersweet experience for us to leave. We left, but a lot
of kids never did leave that ward.''

   - -

   Kirsten flew home to Eugene on Saturday, June 10. A crowd of about 70 friends
and relatives were at the airport to greet her. With her family by her side, she
walked gingerly down the runway into the reception area. She spoke in a whisper,
her vocal chords were not healed from two weeks on a respirator. Her little
sister, Amy, 8, trailed in her wake, holding a sign she had made. ``Kirsten is a
winner,'' it said. It was a sentiment shared by all. Among the crowd was a
typing class from Coquille High School that had raised $500 for Fanconi anemia
research. The Coquille students were among hundreds who reached out to Kirsten
during her long illness. The generosity of strangers touched Kirsten.

   ''It gives me faith in humanity,'' she says. ``We are in this age when you
read about how everything is falling apart and then you hear a group of high
school students has driven 3 hours to meet you and they've raised money for the
research fund. I was really very touched.''

   Last Wednesday, Kirsten and Lynn flew to California, and the senior had a
grand reunion with her classmates and professors. Many had not known until
recently about her battle with Fanconi anemia.

   ``I was very surprised,'' said Dr. Ellen Porzig, who had advised Kirsten on
her senior honors project. ``But she had a core of strength. I knew she had
something in her life that made her strong. She had more maturity than many
people her age.''

   She attended a reception for Phi Beta Kappa award winners and a dinner at the
president's house. But a nagging stomach problem kept her up all night Saturday.

   Her mother let her sleep through the zany general commencement that took
place Sunday morning on the floor of Stanford Stadium before about 25,000
onlookers. Graduates rollerbladed into the stadium, flew kites, set up
volleyball nets, fired squirt guns and smoke bombs, and did cartwheels into
inflatable wading pools.

   Defense Secretary William J. Perry, himself a Stanford graduate, was the
featured speaker. He urged the graduates to become involved in the world. He
talked about opening the door and letting the future in.

   And just what does the future hold for Kirsten Frohnmayer?

   She still faces the possibility that her leukemia could return. Her immune
system will not be whole again for at least a year, and there is the lingering
threat of graft vs. host disease. She must be reinoculated for all of the
childhood diseases. And she must avoid the sun for two years because it can spur
graft vs. host disease.

   The future for her will be like the past, a landscape where no day is taken
for granted, where dreams are not deterred by hospital beds or blood tests.

   Amid the happy noise of graduation day, other words echoed across the
red-tiled roofs of the Stanford Quad. The words were from the student body
president of the South Eugene High School Class of 1991. Her name was Kirsten
Frohnmayer:

   ``A final thought I'd like to share with you tonight is my belief that
sometimes we should live for the day. Too often life consists of anticipation of
the future or regrets about the past. But we can't change the past, and we don't
know what the future will hold.

   ``So, at least some of the time, we should concentrate on the present.
Whatever path you've chosen, whether you're talking about college, a job,
volunteer work or family, you're talking about life, and life must be fun. Find
the fun in life.''

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             275 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                      June 18, 1995, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 2248 words

HEADLINE: Biotech poised to deliver on early promise

BYLINE: Timothy J. Mullaney, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   The drawing outside Cabot Caskie's office at Univax Biologics Inc. in
Rockville is a cartoon. But it says too much about Maryland's future to be a
joke.

   The picture shows Chief Executive Thomas Stagnaro, Chief Financial Officer
Caskie, and other top managers riding a rocket representing the future of the
company and the biotechnology industry.

   The caption: "Tom, where did you say we're going next?"

   After years of work and several conspicuous failures, that rocket-like future
is tantalizingly close for Maryland biotech. Led by a half-dozen or more
companies analysts believe will turn profitable by 1997 or 1998, Maryland's 19
publicly traded biotech companies (out of 68 in the state) are nearly ready to
deliver on the promise of the cartoon.

   But also, it seems, on its uncertainties.

   The state has spent 10 years and tens of millions of dollars developing
programs to nurture young biotech companies in an effort to create a "new base"
that will lead the state's work force of 2.4 million in a prosperous Information
Age. As the first crop of companies nears profitability, the state faces new
challenges to keep the firms' growth close to home as the real money is about to
be made. The stakes are very high indeed.

   "You could have the discovery of a cure for AIDS, you could have the
discovery of [specific] human genes," said James Fielder, deputy secretary of
Maryland's Department of Economic and Employment Development. "All these things
are being worked on right now, in addition to the creation of well-paying jobs
our children can work on."

   A 1993 state report estimated that Maryland biotech companies could create up
to 40,000 jobs by 2000 just by keeping the state's share of the market as the
industry grows. Currently about 5,100 work for state biotech companies.

   Behind the state's biotech effort looms the shadow of Sparrows Point, the
Bethlehem Steel mill in Baltimore County that once anchored the industrial job
base Maryland hopes the life sciences will replace.

   After employing nearly 29,000 people in 1957, the mill has shrunk to 5,400
workers today. Once the state's biggest private employer and the world's biggest
mill, Sparrows Point accounts for 23 percent of the 101,000 manufacturing jobs
Maryland has lost in the past 38 years.

   But as Maryland's biotech industry approaches real success for the first
time, the promise that it will be a major part of the state's post-manufacturing
job base -- the next Sparrows Point -- is still open to question.

   "I would love to say that would be the case," Mr. Caskie said. "But we
believe we can produce substantial sales with a work force that stays under
1,000 people (Univax now has 130 workers). DEED doesn't want to hear that, but
these are good jobs. We have no positions under $ 24,000 a year. The average
salary is in the neighborhood of $ 75,000 a year."

   For investors, the past six months have seen a steady stream of almost
entirely positive news about Maryland biotech firms, news that brings
anticipation of profits and jobs:

   * Martek Biosciences Corp. of Columbia got its first product, a baby-formula
additive that stimulates infant brain and eye development, on the market in
Europe. Martek also disclosed that it had reached licensing deals with two top
U.S. formula makers who are working with the Food and Drug Administration to get
the product, called Formulaid, approved for sale in the U.S. Salomon Inc. last
year called Martek "a stock that could explode."

   * Univax got its first major product approved by the FDA in March, setting
the stage for sales of up to $ 100 million by 1999. Analysts say WinRho SD will
quickly supplant existing therapies for a common AIDS complication that causes
the body to destroy its own blood platelets. The drug will help the body
maintain its ability to stop bleeding and resist bruising. "We're a real
business now," Mr. Caskie said.

   * Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Baltimore plans to file for final FDA
approval by fall for its Gliadel implant for brain cancer patients. Gliadel is a
wafer soaked with chemotherapy drugs that surgeons can implant immediately after
removing a tumor, allowing the drugs to work directly on the remaining cancerous
cells without the side effects of today's chemotherapy. Analysts project $ 50
million to $ 75 million in Gliadel sales by 1998.

   * MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg plans to reapply for final FDA approval this
summer for RespiGam, which is designed to prevent a virus leading to infant
pneumonia. Rejected by an FDA panel in 1993 because of flawed clinical studies,
the drug's sales could reach $ 82 million by 1998, according to Morgan Stanley &
Co. The company's 1994 sales were only $ 12 million.

   * Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg won rights to commercialize a key NIH
patent for ex vivo gene therapy -- altering genes outside the body and then
inserting the improved genes into a patient to correct a disease. The patent
would en

   title Genetic Therapy to royalties from any company using the method. In
addition to that patent, Genetic Therapy could make millions more if any of the
therapies it is developing for 11 diseases reach the market.

   "I think what you have in the Baltimore area is the culmination of a lot of
seeds that were planted in the last decade," said G. Steven Burrill, a San
Francisco biotechnology consultant. "This is what should happen. It has been
slower than people expected. People thought everything that went into clinical
trials would be a billion-dollar drug."

   Vagaries of the industry

   Biotech executives warn that a lot can still go wrong between now and 1997 or
1998. Previously undiscovered problems can turn up even in the final stages of
an FDA review, as MedImmune discovered in 1993. In many cases, there are
competing technologies -- a particular problem for Genetic Therapy's NIH patent,
which some analysts believe will be quickly overtaken by a method now in an
earlier stage of research. Also, the companies must build sales and marketing
forces.

   Most critically, the late stages of commercialization demand enormous amounts
of money to finish FDA review and build factories. The companies must raise
these funds in a very skeptical market that has been badly burned by the
near-collapse of biotech stocks since 1992.

   The cash crunches could keep some products from getting to market. But a
bigger threat is that money problems could force biotech executives to sell
their companies, or at least lucrative manufacturing and distribution rights, to
established drugmakers.

   That could mean that major firms, located largely in the corridor between New
York and Philadelphia, would reap many of the biggest rewards from the
entrepreneurs' work -- and from Maryland's economic development dollars.

   "It has been a risk that has been around for a long time -- the risk of
cherry picking," said Charles McMillion, an economist who is president of a
Washington consulting firm. "Cherry picking is when large companies --
pharmaceutical companies and others -- wait to see these biotech firms hit a
gusher with a product and then buy them up and move them away."

   Production moves out

   Another threat is that Maryland biotech firms will do their manufacturing
someplace cheaper, even if they stay independent. The fear is rooted in the
state's spotty record of nurturing science from laboratory to market. Saccharin,
Bufferin and the AIDS drug AZT all stem at least partly from research done in
Maryland. But none is produced here.

   Already, MedImmune has tentatively agreed to accept an incentive package to
build a $ 30 million plant in Ohio. Martek bought a plant in Kentucky for $ 10
million -- less than half its construction cost. And American Type Culture
Collection of Rockville, which distributes biological products to researchers,
has announced plans to move its 230 workers to Virginia.

   On the other hand, Guilford has built a factory in Baltimore to make Gliadel,
and biotech suppliers such as Life Technologies Inc. of Gaithersburg and
BioWhittaker Inc. of Walkersville also manufacture in Maryland.

   "American Type and MedImmune aren't flukes," said Michael A. Conte, director
of the Regional Economic Studies Program at the University of Baltimore. "We
have to have the manufacturing jobs and we have to have the biotech-dependent
jobs. Those jobs are annuities. Research is a one-time thing."

   Industry officials say Maryland should not worry too much over whether it
retains most biotech manufacturing for three reasons.

   First, they say much manufacturing is bound to go out of state because of
Maryland's high cost of living and elite work force, only 8 percent of which
works in manufacturing jobs now. Second, they say the jobs that will stay in
Maryland are the ones most worth having. Lastly, a biotech company generates
more white-collar jobs than blue, especially because a big chunk of early
profits is plowed back into research.

   The commercialization of Maryland biotech companies, they say, could create
up to 10,000 jobs in the state, with direct biotech employment growing 35
percent annually in the first years after products reach the market.

   MedImmune is an example. It will add up to 100 production workers after
building its planned suburban Cleveland plant, executive vice president David M.
Mott said. But it will also add about 65 people to sales, research and
administration on top of the 130 mostly white-collar employees the company
already has, he said. Many of the new white-collar jobs will be in Montgomery
County.

   "If Maryland's advantage is brains and entrepreneurial activity, you can make
the same claim about Boston and Silicon Valley and they're doing fine," Martek
Chairman Henry "Pete" Linsert Jr. argues. "Maryland is filled with people in
suburbia who have service and intellectually related backgrounds. That's us. Our
standard of living is high because our per-capita income is high. Those are not
the characteristics of low-cost manufacturing."

   Knowledge is money

   Genetic Therapy Chairman M. James Barrett says it's more important for
Maryland to hang on to jobs in marketing and research and development of new
drugs, because those jobs create the value consumers pay for. The drug business,
he says, works a bit like the Grateful Dead.

   "When you buy a CD, the disc is 12 cents and the packaging is a dime," Dr.
Barrett said. "But you pay $ 15. The reason is the knowledge."

   He says Maryland can hold on to the most important biotech jobs. "There's no
reason for me to move that to West Virginia. I couldn't get the kind of people I
want," he said. "You can't have all your jobs demand Ph.Ds, but you can't have
thousands of people driving up to Sparrows Point in biotech."

   Even a state rival admits that capturing manufacturing is not the main point,
especially for a high-wage state like Maryland.

   "If you had a choice between research and development, and manufacturing, you
would take the R&D," said Walter H. Plosila, former head of the Rockville-based
Suburban Maryland Technology Council who now leads the North Carolina Alliance
for Competitive Technologies. "Maryland wants the R&D because it pays the wages
that let people afford to live in the state."

   Outdated strategy

   Nonetheless, biotech executives say, it makes sense for Maryland to try to
keep whatever manufacturing it can. But they say state government makes it
harder with what many in the industry believe is an outdated strategy.

   Maryland concentrates its aid to biotechnology on very young companies that
are years away from developing marketable products, the executives claim,
instead of making bigger commitments to companies that are on the verge of
living up to their early promise.

   "We're the company the state should want, not the 50 companies that employ 12
people and have real long shots at ever getting to the other side," MedImmune's
Mr. Mott said.

   Mr. Caskie of Univax said Maryland's stance has shown signs of a change since
Gov. Parris N. Glendening took office. He said the new administration has
doubled the state-supported financing it is willing to offer when Univax is
ready to build a factory, which the company hopes to place near Frederick.

   Mr. Fielder insists DEED hasn't changed its policy. It just uses the right
tools for the right stage of the industry's development, he says.

   "We are targeting that [manufacturing] sector right now," Mr. Fielder said.
"Five years ago that wasn't true, because five years ago the biotech industry,
including MedImmune, wasn't ready."

   The bottom line that counts depends on what an individual observer thinks is
most important.

   For investors like Baltimore venture capitalist Charles W. Newhall III,
success is measured in the number of people who become millionaires as biotech
companies explode into the next stage of their lives. By that measure, Maryland
is on the cusp of making it big.

   "An Amgen creates 45 millionaires. And that's 45 million-dollar homes. And
there's probably 300 $ 250,000 homes. Then there's the service businesses. . . .
These are the ripples in the pond."

   But for economists like Charles McMillion, a big part of the bottom line is
jobs. The fact is that biotech is not as labor-intensive as making steel. People
who expect it to be are going to be disappointed, he said.

   "There is enormous upside for profits, but not enormous upside for jobs," he
said. "No more than a few thousand, and that's in a state with 2.4 million
workers."

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, BARBARA HADDOCK TAYLOR/SUN STAFF PHOTO; PHOTO, BARBARA
HADDOCK TAYLOR/SUN STAFF PHOTO, (HENRY "PETE" LINSERT JR.); CHART 1, Institute
for Biotechnology Information, BIOTECH LEADERS; CHART 2, Company reports, Sun
interviews, Bloomberg Business news, University of Baltimore Regional Economic
Studies Program., DOES MANUFACTURING MATTER?

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995


                             276 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1995 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          June 17, 1995, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 945 words

HEADLINE: 'U' will try gene therapy against disease

BYLINE: Gordon Slovut; Staff Writer

BODY:

    The University of Minnesota has received permission from the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration to begin using human gene therapy for the first time to
treat a hereditary disease.

    In what could be the start of a new era in the treatment of X-linked
conditions - hereditary diseases usually passed on only to male offspring via
X-chromosomes - university scientists plan to use harmless viruses to deliver
corrective genes into the white blood cells of two adult volunteers with Hunter
syndrome.

    They hope the genes, which will replace genes that are missing or not
functioning properly, will begin producing an enzyme needed to recycle complex
carbohydrates.

    The trial is the first gene therapy program approved at the University of
Minnesota and the first approved for Hunter syndrome.

    The disease is rare - about 30 cases are identified in the United States
each year - but devastating.

    In its severe form, the first symptoms appear in boys at the age of 2 or 3.
Typically, they become mentally retarded, develop behavioral, respiratory and
heart problems and die before age 15.

    In its mild form, it does not cause mental retardation and usually isn't
diagnosed until adulthood, when it manifests itself as extreme joint stiffness,
hearing loss and breathing and heart problems.  Most men with the mild form live
to about 40.

    In terms of diseases passed on from mothers to some sons, Hunter's closest
relatives are Duchenne muscular dystrophy, hemophilia and Lesch-Nyhan syndrome,
all of which manifest themselves in different ways.

    There are about 4,000 known genetic diseases.  Scientists have identified
the defective gene, or genes, in only a few of them.  Dr. Michael Blaese, a
former University of Minnesota researcher who is director of gene therapy for
the National Institutes of Health, has said it will be 10 or 20 years before
gene therapy becomes available for many of the diseases.

    Chester Whitley, a University of Minnesota associate professor of
pediatrics-human genetics and director of the Hunter project, said that bone
marrow transplants have been tried on Hunter patients, with limited success.

    He said bone marrow transplants have some problems: 10 to 20 percent of
recipients die of complications, suitable marrow donors are often impossible to
find and the cost is extremely high, often $ 200,000 or more.

    University scientists have been doing dry runs on the therapy with the
cooperation of Jim Oliger, 44, a public school administrator from Davenport,
Iowa, who has a mild form of Hunter. Oliger donated white blood cells to the
research project the past two summers.

    The scientists removed white blood cells from Oliger's blood, and inserted
the gene he needs into the cells by way of a harmless, genetically modified
virus called a therapeutic vector.

    In the laboratory, they cultured the corrected cells, making them increase
tenfold in the course of a week.

    "We would receive 50 million cells from a patient, [insert the needed gene
into them] and after seven to 10 days we would have 50 billion cells [containing
the needed gene]," Whitley said.

    When the trial starts, the gene-corrected cells will be dripped back into
the volunteers.

    Whitley said that if the treatment works, patients would probably be
resupplied every few weeks with another dose of corrected genes.

    Whitley said he wouldn't be surprised if it turns out that patients require
larger doses than those used in the initial trials.

    "The goal of this trial is to demonstrate that this form of experimental
gene therapy is feasible, as well as to learn about adverse effects," Whitley
said. "Whether or not this treatment will work is completely unknown, but if the
initial treatment appears to be safe, future studies would be required to assess
how well they really work."

    Only six U.S. universities have received FDA approval to manufacture the
tamed-virus vectors for gene therapy clinical trials.

    The project is being financed by grants from the university's National
Institutes of Health-funded Clinical Research Center, the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development and the university's Academic Health Center.
Private donations paid for the studies leading up to the trials.

    Oliger said he only learned he had Hunter syndrome about 15 years ago when
it was diagnosed in a cousin who is now near death.

    "Tests showed that six or seven other family members have it," he said. "I
have stiff joints and hearing loss. Fortunately, I haven't had cardiac problems
or respiratory problems to the degree others have. I have carpal tunnel
syndrome; a number of us have that."

    He said he hasn't decided yet whether he wants to be one of the first two
adult volunteers who would receive the gene therapy in the next six months.

    If he does so, it would be partly because it might help children who develop
the severe form.

    "Those kids die at such a young age," he said.  "Their parents go through
such agony, seeing their children suffer so much."

    Of course, he said, he would like to see his own family benefit. "My
daughter is a carrier," he said.

    The disorder doesn't usually develop in girls and women because they have
two X-chromosomes, so if one carries a defective gene, the other X-chromosome is
likely to have the healthy gene. The disease occurs in boys and men because they
have only one X-chromosome.


LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995


                             277 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 16, 1995 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO and CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Xytronyx Inc. terminated Rand P. Mulford, the company's president and chief
operating officer.

   The company said the termination was part of its efforts to reduce costs.

   Mulford joined the company as chief operating officer in September 1994. His
responsibilities will be assumed by Larry Bymaster, Xytronyx's chief executive
officer, and Dale Sander, chief financial officer.

   Xytronyx is attempting to commercialize a periodontal disease detection kit
and sun-sensitive materials. Sibia Inc. announced that its three-year
collaborative research agreement with Eli Lilly and Co. to develop and exploit
technology to identify certain drugs has been expanded in scope and extended for
an additional two years. Immune Response Corp. and the San Diego Regional Cancer
Center have begun the clinical testing of a potential colon cancer gene therapy
vaccine.

   The first test will include 12 patients at a Sharp Healthcare facility. The
1996 version of Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia includes content updates
through a computer on-line service.

   Carlsbad-based Compton's NewMedia, which makes the encyclopedia CD-ROM, said
a new on-line button takes America Online subscribers directly to Compton's
on-line area, and allows users to roam from there.

   For buyers who don't subscribe to America Online, the encyclopedia comes with
10 hours of free computer time on AOL. The 1996 version will be available July
17, the company said. The Navy awarded a $5.5 million contract for a
minesweeping system to General Atomics.

   All work on the project will be done at General Atomics' San Diego facility.

   The system is scheduled for completion by 1999. Intelligent Surgical Lasers
Inc. and certain of its officers and directors were named defendants in a
class-action complaint filed in the U.S. District Court for southern New York.
The company said the suit, which also names David Blech and D. Blech & Co., was
related to earlier litigation filed against Blech.

   Intelligent Surgical said it believes the claims against it and its officers
and directors are without merit and intends to contest them vigorously. DH
Technology said a subsidiary, Cognitive Solutions, has received a multiyear
order from DHL Worldwide Express for a printer to be used with DHL's shipping
system.

   Terms were not disclosed, although DH Technology said the order involves
upgrading several thousand units throughout the country.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             278 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 15, 1995 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:7,8,1; B-3:6

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Doctors begin test of genetic therapy on cancer patient

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   With a simple injection of a thimble-full of cells, doctors from the Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center here began testing an experimental genetic therapy
yesterday in a man with colon cancer. The injected cells have been augmented to
carry an additional gene that the physicians hope will boost the man's immune
system to better fight his cancer, although this initial test is designed
primarily to test the therapy's safety. The test, begun yesterday at Sharp
Memorial Hospital in Kearny Mesa, is among the first clinical trials of gene
therapy techniques in San Diego.

   In an unremarkable-looking procedure, Clarence Klosterman, 69, a retired
mechanical engineer from Riverside County, received an injection in his upper
arm. Doctors remain intensely interested in the use of transplanted genes
because of their ability to provide proteins, hormones, enzymes or other natural
factors that have the potential to be more fundamental treatments than
conventional drugs. In this case, the altered cells carry a gene that produces
Interleukin-2, a protein that Dr. Ivor Royston and Dr. Robert E. Sobol believe
can stimulate activity among the immune system's cancer-fighting cells. The
injections also include cells from the patient's own tumor.

   Together, the cells serve as a target for the immune system's cytotoxic
T-cells and natural killer cells. Klosterman was diagnosed with colon cancer in
1991, and despite surgery, chemotherapy and radiation treatments, the tumor has
spread elsewhere in his body, including his lungs, where it is difficult to
treat effectively. "At this point, it's appropriate to try a novel therapy,"
Sobol said. "We hope the patient will mount an immune response." The doses are
designed to test primarily for safety and to make certain there are no serious
adverse effects.

   But if there is evidence that it attacks his tumor, doctors can continue to
give the treatment, Sobol said. Klosterman will receive two additional
injections, each two weeks apart. The doctors will test Klosterman's blood for
evidence of increased immune activity, and they will monitor his tumor for any
sign of regression. Eight additional patients will be brought into the trial,
Sobol said.

   Like Klosterman, they are seriously ill people who qualify for the test
because they can expect little benefit from standard treatments, he said. The
doctors envision the therapy not as a replacement for standard treatments but as
a supplement to fight the recurrence of cancer that, after surgery, can arise
from microscopic pockets of the original tumor that often linger and migrate to
the liver, abdomen or other organs. Gene therapy also can be less traumatic on
the body than other treatments. After two hours of observation yesterday,
Klosterman returned home. About 138,000 people are diagnosed with colon cancer
each year in the United States, and about 55,000 die of it annually. The
gene-therapy technique has induced tumor regression in mice that had colon
tumors, and that evidence prompted the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to
approve the human trial now under way. Sobol estimated it might take five years
of testing and review before the therapy would qualify as part of a standard
cancer-treating regimen. Other genetic treatments being tested in San Diego
include a trial at UCSD of a technique developed by Viagene Inc. for attacking
AIDS. Flossie Wong-Staal, a UCSD researcher, is awaiting FDA permission to test
an approach that attempts to fight AIDS by using a scissorslike molecule to snip
the AIDS virus. The Kimmel Cancer Center on Torrey Pines Mesa was known as the
San Diego Regional Cancer Center until this month when Sidney Kimmel, an East
Coast garment industry executive, gave the center $5 million, and it was renamed
in his honor. The cancer center has licensed the gene-therapy technology to
Immune Response Corp. of San Diego. Royston battled federal regulators in 1993
and won permission to try a similar gene therapy to treat a virulent brain tumor
in a La Mesa woman even though the therapy had not undergone the usual testing.

   That use ultimately was allowed with a special, "compassionate" exception
because all standard treatment had failed.

   Despite the treatments, the woman, Clemma Hewitt, died of the brain tumor.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             279 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       June 14, 1995 Wednesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 2391 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC TESTING: PROGRESS, ETHICAL QUESTIONS

SERIES: Worlds of Difference
Population
Fourth in a series.

BYLINE: ANNE M. HAMILTON; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Nancy Lastrina's sister had had twins, so Lastrina's obstetrician recommended
an ultrasound. He wanted to see if she was carrying two fetuses.

   Lastrina, then 25 and a newlywed, wasn't worried when the doctor told her to
repeat the test.

   "I didn't think of birth defects. I thought, I'm healthy. Why shouldn't my
baby be healthy?"

   The doctor said the test showed the possibility of Down syndrome, a genetic
birth defect and one of the most frequently occurring forms of mental
retardation. He advised Lastrina to have an amniocentesis -- testing the
chromosomal makeup of the fluid inside the womb -- to confirm the diagnosis.

   But Lastrina, a devout Roman Catholic opposed to abortion, refused. Instead,
she read a few books about Down syndrome. One evening, she went bowling with her
husband to take her mind off her concerns.

   "In the lane next to us was a mother and father with a Down son," she said.
"I thought, 'So be it. If that's us, that's us.' "

   Four months later, her daughter Gina, now 6, was born. She did not have Down
syndrome. Since then, Lastrina, a news clerk for The Courant, has had two other
children. "You just hope for the best," she said, "and prepare yourself for the
worst."

   NOT EVERYONE'S MIRACLE

   Technology has allowed humans to soar into the heavens, dive deep into the
sea and reach far into the mysteries of cyberspace.

   It has allowed us to understand our bodies and make decisions about them.

   But genetic technology -- reading and maybe someday even altering the codes
that determine who and what we are -- is not progress to everyone.

   In the past two decades, it has permitted more doctors to determine if
children will be born with mental retardation.

   The technology does not yet provide methods to prevent retardation, but it
has allowed parents to avoid or abort some pregnancies that could result in the
birth of a retarded child.

   There are many who wonder, however, whether that ability -- or gene
manipulation -- is such a good thing.

   Should scientists, doctors and parents try to eradicate birth defects and
retardation just because they can? Some say yes. But Lastrina and others believe
we should play the hands we're dealt and never look to discard. To purge the
population of disabled people, they say, would indicate that disabled people
among us are worthless or, at best, worth less.

   What of the other ethical questions posed by genetic testing?

   Should we impose sterilization on retarded people just because there is a
slightly higher chance some may have retarded offspring?

   Should we spend precious public and private funds developing testing methods
for every conceivable genetic cause of mental retardation, or should we spend
that money to help retarded people fit into society?

   Should we fear tests for genetic abnormalities will cause discrimination
against those with positive tests?

   Will there be pressure on couples not to attempt childbirth because their
genes contain the possibility of birth defects?

   They are questions central to a society's response to mental retardation. But
they do not worry some.

   "Every time there is a scientific breakthrough, people push it to the
boundaries of how it will be misused," said Robert Greenstein, who heads the
University of Connecticut Health Center's genetics division. "I have great faith
in people's natural intelligence. People gradually learn to understand and make
decisions."

   Still, others are not so sure.

   NOT CURES

   The availability of genetic testing varies around the world. In developed
countries, it has allowed many parents to learn about disabilities their
children could face.

   In the United States, women over 35 and couples with a history of genetic
problems are routinely offered tests.

   In less developed countries, prenatal diagnosis, counseling and abortion are
unavailable or considered a luxury; obtaining basic medical care is the critical
issue.

   * In Ireland, where abortion is illegal, prenatal genetic testing, available
only in the largest cities, is not widely used.

   * In other Western European nations, amniocentesis is widely available under
national health care systems.

   * South Africa and Egypt are the only African countries with more than a
handful of geneticists. In Muslim countries, abortion is illegal and, in all
African countries, the level of poverty makes mere survival hard.

   * Except in Cuba, abortion in Latin America is illegal, other than to save
the mother's life.

   But even where tests are available, their ability to determine the chances of
retardation has far outstripped the ability of science to cure the condition.

   Using ultrasound or a blood test known as the "triple test," many conditions
can be tentatively identified 15 weeks after conception. Ultrasound uses sound
waves to produce an image of the fetus, showing body parts as well as fetal
movement. It can show heart and brain defects, limb abnormalities, even the sex
of the fetus.

   While the triple test is not definitive in many cases, it can suggest the
presence of Down syndrome or other chromosomal abnormalities. It can also show
an increased risk of neural tube defects -- malformation of the spinal cord --
such as spina bifida. With low risk and at a cost of less than $100, the test
can be offered to younger women who would not routinely have an amniocentesis.

   The results of amniocentesis and of chorionic villus sampling, in which a
small amount of the placenta is removed and tested, are more conclusive, but
each of these tests presents possible problems.

   Amniocentesis -- taking a small amount of amniotic fluid from the uterus of
the mother -- is usually performed 14 to 16 weeks after conception. The test
itself causes miscarriage in about 1 out of 200 cases, and any decision to
terminate a pregnancy based on its results must be made well into the second
trimester.

   Chorionic villus sampling can be done earlier, but it may cause limb
deformities, and the rate of miscarriage is higher than for amniocentesis.

   Alicia Craffey, coordinator of prenatal genetics at the University of
Connecticut Health Center, says about 90 percent of her patients who learn their
child would have Down syndrome choose to terminate the pregnancy. With more
serious forms of retardation or disability, more than 99 percent choose to do
so.

   But genetics counselors say tests also give couples who choose to continue
pregnancies time to learn about the disability and make medical decisions in
advance. A baby, for example, with spina bifida can be delivered by caesarean
section, lessening the risk of infection.

   CAN'T ALWAYS PREDICT

   Even with the best diagnostic tests, there are still surprises.

   Susan Tew of New York had an amniocentesis after she became pregnant at 38.
The test revealed no problems. But her daughter Emily was born with a rare
chromosome anomaly that had not been detected. Tew said she would have
considered an abortion had she known about her daughter's condition. Emily, now
3, has severe retardation and functions on the level of a 1-year-old.

   Despite the advances in genetic screening, there are still many conditions
that do not show up in prenatal tests. And even a positive test doesn't reveal
everything.

   "There are some chromosome abnormalities that we can't predict what the
outcome will be in terms of intellectual development or how much this will
affect someone's life," said Jodi Rucquoi, a genetics counselor at Yale-New
Haven Hospital.

   Chromosomal abnormalities occur in 10 percent to 15 percent of all
conceptions, but only 5 percent of those fetuses survive until birth, said Mark
Batshaw, a professor of pediatrics and neurology at the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine. Despite these problems, and others during
pregnancy, 14 out of 15 infants are born with no significant birth defects, he
said. Experts say 50 percent to 75 percent of birth defects in the United States
are genetic; the rest are caused by alcohol, drugs or diseases.

   While scientists work to decipher the mysteries of DNA and end genetic
disorders that cause retardation, advocates for people with disabilities
question their motives, techniques and goals.

   Adrienne Asch, an ethicist at Wellesley College, challenges people to think
about the word "disability."

   Is it intrinsically better to be "able" than "disabled"? Such an assumption
often masks prejudice against people with disabilities, says Asch, who is blind.

   No one is completely independent, she argues, so what's the difference
between getting help fixing a toilet, and asking for help cutting up food?

   Marcia Rioux, director of the Roeher Institute, an Ontario clearinghouse for
information about disabilities, wonders how bias affects public spending. Should
tax dollars go for basic scientific research to eradicate or cure disabilities?
Or should they be used to improve conditions disabled people encounter?

   "People may want to be alive with a disability rather than not be alive at
all," Rioux said.

   Asch says a desire for a perfect child causes some parents to fear having a
child with disabilities. As a feminist, she defends the right of a woman to
terminate a pregnancy. But she warns that abortion to prevent the birth of a
child with disabilities is a dangerous step toward a homogeneous, genetically
"perfect" society.

   Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, thinks Rioux and Asch carry the argument too far.

   Acknowledging a disability and trying to cure or prevent it is not the same
as denigrating the worth of a person with it, Caplan said.

   "Given the way society is structured and life is structured," he said, "it is
definitely a disadvantage not to be able to see and hear."

   But Rioux counters that people once condoned slavery because slaves weren't
considered "human." Only a half-century ago, Hitler tried to "improve" the human
race by eliminating Jews, gypsies, homosexuals and people with disabilities.
"Are we in the same place now?" she asked.

   80,000 GENES

   In a modern building surrounded by azaleas on the vast campus of Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston, researchers are trying to identify genetic
abnormalities leading to mental retardation.

   The research is part of an effort to locate each of the 60,000 to 80,000
genes in the cells of our bodies and learn what each does.

   Like detectives, the researchers are trying to find out which gene is
responsible for a disease or trait, from cancer to sexuality. "It is like
landing on the planet and trying to find the house of your best friend without
an address, without a map," said Huda Zoghbi, acting director of the Baylor
mental retardation research center.

   How will such information be used? Will there be pressure -- subtle or great
-- against bringing children at risk for cancer or retardation into the world?
Will parents use genetic testing to produce only handsome, intelligent
offspring?

   Will employers, fearful of the costs of insurance or the lack of
productivity, refuse to hire based on genetic profiles that reveal a propensity
for disease or disability?

   Caplan cites societal pressure. "We could find ourselves in a situation where
a 'good parent' isn't a good parent if they choose to have a child with cystic
fibrosis or cerebral palsy or Down syndrome or spina bifida that could have been
prevented," he said.

   While there have been no definitive court cases, there has been anecdotal
evidence of discrimination.

   For example, children of people with the gene for Huntington's disease, a
fatal nervous system disorder that usually starts in middle age, have a 50-50
chance of inheriting it. Just taking the test indicates the possibility that a
person may develop the disease, and that could be used against the person. As a
result, many patients tested for the disease at the University of Connecticut
Health Center have asked that the test not be billed to their insurance company,
said UConn's Greenstein.

   In March, fears of discrimination in employment were somewhat calmed when the
federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission declared that the Americans With
Disabilities Act outlaws discrimination against healthy people with abnormal
genes.

   Still, as individuals learn more about their genetic makeup, some fear
insurance companies will refuse to insure them by using the "pre-existing
condition" exclusion.

   'VERY COMPLICATED'

   Suppose it were possible to remove a "bad" gene and replace it with a healthy
one? The promise of gene therapy -- the replacement or repair of defective genes
in living human cells -- may someday be reality.

   Gene replacement is already being done with fruit flies, rabbits and other
animals. It is being tried on an experimental basis with cystic fibrosis, a
fatal disease that starts in childhood and causes a buildup of mucus in the
lungs, making breathing increasingly difficult. Preliminary results show
symptoms have been diminished, at least temporarily.

   At Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, Dr. Hugo Moser
has recently obtained permission to try to prevent Zellweger syndrome, a rare
condition that causes severe retardation and usually death.

   While the human fetus is still the size of a mouse, Moser plans to do an
intrauterine bone marrow transplant, inserting healthy bone marrow into the
abdominal cavity of the fetus. The hope is that the healthy gene will replace
the faulty one.

   But scientists warn that any widespread cure or prevention of disease is many
years away. That is because most human diseases involve a complex interaction of
more than one gene, as well as environmental factors.

   And scientists are cautious about the long-term effects of any human attempt
to change genetic material. They worry that manipulation of genes may cause a
normal gene to mutate into a cancer-causing gene, thereby turning a short-term
improvement in health into a catastrophe.

   And that is not the only profound ethical question that arises as the
capability for germ-cell therapy increases. What would be the implications of a
"genes race," in which countries competed to produce a population that was
"superior"?

   The questions multiply faster than answers are found. And experts agree that
the vigorous debate will continue over who should make the tough ethical
decisions -- scientists, doctors, ethicists, judges or the people most directly
affected.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (b&w), Brad Clift / The Hartford Courant; * While his father
guides the boat on the river behind their house, Wang Zhi Jun, l8, mans a rod
that steers it. Each day he rides home from school on his bicycle to help his
father, Wang Hong Xi, check the nets for fish to see if the family has something
to sell in the local market. "Sometimes he helps with the nets, sometimes the
farming, but usually he can only do housework," his father says. "It's all he
understands."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1995


                             280 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                             June 11, 1995, Sunday

SECTION: News Pg.  28

LENGTH: 1424 words

BYLINE: By COLETTE BOUCHEZ

BODY:


   Ultra-sensitive microbes imbedded under the skin at birth will help
physicians electronically gather data about how our body is working.

   Supercell detection technology will allow future parents to know their
child's physical characteristics, mental capabilities and susceptibility to
disease just four weeks after conception.

   Every home will be equipped with a health scan a portable computer able to
read body functions the way a thermometer takes our temperature and tell us
instantly when the first sign of biological stress occurs.

   According to at least one medical visionary scientist and author Gentry Lee
these and other medical miracles will be common fare within the next 25 years.

   "The 21st century will be dominated by changes that come from biomedical
research . . . a biological revolution," says Lee.

   But for many doctors and researchers around the world, the future is now. A
plethora of medical breakthroughs many occurring here in New York are about to
change our lives in countless ways.

   Here's a look at some of the latest discoveries and the treatments that could
be available in two years or less: The Cancer Vaccine

   Doctors at New York University Medical Center are at work on a vaccine for
melanoma, the most aggressive and deadliest form of skin cancer.

   According to Dr. Jean Claude Bystryn, it is the first of its type to contain
numerous tumor antigens, which can stimulate protective immunity against a
variety of cancer cells.

   More than 400 melanoma patients have received the vaccine thus far, and
two-thirds of them have experienced the stimulation of protective immune
responses, without any toxic side effects. For those who developed the strongest
immune system response, the survival rate was nearly five years longer than
those not receiving the treatment, even in cases of severe progressive disease.
Safer Transfusions

   Blood shortages combined with fears of HIV and other contaminations have
placed donor transfusions in a tenuous light. The solution at least at
Northfield Laboratories in Evanston, Ill.  is artificial blood.

   One of several firms working in this field, Northfield recently pulled ahead
with the first successful infusion of five patients with six units (300 grams)
each of their PolyHeme blood substitute.

   The experiment represents the largest infusion to date of a blood substitute
with no discernible side effects. PolyHeme can be stored for up to a year
natural blood lasts just a few weeks and it is universally compatible with all
blood types. By nature, it is automatically free of all blood-borne bacteria and
viruses. A Cure ForParkinson's Disease

   Scientists at New York's Mount Sinai Medical Center, together with doctors
from Chicago, Florida and Canada, became the first research team to successfully
use fetal tissue implantation for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.

   A progressive neurological disorder affecting some 1 million Americans,
Parkinson's involves the loss of nerve cells which manufacture the brain
chemicals that control muscular movement. The fetal transplants, say doctors,
supply those much needed nerve cells. A year-long followup showed significant
patient improvement and no tissue rejection. Join Broken Bones in Minutes

   Repairing broken bones with a substance that looks like toothpaste could be a
reality thanks to scientists from Stanford University, the University of
Michigan and Massachusetts General Hospital.

   They've been testing Norian SRS, a new paste-like bone mineral substitute
that, once injected into the skeletal frame, hardens and bonds to natural bone
in 10 minutes. In just 12 hours it's stronger than natural bone, without
rejection or other adverse effects.

   The product will be used to help bone fractures mend without internal metal
wiring or pins. It is already in use in Holland as a stabilizer in wrist, hip
and spine fractures. Regrowing Cartilage

   Remember biology 101, where you first learned that cutting a worm in two
gives you two worms?

   The process is called "regeneration" and doctors say humans can perform
almost the same trick with cartilage, the connecting tissue in joints.

   Researchers from the University of Goteborg in Sweden extracted healthy
cartilage cells from one area of the body, grew them in a laboratory for two
weeks, then implanted them in damaged knees.

   The result: The cells took root, grew and quickly restored the knees to near
normal function. After two years, the transplanted cells were virtually
undistinguishable from surrounding cartilage. A Natural Bypass Procedure

   Doctors at Tufts University School of Medicine are helping patients with
severely clogged leg arteries through a process called angiogenesis.

   In layman's terms, it means growing a new set of collateral blood vessels. It
works by infusing the cells lining the blocked artery with trillions of human
genes responsible for helping new blood vessels grow.

   The first human clinical trials are already under way. Doctors are watching
several patients to see if the procedure will generate the growth of enough new
vessels to overcome their circulation problems. If successful, it could become
another alternative to bypass surgery or angioplasty. Pig Hearts and More

   Amid a storm of controversy from ethicists, doctors around the world continue
to pursue xenotransplants animal-to-human organ transplantation.

   The latest try: Researchers from Karolinska Institute in Stockholm
transplanted insulin producing islet cells from the pancreas of pigs into
diabetics whose pancreases could not produce sufficient insulin. The immune
systems of four the 10 patients accepted the pig cells, which continued to
produce low levels of insulin for 14 months. The next step: getting the cells to
produce more insulin.

   Elsewhere, Nextran, a California company, just announced it has successfully
breeded pigs that contain human genes which, it says, could help reduce
rejection of pig hearts by humans.

   Nextran says it expects to develop a process for transplanting pig hearts
into humans in two years. Making Waves

   Scientists at ReSound, a Louisiana corporation, recently announced the
development of an "artificial inner ear" a hearing device that takes the place
of the inner ear by filtering sound waves so they are perceived at appropriate
levels.

   Unlike conventional hearing aids, which amplify all sound equally, the new
system differentiates between sounds that are close and those that are far away,
and adjusts volumes accordingly. Halting Prostate Cancer

   If doctors at Johns Hopkins University are correct, a single gene called Kal
1 may block the spread of prostate cancer cells to other organs.

   So far, the power of Kal 1 has only been proven in lab experiments. But if
the gene suppresses prostate cancer cells in humans, testing for its natural
presence will alert doctors as to which patients should receive aggressive
cancer therapy and which should not. Zapping Eye Disease

   By aiming finely focused X-ray beams on the abnormal blood vessel growth on
the back of the eye, doctors at Medical College of Georgia are halting vision
loss associated with macular degeneration the most common form of blindness
among older adults.

   While laser therapy can produce the same results in about 50% of patients,
for the other half, the vessel growth recurs or persists. The new X-ray
treatment which takes just four to seven sessions of a few minutes each is
expected to help those lasers cannot. Gene Therapy

   Gene therapy, with its promise of transporting treatment directly into
diseased cells, may launch a medical revolution in the next century, experts
say.

   Dr. Karen Antman, chief of medical oncology at Columbia Presbyterian Medical
Center, said gene therapy could help some cancer patients endure large doses of
chemotherapy.

   Under the procedure, she said, a multiple drug resistant gene would be
injected into stored bone marrow, which in turn would be planted back into the
patient's bone. Additional cycles of chemotherapy would not destroy the
fortified marrow's ability to make vital red blood cells.

   So far, the procedure has only been tried on laboratory cultures of human
tissue but doctors at CPMC are expected to test cancer patients before the end
of this year.

   Additionally, Dr. Lee Riley, a tuberculosis researcher at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, discovered the gene that allows the TB bacteria
to enter human cells. He then cloned the gene to deliver powerful antibiotics
directly to the cells infected by the TB.


                             281 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 11, 1995 Sunday

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 3550 words

HEADLINE: Four years of biological surveys and quiet negotiations by builders,
conservationists and planners are nearing a climactic conclusion that may forge
a new public policy to preserve one of the world's most delicate habitats.;
coastal sage UNDER SIEGE

BYLINE: EMMET PIERCE and TERRY RODGERS, Staff Writers

BODY:

   A bone-rattling ride across rugged back country came to an abrupt halt as
Bill Toone braked hard, bringing his battered pickup to a dirt-swirling stop on
a ridge overlooking the San Pasqual Valley. Stepping into a mosaic of grassland,
brush and blooming cactus, Toone surveyed patches of tan and gold vegetation
that carpeted hills leading down to the green valley floor. A casual observer
might not have looked beyond the lush pastoral beauty. The globe-trotting
conservationist saw a battlefield. "The wildlife you find here you could find
nowhere else in the world," said Toone, a key member of the scientific team that
salvaged the all-but-extinct California condor.

   "This is the front line in the battle for conservation." Although he has made
a career of mentoring conservationists in Third World countries, Toone has
turned his attention to his native Southern California.

   The region that so readily embraced strip malls and tract homes is now at the
epicenter of a struggle to preserve one of the world's most endangered habitats,
coastal sage scrub.

   The outcome may determine not only the fate of special plants and animals,
but also the survival of the 22-year-old federal Endangered Species Act, which
has been targeted by the new Republican-controlled Congress. Economic growth can
continue in Southern California without destroying the rest of coastal sage
scrub, U.S. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt insists. "It's not a matter of
either-or, it's a matter of whether or not we can work together to channel
development in a way that preserves these remnant ecosystems that also makes a
statement about the desirability of open space," he said.

   " We're at the 11th hour, there is no question." Described by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service as one of the most depleted habitat types in the United
States, coastal sage covers less than 15 percent of its original range in
Southern California.

   As its name implies, most coastal sage exists within 30 miles of the Pacific
Ocean. "Like the redwood forest, it's a unique combination of plant and animal
species," said Peter Stine, an ecologist with the Interior Department's National
Biological Survey.

   "Some people refer to it as San Diego's rain forest.

   The richness is significant." For four years, builders, conservationists and
planners have been meeting quietly to craft a preservation plan.

   The focus of the debate is: How many acres can be bulldozed without pushing
threatened species to extinction? "Everyone is looking to California to figure
out how we're going to solve that essential problem between human population
growth and the need to conserve our natural heritage," said Dennis Murphy of
Stanford University's Center for Conservation Biology.

   "And I really do think that the line in the sand is in fact a line in the
coastal sage scrub." The public debate Until recently, the planning process has
been largely an internal dialogue between environmental activists, builders and
bureaucrats.

   A publicity blitz featuring public hearings and mass mailings was launched
this spring by the city of San Diego, which has released a draft habitat
conservation plan for the southern part of the county. Eventually, the debate
will take in all of Southern California as additional habitat plans are
completed. Proponents say enough coastal sage areas remain to sustain a
biologically viable ecosystem. Critics question whether supporters, led by
Interior Secretary Babbitt, can muster the money and the political clout to make
it happen.

   Far more is at stake than the survival of such obscure creatures as fairy
shrimp, whiptail lizards and horned toads. The success of the habitat
preservation plan would create a model system for open space in Southern
California.

   Beyond that, a new public policy could emerge for dealing with endangered
species issues throughout the United States. The groundbreaking concept
essentially would turn administration of the Endangered Species Act over to
local governments with habitat conservation plans.

   State and federal agencies would retain oversight responsibility. Local
governments would have unprecedented control over thorny biological mitigation
issues that arise wehn real estate projects affect endangered species. Under the
current system, separate and costly habitat mitigation plans must be completed
on a project-by-project basis when the proposed real estate project will affect
endangered species. The Natural Communities Conservation Planning program would
streamline the bureaucracy by creating a regional endangered species permitting
process.Current public policy is based on the premise that saving habitat
requires economic trade-offs. Recently, prominent fiscal forecasters have
concluded that a healthy economy depends on a healthy environment. In a landmark
report, California's largest bank warned that unchecked urban sprawl will delay
the state's economic recovery and destroy its quality of life. The Bank of
America said Californians must adopt "a new sense of urgency" about managing
growth.

   According to the bank's report, sprawl burdens residents with hidden costs
such as loss of habitat, increased pollution and a geographically dispersed work
force. Babbitt has asked Congress to provide funding for California's Natural
Communities Conservation Planning (NCCP) program, an ambitious plan to preserve
the best of what is left of Southern California's most valuable open space.
Created four years ago, the conservation planning program's goal is to prevent
conflicts between developers and conservation agencies over the federal
Endangered Species Act while protecting coastal sage and eventually 27 other
related habitats. The concept is simple: identify and preserve key habitats
before species become endangered.

   In exchange for cooperation, developers receive guarantees from local
governments that construction will not be halted if new species become
imperiled. The state program was initiated in 1991 in response to petitions
asking the federal government to list the California gnatcatcher as an
endangered species.

   The overriding goal is to preserve the best habitats -- with an emphasis on
coastal sage scrub -- within a 6,000-square-mile area encompassing Los Angeles,
San Bernardino, Orange, Riverside and San Diego counties. Focus of the peril So
far, the focus has been San Diego County, which has the greatest number of
threatened and endangered species in the continental United States.

   More than 200 species of plants and animals are considered in peril. San
Diego was a natural choice for the conservation plan. First, it contains the
largest remaining tracts of coastal sage; second, pioneering habitat-planning
efforts were already under way when the statewide program was launched. Although
the gnatcatcher has come to symbolize the preservation effort, "this is about
saving an entire natural community and all of its component parts," said Peter
Stine, an ecologist with the Interior Department's National Biological Survey.
Nearly 100 threatened, endangered or rare plants and animals are associated with
coastal sage. This blend of low-growing shrubs, cactus, trees and grasses once
covered millions of acres from northern Mexico to Santa Barbara County.

   Most has been destroyed for housing and highways.

   What remains is fragmented. That's one reason E.O. Wilson, winner of the
National Medal of Science and two Pulitzer prizes, has identified Southern
California as one of the world's environmental hot spots. If San Diego is to
avoid the environmental degradation that plagues Greater Los Angeles, people
must pay attention to vanishing habitats, conservationists say.

   The health of the plants and animals that surround us are barometers of our
own environment. "All of the things dying around us are indicators," Toone said.

   "This is a human issue.

   It's a survival strategy for us.

   If you're talking about conservation, it's a war, in a sense.

   It's not a war of people against people or people against nature.

   It's a battle for survival for all of us." Jeffrey Opdycke, the Wild Animal
Park's local habitat analyst, agrees. "Look at the L.A. Basin," Opdycke said.

   "They cared about people there to the exclusion of everything else.

   Now what have they got?" There was no shortage of coastal sage habitat when
Father Junipero Serra and other early Spanish settlers arrived in Southern
California, when theestimated range of the habitat was 2.8 million acres, said
Terri Stewart of the state Department of Fish and Game. Today approximately
422,000 acres remain in the five-county NCCP area. The majority of quality
coastal scrub in San Diego County is privately held and is among the region's
costliest real estate. Opdycke worries that the public tends to view coastal
sage scrub merely as something to be cleared for construction. "It's not the
type of habitat that jumps out at you," Opdycke said.

   "It's not like a drive through the redwood forest.

   You have to get down on your hands and knees to experience the color and the
diversity and the wonder. It's a world-class ecosystem." Putting pieces together
Habitat planning here has been piecemeal at best.

   Isolated parcels have been set aside for plants and animals in return for
building permits. Scientists have proven that sensitive plants and animals
cannot survive for long in these fragments.

   San Diego County and the region's 18 cities are attempting to correct the
situation by creating a network of wildlife preserves. The idea is to establish
large preserves that make sense biologically.

   The program appeals to developers because it could determine what sites they
can depend on for construction.

   It also promises to place a cap on the growing list of threatened species
whose presence can bring bulldozers to a standstill. The habitat program --
which has heavy developer involvement -- consists of three related projects: the
Multiple Species Conservation Plan in the southern portion of the county; the
North County Multiple Habitat Conservation Program; and the county's wildlife
conservation and open-space program for East County. "Each of the subregions is
doing their own plan," said Janet Fairbanks a senior regional planner with the
San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG). The first to seek approval will
be the city of San Diego's plan for southern San Diego County, she said.

   A draft document recently was distributed to affected property owners,
community groups and government agencies.

   Public hearings began this spring.

   The matter could return to the City Council for adoption by late summer. The
North County program is next, with fall as the target date for completing a
draft plan.

   No date has been set for completion of the county's draft plan for East
County. Planners envision a network of "wildlife corridors" stretching from the
Mexican border north to the Riverside and Orange county lines. "We're all
breaking new ground here," said Babbitt.

   "This is a new chapter in biodiversity planning." Funding is the key
weakness. Jim Whalen, spokesman for the Alliance for Habitat Conservation
landowners group, has urged elected officials not to try to shift local
government's costs to developers. State officials say it could cost $1.5 billion
to obtain the private land necessary to maintain the ecosystem.

   State and local governments have spent about $7 million on the NCCP in San
Diego County, Fairbanks said. Federal money could be crucial to the program's
success because California voters appear unwilling to approve statewide bond
issues. Although voters approved park-related bond issues in 1980, 1984, 1986
and 1988, they rejected all five statewide bond proposals, including a major
parks and open-space issue, on the 1994 ballot. John Barone of the Fieldstone
Co. -- a development firm that owns thousands of coastal sage acres -- is
guardedly optimistic that wildlife corridors can be woven from remaining
fragments of habitat.

   He urges environmentalists to lower expectations. Balancing dollars with
wishes "We have to recognize that a lengthy biological wish list has to be
tempered realistically with dollars available for acquisition," he said. "The
question no one can answer is what the private sector will have to bear, what
individual landowners will pay." Ed Sauls, chairman of the Building Industry of
Southern California's Endangered Species Committee, said the habitat network may
have to be created in stages, as money becomes available. "I'm hoping it can be
done," Barone said.

   " We may need to find 25 different ways of funding habitat acquisition."
Companies such as Fieldstone are eager to get the ball rolling. "We've been
promised for at least two years that the final NCCP plans are just around the
corner," Barone said.

   "But the final plans must be approved by state and federal resource agencies
through a formal process." Most large landowners are willing to take part in the
program.

   They say the return should be twofold.

   First, developers want assurances that agreements on open space and
development will stick, said Whalen.

   They also want to be compensated for land they are asked to give up beyond
land-use planning process requirements.

   Compensation could be cash or increased building densities on parcels not
critical to the habitat plan, he said. Landowner Bob Pankey has little faith in
the planning process.

   Pankey grows citrus and avocado on land abutting the San Luis Rey River, near
Pala. For more than four decades, his family has ranched and farmed in inland
North County.

   Independent and self-reliant, he dislikes government interference. "If areas
are designated coastal sage, we cannot expand or change our operations," the
Bonsall resident said.

   "It creates quite a problem for the ranchers.

   People who have their property put into one of these preserves, their ability
to do anything with the land is taken away." Hugh Hewitt, an outspoken land-use
attorney and Orange County radio commentator, said he has little hope that the
conservation program will succeed.

   State and federal officials don't have the financial resources or the
political will to make it work, he said. While Babbitt is hopeful voters will
approve bond sales to support habitat protection programs, Hewitt considers it
wishful thinking. "Government is broke," Hewitt said.

   "Orange County is bankrupt.

   Is Orange County going to spend any money on a voluntary program at a time
they are laying off hundreds of workers and schools are facing imminent
layoffs?" Environmental economy Babbitt argues that environmental conservation
enhances economic recovery. "Ultimately, this kind of preservation works to the
advantage of the economy for an obvious reason," he said.

   "You are preserving the very qualities that brought people to Southern
California in the first place." Perhaps the toughest challenge is convincing the
public that saving endangered habitats is in the best interest of average
Californians. "There are a lot of ways to come at that," Babbitt said.

   "I was up in Yellowstone this summer, where, through a foresighted act of our
predecessors, we preserved a whole series of geysers and hot springs of no
apparent value." In the 1960s, research was conducted on thermobacteria within
the geysers, he said. "It turns out that a couple of those bacteria have now
become the key part of the entire genetic research gene-therapy medical
industry.

   There is a multibillion-dollar sector of the pharmaceutical industry which is
built on the properties of these bacteria." Bill Toone, the Pied Piper of
habitat conservation for the San Diego Zoological Society, believes the program
could be an example for less-developed nations struggling with ecological
issues.

   Western conservationists find it difficult to convince Third World countries
to adopt sound environmental policies when far richer nations have failed to do
so. "Over the last eight or so years, I've traveled to 35 countries doing
conservation work," Toone said.

   "This country stands to set a very important example." During a recent trip
to New Guinea, Iamo Ila, that country's secretary of environment and
conservation, patiently listened as Toone explained the consequences of
clear-cutting forests.

   Then, tongue-in-cheek, Ila asked Toone how America's endangered spotted owl
was faring in old-growth forests. The surprising rejoinder forced the scientist
to re-examine his own country's conservation practices. "The next time I go to
New Guinea," he said, "I want to be able to look Iamo Ila in the eye." ON THE
LIST The following is a list of coastal sage scrub species named on the
endangered species list or proposed for federal protection: FEDERALLY LISTED
Coastal California Gnatcatcher Polioptila californica californica Pacific pocket
mouse Perognathus longimembris pacificus Slender-horned spineflower Dodecahema
leptoceras Santa Ana River woolly-star Eriastrum densiflorum ssp. sanctorum
PROPOSED FOR FEDERAL PROTECTION Quino checkerspot butterfly Euphydryas editha
quino Munz's onion Allium munzii Braunton's milk-vetch Astragalus brauntonii
Thread-leaved Brodiaea Brodiaea filifolia Orcutt's spineflower Chorizanthe
orcuttiana Del Mar Mesa sand aster Corethrogyne filaginifolia Short-leaved
Dudleya Dudleya blochmaniae Santa Monica Mountains dudleya Dudleya cymosa
Big-leaved crown-beard Verbesina dissita Bell's sage sparrow Amphispiza bellii
bellii Southern California rufous-crowned sparrow Aimophila ruficeps canescens
Coastal cactus wren Campylorhynchus bruneicappilus couesi Western burrowing owl
Athene cunicularia hypogaeae Hermes copper butterfly Lycaena hermes Los Angeles
pocket mouse Perognathus longimembris brevinasus Northwestern San Diego pocket
mouse Perognathus fallax fallax San Diego black-tailed jackrabbit Lepus
californicus bennettii San Diego desert woodrat Neotoma lepida intermedia
Southern grasshopper mouse Onychomys torridus ramona Coast patch-nosed snake
Salvadora hexalepis virgultea Coastal rosy boa Lichanura trivirgata rosafusca
Coastal western whiptail Cnemidorphorus tigris multiscutatus Coronado skink
Eumeces skiltonianus interparietalis Northern red diamond rattlesnake Crotalus
ruber ruber Orange-throated whiptail Cnemidophorus hyperythrus San Diego banded
gecko Coleonyx variegatus abbotti San Diego horned lizard Phrynosoma coronatum
blainevillei San Diego ringneck snake Diadophis punctatus similis San Diego
thornmint Acanthomintha ilicifolia Nevin's barberry Berberis nevinii Laguna
Beach live-forever Dudleya stolonifera Sticky-leaved Dudleya Dudleya viscida
Shaw's agave Agave shawii San Diego ragweed Ambrosia pumila Aphanisma Aphanisma
blitoides Dean's milk-vetch Astragalus deanei Jaeger's milk-vetch Astragalus
pachypus South coast saltbush Atriplex pacifica Plummer's mariposa lily
Calochortus plummerae Foothill mariposa lily Calochortus weedii Peirson's
morning-glory Calystegia peirsonii Payson's jewelflower Caulanthus simulan San
Fernando Valley Chorizanthe Chorizanthe parryi Parry's spineflower Chorizanthe
parryii Knotweed spineflower Chorizanthe polygonoides Orcutt's bird's beak
Cordylanthus orcuttianus Orcutt's dudleya Dudleya attenuata Blochman's Dudleya
Dudleya blochmaniae Many-stemmed live-forever Dudleya multicaulis Variegated
Dudleya Dudleya variegata Green live-forever Dudleya virens San Diego barrel
cactus Ferocactus viridescens Palmer's Haplopappus Haplopappus palmeri Palmer's
grappling-hook Harpogonella palmeri Orcutt's Hazardia Hazardia orcuttii Otay
tarweed Hemizonia conjugens Tecate tarplant Hemizonia floribunda Santa Susana
tarweed Hemizonia minthornii Curving tarweed Holocarpha virgata Davidson's bush
mallow Malacothamnus davidsonii Parish's bush-mallow Malacothamnus parishii
Willowy Monardella Monardella linoides San Diego goldenstar Muilla clevelandii
Chaparral beargrass Nolina cismontana Snake cholla Opuntia parryi South Island
phacelia Phacelia floribunda Small-leaved rose Rosa minutifolia Parry's
Tetracoccus Tetracoccus dioicus Pringle's monardella Monardella pringlei Santa
Catalina desert-thorn Lycium hassei Orange County Turkish rugging Chorizanthe
staticoides Western dichondra Dichondra occidentalis FOR MORE INFO... Additional
information about coastal sage scrub habitat and related conservation programs
can be obtained from the following sources: [] The local office of the
California Department of Fish and Game, 467-4202, or Assistant Deputy Director
Jeff Weir at (916) 653-6420 [] U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Information and
Education Specialist Connie Babb, 431-9440. [] San Diego Sierra Club
Conservation Coordinator Craig Adams, 299-1741. [] "A Natural History of
California," a book written by Allan A. Schoenherr and published by the
University of California Press. COASTAL SAGE SCRUB: A VANISHING HABITAT The
knee-high habitat of the coastal sage scrub is sometimes refferred to as "soft
chaparral" because its dominant plants -- California sagebrush, monkey flower,
coast brittle-bush and the true sages (black, purple and white) -- have flexible
leaves and bend easily.

   It does best where it is exposed to coastal weather influences, especially
fog.

   While susceptible to frost damage, it has adapted to withstand drought.

   It thrives in coastal areas where rainfall averages 10 inches annually or
less.

   Many species have large, showy flowers.

   Despite being hardy, attractive and pleasant-smelling, the plants of the
coastal sage have yet to catch on with suburban landscapers.

GRAPHIC: 7 PICS; 1 MAP; 1 DIAGRAM; 2 CHARTS; 5 DRAWINGS; CAPTIONS: 1. Tribal
treasure: Mark Macarro, manager of the Rincon tribal museum, sniffs white sage,
a coastal plant believed to carry medicinal qualities. Documents in the museum
describe ancient tribal uses of coastal sage plants. 2. COASTAL SAGE SCRUB: A
VANISHING HABITAT 3. Species dependent on the coastal sage scrub | The listing
of the California gnatcatcher in 1993 as a federally threatened species prompted
a state-sponsored effort to preserve coastal sage. And the gnatcacher isn't the
only species in trouble: The Palos Verdes blue butterfly was considered extinct
in 1982, but a small population was discovered last year near San Pedro. And the
Stephens kangaroo rat is found in Riverside County between the Santa Ana and San
Jacinto mountains. 4. Bill Toone:Conservationist and bird curator. 5. Urban
conflict: Much of Southern California's coastal sage scrub has been fragmented
by highways farmlands and tract housing. Biologists say its difficult for
habitat fragments, such as this one in Del Mar Heights, to support a full range
of plants and animals. (H-8) 6. Preservation drive: A kiosk at the eastern
terminus of Arroyo Sorrento Road east of Del Mar invites visitors to Carmel
Mountain -- called Neighborhood 8A on city planning maps -- to sign up for
information on preserving the the mesa's endangered coastal sage scrub habitat.
(H-8) 7. Low profile: Biologists say you have to look close to appreciate the
wide array of plants and animals that call coastal sage home. Here, a prickly
pear cactus provides a thorny nesting site for a coastal cactus wren. (H-8) 8.
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt (H-9) 9. ON THE LIST | The following is a list
of coastal sage scrub species named on the endangered species list or proposed
for federal protection: (H-8) 10. Coastal California Gnatcatcher (H-8) 11.
Coastal Cactus Wren (H-8) 12. Orange-throated whiptail (H-8) 13. ON THE LIST |
The following is a list of coastal sage scrub species proposed for federal
protection (H-9) 14. San Diego thornmint 15. Short-leaved dudleya (H-9) 16. FOR
MORE INFO... (B-9); PHOTOBY: 1,4,5,7. Union-Tribune photos / TONY DOUBEK 2,3.
SOURCE: State Fish & Game Dept.; Torrey Pines Docent Society; Audubon Society
field guide series; habitat map by Peter Stine, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service |
Research: Terry Rodgers, Emmet Pierce, Paul Horn / Union-Tribune 8. FILE PHOTO
9. SOURCE: City of San Diego; U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service: Union-Tribune
research 15. UNION-TRIBUNE

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             282 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            June 10, 1995, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2D, AREA BUSINESS

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: INCOME DOWN, BUT SALES UP, AT VALUE CITY

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   A same-store sales slump at Value City Department Stores contributed to a
loss for the quarter ended April 29.

   The local discount retailer yesterday reported a loss of $ 3.2 million, or 10
cents a share, compared with net income of $ 3.5 million, or 11 cents a share,
for the similar year-ago period. Meanwhile, sales in the quarter inched up to $
183.4 million from $ 182.7 million last year.

   Through the past three quarters, net income was $ 17.8 million, or 56 cents a
share, compared with $ 31.5 million, or 98 cents per share, for the nine months
ended April 30, 1994.

   The current year figures were boosted by $ 2 million, or 6 cents per share,
from inventories taken in the second quarter.

   Last year, those effects showed up in fourth-quarter earnings. Last year's
earnings also included $ 600,000, or 2 cents per share, for an income tax
reduction wrought by tax law changes.

   Pact could reap $ 50 million

   Progenitor Inc., a Columbus biomedical company, has signed an agreement with
Seattle-based Novo Nordisk for the development and sale of gene and cell-based
pharmaceutical products to treat cancer and immune system disorders.

   The agreement has a potential value of $ 50 million to Progenitor, according
to its president and chief executive, Douglass B. Given.

   Progenitor, a subsidiary of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Lexington,
Mass., was established in 1992 to commercialize cellular and genetic therapies
developed by researchers at Ohio University's Edison BioTechnology Institute.

   Novo Nordisk is the world's leader in insulin production and diabetes care,
and is the world's largest producer of bioindustrial enzymes.

   Rubbermaid stock falls

   Rubbermaid Inc.'s shares fell 14 percent after it said it expects
second-quarter earnings to fall short of analysts' forecasts.

   The Wooster, Ohio-based company cited a steep cost increase in plastic resin,
a key raw material, and weak consumer spending.

   Rubbermaid said it expects earnings per share ''in the high teens to the low
20s.'' The average estimate was for profit of 35 cents a share, the same as in
the year-ago quarter, in a poll of 13 analysts by Zacks Investment Research.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995


                             283 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

HEADLINE: Not First Gene Patent

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   In your article on advances in gene therapy (Business Day, June 1) you note
that a recent patent "in effect marks the patent office's recognition of the
technology's usefulness."

    The Patent Office granted a broad-ranging patent for gene therapy to the
University of California in 1983. This patent covers a similar area to that
described in the Genetic Therapy Inc. patent, that is, the introduction into
mammalian cells of new gene sequences, including gene sequences to be used for
therapeutic purposes, in inherited diseases and cancer.

MARTIN J. CLINE, M.D.
Bowyer Professor of
Medical Oncology, U.C.L.A.
Los Angeles, June 2, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1995


                             284 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     June 10, 1995, Saturday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg.  C01; DIGEST

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   The Senate approved an amendment to telecommunications reform legislation
that would bar cable operators and telephone companies from buying each other
out in all but rural towns with 50,000 people or fewer. The vote was a victory
for the Clinton administration and consumer groups, which said the industry
could otherwise become too concentrated.

   Bell Atlantic won FCC approval of the price it will charge to offer cablelike
video services, though the FCC said it will continue to investigate the fairness
of those prices. Bell Atlantic will be the first regional telephone company to
enter the cable market when its video service starts in September in Dover
Township, N.J.

   The American Association of Retired Persons is moving the offices of Modern
Maturity, the largest-circulation U.S. magazine, to its Washington headquarters.
AARP, which sends Modern Maturity to its 22 million members, said all 40 of the
magazine's staffers will relocate from offices in Lakewood, Calif.

   ITT agreed to sell its mortgage and reinsurance businesses and a portfolio of
California realty to a number of unidentified buyers for $ 5.5 billion, marking
its exit from financial services. ITT will focus on manufacturing, lodging and
entertainment. Its shares rose 62 1/2 cents to $ 110.62 1/2 on the news.

   Turner Broadcasting System's board, which includes officials of TCI, Time
Warner, Continental Cablevision and Comcast, approved plans for a business cable
channel that will put Cable News Network in direct competition with the CNBC
business channel.

   Westinghouse Electric agreed to sell its real estate business to a group of
Florida investors led by developer Al Hoffman for about $ 550 million, officials
familiar with the agreement said. Final details of the sale, first reported by
the Wall Street Journal, are being worked out, officials said.

   The FTC settled antitrust complaints against two New York fashion industry
groups over alleged attempts to fix or reduce fees paid to models. The
settlement prohibits the Council of Fashion Designers of America and 7th on
Sixth from fixing fees and requires them to educate designers that price-fixing
is illegal.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   Genicom of Chantilly, a supplier of computer network parts, printers and
related services, ended talks about acquiring a desktop printer business from an
undisclosed company. In November, Genicom said the operation, which includes a
non-U.S. manufacturing facility, had revenue of less than $ 100 million.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg said a National Institutes of Health
panel approved the company's human gene therapy treatment for multiple myeloma,
a type of malignant bone cancer.

   Compiled from reports by the Associated Press, Bloomberg Business News, Dow
Jones News Service, Reuter and Washington Post staff writers

CORRECTION-DATE: June 13, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

CORRECTION:


   An item in Saturday's Business section digest incorrectly stated the
membership of the American Association of Retired Persons. The group has 33
million members, who are in 22 million households.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1995


                             285 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     June 8, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: Esiason consumed by CF fight

BYLINE: Ken Murray, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   With one exception, blond-haired Gunnar Esiason is like almost any other
4-year-old boy. He's big on the birthday party circuit, likes to have friends
over, and is active in all kinds of sports.

   The exception is a flawed gene that makes all the difference to him and his
parents, Boomer and Cheryl Esiason.

   Gunnar is one of approximately 30,000 Americans afflicted with cystic
fibrosis, a deadly genetic disease that attacks the respiratory and digestive
systems of children and young adults.

   The defective gene controls the flow of mucus in the body. The result is a
buildup of mucus in the lungs.

   "That mucus is thick and sticky, and it attracts bacteria," said Boomer
Esiason, New York Jets quarterback and former Maryland star who was in Baltimore
yesterday to launch a fund-raiser for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "When
bacteria gets into that mucus, it eats away at the lungs. The lungs are a
non-rejuvenation organ; if you lose a piece of it, it never comes back."

   Thus, the Esiasons live in constant fear of the common cold, a sudden sneeze
and any microscopic bacteria passed on to their son in the most innocent
fashion. They fight that fear with a number of precautions -- anti-bacterial
soap, an alcohol scrub, conventional therapy and just plain, old common sense.

   "This is the aggressive approach," said Esiason. "Any birthday party he goes
to, we're calling up and making sure that none of the children are sick. Any
guests that come to our house, they all know [the situation]. They'll tell us,
'No, we can't bring little Nickie over today because she's got a cold.'

   "Everybody around us knows. That's an important part of our fight. Because
we've been able to share it with our family and friends, it has made it that
much easier to deal with."

   The Esiasons' fight goes well beyond those disciplined precautions, though.
Since Gunnar's condition was diagnosed in May 1993, Esiason has become national
spokesman for the CF Foundation, using his celebrity status as an 11-year NFL
veteran and one-time MVP (1988) with the Cincinnati Bengals.

   He said he has raised more than $ 1 million for research to find a cure, and
expects to double that total by 1996.

   He even formed his own foundation, The Boomer Esiason Heroes Foundation, to
assist in fund-raising.

   On May 19, Esiason and his foundation made an initial $ 500,000 contribution
to the CF Foundation toward a commitment of $ 1.6 million to advance research.

   The same day, the Children's Hospital Medical Center in Cincinnati dedicated
a wing -- the Gunnar H. Esiason Cystic Fibrosis and Lung Center -- to Gunnar,
who receives treatment there.

   Yesterday, the Esiasons were at the Inner Harbor to help kick off ticket
sales for the eighth annual Hard Travelers/Ryan Homes country concert, featuring
Kenny Rogers, at the Baltimore Arena on Aug. 25. The goal is to net $ 500,000
for CF research.

   Tickets cost $ 12.50 and $ 17.50 for upper reserved seats, $ 25 for reserved
and $ 50 for premium seats. For information or tickets, call (410) 771-9000, or
call the 24-hour concert hot line at (410) 771-0560.

   Cheryl Esiason, a native of Westminster, said she hopes a cure is found
within 10 years.

   "Gunnar is considered a mild CF patient," she said, "and that has a lot to do
with age. But it is a disease that will progressively worsen and lead to a total
loss over time, until a cure is found, or until new and better drugs come onto
the market. But right now, the prognosis is good because there is a cure in
sight. They located the CF gene in 1989, and since then have cloned it and begun
gene therapy trials."

   C. Richard Mattingly, executive vice president and CEO for the CF Foundation
in Bethesda, said that while a cure is now conceivable, the cost of research is
skyrocketing.

   "We're learning a lot about means of delivery [of a corrective gene] and how
to administer it safely," Mattingly said. "We've made enormous progress . . .
But the closer we get, the more complicated it gets and the more expensive it
gets.

   "Boomer has been a godsend to us in many ways. He came in after Gunnar was
diagnosed. He could've turned his head and walked away. But he's made a big
difference, he and Cheryl."

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, PATRICK SANDOR/SUN STAFF PHOTO, Boomer Esiason, with his
son Gunnar, came to town to promote a concert to raise money in fight against
cystic fibrosis.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1995


                             286 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 6, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 68 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

   Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about the
improving prospects for gene therapy companies referred incorrectly to a patent
on one form of gene therapy used by Genetic Therapy Inc. The patent is held by
the National Institutes of Health, not the company. The institutes granted an
exclusive license to the company, which was a collaborator in the gene therapy
technology.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1995


                             287 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       June 6, 1995 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: PROSPECTS BRIGHTER FOR PARALYZED;
NEW DRUGS, THERAPIES LESSEN SPINAL INJURIES

BYLINE: By RICHARD SALTUS; BOSTON GLOBE

BODY:

   Drugs given right after catastrophic accidents like the one suffered by actor
Christopher Reeve, together with experimental therapies for people paralyzed for
many years, are brightening prospects for victims of spinal cord injuries,
scientists say.

   So many researchers have jumped into the promising field of coaxing damaged
spinal cord nerves to regenerate that there isn't enough money to fund them all
- a constant frustration to scientists in the field.

   "There's an incredible amount happening, and it's thankfully only partially
being dampened by what's happening in Washington," said Dr. Wise Young, a
neurosurgeon at New York University. He was referring to efforts in Congress to
curb or even cut back federal funding for medical research.

   "There is fairly substantial progress and hopeful news about therapies that
are working in animals," including drugs, transplants and gene therapy
strategies, said Young.

   Whether any new or experimental treatments have been tried in Reeve's case
has not been released. The actor best known for playing Superman remains in the
University of Virginia Medical Center.

   Neurosurgeons not involved in the case were keenly interested in learning
whether Reeve was given massive doses of a synthetic steroid called
methylprednisolone in the first few hours after he was thrown from a horse last
Saturday and crushed two bones in his neck.

   Research in the late 1980s revealed that the drug could reduce swelling and
subsequent damage to the spinal cord, lessening the eventual paralysis in many
cases.

   The neurosurgeon directing Reeve's treatment, Dr. John Jane, said Thursday
that the actor was not in pain and could communicate by mouthing words although
he was connected to a respirator. Reeve can't breathe on his own because the
damage to his spinal cord just below the skull blocks nerve messages that
initiate breathing, said Young. That could change as he recovers, but some
patients with broken necks remain on respirators, he added.

   Both Jane and other neurosurgeons emphasized that, despite Reeve's total
paralysis now, it is possible he could regain significant bodily function, but
said it is too soon to predict. In fact, Reeve is not yet out of danger of
life-threatening complications from his injury.

   Henry Stifel, a mostly paralyzed investment salesman speaking by telephone
from the trading floor of Morgan Stanley & Co. in New York, said even with the
best medicine can offer, Reeve faces a difficult future.

   "Can he survive? Yes," said Stifel, who broke his neck in a car accident in
1982, when he was 17. "Will it be incredibly tough? It's going to be a
nightmare."

   Like Reeve, Stifel needed a respirator to breathe following the accident: he
now has limited use of his upper body and arms.

   Arthur Ullian, a Boston real estate developer who has become an activist for
increased funding for brain diseases and spinal cord injuries, called Reeve's
accident a "total tragedy."

   Ullian suffered a similar but not quite as disabling injury in 1991 when he
flipped off a bicycle and struck his chin on the ground, bending his neck back
and damaging the spinal cord. The site of the injury was lower on the spine than
Reeve's, leaving Ullian the use of his arms and sparing his breathing.

   "I know what if feels like, and it just makes me cry," he said in a telephone
interview. "The worst thing is that he's able to think, he knows what has
happened, he can't move or do anything - it's the worst thing in the world."

   Ullian has been buttonholing Washington legislators to spread the word about
research that is defying the former dictum that the brain and spinal cord
couldn't be healed. More funding could move these projects along faster, he
said.

   Young, the NYU neurosurgeon, listed several promising developments:

   Research at William and Mary College in which drugs that cause inflammation
were given to spinal cord-injured rodents along with drugs that reduce
inflammation and a steroid. The combination led to "quite impressive
improvement" in the rats' ability to walk, indicating the spinal cord was
healing.

   Discovery of two substances in spinal cord cells that keep them from
regrowing after damage. They help explain why the brain and cord are so hard to
heal and suggest that drugs to block these growth inhibitors may help nerves
regrow, Young said.

   A study this month in which cells that manufacture a natural substance known
as an adhesion molecule were transplanted into injured spinal cords of animals
and improved their recovery.

   Naomi Kleitman, a neuroscientist with the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis,
added that there has been significant improvement in electrical stimulation
devices that can enable paralyzed patients to exercise muscles and to stand up -
and even walk short distances.

   One long-paralyzed man who used such a device told Kleinman, "the first time
I stood up and looked a person in the eye, itwas tremendously important to me,"
she said.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS; SPINAL INJURY; PHOTO BY: NO CREDIT; Reeve

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1995


                             288 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       June 6, 1995 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: SAFER CHEMOTHERAPY

BYLINE: FROM STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

BODY:

   Chemotherapy is supposed to destroy cancer cells but the process also damages
the patient. Researchers at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
are on their way to reducing the toll chemotherapy takes on the body.

   They have developed a gene therapy to protect against the hazards of the
treatment in mice, which is a crucial step in learning how to get it to work in
humans. The researchers are able to transfer a drug-resistance gene called MBMT
into bone marrow cells, the most susceptible to damage. The enzyme tells the
cells to produce worker enzymes, called alkyltransfase, that repair DNA damage
from chemotherapy.

   A delicate balance must be reached when using chemotherapy for cancer. Too
much can supress or destroy bone marrow cells, which can kill the patient. But
an inadequate amount might not affect the cancer. Dr. Stanton Gerson, a
professor of medicine at CWRU, hypothesized the dilemma could be resolved by
increasing the enzymes. Gerson worked with James A. Allay, a CWRU graduate
student, to develop the method of delivering the gene. Their work appeared in a
recent issue of the medical journal Blood.

   Antioxidants aid eyesight

   Antioxidants, the dietary superstars, appear to be as important for the eyes
as for their potential to lower cancer risk and increase longevity.

   Recent research suggests that people who eat foods high in antioxidants -
vitamins B, C, E and beta carotene - are less likely to develop cataracts,
according to the nonprofit Better Vision Institute. A diet rich in antioxidants
and zinc may help protect against macular degeneration, an irreversible
condition that damages vision in older people.

   The institute said studies have found that eating foods high in vitamins A, C
and E may help prevent cataracts - clouding of the eye's lens - by scavenging
oxygen compounds that damage those cells.

   "Cataracts that are caused by cellular damage from ultraviolet and visible
light oxidation could be reduced if individuals increased their intake of
vitamins C and E," said Dr. Robert M. Kershner.

   Geneticists track obesity

   A discovery by geneticists at the Jackson Laboratory in Maine could open a
new window into the link between genes and obesity, the scientists say.

   Reporting in the journal Nature Genetics, the researchers have found that a
single mutation, or genetic misspelling, could cause obesity in a certain strain
of mice. The scientists, led by Jurgen Naggert and Edward Leiter, discovered
that the mutation caused a malfunction in the rodents' insulin, a hormone that
converts glucose to energy.

   The mutant gene, which they dubbed fat, is the third gene discovered in the
past two years to play a role in regulating obesity.

   Werewolf gene hunted

   Scientists say they are close to tracking down a so-called "werewolf gene"
that can cause a rare disorder of excessive, disfiguring hair growth on the face
and upper body.

   The suspect gene is implicated in extreme hairiness of 19 males belonging to
a large five-generation Mexican family.

   People born with the condition, known as congenital generalized
hypertrichosis, are rare. Because of the long hair on their faces and upper
bodies, many have been exhibited in circuses as "dog men" or "human werewolves"
- and have suffered social humiliation.

   Scientists from Mexico, Italy and the United States reported this week in the
journal Nature Genetics that they have narrowed the location of the gene to the
X, or female, chromosome, and say it is the first step toward isolating genes
involved in normal hair growth patterns, and perhaps baldness.

COLUMN: HEALTH BEAT

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1995


                             289 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 4, 1995, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: 3 OF COUPLE'S 4 CHILDREN SUFFERING RARE, FATAL ILLNESS

BYLINE: ARTHUR H. ROTSTEIN; Associated Press

BODY:


   Three times, Cindy and Michael Parseghian heard the horrifying news.

   Three of their four young children -- grandchildren of former Notre Dame
football coach Ara Parseghian -- have a fatal, untreatable genetic disorder.

   That has haunted and driven the family for the last two years.

   Michael, 8, Marcia, 6, and Christa, 3, all have Niemann-Pick Disease Type C.
They cannot metabolize cholesterol, and it's unlikely they'll live beyond their
teen-age years unless a cure is found.

   When they received the diagnoses, Cindy Parseghian said the family went
through "several weeks of pure grieving."

   Then they dried their tears and resolved to convert their anguish into
action.

   The Ara Parseghian Medical Research Foundation, founded in November, already
has raised nearly $ 2 million and will attempt to raise at least that much every
year until a cure is found, the Parseghians announced at a news conference this
week.

   The foundation expects to hand out $ 1 million in major research grants
within the next 30 days.

   Dr. Michael Parseghian, an orthopedic surgeon, said the foundation's goal is
to identify the defective gene behind the disease in a year -- half the time
geneticists think it will take.

   Once the gene is isolated, gene therapy or other approaches, including
medications, could then be attempted to treat and cure the disease, Parseghian
said.

   The foundation's research could affect about 40 genetically based,
cholesterol-related diseases, from cardiovascular to Alzheimer's, said Dr.
Michael Parmacek of the University of Chicago, a cardiologist, molecular
biologist and close friend of the Parseghians.

   The Parseghians have enlisted the help of the children's grandfather in the
hopes that his contacts as former Notre Dame football coach will help raise
money and increase awareness of the disease. Parseghian coached at Notre Dame
from 1964 to 1974.

   "I spent about a month where I just couldn't talk about it," Parseghian, 72,
said Friday from his Marco Island, Fla., home. "I was almost in a stupor."

   He has since rallied scientists, doctors, laboratories and fund-raisers to
help save the lives of his grandchildren and others.

   A child must inherit two copies of an abnormal gene, one from each
gene-carrying parent, to get Niemann-Pick Disease Type C. Even so, such a child
has just a one-in-four chance of getting the disease.

   "I've never personally been exposed to a tragedy as severe," Parmacek said.
"Three is just extraordinary, extraordinary bad luck."

   Researchers have known of the illness for 50 years or more, but only about
500 cases have been diagnosed in this country, though doctors suspect at least
as many undiagnosed cases.

   The disease causes storage of fatty acids in the cells of its victims'
livers, brains and spleens. Eventually, their nervous systems and bodies break
down.

   Onset of symptoms usually begins at age 5 or 6, and victims rarely live
beyond age 20. The Parseghian girls haven't shown outward signs yet.

   "Two years ago, Mike and I thought we were on top of the world," Mrs.
Parseghian said.

   Then their ordeal began. They noticed young Michael having handwriting,
balance and speech problems. He fell frequently. He had trouble raising and
lowering his eyes. And doctor after doctor was unable to diagnose the condition.

   Finally, after 18 months, a pediatric neurologist at Columbia University
referred the Parseghians to the National Institutes of Health, where the
diagnosis was made in September.

   Further testing revealed that Marcia and Christa also had the condition.

   Michael, Marcia and Christa take cholesterol-reducing medication and are on
non-fat, low-cholesterol diets.

   "The kids are handling it quite well," Michael Parseghian said. "It's the
adults that have a problem with it."

GRAPHIC: Associated Press; Dr. Michael Parseghian, son of former Notre Dame
football coach Ara Parseghian, and his wife, Cindy, in Tucson, Ariz.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1995


                             290 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      June 4, 1995, Sunday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: Family forms research foundation to save own children, others from
disorder

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: TUCSON, Ariz.

BODY:

   TUCSON, Ariz. -- Three times, Cindy and Michael Parseghian heard
the horrifying news.

   Three of their four young children -- grandchildren of former
Notre Dame football coach Ara Parseghian -- have a fatal,
untreatable genetic disorder.

   That has haunted and driven the family for the last two years.

   Michael, 8, Marcia, 6, and Christa, 3, all have Niemann-Pick
Disease Type C. They cannot metabolize cholesterol, and it's
unlikely they'll live beyond their teen-age years unless a cure is
found.

   When they received the diagnoses, Cindy Parseghian said the
family went through ""several weeks of pure grieving. ''

   Then they dried their tears and resolved to convert their
anguish into action.

   The Ara Parseghian Medical Research Foundation, founded in
November, already has raised nearly $ 2 million and will attempt to
raise at least that much every year until a cure is found, the
Parseghians announced at a news conference this week.

   The foundation expects to hand out $ 1 million in major
research grants within the next 30 days.

   Michael Parseghian, an orthopedic surgeon, said the
foundation's goal is to identify the defective gene behind the
disease in a year -- half the time geneticists think it will take.

   Once the gene is isolated, gene therapy or other approaches,
including medications, could then be attempted to treat and cure
the disease, Parseghian said.

   The foundation's research could affect about 40 genetically
based, cholesterol-related diseases, from cardiovascular to
Alzheimer's, said Dr. Michael Parmacek of the University of
Chicago, a cardiologist, molecular biologist and close friend of
the Parseghians.

   The Parseghians have enlisted the help of the children's
grandfather, Ara Parseghian, in the hopes that his contacts as
former Notre Dame football coach will help raise money and increase
awareness of the disease.  Parseghian coached at Notre Dame from
1964 to 1974.

   ""I spent about a month where I just couldn't talk about
it,'' Ara Parseghian, 72, said from his Marco Island, Fla., home on
Friday.  ""I was almost in a stupor. ''

   He has since rallied scientists, doctors, laboratories and
fund-raisers to help save the lives of his grandchildren and others.

   Researchers have known of the illness for 50 years or more,
but only about 500 cases have been diagnosed in this country,
though doctors suspect at least as many undiagnosed cases.

   Onset of symptoms usually begins at age 5 or 6, and victims
rarely live beyond age 20.  The Parseghian girls haven't shown
outward signs yet.

   ""Two years ago, Mike and I thought we were on top of the
world,'' Cindy Parseghian said.

   Then their ordeal began.  They noticed young Michael having
handwriting, balance and speech problems.  He fell frequently.  He
had trouble raising and lowering his eyes.  And doctor after doctor
was unable to diagnose the condition.


LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1997


                             291 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 4, 1995, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1110 words

HEADLINE: RELIEF PITCHERS; FIRMS BATTLE FOR SALES OF ARTHRITIS DRUGS

BYLINE: Robert Steyer Of the Post-Dispatch Staff

BODY:


   Frail in body yet strong in spirit, Sally Brockman knows full well the
promises and disappointments of arthritis medications.

   "The only thing I'm looking for is a cure," said Brockman, a Creve Coeur
resident who has suffered from a severe form of arthritis for nearly half of her
43 years. "I don't need another remedy. I've had enough remedies in my
lifetime."

   She has taken drugs ranging from nonprescription painkillers to steroids and
toxic products designed primarily for malaria and cancer patients. She also has
had both hips replaced, both wrists fused and the knuckle joints on her right
hand replaced.

   But there is no cure for arthritis, which is really 100 types of joint pain
and inflammation, and that's why drug companies are paying attention to Brockman
and a growing number of arthritis sufferers. Many will take drugs constantly or
intermittently for the rest of their lives.

   An estimated 37 million people - 14 percent of the U.S. population - have
some form of the disease, the Arthritis Foundation says. That number should rise
to 59 million within 25 years.

   The market is growing because the population is aging. Nearly 15.5 million
arthritis patients are 65 and older; another 13.5 million are between 45 and 64,
the foundation says.

   The most common form is osteoarthritis, the pain and inflammation that comes
from gradual wearing of joint tissue. About 43 percent of U.S. arthritis
patients have this disease, which usually starts after age 45.

   Brockman has rheumatoid arthritis, which affects about 6 percent of arthritis
patients and attacks younger people. The disease is caused by the body's immune
system turning against parts of the body, especially joints.

   As arthritis becomes more prevalent, competition among drugmakers has
intensified.

   "This is a highly unsatisfied market where doctors and patients frequently
change drugs," said Kenneth Nover, a drug industry analyst at A.G. Edwards &
Sons Inc.

   "People get frustrated when the drugs don't work," said said Dr. Sherry
Shuman, director of clinical rheumatology at the Washington University School of
Medicine.

   Sometimes, a drug simply stops easing pain and swelling. Sometimes, a drug's
side effects are worse than the disease. In the early 1980s, three drugs
produced such extreme side effects - patients died in some cases - that they
were withdrawn from U.S. and/or foreign markets.

   So patients jump from one drug to the next. They also jump from one doctor to
the next, frequently asking about - sometimes demanding - new medications.

   "Every time I hear about something in the news media, I'm at the doctor's
office asking 'Is this better than what I'm taking now?' " Brockman said. "My
doctor says, 'Why switch if you're doing all right.' "

   Many patients consult the Physicians' Desk Reference (PDR), the professional
bible of drugs and their side effects.

   "Some read the PDR and some read the National Enquirer," said Dr. Terry
Moore, director of the rheumatology division at St. Louis University Health
Sciences Center.

   "When I get a lot of calls, I know some report (of a new treatment) has been
on TV or in the newspapers," said Moore, named after the St. Louis Cardinals
outfielder ("my dad's favorite ballplayer").

   Doctors can't predict which drug will work for their patients, so there's a
lot of sampling.

   "Someone may fail on three drugs and succeed on the fourth, even though the
fourth is similar to the others," Moore said.

   The switching occurs among nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), the
most popular medication and the biggest battleground for drug companies.

   NSAIDs aren't as toxic as steroids or the industrial-strength drugs for the
worst forms of arthritis; they deliver the same pain-relieving punch as aspirin.

   NSAIDs are popular because aspirin can cause stomach problems because
arthritis patients must take a lot of it. "Aspirin is the gold standard, but you
have to take 12 to 16 tablets a day," Shuman said.

   NSAIDs can be taken between one and four times a day. They can produce side
effects that include diarrhea, dizziness, vomiting, ulcers, rapid heartbeat,
liver ailments and kidney problems.

   At least 18 brand-name prescription NSAIDs are sold in the United States.
Generic prescription NSAIDs are multiplying. And some NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen
and naproxen, are available in nonprescription, reduced-strength versions.

   "None of the NSAIDs is superior to others," Shuman said.

   That presents a marketing opportunity, even though U.S. regulators lament the
proliferation of "me-too" drugs for arthritis and other diseases.

   "Pharmaceutical companies are waging aggressive campaigns to change
prescribers' habits and to distinguish their products from competing ones, even
when the products are virtually indistinguishable," said a Nov. 17 article in
the New England Journal by Dr. David A. Kessler, commissioner of the Food and
Drug Administration, and four others.

   Still, companies keep working on new NSAIDs or easier-to-use versions of old
NSAIDs.

   Last year, U.S. prescription sales of NSAIDs reached $ 1.6 billion, down
about 16 percent from 1993, according to IMS America, which tracks drug sales.
The dip in revenue was caused by the growth of cheaper, generic NSAIDs.

   This sales figure, however, excludes nonprescription painkillers like aspirin
and acetaminophen, which is sold as Tylenol and other branded products. And it
doesn't count what some arthritis experts believe is a $ 1-billion-a-year market
for unproven remedies like copper bracelets and vibrators.

   Despite their affinity for NSAIDs, drug companies are searching for a magic
bullet, or at least a therapy that the Food and Drug Administration will approve
as more effective than aspirin or NSAIDs.

   Some researchers are working with monoclonal antibodies, genetically
engineered clones of the body's immune system that can be aimed at healing
joints. Others are looking at ways to prevent the body's immune system from
turning against itself and causing rheumatoid arthritis. There's also gene
therapy research to combat osteoarthritis.

   All of this makes intersting reading for Sally Brockman, who, despite all of
her replacement parts, still faces "a lifetime of taking Tylenol and maybe an
NSAID." She's taking one NSAID now; she took two others in the past.

   She figures she spends "hundreds of dollars a month" on medicine. While many
universities and drug companies spend millions of dollars a year on arthritis
research, Brockman said her best treatment now is water therapy three times a
week with other patients.

   "I enjoy the camaraderie," she said. "It's not medicine."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) Color Photo by Robert C. Holt Jr./Post-Dispatch -
Arthritis sufferer Sally Brockman of Creve Coeur wants a cure, but she's only
likely to get more remedies. (2) Color Graphic by Post-Dispatch - Who Has
Arthritis? - chart list percent of age group with arthritis. (3) Graphic Chart -
Major Forms Of Arthritis Osteoarthritis: Causes joint tissue to break down,
resulting in pain and stiffness. It affects about 15.8 million Americans, mostly
over 45. Rheumatoid arthritis: Results from a revolt of the body's immune
system. It affects 2.1 million Americans, mostly women, and can lead to weight
loss, extreme fatigue and slight fever. Gout: Causes sudden, severe attacks of
pain and tenderness in joints, especially the big toe. Affects about 1 million
Americans, mostly men. Ankylosing spondylitis: Also called spinal arthritis,
this chronic inflammatory disease of the spine affects more than 300,000
Americans, mostly young men. Early Symptoms include constant hip pain, low back
pain and stiffness. Systemic lupus erythmatosus: A disease of the body's immune
system, it affects an estimated 131,000 Americans, mostly women. It can damage
skin, kidneys, the nervous system and the heart. (SOURCE: Arthritis Foundation)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1995


                             292 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JUNE 3, 1995, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Aid From AIDS
 Altered virus may do good

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    A synthetic version of the virus that causes AIDS is being crafted by a
Novato biotechnology company in hopes of solving a simple but vexing medical
problem -- how to get medicine to go where it can do some good.

   Advanced Therapies Inc.'s technology, called the artificial viral envelope,
is a long way from commercial use. Still, the privately held firm's novel
approach to drug delivery is attracting attention, especially in the burgeoning
new medical field known as gene therapy.

   ''They're legit,'' said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor-in- chief of BioVenture
View, a biotechnology industry publication in San Mateo. Robbins-Roth served as
an adviser to Advanced Therapies' financial backers. ''They don't have the whole
answer, but it may be an important piece of the puzzle.''

   Gene therapy is a cutting- edge technology that involves altering the
molecular makeup of a patient's cells. Defective genetic material can be
replaced with healthy genes in patients suffering from immunological disorders,
various cancers and metabolic diseases.

   But it can work only if the healthy genes land in the right place.  It's a
vexing problem, and one of the most promising solutions involves packaging the
gene therapy within a virus -- nature's own elegant system for invading cells.

   Other companies are using natural viruses to carry gene therapy.  Although
these natural viruses are disabled to prevent them from causing disease, they
still can trigger dangerous, unpredictable side effects.

   By using a synthetic virus, Advanced Therapies hopes it can avoid those
problems.

   ''We are copying the virus's very efficient ability to deliver things to
cells, but with none of the viral components that cause illness or injury,''
said Jon Conary, a molecular biologist at Advanced Therapies.

   The synthetic viral envelope is ''preaddressed'' to a particular group of
cells in the lungs, kidneys or elsewhere by attaching particular proteins around
the perimeter. These proteins can be honed to latch onto particular cells and
bypass others.

   In gene therapy, for example, the synthetic viral carrier is loaded with the
healthy genes, and then can be injected, inhaled or applied to the skin. In
effect, the envelope finds the right spot, forms a bond and delivers the medical
''payload'' precisely where it's needed.

   HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, was chosen as the model to capitalize on the
intensive research that has already been done on that particular organism. The
artificial version contains no natural DNA and cannot reproduce, much less
actually cause AIDS.

   The company's drug delivery system is not designed to fight AIDS in
particular, although it could play a role if an AIDS treatment or vaccine is
developed. Initially, the most promising application will be attacking diseases
for which a treatment is known but there are problems getting it to the right
place.

   Last month, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation awarded a two- year, $ 172,000,
research grant to Advanced Therapies to continue building its artificial viral
envelope for eventual use in combatting cystic fibrosis.

   The technique was pioneered by the company's co-founder, re searcher Hans
Schreier, when he was at Vanderbilt University. It could be used to deliver a
wide variety of medicines, including some that are so toxic they would kill the
patient if allowed to roam through the body.

   Careful targeting is ''clearly advantageous,'' said Elizabeth Moyer, a staff
scientist at Athena Neurosciences Inc., a South San Francisco maker of
neurological treatments that has long wrestled with the problem.

   Another appeal is financial.

   Advanced Therapies hopes to license its technology to drugmakers on the verge
of losing patent protection for established treatments.  If the technical bugs
can be worked out, an old treatment could be repackaged and given extended
market life.

   Licensing talks now are under way with half a dozen major pharmaceutical
companies, according to Advanced Therapies chief executive Gary Boring. The plan
is to hand over customized virus envelopes to drugmakers willing to pay
royalties and underwrite development.

   ''We're not calling them; they're calling us,'' Boring said. ''It means new
life for the their products.''


GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), GRA,PHOTO, (1) CEO Boring, (2) Biologist Jon Conary worked
with a DNA sample in Advanced Therapies' Novato laboratory , PHOTOS BY VINCE
MAGGIORA, THE CHRONICLE, GRAPHIC, HOW ARTIFICIAL VIRUSES WORK , CHRONICLE
GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1995


                             293 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          June 3, 1995 Saturday, THIRD

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: FIRM HOPES VIRUS DELIVERS

BYLINE: By CARL T. HALL San Francisco Chronicle

BODY:

   A synthetic version of the virus that causes AIDS is being crafted by a
Novato biotechnology company in hopes of solving a simple but vexing medical
problem - how to get medicine to go where it can do some good.

   Advanced Therapies Inc.'s technology, called the artificial viral envelope,
is a long way from commercial use. Still, the privately held firm's novel
approach to drug delivery is attracting attention, especially in the burgeoning
new medical field known as gene therapy.

   "They're legit," said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor-in-chief of BioVenture
View, a biotechnology industry publication in San Mateo, Calif. Robbins-Roth was
an adviser to Advanced Therapies' financial backers. "They don't have the whole
answer, but it may be an important piece of the puzzle."

   Gene therapy is a cutting-edge technology that involves altering the
molecular makeup of a patient's cells. Defective genetic material can be
replaced with healthy genes in patients suffering from immunological disorders,
various cancers and metabolic diseases.

   But it works only if the healthy genes land in the right place. It's a vexing
problem, and one of the most promising solutions involves packaging the gene
therapy within a virus - nature's own elegant system for invading cells.

   Other companies are using natural viruses to carry gene therapy. Although
these natural viruses are disabled to prevent them from causing disease, they
still can trigger dangerous, unpredictable side effects.

   By using a synthetic virus, Advanced Therapies hopes it can avoid those
problems.

   "We are copying the virus's very efficient ability to deliver things to
cells, but with none of the viral components that cause illness or injury," said
Jon Conary, a molecular biologist at Advanced Therapies.

   The synthetic viral envelope is "preaddressed" to a particular group of cells
in the lungs, kidneys or elsewhere by attaching particular proteins around the
perimeter. These proteins can be honed to latch onto particular cells and bypass
others.

   In gene therapy, for example, the synthetic viral carrier is loaded with the
healthy genes, and then can be injected, inhaled or applied to the skin.  In
effect, the envelope finds the right spot, forms a bond and delivers the medical
"payload" precisely where it's needed.

   HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, was chosen as the model to capitalize on the
intensive research that has already been done on that particular organism. The
artificial version contains no natural DNA and cannot reproduce, much less
actually cause AIDS.

   The company's drug delivery system is not designed to fight AIDS in
particular, although it could play a role if an AIDS treatment or vaccine is
developed. Initially, the most promising application will be attacking diseases
for which a treatment is known but there are problems getting it to the right
place.

   Last month, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation awarded a two-year, $172,000
research grant to Advanced Therapies to continue building its artificial viral
envelope for eventual use in fighting cystic fibrosis.

   The technique was pioneered by the company's co-founder, researcher Hans
Schreier, when he was at Vanderbilt University. It could be used to deliver a
wide variety of medicines, including some that are so toxic they would kill the
patient if allowed to roam through the body.

   Careful targeting is "clearly advantageous," said Elizabeth Moyer, a staff
scientist at Athena Neurosciences Inc., a San Francisco maker of neurological
treatments that has long wrestled with the problem.

   Another appeal is financial.

   Advanced Therapies hopes to license its technology to drug makers on the
verge of losing patent protection for established treatments. If the technical
bugs can be worked out, an old treatment could be repackaged and given extended
market life.

   Licensing talks are under way with half a dozen major pharmaceutical
companies, according to Advanced Therapies Chief Executive Gary Boring. The plan
is to hand over customized virus envelopes to drug makers willing to pay
royalties and underwrite development.

   "We're not calling them; they're calling us," Boring said. "It means new life
for their products."

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1995


                             294 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                       June 2, 1995, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: Research offers hope in spinal cord cases;
Drugs, therapies called promising

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Drugs given right after catastrophic accidents like the one suffered by
actor Christopher Reeve, together with experimental therapies for people
paralyzed for many years, are brightening prospects for victims of spinal cord
injuries, scientists said yesterday.

   So many researchers have jumped into the promising field of coaxing damaged
spinal cord nerves to regenerate that there isn't enough money to fund them all
- a constant frustration to scientists in the field.

   "There's an incredible amount happening, and it's thankfully only partially
being dampened by what's happening in Washington," said Dr. Wise Young, a
neurosurgeon at New York University. He was referring to efforts in Congress to
curb or cut back federal funding for medical research.

   "There is fairly substantial progress and hopeful news about therapies that
are working in animals," including drugs, transplants and gene therapy
strategies, said Young.

   Whether any new or experimental treatments have been tried in Reeve's case
wasn't known yesterday. A spokeswoman at the University of Virginia Medical
Center, where the actor known for playing Superman remained in serious but
stable condition, said no information would be released beyond brief medical
updates.

   Neurosurgeons not involved in the case were keenly interested in learning
whether Reeve was given massive doses of a synthetic steroid called
methylprednisolone in the first few hours after he was thrown from a horse last
Saturday and crushed two bones in his neck.

   Research in the late 1980s revealed that the drug could reduce swelling and
subsequent damage to the spinal cord, lessening the eventual paralysis in many
cases. Some ambulances and many hospital emergency rooms now have
methylprednisolone to give to victims of spinal cord injuries, because the
sooner it is given, the more effective it is.

   Other new drugs that may protect the spinal nerves from acute damage
following an accident are undergoing testing, Young said.

   The neurosurgeon directing Reeve's treatment, Dr. John Jane, said yesterday
that the actor and horseman was not in pain and could communicate by mouthing
words although he was connected to a respirator. Reeve cannot breathe on his own
because the damage to his spinal cord just below the skull blocks nerve messages
that initiate breathing, Young said. That could change as he recovers, but some
patients with broken necks remain on respirators, he added.

   Both Jane and other neurosurgeons emphasized that, despite Reeve's total
paralysis now, it is possible he could regain significant bodily function, but
they said it is too soon to predict. In fact, Reeve is not yet out of danger of
life-threatening complications from his injury.

   Henry Stifel, a mostly paralyzed investment salesman speaking by telephone
from the trading floor of Morgan Stanley & Co. in New York, said even with the
best medicine can offer, Reeve faces a difficult future.

   "Can he survive? Yes," said Stifel, who broke his neck in a car accident in
1982, when he was 17. "Will it be incredibly tough? It's going to be a
nightmare."

   Like Reeve, Stifel needed a respirator to breathe following the accident: He
now has limited use of his upper body and arms.

   Arthur Ullian, a Boston real estate developer who has become an activist for
increased funding for brain diseases and spinal cord injuries, called Reeve's
accident a "total tragedy."

   Ullian suffered a similar but not quite as disabling injury in 1991 when he
flipped off a bicycle and struck his chin on the ground, bending his neck back
and damaging the spinal cord. The site of the injury was lower on the spine than
Reeve's, leaving Ullian the use of his arms and sparing his breathing.

   "I know what it feels like, and it just makes me cry," he said in a telephone
interview. "The worst thing is that he's able to think; he knows what has
happened; he can't move or do anything - it's the worst thing in the world."

   Ullian has been buttonholing Washington legislators to spread the word about
research that is defying the former dictum that the brain and spinal cord
couldn't be healed. More funding could move these projects along faster, he
said.

   Young, the NYU neurosurgeon, listed several promising developments:

   - Research at William and Mary College in which drugs that cause inflammation
were given to spinal cord-injured rodents along with drugs that reduce
inflammation and a steroid. The combination led to "quite impressive
improvement" in the rats' ability to walk, indicating the spinal cord was
healing.

   - Discovery of two substances in spinal cord cells that keep them from
regrowing after damage. They help explain why the brain and cord are so hard to
heal and suggest drugs to block these growth inhibitors may help nerves regrow,
Young said.

   - A study this month in which cells that manufacture a natural substance
known as an adhesion molecule were transplanted into injured spinal cords of
animals and improved their recovery.

   Naomi Kleitman, a neuroscientist with the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis,
added that there has been significant improvement in electrical stimulation
devices that can enable paralyzed patients to exercise muscles and to stand up
and even walk.

 Spinal cord injuries: higher means more disabling

   Actor Christopher Reeve suffered damage to his spinal column at the worst
possible location - the two highest vertebrae. Because the spinal cord conducts
the nerve signals from the brain that control all body movement and feeling, a
severe cord injury generally causes loss of feeling and motion everywhere below
that point.  GLOBE STAFF GRAPHIC

GRAPHIC: CHART DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1995


                             295 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    June 2, 1995 Friday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 335 words

HEADLINE: COLON CANCER GENE FOUND

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   Researchers have identified a gene that causes colon cancer, a finding
expected to lead to a blood test in the next few years to find the disease
early.

   Their study, published today in the journal Science, also may help develop
gene therapy treatments for people who have colon cancer. It also may help
people with inherited forms of ovarian, endometrial, stomach and pancreatic
cancer, diseases with similar genetic origins, researchers said.

   "Our goal is to turn this finding into a blood test in the next couple of
years; our longer-term goal is to turn this into therapy," said Dr. Sanford
Markowitz, lead author of the study and a colon cancer specialist at Case
Western Reserve University, in Cleveland.

   Each year, about 150,000 Americans are diagnosed with colon cancer, and
55,000 die, usually because their cancers were found at advanced, incurable
stages. Among cancers that affect both men and women, only lung cancer is more
common or kills more.

   The gene identified by Markowitz and his team is a tumor suppressor -- it's
the body's way of preventing the disease. It does so by helping the body shed
the inner lining of the colon. In just one week's time, the body naturally sheds
this inner lining, Markowitz said.

   But people who have colon cancer can't thoroughly shed this lining because of
a genetic defect, Markowitz found. When the gene -- which he calls RII -- is
destroyed, cancer develops, he said.

   The finding is a new link in a growing chain of research, in which three
other genes that cause familial forms of colon cancer have been identified.
Familial forms of the disease account for about 5 percent of all colon cancer
cases.

   The gene his team identified plays a role in both the familial form of colon
cancer and in others that occur in the right side or top of the colon -- about
half of all colon cancer, Markowitz said.

   Researchers at the Medical College of Ohio, in Toledo, and Johns Hopkins
University, in Baltimore, also worked on the study.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             296 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      June 2, 1995, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 371 words

HEADLINE: Colon cancer's gene discovered;
A diagnostic blood test may come in a few years

BYLINE: Knight-Ridder Newspapers

BODY:

   Researchers have identified a gene that causes colon cancer,
a finding expected to lead to a blood test in the next few years to
find the disease early.

   Their study, published today in Science, also may help
develop gene therapy treatments for people with colon cancer.  It
also may help people with inherited forms of ovarian, endometrial,
stomach and pancreatic cancer, diseases with similar genetic
origins, researchers said.

   ""Our goal is to turn this finding into a blood test in the
next couple of years; our longer-term goal is to turn this into
therapy,'' said Dr. Sanford Markowitz, lead author of the study and
a colon cancer specialist at Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland.

   Each year about 150,000 Americans are diagnosed with colon
cancer and 55,000 die, usually because their cancers were found at
advanced, incurable stages.  Among cancers that affect both men and
women, only lung cancer is more common or kills more.

   The gene identified by Markowitz and his team is a tumor
suppressor -- it's the body's way of preventing the disease.  It
does so by helping the body shed the inner lining of the colon, a
long organ shaped like a distorted M that winds through the
abdomen.  In just one week's time, the body naturally sheds this
inner lining, much as skin cells are continually shed and regrown,
Markowitz said.

   But people with colon cancer can't thoroughly shed this
lining because of a genetic defect, Markowitz found.  When the gene,
which he calls RII, is destroyed, cancer develops, he said.  He
compared the broken genes to a frayed rope.  ""At some point, it
will break,'' causing cancer.

   The finding is a new link in a growing chain of research, in
which three other genes that cause familial forms of colon cancer
have been identified.  Familial forms of the disease account for
about 5 percent of all colon cancer cases.

   The gene his team identified plays a role in both the
familial form of colon cancer and in others that occur in the right
side or top of the colon -- about half of all colon cancer,
Markowitz said.

   Researchers at the Medical College of Ohio in Toledo and
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore also worked on the study.


LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1997


                             297 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              June 2, 1995 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 1039 words

HEADLINE: CARS, ELEVATORS, TOILETS: A TRIO OF MODERN MALADIES

BYLINE: Gerry Frank

BODY:

   Friday, June 2, 1995 CARS, ELEVATORS, TOILETS: A TRIO OF MODERN MALADIES

   The stock market is about at its peak for 1995. The car, the toilet  and the
elevator are the worst inventions of this century. Too many of the  poorest
students go into teaching. Genes that could develop a robust immune  system in
humans are being tested in laboratories.

   These are a few of the fascinating, unusual, controversial and sometimes
off-the-wall ideas thrown out at a dinner in Manhattan last week. The host was
the ever-stimulating editor and publisher of Bottom Line, one of the country's
largest circulation general newsletters. As he does several times a year,  Marty
Edelston had gathered together interesting people from diverse  backgrounds who
were challenged to throw out ideas that would lead to  heavyweight discussion
among the 18 guests.

   Naturally the economy was a prime topic for all kinds of predictions, as
several of the folks around the table had connections with leading New York
area financial institutions.

   The most self-assured expert, a man who advises his firm about what will
happen in the stock market tomorrow, was not bullish about the short-term
outlook. He felt the advance in recent months was pretty heady and saw few
signs that this euphoria would continue indefinitely.

   What to do? He suggested buying top companies like General Electric or  Merck
or Intel and sitting with them for awhile. One of the great strengths of our
present economy, he agreed, has been the increase in productivity as more  and
more major firms downsize their work forces and increase output per  employee.
But he warned that most of the savings in this arena have now been  realized.

   Another financial guru, a young man who specializes in the communications
industry for Bear Stearns, a major finance house, was upbeat about the future
in that area. He felt that the multitude of mergers and acquisitions between
telephone companies, television and cable outfits and other media giants
(including those in the entertainment world) would produce a small group of
huge corporations that will dominate this industry. His advice? Get in on the
ground floor with the best names and hold on.

   Discussion of global economics was dominated by a guest who spends the
majority of his life in Southeast Asia as an executive with a publisher of
newsletters on current activities in the region. He could hardly contain his
enthusiasm for the Singapore, Jakarta, Bangkok and Beijing markets, noting  that
this is where the action of the next decade will be. He was less upbeat  about
the future of Hong Kong after China takes over in 1997, feeling that  this
booming bastion of free enterprise would become just another Chinese  city.

   Then there was time for a lady seated at the host's right, who was
introduced as a journalist who had just finished an article for The New York
Times on what happens to lottery winners. But her remarks were a far cry from
that subject!

   She was the one who threw out the theories that cars, elevators and toilets
(in that order) were the most damaging of modern inventions. This hypothesis
made every eye and ear turn in her direction, which was obviously what she
wanted.

   The car was the culprit in destroying the family and the community, she
allowed, by making folks too mobile and too withdrawn from their neighbors.  She
was particularly critical of what the automobile has done to young people, who
she claims are becoming less and less attached to home base as they reach
driving age. But what about the enormous employment this industry has brought
about? On this subject she seemed less sure of herself, defending what to many
seemed a rather weak rationale about one of the underpinnings of American
progress.

   Her problem with the elevator was that we are concentrating activity in  less
and less area, building huge cities that are increasingly difficult to  govern.
Not so many arguments here. Fortunately, no representatives of Otis  Elevator
were present!

   However, when it came to flush toilets, the consensus was that the charming
author should stick to printed papers rather than the other kind. . . . Her
problem, as I understood it, had to do with the waste of water. Hmmm. I wonder
how much time she has spent in some of the less developed countries of our
world.

   Her husband, a psychiatrist, was troubled about something else we hear so
much about these days, the increase of violence shown on our television
screens. He was particularly concerned that young people are so inundated with
guns and blood and death that it takes increasingly lurid scenes just to keep
their attention. The good doctor felt that all of this led to the disturbing
increase of hostility. A byproduct of the trend: In the sports world, the more
combative and aggressive the game, the more compelling it seems to be for the
spectator.

   One of two educators at the dinner, a former college president, was
defensive when the other conjectured that we are seeing the least qualified
students go into teaching. Poor salaries, unpleasant working conditions and
lack of community respect were given as reasons that top young people are
shying away from this field. In addition, this observer said that ``people
management'' in schools is abysmal, that educators are doing too much research
and not enough classroom teaching and that most curricula are woefully
outdated.

   It was one of the world's leading gene therapists who had everyone on the
edge of his or her seat. His discussion of the coming genetic manipulation of
human beings seemed scary to most of us. He predicts that medical treatment  and
diagnosis in the years to come will be mainly gene-based and observed that genes
relating to longevity are being isolated in research labs today.

   I left the evening with a certain amount of ambivalence, encouraged about
our strides in making us more competitive and productive but discouraged about
the prospects of living longer if the lady with the water-waste hang-up has  her
way!

   Gerry Frank, a native Oregonian, is the fourth generation of the family  that
founded Meier & Frank. His column appears each Friday. He can be reached  in
Salem at 585-8411 or by mail at PO Box 2225, Salem, OR 97308.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             298 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                        June 2, 1995 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS PINPOINT GENE FOR SOME CANCERS

BYLINE: By LAURA YEE; PLAIN DEALER HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:

   Imagine the havoc when the lawnmower unexpectedly breaks and the grass isn't
regularly trimmed. Weeds rise, choking blades of grass to death.

   A similar situation occurs with colon cancer, say local researchers, who have
identified the primary gene responsible for certain types of the deadly disease.
Their discovery is detailed in today's issue of the journal, Science.

   The broken lawnmower is a defective gene that normally allows for the weekly
maintenance of colon cells. When the layer of cells aren't clipped every week,
the wall of cells in the colon begin to grow out of control, creating an
environment ripe for tumors.

   "This may lead to figuring out what triggers other cancers," said Dr. Sanford
Markowitz, an oncologist at University Hospitals of Cleveland and an associate
professor of medicine at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine.

   The discovery of the defective RII gene will help researchers develop a blood
test showing whether an individual has colon cancer. It also puts the scientific
community at the forefront of developing a gene therapy - using a healthy form
of the defective gene to prevent or cease tumor growth.

   "This type of cancer grows insidiously with no symptoms," said Dr. James
Willson, director of University Ireland Cancer Center and director of the Cancer
Research Center at CWRU. "Diagnosis is often in the advanced stages which means
if the cancer has spread to other organs, mortality is almost 100 percent.

   "If you can catch it early on, you can save lives."

   The RII gene discovery is significant because it is the missing piece of the
puzzle that forms the colon cancer picture. In December 1993, researchers
discovered that people with inherited colon cancer have a flawed hMSH2 gene -
the mechanism that keeps DNA from falling apart. Last year, researchers
identified the hMLH1 gene, which serves a similar function. A blood test has
been developed to screen for the two genes.

   Presence of the gene means only that an individual is at risk for colon
cancer. A malfunctioning RII gene means that the person has cancer.

   "People with hereditary colon cancer have unstable DNA - like a fraying
rope," said Markowitz. "A defective RII is the breaking point."

   Markowitz and Willson have been studying colon cancer for more than a decade.
They were assisted in their most recent discovery by researchers at the Medical
College of Ohio in Toledo and Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore.

   Colon cancer is the second-most common form of cancer, resulting in about
56,000 deaths annually. According to the American Cancer Society, about 140,000
people will develop colon cancer this year.

   About 7,000 of those deaths and 40,000 cases of colon cancer can be
attributed to the defective gene, known as the RII gene. People who have a
family history of colon cancer or of cancer that develops in the right side of
the colon near the appendix have a faulty RII gene.

   Researchers suspect that people with cancer of the stomach, uterus and ovary
may also have a defective RII gene.

   "This is why we are so excited," said Markowitz. "It's not just a few
people."

   From studying 55 colon cancer patients at University Hospitals, Markowitz and
Willson found that a flawed RII gene means that the lining of the colon does not
shed as it should once a week. But cells continue to grow, creating fertile
ground for cancer.

   Markowitz and Willson have been able to prove that gene therapy holds promise
for this type of cancer, at least in their work with animals. But getting it to
work in humans is a huge jump.

   It could be two years before a blood test could provide early diagnosis of
RII, Markowitz said.

   "It's one step at a time," Willson said. "We're only at the beginning
stages."

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1995


                             299 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           June 2, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: GENE TOUTED TO FIND, TREAT COLON CANCER

BYLINE: By Knight-Ridder Newspapers

BODY:

   Researchers have identified a gene that causes colon cancer, a finding
expected to lead to a blood test in the next few years to find the disease
early.

   Their study, published today in the journal Science, also may help develop
gene therapy treatments for people with colon cancer. It also may help people
with inherited forms of ovarian, endometrial, stomach and pancreatic cancer,
diseases with similar genetic origins, researchers said.

   "Our goal is to turn this finding into a blood test in the next couple of
years; our longer-term goal is to turn this into therapy," said Dr. Sanford
Markowitz, lead author of the study and a colon cancer specialist at Case
Western Reserve University in Cleveland.

   Each year about 150,000 Americans are diagnosed with colon cancer and 55,000
die, usually because their cancers were found at advanced, incurable stages.
Among cancers that affect both men and women, only lung cancer is more common or
kills more.

   The gene identified by Markowitz and his team is a tumor suppressor - the
body's way of preventing the disease. It does so by helping the body shed the
inner lining of the colon, a long organ shaped like a distorted M that winds
through the abdomen. In just one week's time, the body naturally sheds this
inner lining, much as skin cells are continually shed and regrown, Markowitz
said.

   But people with colon cancer can't thoroughly shed this lining because of a
genetic defect, Markowitz found. When the gene, which he calls RII, is
destroyed, cancer develops, he said.

   He compared the broken genes to a frayed rope. "At some point it will break,"
causing cancer, he said.

   The finding is a new link in a growing chain of research, in which three
other genes that cause familial forms of colon cancer have been identified.
Familial forms of the disease account for about 5 percent of all colon cancer
cases.

   The gene his team identified plays a role in both the familial form of colon
cancer and in others that occur in the right side or top of the colon - about
half of all colon cancer, Markowitz said.

   Researchers at the Medical College of Ohio in Toledo and Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore also worked on the study.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1995


                             300 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1737 words

HEADLINE: Bottling The Stuff Of Dreams

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   These are busy days at Vical Inc., a small biotechnology company here. Using
a second-generation approach to biotech drug development known as gene therapy,
Vical is collaborating with industry giants like Merck & Company and Baxter
International Inc. to develop everything from a vaccine for hepatitis to
treatments for cancer, hemophilia and cystic fibrosis. Two of its cancer
treatments recently produced encouraging results in clinical trials, and there
has just been a breakthrough with a flu vaccine.

   Across town, things are also hopping at Viagene Inc., one of the first gene
therapy companies to attract a deep-pocket buyer. In April, the Chiron
Corporation agreed to pay about $113 million for Viagene in a deal that amounted
to a big vote of confidence in the company's quest for vaccines to combat cancer
and viral diseases, including AIDS.

    Gene therapy -- the revolutionary concept that disease can be treated with
the body's own genetic material -- is alive and well, and not just in San Diego.

   The 20 or so gene therapy companies around the country still face daunting
technical, safety and financial hurdles. Yet they are edging closer to unlocking
the therapy's vast potential to correct genetic defects and, in theory at least,
treat almost every disease known to man. Barely five years old, the therapy
involves the injection of DNA into human cells, with the goal of replacing
damaged genes or producing proteins that stimulate the immune system.

   Industry executives say they are confident of winning Government approval by
the end of the decade for the first of what could be a steady stream of potent
drugs.

   "Compared to two years ago, when this was something wonderful for the 21st
century, there are now some products in clinical trials and progress is being
made," said Dr. Alain B. Schreiber, president and chief executive of Vical.
"This is no longer a pipe dream."

   Indeed, a number of developments, on both the research front and the business
side, are speeding the transition from laboratory vision to doctor's shelf:

   * Big drug companies like Bayer, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer and Sandoz, in addition
to Baxter and Merck, are pouring money into joint development deals with the
fledgling companies, including Applied Immune Sciences of Santa Clara, Calif.,
Somatix Therapy of Alameda, Calif., and Systemix of Palo Alto, Calif.

   * About 100 products are undergoing trials. Viagene's AIDS therapy is in the
second of three phases of Food and Drug Administration trials, the first gene
therapy to get that far.

   * In April, Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md., won a broad patent
relating to one form of gene therapy. The decision represents a big boost not
only to the company but also to the credibility of the therapy itself because it
in effect marks the patent office's recognition of the technology's usefulness.

   Simple in concept but complex in implementation, gene therapy may yet prove
more difficult to master than researchers now think. For openers, most gene
therapy companies use various viruses as carrier mechanisms when injecting DNA
into cells. Although the viruses are "deactivated," their ability to mutate
raises the specter of a therapy causing infection.

   And Wall Street remains skeptical about the therapy, at least in the short
term, despite the recent advances. The shares of most of the publicly traded
companies involved have continued to languish in the single digits, dragged down
by the general malaise of all but the largest biotech stocks since 1993.

   Analysts say many gene therapy companies lack sufficient financing to
complete their first products and will not be able to raise money in the public
markets. While the large drug makers have shown a great willingness to
underwrite the technology, they also know they can play a waiting game and
acquire desperate companies at deep discounts. Some of the gene therapy
companies simply will not survive.

   But it will be worth the wait for those that do, say gene therapy proponents.

   "If you swing for the fences, the technology will have a very hard time
maturing," said Robert T. Abbott, Viagene's president and chief executive.
"Genetic diseases are a swing for the fences."

   The ultimate goal of gene therapists is gene replacement, which would totally
alter the fate of people born with genetic diseases like cystic fibrosis,
diabetes and hemophilia. But a cure for these diseases, perhaps with a single
injection, is many years down the road.

   Much closer at hand is immunotherapeutics, or the use of gene therapy to
produce proteins that work like sophisticated vaccines. In swinging for this
home run, genetic therapists are trying to send the ball far beyond genetically
engineered therapeutic proteins, the first generation of biotechnology.

   Those drugs, like Chiron's Interleukin 2 or Amgen Inc.'s Epogen, are copies
of naturally occurring proteins that are manufactured in giant fermentation
vats. Injected into the body, they can compensate for genetic deficiencies or
stimulate the immune system. But they cannot be directed to the precise place
that they are needed. That presents a problem since proteins can be toxic if
they wind up in the wrong place and in the wrong concentration.

   Gene therapy solves that problem, at least in theory. The idea is to inject
synthesized DNA directly into cells that are part of an organ that is diseased.
The DNA is then supposed to cause proteins to be made in the right place and in
the right amount.

   But gene therapy presents its own problems.

   One is the use of viruses and the safety risks they bring. While genetically
engineered proteins and conventional drugs both work primarily outside cell
walls, gene therapies must penetrate not only the cell but also the nucleus
within the cell in order to modify the genetic material there. To break through,
most treatments have used a genetically modified virus -- usually the mouse
leukemia virus -- as a carrier, or "vector," for the DNA. Now, Vical and other
companies are working to use nonviral vectors, which in the past have lacked the
potency to deliver adequate amounts of genes to cells.

   Another hurdle is the targeting of appropriate cells. Because no one has
developed a gene therapy that can be injected in the bloodstream and find its
way to the right cell, most regimens are performed ex vivo, or outside the body.
That means blood or tissue samples are removed from a patient. The appropriate
cells are separated from the mass of material, treated with a gene therapy
vector and then returned to the patient.

   Some companies, including Viagene, are now exploring treatments that are
performed in vivo, or inside the body, for those immunotherapies in which broad
distribution of the gene is desirable, as with AIDS. An in vivo treatment would
have far greater commercial potential because it could be packaged in vials and
handled like any conventional drug that is injected.

   But ex vivo treatment, though costly and cumbersome, is the only approach
that has been proved effective so far.

   Developed by researchers at the National Institutes of Health under the
direction of Dr. W. French Anderson, ex vivo therapy was first performed in 1990
on two girls, ages 4 and 9, who lacked a critical immune system enzyme,
adenosine deaminase, giving rise to "the boy in the bubble" syndrome. The girls
now lead relatively healthy lives.

   In May, researchers at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles reported that the
first infants to be treated for this deficiency with gene therapy also appear to
be healthy and to be producing the needed enzyme on their own.

   The patent that was received in April by Genetic Therapy Inc., which
collaborated with Dr. Anderson, covers all forms of ex vivo gene therapy. M.
James Barrett, Genetic Therapy's chairman and chief executive, said the company
expects to derive substantial revenue from licensing others to pursue ex vivo
treatments. That should free his company from the need to raise additional money
on Wall Street, he said.

   Nonetheless, the race is on to find an in vivo treatment, and Viagene appears
to be ahead with its treatment for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS. The
treatment is injected directly into muscle tissue. There, it prompts the
production of so-called killer T cells, which recent studies indicate may play a
greater role in the body's ability to fight viruses and cancers.

   The use of viral vectors in this and other gene therapies remains
controversial, however. Some experts fear they may prompt cancers or regain
their virulence by recombining with nondisabled viruses that are typically
present in the body. Adenoviruses, which normally attack the respiratory system,
could be partly disabled for treating diseases centered in the lung, like cystic
fibrosis, but have shown a disturbing tendency to migrate to other parts of the
body.

   Indeed, in some of the early attempts at gene therapy, the quantity of virus
"in and of itself can be a toxic event," said Philip Noguchi, director of
cellular and gene therapy at the F.D.A.'s Center for Biologics. There may be
little choice, he added. "From a biological perspective, if it's not dangerous
it's probably not going to work," he said. "You must accept risk in order to
achieve effective therapy."

   Vical is attempting to reduce the risk by forsaking viral vectors in favor of
so-called naked DNA, which is either injected in a solution or enclosed in fat
molecules known as lipids. After several years of work, researchers have
increased the ability of these nonviral vectors to deliver genes by several
thousandfold, prompting one editorial in the journal Science to call naked DNA
"the biological equivalent of cold fusion."

   Vical is collaborating with Merck on the use of naked DNA gene therapy in the
development of vaccines for hepatitis B, herpes simplex, tuberculosis, H.I.V.,
influenza, hepatitis C and human papilloma virus.  [Just this week, Vical's
collaborators at Merck Research Laboratories in West Point, Pa., announced that
they had successfully immunized animals against the flu virus using naked DNA.
The DNA vaccine appeared to protect against several strains of flu virus at
once, unlike current flu vaccines, which must be changed each year.]

   "We've been focused on nonviral delivery all along," said Vical's Dr.
Schreiber. "For the larger market, you would have to be a fool to want any piece
of a virus in there."


CORRECTION-DATE: June 6, 1995, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

   Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about the
improving prospects for gene therapy companies referred incorrectly to a patent
on one form of gene therapy used by Genetic Therapy Inc. The patent is held by
the National Institutes of Health, not the company. The institutes granted an
exclusive license to the company, which was a collaborator in the gene therapy
technology.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Viagene's chief executive, Robert T. Abbott, holds a vial of
gene therapy "vector," or carrier, used in human clinical trials for the
treatment of people with H.I.V. (Robert Burroughs for The New York Times) (pg.
D1)

Chart: "The Gene Therapy Market"

    The following are publicly traded companies with gene therapy programs and
their disease targets or technology approach.

Applied Immune Sciences Inc., Santa Clara, Calif.
Cell-isolation technology, cancer and AIDS.
Corporate Partner: Rhone Poulenc Rorer.

Cell Genesys Inc., Foster City, Calif.
Cell therapy, genetic manipulation of c ells for therapeutic benefit.
Corporate Partner: Japan Tobacco.

Genetic Therapy Inc., Gaithersburg, Maryland.
Ex-vivo gene therapy, brain cancer immunotherapeutic.
Corporate Partner: Sandoz.

Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, Mass.
Cystic Fibrosis.
Corporate Partner: Vical.

Somatix Therapy Corp., Alameda, Calif.
Anticancer immunotherapeutics, hemophilia, neurological disorders.
Corporate Partner: Baxter.

Systemix Inc., Palo Alto, Calif.
Universal stem cells for transplantation, genetically altered mouse.
Corporate Partner: Sandoz.

Targeted Genetics, Seattle, Wash.
Modified killer T cells, stem cell therapy, cystic fibrosis.
Corporate Partner: Immunex.

Viagene Inc., San Diego.
Anticancer and antiviral immunotherapeutics, hemophilia.
Corporate Partners: Chiron, Green Cross, Bayer.

Vical Inc., San Diego.
Viral vaccines, cancer immunotherapeutics, cystic fibrosis.
Corporate Partners: Merck, Baxter, Pasteur-Merieux, Genzyme. (pg. D6)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1995


                             301 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z07

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: Why Scientists Milk Drugs From Farm Animals

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

BODY:


   Monoclonal antibodies, which track down their targets like molecular
bloodhounds in the body, don't necessarily kill their quarries by themselves.
But scientists can attach them to cancer-killing drugs and inject the linked
compounds into patients. The antibodies carry the drugs directly to cancer
cells, blasting the tumor while inflicting minimal harm elsewhere in the body.

   Alternatively, scientists can attach radioactive molecules to monoclonals,
delivering deadly radiation directly to tumors. Or, with milder radioactive
substances attached, such compounds can serve as markers that light up on a
person's X-ray, showing exactly where tumor cells are hiding out. Some
monoclonals attack infectious agents, such as bacteria or viruses, or neutralize
various poisons in the body. Only one monoclonal has been approved by the Food
and Drug Administration as a medical treatment; called OKT-3, it helps prevent
rejection of transplanted kidneys.

   Recently released figures from the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers
of America offer a good measure of the great promise that monoclonal antibodies
hold: Of the 234 medicines now under development by the nation's biotechnology
companies, fully 69 are monoclonal antibodies -- by far the single largest
category, followed by 43 vaccines and 17 gene therapy drugs.

   Animal studies with monoclonal antibodies have been encouraging. "We've seen
complete regressions of tumors," said Peggy Ballman, a spokeswoman for
Bristol-Myers Squibb, which has several monoclonals in development. But while
several groups have reported positive results from preliminary patient trials,
they don't always work as well as in animal tests. One Bristol-Myers Squibb
monoclonal linked to the chemotherapy drug doxorubicin looked very promising in
animal studies. But researchers reported at a scientific meeting last month that
the drug caused significant nausea and stomach bleeding in patients. The company
says it still has hopes for the drug.

   As evidence of its confidence, the Princeton, N.J.-based pharmaceutical giant
this month asked Genzyme Transgenics to create a line of goats whose milk will
contain the antibody, usually made in laboratory cells. But the company isn't
putting all its antibody eggs in one basket. It has also contracted with
Agracetus, a biotechnology company in Middleton, Wis., to see about making the
same monoclonals in genetically engineered corn and soybean plants.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995


                             302 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                       May 28, 1995, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 2586 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PROFILE;
THE BRAIN TRUST;
HE HAS BEEN CALLED 'BRILLIANT,' A 'SUPERSTAR,' EVEN A GOD. NEUROSURGEON KEITH
BLACK IS ZEROING IN ON A WAY TO ZAP MALIGNANT TUMORS.

BYLINE: By EDWARD J. BOYER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The letter, in slightly awkward English, came from Dortmund, Germany, typical
of dozens UCLA neurosur geon Keith L. Black receives from around the world each
year:

   *

   My husband . . . is suffering since 10 months from a malign tumor in the
right hemisphere of his brain. As I trust and hope that you will be able to cure
this tumor with your new medical technique, I look forward to receiving your
advice.

    *

   Black knows intimately the devastation brain tumors wreak on patients and
their families.

   "I think a malignant brain tumor is the worst disease you can have," he says.
"A tumor can strike you in the prime of your life. You're healthy, you're
thriving, but you lose the things that make you human, that make you the person
you are. Your personality isn't the same. You lose the ability to understand
your environment, to even manipulate language."

   He picks up a glass of water, slowly turning it in his hand.

   "To be able to use your physical ability to pick up this glass of water, but
to not know what it is . . . I cannot think of a worse tragedy that can happen
to you."

   The UCLA School of Medicine recruited Black, 37, just more than seven
yearsago from the University of Michigan to lead its efforts to relieve that
tragedy -- to build a brain tumor program where none had existed.

   "His contribution is spectacular," says Dr. Donald Becker, UCLA's chief of
neurosurgery, who co-directs the program with Black. "He has exceeded all
expectations. He's a superstar in our field."

   Others echo that assessment: One patient calls him "a miracle worker," a
colleague calls him "a brilliant surgeon," and a UCLA staffer treads to the
threshold of blasphemy, whispering: "He's a god."

   And those familiar with his flying, sky-diving, scuba-diving, mountain
climbing and white-water rafting only half-jokingly call him "Indiana Black," a
nod to the swashbuckling adventurer within the compassionate healer.

   Tramping through freezing Himalayan streams and plucking leeches from his
sodden feet were once as irresistible to Black as his work developing techniques
to deliver higher concentrations of drugs to a tumor. Plunging into a South
Asian jungle aboard an elephant or watching a meteor light up the sky from atop
Tanzania's Mt. Kilimanjaro touched an important corner of his psyche.

   "My basic philosophy ever since high school has been that I want to have as
many experiences in life as I can," Black says. "I wanted to be able to
incorporate into my way of thinking all the knowledge I could acquire."

   But three years ago, he put aside jumping out of airplanes and dodging
avalanches. "I felt I owed it to my kids to not do that anymore," he says. So he
now focuses on sailing with his wife, Dr. Carol Bennett, a urologist at USC's
medical school, their 6-year-old daughter, Teal, and son, Keith, 4.

   "A couple of years ago, we never saw each other," says Bennett, who met Black
during her residency at the University of Michigan.

   Weekends are now jealously guarded "family time," devoted to exploring
museums and bookstores or just enjoying their Bel-Air home on a ridge above the
new Getty Center. They have spent carefully planned summer vacations sailing the
Caribbean and will take time off this year to sail in the South Pacific with
their children.

   Sitting at the dining room table on a recent afternoon, Bennett kids her
husband about working on the affluent Westside while she goes "Downtown, where
the real people are. I make the commute. He runs down the hill."

   At work in the operating rooms in the bowels of UCLA Medical Center, Black
has become what is known in sports jargon as the "go to guy," the clutch player
to whom other neurosurgeons send their toughest cases.

   "Guys with big reputations usually can't do surgery worth a damn because they
got those reputations by writing a lot of journal articles," says Dr. James
Ditchick, 40, an Encino anesthesiologist whose tumor Black removed four years
ago. "Keith walks the walk. He's doing these surgeries every day. That's why
he's as good as he is."

   Rosemarie Rabin Epstein went to Black last year in a wheelchair, which was
the result, she says, of steroids prescribed after brain surgery three years
ago. She had lost the use of her right leg and the peripheral vision on her
right side.

   "Dr. Black, to me, was a miracle worker," says Epstein, 71, an environmental
planner from Marina del Rey. "I had been everywhere with this thing, and he was
able to do what several doctors could not. He brought me from the jaws of death
and gave me back a life almost like the one I had."

   Dr. Jack Barchas, formerly dean of research and neuroscience at UCLA School
of Medicine, calls Black a "brilliant surgeon with extraordinary compassion."

   UCLA's brain tumor program, with five surgeons and four residents, performs
400 surgeries a year -- up from 50 a year when Black arrived. He does half the
operations and has helped recruit a research team that, Black says, puts the
program "on the verge of making some really major breakthroughs" in the
treatment of tumors.

   Perhaps because of the gravity of his work, Black maintains an exterior cool.
But he can barely contain his excitement when talking about UCLA's gene therapy
research. He predicts that advances made there and at such centers as UC San
Francisco and Johns Hopkins University will make malignant brain tumors curable
within 10 years.

   "He has led the development of a very exciting program in laboratory and
clinical research at UCLA," says Dr. Edward Oldfield, chief of surgical

   neurology at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. "Certainly
UCLA is one of the national centers in the research and treatment of brain
tumors."

   *

   Black was born in Tuskegee, Ala., only because no hospital in the family's
hometown of Auburn would admit African Americans. This was an Alabama where
outdated, hand-me-down textbooks were sent to black schools after white students
had worn them out.

   But at Boykin Street Elementary School, where Black's father was principal
and his mother taught first grade, the books were new.

   "My dad would not compromise," Black says. "They wanted to deliver stale
bread for the lunch program, but fresh bread to white schools. He just said,
'I'm not going to (accept) that.' "

   Instead, Black's father integrated his staff, built the best library in the
system and offered French to elementary school students.

   "He was quite ahead of his time for Alabama," Black says.

   So was his son.

   By third grade, Keith was dissecting birds and frogs, studying the hearts of
chickens and cows, building rockets and weather stations -- all on his own.

   "I still played basketball, football and did all those things," he says. "I
didn't grow up isolated, but there was always a very clear affinity for
science."

   By eighth grade, after his family moved to the Cleveland suburb of Shaker
Heights, Keith was hanging around medical research labs. In high school he did
organ transplants and heart valve replacements on dogs at a lab where he worked.

   "At first I was suturing," he says. "Pretty soon, I was doing the entire
operation myself. That gave me a tremendous exposure to surgery and a lot of
confidence to work with my hands and operate at a very early age."

   As a senior at Shaker Heights High School, he delivered a scientific paper to
a conference of cardiologists -- a project that won him a Westinghouse National
Science Award -- before heading off to a six-year program leading to a medical
degree at Michigan.

   In Ann Arbor, he met Dr. Otelio S. (O.T.) Randall, an African American
cardiologist, who became his mentor. "He was, in my mind, the ultimate academic
physician," Black says. "He had a real compassion for teaching, for advancing
African Americans -- particularly in medicine but also in other areas. He was a
fantastic doctor, a great scientist . . . everything I wanted to be. I wanted to
be O.T. Randall."

   Black went to work in Randall's lab, designing his own research projects,
talking through the night about navigating medical school politics, listening to
John Coltrane.

   "Keith did not have his drive blunted by some big lab telling him he was not
smart enough," says Randall, now a professor of medicine at Howard University in
Washington, D.C. "He came to my lab. I was stupid enough to tell him we could do
anything. It didn't take long for him to begin to see how he could make my lab
better."

   Black, who graduated in the top 5% of his med school class, had planned to
become a cardiologist, but he was soon seduced by the brain.

   "To me, the brain is just the most fascinating system in the universe --
biological, physical or otherwise," he says. "Once I began to see that, I said,
this is the way I want to go."

   That voyage took him into computer science, electrical engineering, courses
in artificial intelligence, philosophy, religion and up to the brink of
mysticism.

   "What I really want to do -- if I can do anything with my life -- is define
consciousness," he says. "What is this whole mind/brain phenomenon?"

   He found himself studying more and more, he says, but learning less and less;
details heaped upon minute details -- but still no answers. He confronted the
question: Does an organism have to be more complex than the one it is trying to
understand in order to understand it?

   "I may be able to completely understand an amoeba, but can I completely
understand myself?" he wonders.

   He eventually put the question aside, choosing to turn his attention to
"something where I can do some good for people. I started working on strokes."

   But a trace of the mystic remains.

   "Scientists are basically art critics, in my view," he says. "If you want to
understand the artist, look at his art. When I operate and look at the structure
of the brain under the microscope, what I'm looking at is God's art."

   *

   About 20,000 people die each year in this country from primary brain tumors,
those which originate in the brain, Black says. Factor in tumors that migrate to
the brain from other sites, and that number jumps to 200,000.

   Half of all primary brain tumors are benign, but even those can be fatal,
Black says. In the past 10 years, breakthroughs in research and new surgical
techniques have enabled neurosurgeons to cure benign tumors. Such advances have
also allowed many patients with aggressive malignant tumors to enjoy years of
quality life.

   During his study of strokes at Michigan, Black began exploring how to breach
the blood-brain barrier, which prevents toxic levels of drugs from reaching
normal tissue. "That defense is great under normal conditions," he says. But it
also prevents cancer-fighting drugs from reaching tumors.

   Once at UCLA, Black continued to focus on the blood-brain barrier, using
compounds called leukotrienes to pioneer a technique to penetrate it. The more
effective compounds he has since developed can deliver even higher
concentrations of drugs directly to the tumor without harming healthy brain
tissue.

   UCLA is also one of only two brain tumor centers in the country developing an
open magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner that will ultimately give surgeons
a real-time image of the brain as they operate. Using the scanner, surgeons can
already insert a probe through a pinhole in the skull and destroy some tumors
with lasers or radio waves, Black says.

   Aerospace engineers can create a cruise missile that can hit a small target
200 miles away, he says. "What we're saying is that we need that kind of
accuracy in surgery."

   Ten years ago, patients "wouldn't come out of brain surgery in good shape,"
he says. Loss of vision or paralysis was common. "Complications are very rare
now in the 400 surgeries done at UCLA each year," he says. Patients typically
spend only one night in intensive care, and many go home the next day.

   As UCLA forges ahead on the blood-brain barrier and the open MRI scanner,
Black expects the research team's work on gene therapy to contribute to a cure
for malignant tumors.

   "The way a brain tumor survives, unlike most other cancers, is that it
suppresses the immune system," Black says. "A brain tumor cell says: 'I'm going
to make a chemical compound that's going to turn your immune system off so that
it cannot get to me.' "

   The body constantly develops cancer cells, he explains, but a healthy immune
system detects and kills them. The gene therapy research involves taking tumor
cells from dead laboratory mice and implanting a gene in them that blocks the
cells' ability to turn off the immune system. These cells are then re-injected
in mice with brain tumors. Now, the animals' immune systems can recognize all
the tumor cells and destroy them. In tests so far, all of the animals have
lived.

   UCLA researchers can now say to tumor cells: "I understand how you work. I
understand how you live," Black says. "I can insert a gene that will now allow
my immune system to recognize you -- to divide up and build an army of cells
that will seek and find and kill you. And only you."

   He expects UCLA to receive permission from the National Institutes of Health
to begin human trials with the therapy early next year.

   Brain surgeons now have "tremendous technical ability," Black says. "We do
things now that are really quite amazing, that we didn't think we could do five,
10 years ago."

   But there are times, he says, when part of his role is to be "friend, adviser
and family counselor," to tell patients and relatives when to back off.

   "If I can keep your intellect intact, if I can keep you functioning at a high
level, we'll do whatever we can," he says. "But when the quality isn't there
anymore, and I don't have the ability to give it back to you, then it's not
worth pushing forward."

   Los Angeles attorney Cynthia McClain-Hill says her mother was one of those
cases. She learned of her mother's tumor about a month after giving birth to son
Gregory.

   "He maintained her quality of life for as long as he could," she says of
Black. "He treats patients, and he treats families."

   Her mother died two years ago, but Gregory, now 5, can talk about his
grandmother, and recognizes her picture.

   Black gave her mother three "very good years," McClain-Hill says. "He doesn't
play a death game. He plays a life game."



   Dr. Keith L. Black Age: 37.

   Background: Born in Tuskegee, Ala. Lives in Bel-Air.

   Family: Married to Dr. Carol Bennett, a urologist at the USC School of
Medicine. Two children: daughter Teal, 6, son Keith, 4.

   Passions: Research, surgery, teaching, patient care.

   Hobbies: sailing, collecting African art, exploring museums.

   On patients: "They're the real heroes, some of the bravest people I've ever
met, and some of the best teachers. I've learned that if you understand what
real quality of life is, you can live a lifetime in a year."

   On working with physicians in research labs as a teen-ager: "The key is
persistence. A lot of labs would just say, 'Go away.' But if you knock on 100
doors, you're going to find one guy who'll say, 'Come on in.' "

   On the art of surgery: "It takes more than just understanding the techniques
(to be a great surgeon). That comes from inside. You cannot teach someone to be
John Coltrane."

   On living in Los Angeles: "L.A. is, I think, one of the best cities --
particularly if you're African American -- to raise a family, although people
say the reverse. It's hard to find a place, at least in the United States,
that's more tolerant of diversity than Los Angeles."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, "I think a malignant brain tumor is the worst disease you
can have," says Dr. Keith Black. " . . . I cannot think of a worse tragedy that
can happen to you." ; Photo, COLOR, Black does about half of the 400 yearly
operations. ; Photo, COLOR, Dr. Keith Black gets a warm thank-you pat from a
patient who's just out of the operating room. ; Photo, COLOR, He quit jumping
from planes and dodging avalanches because of his kids. Now Black enjoys tamer
sports, like football with Teal and Keith. ; Photo, COLOR, Says the
neurosurgeon: " . . . The brain is just the most fascinating system in the
universe -- biological, physical or otherwise. Once I began to see that, I said,
this is the way I want to go." KIRK MCKOY / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995


                             303 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                  May 28, 1995, Sunday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1606 words

HEADLINE: ALL UCI MEDICAL RESEARCH FUNDING AT RISK IN SCANDAL

BYLINE: By ALICIA DI RAD; LESLIE BERKMAN, TAEHAN CHANG,; MICHAEL GRANBERRY,
TIMES STAFF WRITERS

DATELINE: IRVINE

BODY:

   Less than a year into her tenure as the chancellor of UC Irvine, Laurel L.
Wilkening expressed the fervent hope that Orange County's leading institution of
higher learning could become one of the top 50 research universities in the
country by 2000.

   But that was 1994, well before the startling revelations that Dr. Ricardo H.
Asch and his partners allegedly transplanted patients' eggs without consent and
conducted human-subject research without permission. Well before the university
sued Asch and two of his colleagues.

   Now, the Center for Reproductive Health and even UC Irvine itself are under a
cloud. Some fertility experts and medical ethicists predicted last week that the
scandal might have a far-reaching impact, extending beyond the university to the
research world as a whole.

   However, the most devastating impact is likely to end up here, where UC
Irvine's troubles have not only put the school under a microscope for possible
research violations, but also for possible crimes.

   The Orange County district attorney has opened an investigation, as have the
campus police and the California Medical Board. Perhaps mindful of the pending
litigation, few of the school's administrators have addressed the subject
publicly.

   But some acknowledge that, regardless of how it's perceived, the controversy
poses serious problems in the short term and casts doubt over the school's
ability to fund and conduct research in the long term -- and not just research
limited to infertility.

   "Fundamentally, all of the research depends on federal grants from either the
(National Institutes of Health) or the National Science Foundation," said Carl
Cotman, director of the UC Irvine Brain Aging Institute, which has been hailed
for its pioneering work on Alzheimer's disease.

   Indeed, the NIH views the unfolding developments at UC Irvine with "great
concern," Don Ralbovsky, a spokesman for the agency, said last week.

   "I don't want to prejudge the situation," Ralbovsky said. "I can't say UC
Irvine's funding is in any jeopardy. But our Office for the Protection of
Research Risks is looking at the situation very carefully. It's just not clear
at this point if a violation occurred."

   If the allegations against Asch and his colleagues are proven, UC Irvine runs
the risk of losing all of its funding for medical research, according to Dr.
Joseph Gambone, director of the fertility center at the UCLA School of Medicine.

   "It doesn't take much of an infringement for the (NIH) to just stop the
funding -- all of it," Gambone said. "They're pretty strict. If you don't follow
their regulations, they have a tendency to come down pretty hard."

   And without NIH funding, Gambone said, universities could scarcely function,
at least in terms of research. He noted that UCLA, for instance, receives
"hundreds of millions of dollars" from the NIH, which has an annual budget in
the tens of billions of dollars.

   "What they end up doing generally is punishing the institution as a whole,"
Gambone said. "They have a tendency to say, 'You should have been more
vigilant.' "

   Ralbovsky said that, theoretically, Gambone is right: Although no NIH money
went specifically to Asch's center, it is the institution as a whole that agrees
to meet "all federal guidelines" when obtaining government assistance.

   In the 1993-94 academic year alone, UC Irvine received about $38.6 million
from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and about 90% of that
came from the NIH, according to Karen Newell Young, a spokeswoman for the
university.

   Young said that about $11 million of the total was used for research
"involving human subjects." Gambone said that any threat to such a large chunk
of its funding pie could devastate a university, especially one with such an
ambitious game plan.

   Cotman, director of the Brain Aging Institute, guardedly agreed, using his
own school as an example.

   Cotman's institute alone receives more than $1 million a year in federal
grants for research on studying more efficient ways to diagnose Alzheimer's
disease. He said the university is now rated among the top 12 in the country in
neuroscience research.

   But he predicted that the swift action by Wilkening will have a lasting
impact in terms of righting the university and ensuring that the fertility
crisis reaches no farther than the doorstep of the Center for Reproductive
Health. He cited the university's own investigation and the filing a lawsuit
against the doctors as examples of the fast action.

   "What the chancellor did was act in a responsible fashion (to address the
allegations)," Cotman said, "which I agree with. I would emphasize that the
university did its job."

   Others are not so charitable. Several bioethicists have criticized the
university for delaying action for months. The executive director of the Medical
Board of California has said he would have been glad to use his office's
subpoena powers to help university officials obtain medical records crucial to
their investigation. But the agency was never asked, he said.

   Wilkening remained silent last week as the university took the extraordinary
step of filing a lawsuit against three of its prominent researchers.

   Other experts from around the country agreed that, in terms of preserving the
university's reputation and its dignity -- and, most of all, its funding -- the
kind of response Cotman described is the only kind that federal agencies will
tolerate from an institution beset by scandal.

   Robert Levine, a professor at the Yale University School of Medicine, said
other schools -- such as Harvard University and the University of Minnesota --
have recovered from major research crises of their own, and that it needn't be
the end of the world.

   To condemn a university such as UC Irvine because of the alleged misdeeds of
a few "is like saying the United States is an evil society because somebody blew
up a government building," Levine said. "Like every other institution, there are
some who don't follow the rules."

   Nevertheless, the misdeeds of a few can have a domino effect on the
university as a whole, creating not only potential financial problems but also a
sense of psychological ennui.

   "When there's a story that something went wrong at a university, it can be
very demoralizing to the people within the institution," he added. "What the
effect will be in the long run is hard to predict."

   As chairman of Yale's institutional review board overseeing human subjects,
Levine said that once irregularities are reported, reviewers have the
responsibility to talk to researchers to help them fix their faulty methods or,
in extreme cases, to turn matters over to federal officials to eradicate the
problem quickly.

   He said that, in most scenarios, the only time federal grants to an
institution are threatened is "if the institution itself is out of line."

   Sidney H. Golub, UC Irvine's executive vice chancellor, said he believes the
university's image might actually end up benefiting, because of the quick way it
investigated allegations of research misconduct and took steps to prevent a
repeat of the same abuses or mistakes as alleged.

   At the same time, the California Medical Board has accused the university of
reporting nothing until news of the scandal reached the press. Golub defended
even that action, saying the school had hoped to remedy the problem in private,
free from the glare of the media.

   "We weren't the ones who chose to go public with this," he said, "and it is
with great reluctance that we filed a lawsuit," which he contended was necessary
to gain access to records allegedly withheld by the clinic's doctors.

   In the end, Golub said, "We will be known as a university that cares very
deeply about having patients protected in our human subjects research, and that
will attract faculty here that have those same ethical ideas. I don't think this
will hurt us."

   He said that other institutions, including the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, the University of San Diego and the University of Pittsburgh, have
survived research scandals. Even Gambone's UCLA has survived scandals and kept
its funding intact.

   In 1980, oncology professor Martin J. Cline proposed a gene therapy
experiment on people with beta-thalassemia, a genetic blood disorder. Gene
therapy was extremely controversial at the time, and a UCLA review board turned
down his studies. So, Cline went to Italy and Israel and performed experiments
there, unsuccessfully. The NIH disciplined Cline by requiring him to undergo a
more thorough review when he applied for grant monies.

   In 1991, a 23-year-old man who was the subject of a UCLA Medical Center
psychiatric study on schizophrenia was found dead after he jumped off the roof
of a classroom building. After a three-year investigation, NIH officials found
that UCLA had violated aspects of the "informed consent" rules governing
human-subject experimentation.

   But despite the problems, UCLA has maintained its standing among the nation's
leading recipients of grant monies.

   Even so, the allegations against Asch pose a problem for the entire
biomedical industry, in the view of Gladys White, director of the National
Advisory Board on Ethics and Reproduction in Washington.

   "Any time there is an absence of a meaningful process of maintaining and
ensuring informed consent," White said, "it has a chilling effect on all
research efforts, because the public trust is lost. I'd have to say this is a
very serious problem, not only for Dr. Asch and UC Irvine but for any researcher
who needs to use that kind of human material. Only time will tell what the final
impact will be."

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995


                             304 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     May 25, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1342 words

HEADLINE: AIDS researcher's move to city may be a big draw

BYLINE: Douglas Birch and Jonathan Bor, Sun Staff Writers

BODY:


   Dr. Robert C. Gallo's planned move to Baltimore, hailed yesterday by state
and city officials, will throw an international spotlight on AIDS research in
this region and could draw other prominent scientists and biotechnology firms.

   "Maryland will have the premier center for the study of human viruses in the
country, if not in the entire world," crowed Gov. Parris N. Glendening, in
announcing Dr. Gallo's tentative decision yesterday at a Baltimore news
conference.

   Dr. Gallo, 58, whose lab first showed that the human immunodeficiency virus
causes AIDS, would locate his Institute of Human Virology at the University of
Maryland's Medical Biotechnology Center. Negotiations continue on details of the
agreement, but state officials are confident they can close the deal.

   James G. Brady, secretary of the state's Department of Economic and
Employment Development, said the decision "establishes us as a state that is
just going to play the game of economic development at a different level."

   "It's very exciting," said Dr. David J. Ramsay, president of the University
of Maryland at Baltimore, where institute scientists will hold faculty posts.
"Almost overnight, this is going to become one of the best places in the
country."

   Several months ago, Dr. Gallo and two colleagues -- epidemiologist William
Blattner and clinical researcher Robert Redfield -- decided to leave government
and find a niche where they could continue their research and spin off companies
that would market their discoveries.

   Both Dr. Gallo and Dr. Blattner work at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda. Dr. Redfield works at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research.

   A small pack of research institutions in four states set off in pursuit of
what the journal Science has called "the AIDS dream team." But the University of
Maryland has apparently won the bidding.

   Mr. Glendening said the effort involved Oriole and Baysox games, a dinner at
Government House and "serious, hard-line, bottom-line negotiations."

   To lure Dr. Gallo, the state pledged $ 9 million, or $ 3 million for each of
the next three years, out of its Sunny Day economic development fund. Baltimore
threw in an additional $ 3 million -- $ 1 million a year over the same period --
from an unspecified source.

   Dr. Gallo, who is retiring July 1 after 30 years at the National Institutes
of Health, said he hopes to have his institute running by fall. Eventually, he
said, its labs could employ as many as 300 people.

   Other states offered more money, Dr. Gallo said, but he and his colleagues
chose Maryland for several reasons.

   Baltimore's AIDS epidemic is one draw, providing a pool of subjects for
clinical research.

   In greeting Dr. Gallo's decision, Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke noted yesterday that
AIDS is the leading cause of death among the city's young adults and predicted
Baltimore would play a major role in "ending this plague."

   Dr. Gallo said his decision evolved in relative calm last weekend while he
was attending scientific meetings in Israel.

   He said the trip had been a "reflective" time for him.

   "I was having dinner in some gardens in Israel with some people who really
care about me," he said. His friends, he said, began to tell him what he already
felt:

   Working close to his home in Bethesda would be less traumatic than moving far
away. He needed to work in a big city, and Baltimore was a good medical town. He
was impressed with the University of Maryland hospital system. He had grown to
like the political and academic leaders who were courting him.

   "This was the best situation," he said.

   He flew home Monday and invited Dr. Blattner and Dr. Redfield to a quiet
dinner in his back yard. They talked about the competing institutions, weighing
pros and cons of each. Then, without warning, his colleagues reached in their
pockets and pulled out letters of intent from the state of Maryland.

   They had already signed. After some thought, Dr. Gallo said, "Let's do it."

   Dr. Gallo said his group will focus on the development of vaccines, gene
therapies and new drugs for AIDS, as well as gaining a better understanding of
the basic biology of the disease.

   "We want to bring better therapies, we want to catalyze the development of a
vaccine," he said.

   The team will also continue studies of cancer viruses and neurological
diseases that have viral origins.

   All of this should be easier to accomplish in Baltimore than at the NIH, Dr.
Gallo said, because he will not only have modern laboratories but direct access
to patients seeking care at the hospital and associated clinics. Although he ran
the largest laboratory at the National Cancer Institute, he said he felt limited
by his research orientation and rarely saw patients.

   As an example of his current work, Dr. Gallo cited recent findings that could
lead to an effective treatment for Kaposi's sarcoma, a painful tumor often seen
in gay men infected with the AIDS virus.

   Dr. Gallo and a colleague isolated a hormone that keeps pregnant women from
developing the tumor. Injected into mice, the hormone shrank established tumors.
It is now being tested in humans.

   There is one potential snag to closing the deal. The institute is expected to
occupy about 40 percent of the new six-story Medical Biotechnology Center, a
former warehouse on West Lombard Street that is being renovated into modern
labs.

   Contractors recently discovered that lead contaminated some of the building's
steel girders. Cleanup of the problem has delayed construction work.

   Dr. Gallo said a lengthy wait might jeopardize the deal.

   "We will leave [NIH] when the building becomes available," he said. "If it's
delayed after October, that could cause some very serious problems. I don't want
to waste a lot of time."

   A university spokesman said yesterday that construction is not likely to be
held up more than four weeks.

   Meanwhile, officials are optimistic. "The discussions have been deep enough
so the likelihood of the deal souring are at best remote," Mr. Brady said.
"There has been a real meeting of the minds. . . I am supremely confident that
this is not going to go off track."

   The governor and others who courted Dr. Gallo never voiced concerns about the
scientific controversy that has clung to the assertive and blunt-spoken Dr.
Gallo, parties on both sides of the negotiations said.

   The NIH researcher and French scientist Dr. Luc Montagnier claimed to have
discovered the AIDS virus. The two shared the credit for the finding, which led
to a screening test now routinely used to diagnose patients and identify tainted
blood supplies.

   Later, Dr. Montagnier charged that Dr. Gallo actually used a sample of the
French virus when he claimed to have made an independent discovery. Dr. Gallo
said his virus had accidentally become contaminated with Dr. Mantagnier's.
Although the NIH and a Congressional committee conducted investigations, no
sanctions were ever brought in the case.

   Yesterday, Dr. Gallo said he had tried to put the issue behind him, but media
distortions had made that impossible.

   Despite the controversy, other researchers respect Dr. Gallo's acumen.

   "He's an investigator who has an extraordinary track record for scientific
discovery," said Dr. John Bartlett, chief of infectious diseases at the Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine.

   Dr. David Wheeler, director of the adult HIV program at the University of
Maryland Medical Center, said the Gallo entourage should accomplish in one year
what ordinarily takes universities a decade to build.

   "It's going to really help us to have an expansion of our basic science
research and increase the prominence of the researchers working here."

   Although somewhat overshadowed by the AIDS work at Hopkins,the University of
Maryland has quietly been expanding its capacity to care for people infected
with HIV.

   With the AIDS epidemic taking an ever-increasing toll on Baltimore, the
center now cares for 600 to 700 infected people on an outpatient basis and 25 to
30 people in hospital beds.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, MARK BUGNASKI/SUN STAFF PHOTO, Dr. Robert C. Gallo plans
to move to Baltimore; MAP, JEF DAUBER/SUN STAFF GRAPHIC, DR. ROBERT C. GALLO'S
NEW LABORATORIES AT THE MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY CENTER.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1995


                             305 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                             May 25, 1995, Thursday

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 780 words

HEADLINE: The Scientists Who Would Alter Human Genetic Codes

BYLINE: By Peter N. Spotts; Peter Spotts, a Monitor staff writer, regularly
covers science issues.

BODY:

   ALTERED FATES: GENE THERAPY AND THE RETOOLING OF HUMAN LIFE

   By Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner

   W.W. Norton & Company

   636 pp. $ 27.50

   Leaf through the pages of any newspaper or magazine, and human genetics is
seldom far from the front page or cover. From disputes over the accuracy of
blood tests in the O.J. Simpson trial to discoveries of the latest
disease-related gene and the promise held out for gene therapies, molecular
biology is big news, and, increasingly, big business.

   Yet seldom do readers get any view, let alone a clear one, into how these
developments come about. Nor does daily coverage uncover the clashing egos and
agendas that can fuel the competition to develop the genetic ''magic bullets''
that researchers hope to incorporate into a person's genetic makeup, which they
hope will cure -- perhaps for all time -- some of the most insidious diseases
facing humanity. Such views might be less important in another subject area. But
gene therapies involve changing the molecules inside the body that form the
unique genetic blueprint for every human being. It pays to know who is revising
the drawings.

   ''Altered Fates: Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life'' is an
engrossing, thought-provoking remedy to these shortcomings. The book is laden,
though not leaden, with richly descriptive detail: ''Inside, countless billions
of microbial lab assistants, E. coli bacteria, grow up cozily and happily with
new genes spliced in, forming colonies, making foreign proteins, and dividing
like mad in gamy little dishes of agar jelly that smell like a high school boy's
gym locker.'' As if to drill into readers the horror of certain diseases, the
authors also provide occasional graphic descriptions of symptoms -- not entirely
necessary for the story.

   But the authors also display a sense of pacing that prevents such detail from
turning into a morass that might send a reader packing.

   The book divides roughly into two parts: the first dealing with the people
and events that led to the first experiments in altering a human's genes for
therapeutic reasons; the second, a broader look at the biomedical field and the
economic and ethical issues raised by genetic engineering in humans.

   In many ways, the first part makes the most compelling reading because it
offers a rare verbal diorama of the struggle between two eminent scientists over
the first gene-therapy experiments.

   William French Anderson, a brilliant, driven biochemist at the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), led the four-member team that conducted the first
experiments. One is never clear how much of his effort is driven by concern for
his patients and how much by ambition to make his mark in the field -- even as
he is hailed by the families of volunteers who take part in his experiments.

   On the other side is Richard Mulligan, a biologist at MIT's Whitehead
Institute in Cambridge, Mass., who also sees promise in genetic therapies. He
challenges the quality and rigor of the research that lay behind Dr. Anderson's
efforts to begin gene-therapy experiments on humans.

   In the meetings leading up to NIH approval of Anderson's experiments (which
in turn led to a flood of subsequent approvals), it was a contest between
clinicians, who daily face patients they can no longer help, and scientists, who
demanded fewer uncertainties than Anderson's proposals could deliver. Dr.
Mulligan says: ''What [Anderson] has done is gain acceptance by the public of
the idea of gene therapy. That's positive... But he has not spawned any good
experiments. We still don't know if gene therapy is really safe or not. We're
still not a step ahead clinically. The science so far has been abysmal.''

   Sour grapes or useful warning? Perhaps both. Meanwhile, research proceeds
along several fronts, as do the growing commercial and political interests in
exploiting the fruits of that research -- as the authors describe in later
chapters. They end with their own warning: ''...Most nightmarish scenarios
ignore the innate good sense of people; common sense and an instinct for fair
play, backed by the power of federal laws, it is assumed, will enable us to do
good and protect us from doing ill. Nevertheless, the body politic still works
its will through its representatives in government and the judiciary. These
representatives in turn are influenced by powerful forces in the professions,
business, and academe. The rather inglorious way that the scientific and
administrative elite are handling the earliest fruits of gene therapy is
ominous.''

   A second Pulitzer on this subject may be in order for this Chicago Tribune
writing team, following one for journalism in 1987.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Book cover information.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1995, Friday


                             306 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      May 25, 1995, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: San Gabriel Valley; Part J; Page 6

LENGTH: 263 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE;
INSTITUTE WRESTLES WITH THORNY ETHICAL ISSUES

BYLINE: By RENEE TAWA, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Suppose that genetic research advances to the point where a doctor can
predict that a 25-year-old mother will contract breast cancer.

   How should the doctor tell her? What if the patient wants more children? Is
the information confidential, or should she tell her employer and insurance
company?

   This week, the City of Hope National Medical Center opened the Institute for
Applied Health Care Ethics as a place to wrestle with such thorny questions. The
institute, on the City of Hope's 100-acre Duarte campus, will bring together
scientists, ethics scholars, doctors and others to debate the ethics of gene
therapy and other medical breakthroughs, said director Rabbi Norman T. Mendel.

   "We want to put human values on the same level as progressive science and
advanced medicine," Mendel said.

   City of Hope officials have talked about setting up an ethics institute as
medical advances continue to raise ethical questions, Mendel said. The institute
will be funded by the City of Hope, but will seek other funding through
foundations and corporate grants.

   Mendel said that within the next few years the institute's funding needs will
exceed $1 million.

   The institute will sponsor regional, national and international conferences
on medical ethics. Its first event, a five-day conference on gene therapy,
opened Sunday.

   City of Hope, a cancer hospital and research center, is a leader in the field
of gene therapy. In 1992, the hospital opened the Center for Gene Therapy with a
$3-million grant from the National Institutes of Health and National Cancer
Institute.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1995


                             307 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     May 24, 1995, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1843 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE: COMPUTING / TECHNOLOGY / INNOVATION;
GENETIC BACKLASH;
BIOTECH INDUSTRY, CRITICS CLASH IN THE ETHICS ARENA

BYLINE: By LESLIE HELM, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   When a powerful group of religious leaders last week called for a ban on the
patenting of life forms, it was not merely asking for a change in obscure
intellectual property laws. It was, more broadly, calling for a public debate on
a range of ethical questions raised by contemporary biotechnology research.

   Judging by the reactions of scientists and executives gathered here this week
for the annual Biotechnology Industry Organization conference, the industry
remains determined to avoid any such discussion. There were bitter attacks on
Jeremy Rifkin, the activist credited with putting together the religious
coalition, and an acknowledgment of the need "to educate the public about our
industry," in the words of G. Kirk Raab, chief executive of Genentech.

   But there appeared to be little recognition of the potential for public
backlash against an industry whose underlying technology clearly raises real
ethical questions. In addition, expectations about what the technology can
deliver have been raised so high that disappointment is almost inevitable. While
there may be plenty of fear mongering among biotech opponents -- particularly in
regard to agricultural biotechnology -- even people who are sympathetic to
biotech worry that the industry is asking for trouble.

   "Individual researchers or companies can't make the call about when it's
appropriate to use technology or whether it's appropriate that naturally
occurring genetic information can be patented," says Cynthia Robbins-Roth,
editor of BioVenture View, an industry newsletter. As society did with nuclear
power, she notes, people can move suddenly against something they fear and don't
understand.

   "If something is scary, the public can shut down an industry," Robbins-Roth
says. "Industry should promote discussion instead of hoping nobody takes
notice."

   The 200-plus religious leaders, including Catholic priests, Protestant
ministers, Jewish rabbis and others, have specifically attacked current policies
that enable scientists to patent organisms created though genetic alteration or
isolated in the course of genetic research. They say such patents violate the
sanctity of life by allowing man to play God. But industry researchers say such
patent protection is essential if they are to raise the money needed for
development of bioengineered drugs.

   This is just one of the thorny, here-and-now ethical issues resulting from
profit-driven genetic engineering. As the biotech industry has come up with a
few important -- and, not incidentally, highly lucrative -- drugs, it has also
created some difficult societal problems.

   Genetic testing is one example. Tests that can predict whether someone is
likely to develop a disease based on inherited genes have only recently become
available, but the Council for Responsible Genetics, a Cambridge, Mass.-based
group representing scientists and academics critical of industry practices, has
already documented dozens of cases of discrimination.

   Some states, including California, have passed laws against discriminating in
the workplace on the basis of such tests. But the issue becomes more complicated
when it comes to insurance companies that are aggressively fighting for the
right to use genetic tests to determine whether or not to sell an individual
insurance. Thousands of people could one day find themselves unable to get
insurance because of a genetic trait.

   Insurance companies have long used medical "predictors" of health such as
blood pressure, and there is no compelling reason to deny the use of genetic
tests, says Arno Motulsky, professor of medicine and genetics at the University
of Washington and chairman of a National Academy of Science committee that
published an extensive report on the issue last year.

   And if only patients have access to the results of genetic tests, high-risk
patients could choose to take out disability insurance in large numbers. "The
only answer is some kind of universal health insurance," Motulsky says.

   There is also increasing revulsion against experiments that involve putting
human genes in pigs, either to produce leaner meat or so their organs can be
more easily transplanted into humans.

   The federal government announced this month that it will regulate experiments
involving transplants of baboon organs into humans. But the decision came only
after wide publicity, including a best-selling book, about the danger of viruses
from primates crossing over into human populations -- as AIDS is suspected of
having done.

   Perhaps the greatest fear is that technology advances will enable scientists
to spawn a generation of people with genes that would make them somehow
"better," reminding some of work done by scientists in Nazi Germany.

   Industry executives dismiss such fears as nonsense.

   "We know how to work on the germ line, but we won't do it. We are holding the
line," says George Rathmann, chief executive of Bothell, Wash., biotech start-up
ICOS, referring to work on human ovaries that might one day permit genetic
changes in humans that could be passed on from generation to generation.

   "If you tried to change the human germ line, it would change the human
species," says Rathmann. "We don't want people horsing around in that."

   But industry executives' eschewing of the research is partly due to the fact
that the technology is still decades from being commercially viable. In the
world of basic research, the line is already being blurred. Scientists are doing
extensive germ line research on mice that has applications for humans. And at
the National Institutes of Health, scientists suggest that altering genes might
be acceptable, for example, if the goal was to eliminate hereditary disease.

   In a 1993 article in Science, Nelson Wivel of the NIH argued that each
technology moves from threshold to open conflict to extended debate and
adaptation, and that germ line research is now at the threshold stage.

   Once a line is crossed and technology becomes available, it is difficult to
prevent its use for purposes that might be medically more questionable.

   That's what happened with the human growth hormone Somatrem. Eli Lilly and
Genentech received permission in 1985 to sell human growth hormones to cure the
medical condition that results in dwarfism.

   Today the treatment, which costs $20,000 a year and requires three shots
weekly, is being prescribed by doctors, with industry backing, to thousands of
normal children whose parents worry their youngsters will grow up too short.
Rather than call an end to the practice, the NIH is financing an extensive study
to see whether the treatment is effective on normal children.

   Many people believe medicine has "no right to be mucking about with people
who are normal," says Ernest Prentice, an ethicist at the University of
Nebraska's Omaha Medical Center. The center, along with many others in the
nation, decided it was unethical to participate in the NIH study.

   Gene therapy is another area of concern. In this technology, a gene is
inserted into a human to replace a disease-causing gene. Such therapy has saved
three babies with Bubble Baby Syndrome, a condition in which a newborn's
defective immune system requires it to be kept isolated to protect it from
germs. Critics fear that as gene therapy becomes more common, some practitioners
could promote its use for non-medical reasons such as changing skin or eye
color.

   Critics say that if restrictions on the use of such technology are to be
developed, they must be designed before the technology becomes widely available
and segments of the population can argue that they have a right to the
technology.

   For this reason, the campaign against gene patents may well be too late. It
is difficult to overturn a decade of legal practice: Hundreds of patents have
already been issued.

   "It's like saying, 'We survived when we had just horses and carriages, why
not get rid of airplanes,' " says Gladys Monroy, an attorney for Morrison &
Foerster, a San Francisco-based law firm. "You can't go back."

   Industry executives say any effort to regulate the industry or hold back
research could set the world back on huge opportunities to cure cancer and even
end hunger.

   But such claims are dangerously exaggerated, says Sol Katz, professor of
anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "Don't promise what you can't deliver," Katz warned executives at the
conference, noting that no amount of new miracle plants would make much of a
dent in famine, which has far more complex sociological and economic causes.

   Other executives warn that regulation stemming from ethical concerns could
push badly needed jobs overseas -- though that claim also looks questionable.

   Regulations are far more cumbersome in the rest of the world. The European
Union recently voted against allowing patents on genes and other life forms,
meaning approval must be sought in each country individually.

   German pharmaceutical companies, America's greatest competitor in the world
market, are conducting their biotech research in the United States in
cooperation with smaller biotech firms, in part because of harsh local
opposition to the research at home.

   Biotechnology has an important contribution to make to medicine, but it is
only one tool. As the technology leader, say critics, the United States has both
the luxury and the responsibility of making sure the tool is used safely and in
ways that take account of social concerns.



   The Ethics of Biotech

   Modern biotechnology makes it possible to do things that are ethically
questionable. So far the industry has largely avoided addressing those issues.
Some of the following questions already demand answers, and other will soon:

   * Should life forms, including but not limited to animals and plants that are
genetically altered, be patentable?

   * Should a person who has a genetic defect be allowed to undergo a procedure
to remove the defect? Should the person be allowed to undergo a procedure to
ensure that the defect will not be passed on?

   * Should scientists be allowed to conduct research that might result in
altering or improving characteristics of the human species?

   * Should scientists be allowed to conduct research that would enable parents
to create "designer children" by specifying genetic characteristics?

   * Should insurance companies and employers have access to information on a
person's genetic makeup to help determine the risk of medical problems?

    * Should the United States pressure developing countries to adopt U.S.-style
property rights so seeds and drugs developed through genetic engineering are
protected -- even if widespread use of those products would vastly reduce hunger
and disease?

   FORUM

   Let us know what you think. Send e-mail to edge@news.latimes.com, faxes to
(213) 237-7837, or mail to the Cutting Edge, Business Section, the Los Angeles
Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles, CA 90053. A selection of responses will
be published in The Cutting Edge. Please include full name and telephone number.

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Biotechnology Industry Organization chief Carl Feldbaum.
BEN MARGOT / For The Times; Photo, Jeremy Rifkin is credited with organizing the
anti-biotech coalition.  JUDY ROLFE / For The Times; Drawing, COLOR, (DNA);
Chart, COLOR, The Ethics of Biotech, Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1995


                             308 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 24, 1995 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 967 words

HEADLINE: Todd's resolve grows as his body weakens

BYLINE: DREW SILVERN, Staff Writer

DATELINE: CARLSBAD

BODY:

   CARLSBAD -- Todd Galli can't march to the beat of his own drum. The Carlsbad
High School senior had to give that up in the fourth grade when muscular
dystrophy rendered him too weak to walk.

   In subsequent years most of his muscles have grown useless. But not Todd.
Even now, unable to breathe without the help of a ventilator, and with an
electric wheelchair that he drives with a few fingers, Todd is still fighting to
move forward with his life. A veteran of a lifetime of difficult challenges, his
resolve has gotten stronger and his body has gotten weaker, say family and
friends.

   Whatever the obstacle, he's found a path around it, they say. Until now.
Three weeks short of graduation, Todd is facing the possibility that he may have
to leave school to live in a Coronado convalescent hospital. The reason is a
simple one -- money. Ever since Todd stopped breathing Feb. 10, and spent seven
weeks in the hospital recovering from pneumonia and adjusting to life with a
ventilator and the tracheotomy tube that goes with it, he has required 24-hour
care. He needs a nurse to constantly monitor the machine, which he can't live
without, and, because Todd can no longer cough, he needs someone who's trained
to periodically extract the fluid that collects in his lungs. Such care is
expensive.

   And in the weeks since Todd's hospital release, the Galli's have almost
exhausted the portion of their insurance that covers home care. Twice they've
dodged deadlines for Todd's move to the convalescent hospital after Nancy Galli,
a program coordinator at Palomar College, has mounted furious efforts to come up
with stopgap solutions with her insurance carriers. Now, even as she says she
thinks she's close to a permanent solution -- one that involved Medi-Cal and her
two insurance companies -- Todd's many friends aren't leaving anything to
chance. Tonight, they'll hold a benefit concert at Carlsbad High School's
Cultural Arts Center to raise the funds necessary to keep Todd at home at least
until his June 22 graduation. Efforts publicizing the event, and Todd's plight,
have made the 18-year-old a reluctant cause celebre. His picture has been in
several papers, and local radio and television stations have done features on
him. The Barona Casino has come to his aid, donating $5,000 to the benefit fund
and spreading the word about Todd. It's been a lot of attention for a 90-pound
kid still getting used to the irritation of his tracheotomy tube, the constant
wheeze of his ventilator, and the intrusion of having a nurse looking over his
shoulder day and night. Though initially uncomfortable in the spotlight, Todd
says he's gotten used to it.

   He has plenty of motivation. He says there's nothing he wouldn't do to avoid
spending the rest of his life in a convalescent hospital, "staring at the walls
24 hours a day." Besides, adjusting is nothing new to Todd, not with this
disease. Muscular dystrophy is a class of diseases, all of which are
characterized by the progressive degeneration of the muscles.

   The Duchenne form is a genetic disease that is passed from mother to son and
strikes 3 of every 10,000 boys. (Todd's 16-year-old brother was spared.) Most
don't survive their 20s, dying when their respiratory muscles get so weak that
even a ventilator won't help. Todd, of course, knows all this.

   He knows just about everything about his disease, his wheelchair, his
ventilator. And he says he knows that unless researchers come up with a gene
therapy (something now being studied) in the next six years, his prospects are
slim.

   "But why worry about it.

   I'd go crazy if I spent my time doing that. I just have to be an optimist and
think positively, otherwise I'd kill myself." So Todd dreams of going to college
and then a seminary.

   Though deeply religious and a stalwart of his school's Christian Club, he
admits to harboring his own fantastic secular ambition. "My ultimate dream is to
coach the Pittsburgh Steelers," he says. It's this mix of focus and humor, says
friend Brian McCann, that has made Todd so popular at Carlsbad High School. "He
is so strong-willed and so inspirational.

   He's involved in every extracurricular activity there is and, if you know him
it's hard not to see him as the best example there is that you should never give
up," says Brian, who's known Todd since they were in kindergarten together. His
friends and family say there's no one in their lives who's tougher or more
determined than Todd. And he's accomplished much in his 18 years. He's thrived
at Carlsbad High School, working as the manager for it's football, track and
wrestling teams.

   He's never missed a school dance, he says, even though he doubts his own
efforts "could be called dancing." Too weak to write, he's remained a committed
student, dependent on his friends for help with class notes.

   He takes his tests orally. When he was released from the hospital in March,
after nearly two months, he insisted on going to school the day after he got
home. His latest adjustment has not been an easy one, though. It's not just the
tracheotomy, the ventilator and the nurse that make things difficult, says his
mother. But also his new wheelchair is so big that he has trouble maneuvering
around the house, and it's been all but impossible for him to go anywhere but to
school, which is so close he's able to drive his chair to the campus, and then
home. The family van, modified with a lift that fit Todd's old wheelchair, needs
engine work and instead of fixing it, Nancy Galli, a single mother, had to spend
$15,000 rewiring the house to handle Todd's ventilator and to remodel a back
room so that Todd has a place to sleep, as his new wheelchair won't make it into
his old room. It's all very frustrating, says Todd. But there's only one thing
to do. "I take it one day at a time.

   Otherwise I'd go crazy."

GRAPHIC: 5 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. In class: Todd Galli, 18, sits in his motorized
wheelchair at the front of his Carlsbad High School civics class. 2. On his way:
Todd arrives at Carlsbad High School on Monroe Street in his motorized
wheelchair. It's a two-block journey from his house. 3. On his way: Todd's
nurse, Laura Nekia, sits beside him in his Carlsbad High School civics class.
Todd now needs a ventilator to help him breathe. (B-3:1,6) 4. Helping out:
Todd's nurse, Laura Nekia, sits beside him in his Carlsbad High School civics
class. Todd now needs a ventilator to help him breathe. (B-2:2,3,4,5,7,8) 5.
Todd's plight | Resolve grows as body gets weaker (A-1:1,2,3,4,5,6); PHOTOBY:
1,2,3,4. Union-Tribune / CHARLIE NEUMAN

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             309 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    May 23, 1995 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: GENE INJECTIONS ARE SAFE TO TREAT 3 INCURABLE KINDS OF CANCER,
RESEARCHERS REPORT

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   Injections of genetic material are safe for treating three common but
incurable forms of advanced cancer, a University of Michigan researcher reported
Monday.

   The study by Dr. Gary Nabel is the first report of a large, multi-center
study using gene therapy as a cancer treatment. Experience with the technique so
far suggests it is effective as well as safe, but it will be several years
before researchers know whether it is better than other options.

   Nabel's data were presented Monday to the annual meeting of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology in Los Angeles.

   "This is a new way of doing business against cancer," Nabel, a professor of
internal medicine, said in an interview last week. Larger studies need to be
done before it's clear if the approach helps people survive longer with cancer,
he added.

   "We're only beginning to scratch the surface in terms of the potential of the
technology."

   The next step might be combination treatments of gene therapy with other
drugs or approaches, Nabel said.

   The study uses a type of gene therapy that helps the body's immune system
fight cancer. Doctors use a computerized imaging machine to map exact sites of
tumors. Then they inject the tumors with DNA, or genetic material, modified in a
lab.

   Sometimes, doctors obtain genetic material in surgery and modify the samples
in a laboratory before reinjecting them. Other times, patients receive direct
injections of genetic material -- a quicker, less expensive approach.

   The injected material, called allovectin-7, is first suspended in a fatty
substance to improve its ability to enter tumor cells. It helps the body make a
natural protein that targets cancer cells and destroys them.

   Nabel's research is part of a one-year study of 42 cancer patients at U-M,
the Mayo Clinic, the University of Chicago and the University of Arizona. All
the patients had the most advanced stage of cancers of the colon, kidney or
melanoma, a type of skin cancer.

   When these cancers spread to other organs, all are considered incurable. Many
patients die within a year.

   Doctors use chemotherapy and radiation to help patients live perhaps another
year, but both usually have harsh side effects. Some patients choose not to have
the treatments.

   By comparison, the gene therapy injections caused no side effects, Nabel
reported. "That's what's most remarkable and encouraging about it," he said. "We
haven't seen any side effects, even at the highest doses."

   Nabel said gene therapy helped to shrink tumors in six of 12 patients with
melanoma, but not the two other groups. He observed promising responses even at
very low doses in melanoma patients.

   Patients interested in the treatments should call U-M to find out if they are
eligible for various studies. Nabel expects new studies involving other advanced
cancers, including non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, kidney, colon and possibly breast
cancer, to begin in the fall.

   The study was sponsored by Vical Inc., a San Diego biopharmaceutical company.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             310 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          May 23, 1995 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH MEDICINE GETS FINANCIAL SHOT FROM DRUG FIRMS

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press writer

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Mainstream pharmaceutical companies are going on a bargain-basement shopping
spree in the nation's beleaguered but scientifically promising biotechnology
industry.

   A study shows traditional drug companies invested $1.4 billion in their
biotech competitors in the first three months of 1995, signaling what experts
say might finally be the beginning of biotech's financial recovery.

   "This sector will provide the future of therapeutics, but it has shifted in a
big way to 'big pharma,' " said industry analyst Howard Wachtler of Medical
Venture Holdings Inc. in New York. "It's what's kept the industry going."

   How to get some of this bankroll and stay afloat is the hot topic as 2,500
industry leaders gather in San Francisco this week to learn what's in the
biotech pipeline - and to mingle with mainstream drug giants checking out the
prospects.

   "Things are looking up," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology
Industry Organization, which is hosting the meeting. "But it is hard and we have
to face up to that."

   It takes about 10 years and $250 million to bring a single biotech drug to
market. Only 29 have made it in 10 years, and gene therapy experts told Monday's
meeting that the breakthroughs awaited in their field are still several years
away.

   Analysts say a majority of the nation's 1,200 biotech companies have only 18
months of financing. They staggered last year, particularly under the failure of
nearly a dozen high-profile drugs. Biotech uses engineering techniques to solve
problems affecting living things.

   Although the industry has 270 biotech drugs in human trials, Wall Street
investors have pulled their money in favor of safer bets. But in January, the
pharmaceutical industry - largely acknowledged to have few miracle drugs waiting
in the pipeline - flocked to bail these companies out.

   Mainstream drug makers, in the first quarter of this year, invested 10 times
the amount they invested during the same period in 1994, the investor relations
firm Feinstein Partners Inc. said.

   In just three months, drug giants infused 24 biotech companies with enough
cash to carry them for several years, the report said.

   It makes more sense to help along cutting-edge technology in return for a
share of the profits than to build the infrastructure necessary for new genetic
techniques, Richard Koenig of pharmaceutical leader SmithKline Beecham said.

   SmithKline has invested in at least five biotech companies, and Ligand
Pharmaceutical Corp.'s pursuit of drugs to grow blood cells is its latest
interest. "The idea is to get in early on very new, leading-edge technologies,"
Koenig said.

   But the upturn doesn't mean biotech is out of the woods, said Karen
Bernstein, editor of BioCentury, a newsletter that tracks the industry. At the
same time, attempts to lower health-care costs are making hospitals slower to
accept expensive biotech drugs, she said.

   Bernstein investigated ReoPro, Centocor's drug that dramatically reduces
blood clots during angioplasty, a procedure where a tiny balloon clears
blockages in heart arteries. The drug, recommended for 30 percent of angioplasty
patients, costs $1,350, but over six months saves up to $1,200 in follow-up
care.

   But Bernstein found hospitals reluctant to shell out the hundreds of
thousands of dollars needed to offer ReoPro to all angioplasty patients, opting
instead to save the drug for those most at risk of blood clots.

   "The bottom line for companies will be a slower sales ramp-up and potentially
a lower penetration of the market," she said.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1995


                             311 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                              May 21, 1995, Sunday

SECTION: Editorial Pg.  39

LENGTH: 583 words

BYLINE: By STEPHEN P. PUSH

BODY:
LATER THIS year, 20 volunteers in Boston will participate in a historic
experiment. They will inhale a mist containing copies of a human gene known to
scientists as CFTR. If the experiment is successful, these pioneers will have
helped 30,000 Americans with cystic fibrosis move a step closer to a cure for
the disease that clogs their lungs and kills most of them by age 29.

   The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office granted a patent for the CFTR gene to
the University of Michigan scientists who painstakingly isolated it from 100,000
other human genes and identified what it does in the body.

   But last week, some religious leaders released a petition opposing such
patents on the grounds that "humans and animals are creations of God, not
humans." While I respect the moral concerns that motivated these leaders, I
believe their position is based on mistaken assumptions.

   Caring for the sick is a moral imperative of every religion and ethical
system.

   For example, Pope John Paul said, "A strictly therapeutic intervention whose
explicit objective is the healing of various maladies such as those stemming
from chromosomal defects will, in principle, be considered desirable, provided
it is directed to the true promotion of the personal well-being of the
individual without doing harm to his integrity or worsening his conditions of
life. Such an intervention would indeed fall within the logic of the Christian
moral tradition."

   If religious leaders agree that healing the sick is a moral imperative, is it
logically consistent for them to oppose patenting human genes? I believe it is
not. Patents protect investments

   A biotechnology company must spend hundreds of millions of dollars to develop
a new therapy. If the company is successful in finding a cure, but does not have
adequate patent protection, another company that made no investment in the
research will be able to sell the therapy at a small fraction of the inventing
company's costs.

   Innovative companies cannot raise the money needed to continue their research
unless they can assure shareholders of a reasonable opportunity to receive a
fair return on investment.

   Thus, one of the likely consequences of denying gene patents would be a
reduction in research on new treatments for cancer, heart disease, AIDS and a
host of other devastating ailments.

   Another unintended but likely consequence would be to increase the secrecy of
genetic research.

   If companies cannot obtain adequate patent protection, their only recourse
will be to keep their discoveries secret from their competitors. I believe
society's interests are better served by the current patent system, which
requires publication of a detailed description of the gene.

   The central issue in this controversy, however, is not really patenting. At
the heart of the debate is a broader concern about what biotechnology means for
the integrity of human life. This is a valid concern that society must
continuously address.

   We in the biotech industry agree that human genetic therapy must be
administered with the greatest regard for safety and ethics, and that there must
be limits on how this technology will be used.

   But the best way to determine what these limits should be is not
confrontation over patents. It would be more productive if religious leaders
joined us in a public dialogue to insure that biotechnology is used to further
only the highest moral purposes.

   Push is vice president for corporate communications at Genzyme Corp.


                             312 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 19, 1995, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: The Gene Doctors;
New gene therapy uses fat for brains;
 Liposomes put DNA in damaged cells

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   University of Texas Health Science Center scientists have
used tiny globules of fat to carry genes into damaged brain cells.

   In a report in today's Neuroscience Letters, a team headed
by Dr.Ronald Hayes showed that when the genetic material is
encased in fat capsules called liposomes, the brain cell engulfs
the material in a process called endocytosis.

   Once inside the cell, the liposome releases the gene.  The
DNA -- stripped to the minimum amount of material needed to make a
protein -- races bodies called lysosomes for the nucleus.

   If the lysosome -- a cell protector -- traps the gene, the
gene is destroyed.  But if the gene makes it to the nucleus, it can
cause a repair protein to be made, said Hayes.

   The study accomplished two advances:

   Using liposomes to take a gene into brain cells.

   Introducing a repair gene that causes injured brain cells
to make a protein normally found in such cells.

   Hayes and his neurosurgery department team have accomplished
the gene transfer in laboratory cell cultures and are now working
with rats.

   Liposomes have real advantages over the usual viruses used
to take genes into cells, he said.  For example, viruses can cause
adverse or toxic reactions.  If produced in large batches -- as they
would have to be in commercial operations -- some of the viruses
could be able to reproduce themselves, Hayes said.

   The disadvantage of liposomes is they can infect no more
than 4 percent of the target cells.  Also, the genes are not
permanent occupants.

   However, Hayes considers that an advantage.  ""I'm reluctant
to alter the genome of the human brain,'' he said.

   In this case, he said, the gene needs to get into the cell,
do its work and stop.

   The repair gene causes proteins called neurotrophins to be
made.  When even 4 percent of the cells are making the protein, that
increases the concentration 10 times, said Hayes.  ""It has a
therapeutic effect,'' he said.

   When a brain is injured, it starts a cascade of chemical
events that injure more cells.  In some cases, Hayes said, the cells
could recover with the right sequence of events.

   The new gene restores the cells' structural integrity, he
said.

   ""This is not a Lazarus drug'' that will bring cells back
from the grave, he said.  ""This is an approach with important
therapeutic potential. ''

TYPE: Series

NOTES: One in an occasional series.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1997


                             313 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 19, 1995, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: Bad news for patients helped by gene therapy

BODY:

    There's bad news today for Joan Samuelson and others like her praying for
genetic research to develop cures for their debilitating diseases or to ease
their suffering.

   An ecumenical coalition of religious leaders representing more than 80 faiths
and denominations joined biotechnology adversary Jeremy Rifkin Thursday to
campaign against government patenting of human and animal genes, cells and
organs.

   If successful, these spiritual leaders could doom lifesaving genetic research
-- and people like Samuelson, 45, of Santa Rosa, Calif. "Every day I lose more
brain cells and develop more Parkinson's symptoms," she says. "Someday I will be
frozen in my body, able to think and feel but unable to move or speak. We cannot
allow this campaign to stall or stop research on a cure or breakthrough
therapy."

   But that's exactly what biotech industry representatives say would happen if
the religious leaders prevail in their crusade.

   Patents are the lifeblood of research. They make it possible for
biopharmaceutical companies to attract investments to pay for the years of
research and testing that can cost $ 300 million for a single drug. The patent
provides an opportunity to make a profit before competitors can produce the same
medicine.

   Patent protection was the basis for nearly all the 29 biotechnology drugs
approved so far by the Food and Drug Administration. Among them: An anti-clot
drug that has saved more than 500,000 heart-attack victims since 1987. A
blood-clotting drug important to hemophiliacs. A drug that helps children with
cystic fibrosis breathe more easily.

   Thanks to patent protections, today there are drugs to help people with
multiple sclerosis, a vaccine for hepatitis B, diagnostic tests that help
protect the blood supply from AIDS, detect colon, breast and prostate cancers
and help identify diseases in the early stages while they can be treated.

   And strides are being made in hormone therapy for women and against
sickle-cell anemia, HIV infection and Alzheimer's.

   All this even though the government has awarded patents for human gene
developments only since 1980. Only nine animal patents have been granted.

   It would be tragic to pull the plug on these and potential medical
breakthroughs.

   The religious leaders obviously are sincere in their spiritual beliefs. But
government policy should not be based on theology. And the fears most often
voiced by Rifkin and other genetics critics -- that genetic research will foster
nightmarish eugenics experiments or environmental catastrophe -- are exaggerated
at best.

   Genetic research is more rigorously regulated in the United States than in
any other country. Regulatory agencies involved include the FDA, National
Institutes of Health, Agriculture, Patent Office and the Environmental
Protection Agency.

   Furthermore, many arguments against gene patenting are based on fallacies.

   It's not true, for instance, that genes are patented. Only the use of genetic
material in a specific way for a specific purpose is protected.

   It's also not true that patents let anyone own life. They protect the work of
applicants from being copied for 17 years.

   And it's not fair to accuse genetic researchers of playing God. They are
saving lives, relieving suffering and preventing diseases -- which also happen
to be basic tenets of nearly every faith.

   Perhaps one day the dangers of gene therapy may outweigh the benefits. But
that day is not yet close. Certainly not close enough to justify handing
thousands of desperate sufferers like Joan Samuelson a sentence of painful,
lingering death.

    How a genetic drug helps in heart attacks

    One of the treatments used to treat heart attacks is a genetically
engineered version of TPA, or Tissue Plasminogen Activator.

    1. In most heart attacks, a blood clot in an artery blocks blood flow and
deprives the heart of oxygen.

    2. TPA is injected into the bloodstream.

    3. The clot dissolves and blood flow resumes. According to the manufacturer,
more than 500,000 lives have been saved by use of TPA.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Kevin Rechin, USA TODAY, Source: Genentech Inc. (Diagram)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1995


                             314 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     MAY 17, 1995, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A18; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 1285 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

BODY:

    DON'T TRASH ENVIRONMENTAL 'DOOMSAYERS'

   Editor -- The headline read, ''Earth's Doomsayers Are Wrong'' (Chronicle, May
12), but it's the author Mr. Simon who's wrong.  Because of people sensitive to
the Earth's distress, the world is a better place to live today,
environmentally, than it was in 1970.

   Does Mr. Simon really think that any major city's air and water pollution
levels would be lower today than in 1970 without legislation and pressure from
environmental groups?

   The point of raising concerns about the environment now, as in 1970, is that
there might be time to avoid environmental catastrophe if we take measures now.
Nobody knows when it will be too late to save our planet. I'm not as quick as
Mr. Simon to gamble with the quality of life for all future generations.

   Environmentalists helped you win your little wager with mandatory pollution
controls, voluntary recycling, better sanitation and higher public awareness of
Earth's problems. Rather than ''being proven entirely wrong,'' the people
celebrating Earth Day have proved environmentalists can make a difference.

   DAVID FREITAG

   San Francisco

   .

   CHOICE OF WEAPONS

   Editor -- I was amazed and delighted to see George Bush take a step slightly
left toward the political middle of the road. By dropping his membership in the
NRA, he has denounced their current trend toward right-wing fanaticism and the
use of thuggery as a political means to the availability of weapons of social
terror, assault rifles, automatic weapons and the like.

   Although Mr. Bush has always been a hawk and never shied away from using
violence to achieve a foreign political goal, he, as far I can remember, never
had any citizen of the United States killed or maimed.

   T. BOUCHER

   Berkeley

   .

   UNFAIR TO THE NRA

   Editor -- Cartoonist Schorr's bigoted editorial cartoon (Chronicle, May 13)
defiling the National Rifle Association is in poor taste. Not only does it
disparage the NRA, but also every member of Congress who, unlike The Chronicle,
supports our Constitution's Second Amendment.

   The cartoon, along with numerous other examples of invective that Chronicle
editors, columnists, and reporters use repeatedly to ridicule the NRA and its
members, is sufficiently mean-spirited to serve only to further strengthen the
resolve of NRA members and others who support the Second Amendment.

   You are quick to castigate those who dare to heap verbal or visual abuse upon
liberals and the socialistic programs The Chronicle's editorial policies
endorse, but fail to acknowledge the one- sided news reporting and total
unfairness in maligning 3.4 million NRA members, 60 to 100 million American gun
owners, and most members of Congress, as something less than loyal Americans and
patriotic citizens.

   The NRA and its executive vice president, Wayne LaPierre, have been tarred
and feathered by the liberal media and, yes, even by former President George
Bush, for equating the conduct of FBI and ATF agents with jack- booted fascists.
But in reality you have failed to identify the individual who first called the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms a ''jack-booted group of fascists who
are perhaps as large a danger to American society as I could pick today.''

   The culprit is none other than House Democrat and die-hard Clinton loyalist
Congressman John Dingell (D-Mich.), who until the Republican takeover last
January was chairman of the powerful Energy and Commerce Committee. Dingell was
referring to the BATF's actions during the Waco tragedy. Mr. Dingell, neither a
political conservative nor an impetuous, upstart newcomer, is serving his 21st
term as a member of the U.S. Congress.

   Don't you find it strange that the liberal media failed to mention this at
the time, or to express even a modicum of shock and dismay at such a dastardly
characterization of dedicated federal enforcement agents only doing their job?

   G. RAY ARNETT

   Stockton

   .

   GENETIC TAMPERING

   Editor -- As I understand the recent objection expressed by various organized
religious groups to genetic therapy applied to humans, the basic premise is that
it is tampering with God's will.

   To translate this into the real world, let us assume that I have a child with
Tay-Sachs disease, which will kill her within the first two or three years of
life. let us further assume that two therapies have been developed that will
save my daughter's life. One is genetic and one is not. The religious groups
will oppose the first because it is God's will that she die, but will not oppose
the second because it is God's will that she live. Have I got it right?

   B.E. GORDON

   El Cerrito

   .

   CRISIS AND BLAME

   Editor -- Sue Bohlin's angry assertion that litigation and ''those damn
lawyers'' (Letters, May 13) are the reason behind last week's closing of the
Golden Gate Bridge crystallizes a dangerous attitude all too prevalent in our
time: namely, find someone to blame for the tough positions we find ourselves in
and blame them with a lot of rage and venom.

   While most people would agree that our legal system has serious problems -- a
system which is, incidentally, made up of both lawyers and clients -- to blame
the bridge closing on lawyers is simplistically absurd. With a suicidal man with
a gun loose on the bridge, public officials acted responsibly to protect
Bohlin's and every other driver's life.

   I can sympathize with the frustration over an unplanned two-hour drive and
also over Richmond-San Rafael Bridge officials not accommodating the overflow by
opening more toll booths. (How about eliminating toll-taking altogether until
the Golden Gate Bridge reopened?) But I must ask the question Bohlin asked in
her letter: ''When will common sense prevail?''

   TRACY HAUGHTON

   San Francisco

   .

   BART AND ITS STOOGES

   Editor -- Your support of the pork barrel BART to SFO Alternative VI is
simply a continuation of 30 years of lies. In 1962 BART was to ''Ring the Bay''
for $ 798 million. One third of the system ended up costing $ 1.7 billion. BART
was to carry 250,000 people a day by 1975.  It finally reached 250,000 riders
(125,000 people) in 1991.

   The BART/SFO alternative chosen by BART and its stooges at SamTrans was the
most expensive proposed. It was chosen for that reason and to block CalTrain
from direct access to SFO. If going into SFO was the only concern, other
alternatives were hundreds of millions of dollars cheaper and projected only a
couple hundred fewer riders.

   Testimony to Congress pointed out what anybody who has read the DEIR already
knows: the ridership and cost figures are nonsense.  Justifiably, local
bureaucrats and elected officials should be worried that a cost-conscious
Congress will find out the truth. Of course a ''cost-conscious Congress'' and
''informative newspaper editorials'' are purely theoretical concepts.

   VAUGHN WOLFFE

   Pleasanton

   .

   UNCLEAR ON THE AIRWAVES

   Editor -- Our radical-right (there are no conservatives) friend Mr. Dwyer
(Letters, May 13) treats us to his gang's ability to twist logic to fit its
nefarious ends when he compares broadcast frequencies with newspapers and
magazines.

   Airwaves are limited by their band widths, while anyone can start a newspaper
in any city at any time without limit. If station allocations were private
property, they would all be owned by Rupert Murdoch and other Neanderthals who
worship money.

   Thank God for the FCC and bring back the Fairness Doctrine.

   LORREN DARO

   San Francisco

   .

   LETTERS THAT COUNT

   Editor -- A poem for Bert Aguila (Letters, May 15):

   Chronicle Letters

   Should Always be Nice and Short

   Make Them all Haiku

   CARLTON M. REMY

   Berkeley


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1995


                             315 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     May 17, 1995, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 5

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Brain treatments show promise;
Breakthroughs have encouraged researchers, but budget cuts may have a say.

SOURCE: An Associated Press Report

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Doctors could begin offering millions of Americans unprecedented treatments
for neurological diseases within five years, from replenishing brain cells
attacked by Alzheimer's to curing cocaine addiction, scientists said Tuesday.

   But the coalition of Nobel Prize winners and neurologists also told Congress
the treatments, made possible by unexpected breakthroughs since 1990, may be
imperiled by pending budget cuts for federal research.

   "We're faced with what seem irrational cuts," said Leon Cooper of Brown
University's Institute for Brain and Neural Systems. "It's heartbreaking."

   New knowledge of how the brain works means that by the year 2000, Americans
can expect major treatment advances from Alzheimer's to mental birth defects,
said the Dana Alliance for Brain Initiatives, a consortium of scientists who
marked the midpoint of the "Decade of the Brain" with a progress report. Among
the report's projected treatments:  - By 2000, a way to shield some brain cells
from Alzheimer's damage, and within 10 years, a way to replenish cells with
genes that replace missing components critical to brain function. The immediate
goal is not to cure Alzheimer's but to delay onset of devastating symptoms.  -
By 2005, brain "pacemakers" that send electrical impulses or minute injections
of anticonvulsants to the exact spot where an epileptic seizure is forming.  -
By 2000, a drug to block cocaine's effect, helping patients kick the addiction.

 - By 2000, a screening test to catch future Parkinson's disease patients early.
Later, a genetic therapy to shield nerve cells from degeneration.  - By 2000, at
least two more genetically engineered drugs to fight multiple sclerosis. There
now is only one drug, called Betaseron, which helps early stage MS. One new
drug, called copolymer 1, is already showing promise in trials.  - Final human
trials beginning this year on a treatment to heal holes in the retina that cause
blindness.  - By 2000, a drug for high-risk pregnant women that may cut by
one-third the number of cerebral palsy cases caused by low birth-weight.

NOTES: HEALTH

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995


                             316 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 16, 1995 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2:7,8; B-3:1,6; B-8:2,3,4,5

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: $5 million gift to help cancer research

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The San Diego Regional Cancer Center, a physicians' research group that has
pioneered gene-therapy techniques locally, has received a $5 million donation
and plans to use the gift to significantly expand its research efforts. The
cancer center also is being renamed the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in honor of
the donor, Sidney Kimmel, founder and chairman of the Jones Apparel Group, a
manufacturer of women's garments based in New York. Dr. Ivor Royston, president
of the cancer center, had consulted on the cancer treatment of the daughter of a
friend of Kimmel's, and the association led to discussions with Kimmel that
resulted in the contribution announced yesterday. With the money, the center
expects to enter into new areas of cancer treatment research, hire additional
researchers, expand its laboratory facilities at Torrey Pines Mesa and initiate
a training program for postgraduate students, Royston said. "I'm very proud to
get this major opportunity," Royston said.

   "We can really go into the next major phase of growth of our organization."
The center was founded in 1990 when Royston left his full-time position at UCSD
to work on cancer therapies.

   The facility has gained the most public attention for its work in gene
transfers and manipulations -- gene therapy -- to treat cancers. The center's
greatest visibility came when Royston appealed to the federal review agencies
and obtained special permission to use gene therapy against a virulent brain
tumor suffered by La Mesa resident Clemma Hewitt, even though the therapy had
not undergone the extensive tests and reviews required of other gene therapies
at the time. Despite the injection of genes intended to stimulate her immune
system against the cancer, Hewitt died. Subsequently, the cancer center has
received federal approval to conduct human tests of a similar gene-therapy
approach, used in this instance to attack colon cancer. Those trials have not
begun, but they are expected to start this spring, Royston said yesterday.

   The center is considering other means of manipulating genes to thwart cancer
cells, and much of the expanded research will focus on gene therapy, he said.
Kimmel, in a statement released by the center, said: "Hopefully, this gift will
accelerate translating their impressive scientific discoveries into life-saving
therapies for colon, prostate, brain and other cancers." With the donation,
Royston expects to add perhaps six research scientists to the core group of 10
medical investigators in the lab, while the entire staff may expand from about
50 to perhaps 90 people, he said. Kimmel and Royston met when Royston was
consulting on the treatment for a rare cancer in the daughter of Dick Butera, a
Kimmel friend who lives in Aspen, Colo. Since they met in 1993, Royston had
briefed Kimmel on the San Diego Regional Cancer Center's work, and Kimmel, 66,
the son of a cabdriver and himself a college dropout, was sufficiently impressed
to believe that the $5 million would further the effort, Royston said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             317 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 15, 1995, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Enterprise; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1102 words

HEADLINE: HIGH TECH HELP;
Industry leaders look to small firms for innovation

BYLINE: HILLARY DURGIN; Staff

BODY:

   The titans of the nation's refining and petrochemical
industries, which are wrestling with a $ 20 billion-a-year
problem, have turned to a tiny Houston software firm to help
solve it.

   The group, called the Abnormal Situation Management
Consortium, is relying on Applied Training Resources to help
develop training software to help plant operators better deal
with situations that can lead to disasters.

   For the Houston company with $ 3 million in 1994 sales and 36
employees, the high profile project with a group including
Exxon Corp., Shell Oil Co. and Honeywell provides access to
funds and customer input it wouldn't otherwise have for
developing technology and products.

   ""We're by far the smallest member of the consortium and yet we
are directly linked to the major research and development
centers of the major oil companies,'' says Elliott P. Lander,
president of the company commonly called ATR.

   Industry leaders, ranging from the Exxons of the oil
industry to the Rhone-Poulenc Rorers of the pharmaceuticals
market, see small, high-tech firms as the breeding ground
for future innovation.

   Smaller companies such as ATR seek out these ties because they
need the funds and research their bigger brethren offer, and
they are eager to associate with the larger companies'
customer bases and reputations.

   ""Large companies have cut back a lot in terms of their own
research,'' says Al Bledsoe, managing partner at Coopers &
Lybrand in Houston.

   Now, much of the work is being done in smaller venture capital
environments, he says, but without industry partners who
understand the technology.

   ""Without industry partners who understand the technology, it's
very hard to develop the funds. ''

   Houston-based Introgen Therapeutics, for example, which is
developing gene therapy products to treat cancer, is one of 14
companies with which Rhone-Poulenc is collaborating to
accelerate cell and gene therapy discovery and development.

   And Energy BioSystems Corp., a Woodlands-based company that is
developing a process to remove sulfur from oil, has formed
alliances with companies including Total Raffinage
Distribution of France, a leading European refiner; and M.W.
Kellogg Co., a Houston engineering and construction firm.

   Such consortiums provide a way for large companies to pool
resources to address industry problems.  Small companies, many
of which are founded to solve a big company's problem, are
often well positioned to do the job.

   In the case of ATR, it was formed in 1990 to create software
to help improve the response to accidents at petrochemical
plants and refineries that can cause shutdowns, explosions and
even fatalities.  The consortium estimates that the problems,
including the impact of product shortages, cost the economy
$ 20 billion a year.

   The first product Lander developed taught operators how to
use a widely used control system manufactured by
Minneapolis-based Honeywell.  That led to an alliance, under
which Honeywell agreed to provide sales, marketing and service
support for ATR's products.  That deal helped land ATR its role
in the Abnormal Situation consortium.

   ""We hope to be partnering with people who help customers use
our (equipment) better,'' says Ted Cochran, program manager of
the consortium's research project at Honeywell.  ""ATR has a
handle on how to do some kinds of training very cost
effectively. ''

   The Abnormal Situation consortium will fund about 50 percent
of ATR's research and development activities, Lander
estimates.

   In November, the group received a $ 16.6 million matching funds
grant from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's Advanced Technology Program.  Other consortium
members include Amoco Corp., British Petroleum, Chevron Corp.,
Mobil Corp., Texaco and Gensym Corp., a Massachusetts-based
software company.

   Already, ATR has visited about 10 plants to better understand
the sources of plant disruptions and how operators handle
them.

   As control systems have grown more complex and integrated, it
has become more difficult, for example, for operators to
analyze the source of 150 emergency alarms ringing at once.

   Almost half of all disruptions are caused by people, according
to the consortium.

   ATR is using its own products to develop programs that will
simulate certain emergency situations at plants and test
operators' reactions and response.  The company plans to use
the results to develop a product that will help train
operators to speed their response time and resolve problems
before they get out of hand.

   Ultimately, if the consortium is successful, ATR will have a
head start in developing a commercial product.  In the
meantime, it can weave whatever technology it develops through
the consortium back into its products.

   ""Our customers will be able to take advantage of some of the
solutions the consortium finds,'' Lander says.

   Under Introgen's alliance with Rhone-Poulenc, the
pharmaceutical manufacturer will fund research and development
for Introgen's products, and may take a small equity stake in
the company.  Its investment could total $ 50 million.

   Introgen says Rhone-Poulenc's network of alliances with other
gene therapy companies is critical to developing overall
solutions in the field.  Under its individual alliance,
Rhone-Poulenc will handle the costly, later-stage clinical
testing on two of the genes Introgen has identified as
critical to cancer research.

   ""It means a great deal for a major pharmaceutical company to
validate (Introgen),'' says Introgen President David Nance.  In
addition, Rhone-Poulenc's investment means Introgen can use
its own resources to develop other gene therapy cancer
products outside their collaboration.

   Still, Introgen retains key marketing and manufacturing
rights.

   ""If the deal isn't structured right, the big company rolls
over the little company,'' Nance warns.

   At Energy BioSystems, alliances are providing the company with
resources and expertise to develop cutting edge technology.

   They also are laying the basis for potential customer
relationships.

   For example, Total agreed to collaborate with the company as a
potential customer on the first application of Energy
BioSystems' process for taking the sulfur out of diesel fuel.

   And the company is working with Koch Refining to develop a
similar process for gasoline.

   ""They're guiding the technology in the most useful way,'' says
Jeff Nagel, manager of marketing at Energy BioSystems.

   ""They're telling you, 'If you meet our expectations, we will
buy. ' ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: Elliott P. Lander, president of Applied Training Resources; John
Everett / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1997


                             318 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

HEADLINE: First Infants on Gene Therapy Seem Better

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE

BODY:

   The first three infants to undergo gene therapy seem to be responding to the
highly experimental treatment. Two years after being given a gene that they were
missing at birth, the children are producing a blood factor that is crucial to
their survival, doctors reported last week.

   In the therapy, doctors inserted the gene into certain blood cells taken from
the newborns' umbilical cords and reinjected those cells into the infants'
bloodstreams. The hope was that the genetically altered cells would produce the
missing blood factor and cure the children of their disease.

    "It seems to be working," said Dr. Donald B. Kohn, director of the gene
therapy program at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles, where the experiments
took place. While it is too soon to declare the technique an unqualified
success, Dr. Kohn said, the signs are positive in the three children.

   "This is the first public description of the experiment," said Dr. Francis
Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome Research in Bethesda,
Md. "I would say it's pretty exciting stuff."

   Yet there is reason for caution. The children are also being treated with
medication, said Dr. Ellen Sidransky, a clinical geneticist at the National
Institute of Mental Health, also in Bethesda. "It's too early to tell if it's
the drug or the gene therapy that is keeping them alive," she said.

   Dr. Kohn described the experiment last Wednesday in a talk at a meeting of
the American Pediatric Society in San Diego. If the technique works over the
long run, he said, it might be applied to common blood disorders like hemophilia
and sickle cell anemia and to AIDS patients.

   The children, who are now toddlers, were born with a rare condition called
severe combined immune deficiency, or SCID. Specifically, they lack the gene to
make an enzyme that breaks down one of the body's basic chemicals, adenosine.
When adenosine accumulates in the bloodstream, Dr. Kohn said, it enters and
destroys T cells, which are the body's main defense against infectious diseases.
Such children cannot fight off common infections and, left untreated, usually
die before their first birthday.

   Several years ago, researchers developed a drug, PEG-ADA, that temporarily
restores the enzyme to children with SCID. But the treatment must be repeated
every 6 to 24 months and costs more than $250,000 a year for each patient.

   The gene therapy is intended to produce a permanent cure, Dr. Kohn said. But
it is equally expensive, given all the technical difficulties involved.

   The experiment is based on the fact that human bone marrow contains a small
number of parent cells, called stem cells, that give rise to dozens of different
kinds of blood and immune cells that circulate throughout the body at all times.
Stem cells are rare, making up 1 in 10,000 bone marrow cells, Dr. Kohn said.

   Stem cells are also "immortal," lasting a lifetime, during which they crank
out plasma cells, red blood cells, white blood cells and a host of other
factors. The blood factor missing in SCID patients is usually produced in white
blood cells. But because the children lack the gene that makes it, their stem
cells cannot produce properly functioning white blood cells.

   Dr. Kohn and his colleagues reasoned that if they could introduce the gene
for the missing enzyme into stem cells, the stem cells would produce it for as
long as the children lived.

   Unfortunately, stem cells are difficult to isolate. To fish out the infants'
stem cells from their umbilical cord blood, the medical team used a special
"fishhook," or antibody that attaches itself to both stem cells and to a
shorter-lived progenitor cell that is produced by stem cells.

   Out of an estimated 500 million cells collected from each infant, only three
million were tagged by the antibody. Of those, a small fraction would be
immortal stem cells.

   The researchers then mixed the stem-progenitor cell mix with a virus that
contained the missing gene. They hoped that the gene would be incorporated into
the DNA of several stem cells, enough to make the blood factor permanently.

   But they had another worry. Stem cells divide more slowly than the more
numerous progenitor cells and are less likely to accept the virus-gene compound.
Would any stem cells incorporate the gene?

   After birth, the children were given the missing enzyme in drug form, Dr.
Kohn said. It would have been unethical to withhold the treatment. But each
month, researchers drew blood from the children and examined the white blood
cells to see if any were normal. It appeared that 1 in 10,000 T cells had the
normal gene for the adenosine enzyme.

   When the children were a year old, the researchers used the fishhook again to
examine stem and progenitor cells. One percent carried the gene, "which told us
the gene was probably working," Dr. Kohn said.

   A few months later, doctors cut the children's drug dose in half. "We saw
that the number of white blood cells with the gene has started to go up," Dr.
Kohn said. "We hope with time that the whole immune system will develop"
naturally.

   But the researchers are not yet ready to halt the drug treatment. Other
studies suggest that the three children have no more than three, four or five
individual stem cells that carry the gene. That small number may be enough to
prevent SCID, Dr. Kohn said, but doctors are not taking any chances. The
children's blood is still being tested to see if it is producing normal
products.

   If the technique works, Dr. Kohn said, it might be applied to AIDS patients.
They do not have a missing gene, he said, but it might be possible to insert
synthetic genes into their stem cells. The novel genes would be equipped with
molecular tricks that would block the virus from destroying T cells.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1995


                             319 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                              May 14, 1995, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: CHEMICALS OF BRAIN EXAMINED WITHOUT SURGERY

BYLINE: Laurie Loscocco, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Magnetic-field technology is allowing researchers to get inside the brains of
people with mental illness without having to perform surgery.

   A technique known as magnetic resonance spectroscopy gives doctors valuable
information about the chemical content of the brain, said Dr. Henry Nasrallah,
chairman of psychiatry at Ohio State University Medical Center.

   In a pilot study, Nasrallah and colleagues used proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy to study the brain chemicals involved in schizophrenia.

   Without sampling brain tissue, they found that people with schizophrenia had
lower concentrations of the neurochemical N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) in the right
hippocampus of the brain than did people without the disease.

   NAA is a chemical found inside neurons, or brain cells, and it generally
reflects the number of brain cells in a given location, Nasrallah said.

   The technology ''is a way to count neurons without actually counting them.''

   Mental illness, he said, ''is a biological process involving brain structure
and function. If you disturb the structure, it has major implications for
function.''

   In schizophrenia, it appears that the migration of brain cells to the
hippocampus - part of the brain's temporal lobe - is interrupted, possibly as
early as the second trimester of fetal life, Nasrallah said.

   Autopsy tests and imaging research suggest that the hippocampus is slightly
smaller in schizophrenics than in mentally healthy people. The magnetic
resonance spectroscopy study seems to bolster that theory.

   Nasrallah and colleagues Thomas E. Skinner, Petra Schmalbrock and
Pierre-Marie Robitaille used proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy to measure
NAA levels in the hippocampus regions of 11 people with schizophrenia and 11
healthy volunteers.

   Results showed that the NAA intensity in the right hippocampus region of
schizophrenic patients was 26 percent lower than in the healthy volunteers.

   Magnetic resonance imaging is a way to produce images of the brain and soft
tissues in the body. In this instance, it examines the molecular movement of
protons by subjecting them to magnetic fields.

   In the spectroscopy part of the technology, a computer translates the
information into a spectrum graph that resembles an electrocardiogram reading.

   Nasrallah said several spectroscopic studies are now being done across the
country, using different chemicals and types of magnetic nuclei. The end results
of the research likely will be improved diagnosis and treatment of schizophrenia
and other psychiatric brain disorders, he said.

   For example, some new medicines appear to reactivate ''lost'' functions
associated with schizophrenia, such as the inability to plan, pay attention,
show feelings or socialize.

   With magnetic resonance testing, doctors may be able to monitor which
neurochemicals in a certain region of the brain are activated or changed by the
drugs, he said.

   If schizophrenia can be identified early in life, it might be possible to
build up the number of brain cells in the hippocampus.

   Animal studies have shown that young rats who were exposed to several stimuli
had more brain cells and more connections between cells than those who received
no stimulation, he said.

   Ultimately, he said, gene therapy may be used to correct defects of a fetus
in the uterus.

   ''The sky is the limit,'' he said.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1995


                             320 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           May 14, 1995 Sunday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: BIRTH DEFECT APPARENTLY CURED WITH GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II The Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   The first newborns to undergo gene therapy are healthy and the inserted genes
continue working normally nearly two years after the procedure, researchers from
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles reported this week.

   Dr. Donald Kohn of Childrens, head of the team that performed the therapy,
declared the effort a qualified success at a meeting of the American Pediatric
Society in San Diego.

   The results are encouraging for more than just the three children who
underwent the procedure in Los Angeles and San Francisco. This is the first time
that researchers have been able to insert genes into human blood cells
permanently, said Dr. W. French Anderson of the University of Southern
California. In all previous cases, the insertions were temporary and the
procedures had to be repeated at regular intervals.

   Kohn said this advance represents "a major step toward gene therapy" for
treating a broad variety of genetic diseases. "If we can correct genetic defects
at birth, we can prevent the severe problems that follow."

   The three infants were born lacking an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or
ADA, whose absence prevents the immune system from fighting off viral and
bacterial infections. That absence produces a rare, normally fatal disorder
called severe combined immunodeficiency disease or SCID - the same disorder
suffered by David, the Houston "bubble boy," who died from it in 1984 at age 12.
Since David's death, researchers have developed a drug called PEG-ADA to treat
the enzyme deficiency, but it costs $250,000 per year.

   Kohn and his colleagues isolated white blood cells from the infants'
umbilical cords, altered the cells so they began to produce ADA, and re-infused
the cells into the infants four days later.

   Kohn said the Childrens team is "very encouraged" by the results. "There are
no problems from it and we are confident that we might have a permanent benefit
from it. . . . Based on these results, we would definitely apply it to other
kids."

   About 25 children are born with ADA deficiency in the United States each
year. And the technique pioneered by Kohn could have much wider application; it
could be used to treat many of the thousands of children born each year with one
of the 3,000 congenital disorders caused by defective genes.

   The gene therapy procedure itself is theoretically simple. Researchers insert
a copy of the healthy ADA gene into a common virus, called a retrovirus, that
invades dividing cells and inserts its genes into the cells' own genetic
material. They draw blood from the patient, expose the white blood cells to the
virus so the healthy gene is inserted into the cells, then put the cells back
into the bloodstream.

   This is the procedure Anderson and his colleagues at the National Institutes
of Health previously used on two older girls, Cynthia Cutshall, now 14, and
Ashanthi DeSilva, 9. The technique restored their immunity and they have been
healthy for five years. But because white blood cells are slowly cleared from
the bloodstream, the girls have had to have the procedure repeated every six
months to two years to provide a fresh batch of engineered cells.

   In an effort to make the cure permanent, researchers have attempted to
engineer stem cells, the relatively small number of white blood cells that
reside in the bone marrow and are the progenitors, or parents, of all blood
cells.

   But human stem cells divide very slowly, and it has proved extremely
difficult to get the retroviruses to infect them and insert the healthy gene.
In fact, Anderson said Tuesday, attempts to engineer Cynthia's and Ashanthi's
stem cells have failed.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1995


                             321 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  May 13, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
RELIGIOUS LEADERS PREPARE TO FIGHT PATENTS ON GENES

BYLINE: By EDMUND L. ANDREWS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12

BODY:

   Opening what could be a passionate new battle over religion and science, many
mainstream religious leaders are about to start a campaign against a financial
pillar of the biotechnology industry: the ability to patent human genes and
genetically engineered animals.

   Leaders from virtually every major religion in the United States plan to
issue a joint statement next week asking the Government to prohibit the current
patenting practices for genetic engineering. To do so would reverse a 15-year
policy that industry executives say was crucial to the birth of commercial
biotechnology.
 The statement has been signed by religious leaders across the political and
cultural spectrum: roughly 100 Roman Catholic bishops, numerous Protestant and
Jewish leaders and groups of American Muslims, Hindus and Buddhists.

    "This issue is going to dwarf the pro-life debate within a few years," said
Richard D. Land, head of the Christian Life Commission of the Southern Baptist
Convention. "I think we're on the threshold of mind-bending debates about the
nature of human life and animal life. We see altering life forms, creating new
life forms, as a revolt against the sovereignty of God and an attempt to be
God."

   On the other side, biotechnology companies typically view patents as a
life-or-death issue. Had it not been possible to patent human genes, they say,
thousands of patients would already have been denied life-saving drugs.

   A number of the religious leaders interviewed this week say that they are not
opposing genetic engineering or biotechnology itself on religious grounds.
Rather, they say they are opposed to the patenting of human genes or organisms.
That, they say, violates the sanctity of human life and reduces what some call
the "blueprint of evolution" to a marketable commodity.

   But biotechnology companies respond that in practical terms, opposing
patenting amounts to opposing genetic engineering. They say the patents -- which
grant companies exclusive rights to manufacture or sell inventions for 17 years
-- have been crucial to their ability to raise capital, because they assure that
a company can earn a profit from its research.

   Many of those participating in the campaign say they are also alarmed about
future commercial prospects: companies that own the rights to a line of human
blood cells, or to genes used in tests to detect breast cancer or to genes that
could be inserted into human embryos to create "designer children."

   "One of the basic principles of our church is that life is a gift from God,"
said Bishop Kenneth Carder, who is in charge of the United Methodist Church's
task force on genetic science. "The patenting of life forms reduces life to its
marketability. Gone is the fundamental principle that life is a gift that ought
to be shared and nurtured."

   Indeed, the breadth and depth of religious feeling on the issue are hard to
overstate, and many religious leaders say they plan to encourage a broad
education effort and ignite a long-term political campaign from within their
churches and synagogues.

   The new coalition was painfully stitched together over the last two years,
largely with help from one of the biotechnology industry's most persistent
adversaries: Jeremy Rifkin, head of the Foundation on Economic Trends in
Washington. The foundation has fought biotechnology companies on scores of
issues, from marketing milk produced by cows that receive a growth hormone to
growing new plants that were developed through genetic engineering.

   The Patent and Trademark Office has routinely awarded patents on human genes
since 1980, when the Supreme Court ruled that the Exxon Corporation could patent
a microorganism used to dissipate oil spills. The Government awarded the first
animal patent in 1988, on a genetically modified mouse developed at Harvard
University, and it has since issued eight other animal patents.

   Nearly all of the successful new drugs produced through genetic engineering
have been based on patented human genes, like the gene that produces human
growth hormone or the genes that stimulate production of red blood cells. Human
genes are also central to new "genetic therapies," in which patients with a
genetic disease like cystic fibrosis are injected with healthy genes that
reproduce inside the body.

   "Some people mistakenly assume that breakthrough medical technologies will
occur without patents, but they will not," said Lisa Raines, vice president for
government affairs at the Genzyme Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., which is
working on gene therapies for cystic fibrosis and also owns part of a company
that is developing transgenic goats that produce valuable drugs in their milk.

   Ms. Raines noted that biotechnology companies must raise tens of millions of
dollars years before they have a marketable product, and patents provide the
only assurance of being able to profit in the event that high-risk research is
successful.

   The strongly held -- and opposite -- views are likely to present the
conservative Republican Congress a difficult choice between two constituencies
that lawmakers passionately support: business and religion. While the religious
groups plan to pursue educational campaigns, Mr. Rifkin has been laying the
groundwork for a political assault, financed in part by church contributions.

   Republican lawmakers moved aggressively during the first 100 days of Congress
to remove what they viewed as impediments to business, from environmental
regulations to product-liability lawsuits.

   But conservative Christian denominations have provided a pillar of Republican
support, and some of those same groups have signed up as opponents to the
patenting of genes. Among them are the Southern Baptist Convention, the
Assemblies of God and the Reform Church of America.

   Bishop William Friend of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Northern Louisiana
said that patenting human genes or genetically engineered animals was clearly at
odds with the teachings of Pope John Paul II, who has already preached against
practices including artificial insemination and in-vitro fertilization.

   "Pope John Paul was clearest about this when he said that all activity, all
interference in the genome, must absolutely respect the specific nature of the
human species and the incomparable dignity of every human being," Bishop Friend
said.

   The biotechnology industry, he added, was looking at the issue from the
standpoint of business and science. "You've got to realize that we are dealing
in a larger context -- the sovereignty of God," the Bishop said. "We're calling
for education on this topic. Decisions are being made, and people are garnishing
rights without a public forum. I have a problem with that."

   The debate is likely to become more complicated as technology advances. Most
animal patents thus far have been for mice genetically engineered for use in
medical research. The "Harvard mouse" was genetically engineered to develop
cancer and is used in cancer research. Scios Nova Inc., a company in Mountain
View, Calif., obtained a patent in February for mice that exhibit the symptoms
of Alzheimer's disease.

   But several companies are working on stranger projects. DNX Technologies of
Princeton, N.J., has been trying to develop animals with human-like organs that
can be transplanted to people.

   Ms. Raines of Genzyme said the goal of all these efforts was profoundly
moral. "The motivation of biotechnology is not to play God," she said. "It is to
play doctor. Doing that requires that we learn about, and harness, the genes
that God has placed in us, and to fix those that through an error of nature are
not working properly. We believe those are appropriate goals and that they
reflect our reverence for human life."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1995


                             322 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       May 13, 1995 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: BROAD RELIGIOUS COALITION OPPOSES GENE PATENTING

BYLINE: By EDMUND L. ANDREWS; NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Opening what could be a passionate new battle over religion and science, many
mainstream religious leaders are about to start a campaign against a financial
pillar of the biotechnology industry: the ability to patent human genes and
genetically engineered animals.

   Leaders from virtually every major religion in the United States plan to
issue a joint statement next week asking the government to prohibit the current
patenting practices for genetic engineering.

   To do so would reverse a 15-year policy that industry executives say was
crucial to the birth of commercial biotechnology.

   The statement has been signed by religious leaders across the political and
cultural spectrum: roughly 100 Catholic bishops, numerous Protestant and Jewish
leaders and groups of American Muslims, Hindus and Buddhists.

   "This issue is going to dwarf the pro-life debate within a few years," said
Richard Land, head of the Christian Life Commission of the Southern Baptist
Convention.

   "I think we're on the threshold of mind-bending debates about the nature of
human life and animal life. We see altering life forms, creating new life forms,
as a revolt against the sovereignty of God and an attempt to be God."

   On the other side, biotechnology companies typically view patents as a
life-or-death issue. Had it not been possible to patent human genes, they say,
thousands of patients would already have been denied life-saving drugs.

   A number of the religious leaders interviewed this week say that they are not
opposing genetic engineering or biotechnology itself on religious grounds.

   Rather, they say they are opposed to the patenting of human genes or
organisms. That, they say, violates the sanctity of human life and reduces what
some call the "blueprint of evolution" to a marketable commodity.

   But biotechnology companies say the patents - which grant companies exclusive
rights to manufacture or sell inventions for 17 years - have been crucial to
their ability to raise capital, because they assure that a company can earn a
profit from its research.

   Many of those participating in the campaign say they are also alarmed about
future commercial prospects: companies that own the rights to a line of human
blood cells, or to genes used in tests to detect breast cancer or to genes that
could be inserted into human embryos to create "designer children."

   "One of the basic principles of our church is that life is a gift from God,"
said Bishop Kenneth Carder, who is in charge of the United Methodist Church's
task force on genetic science.

   "The patenting of life forms reduces life to its marketability. Gone is the
fundamental principle that life is a gift that ought to be shared and nurtured."

   Indeed, the breadth and depth of religious feeling on the issue is hard to
overstate, and many religious leaders say they plan to encourage a broad
education effort and ignite a long-term political campaign from within their
churches and synagogues.

   The new coalition was painfully stitched together over the last two years,
largely with help from one of the biotechnology industry's most persistent
adversaries: Jeremy Rifkin, head of the Foundation on Economic Trends in
Washington.

   The foundation has fought biotechnology companies on scores of issues, from
marketing milk produced by cows that receive growth hormone to growing new
plants that were developed through genetic engineering.

   The Patent and Trademark Office has routinely awarded patents on human genes
since 1980, when the Supreme Court ruled that Exxon Corp. could patent a
microorganism used to dissipate oil spills.

   The government awarded the first animal patent in 1988, on a genetically
modified mouse developed at Harvard University, and it has since issued eight
other animal patents.

   Nearly all of the successful new drugs produced through genetic engineering
have been based on patented human genes, like the gene that produces human
growth hormone or the genes that stimulate production of red blood cells.

   Human genes are also central to new "genetic therapies," in which patients
with a genetic disease like cystic fibrosis are injected with healthy genes that
reproduce inside the body.

   "Some people mistakenly assume that breakthrough medical technologies will
occur without patents, but they will not," said Lisa Raines, vice president for
government affairs at the Genzyme Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., which is
working on gene therapies for cystic fibrosis and also owns part of a company
that is developing transgenic goats that produce valuable drugs in their milk.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995


                             323 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     May 11, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 14C

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy cut its losses in 1st quarter

BYLINE: Ross Hetrick, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   Genetic Therapy Inc., a Gaithersburg biotech firm, cut its losses by nearly a
third in the first quarter as it received additional funding for research from
its Swiss backer.

   The 9-year-old company, which is pursuing genetic-based cures for a variety
of diseases, yesterday reported its quarterly revenues were up 86.6 percent to $
2.8 million compared with $ 1.3 million for the same period a year ago.

   This was primarily due to increased funding from Sandoz Pharma Ltd. The Swiss
company, which is part of the giant international conglomerate Sandoz AG,
stepped up its support in June for research in brain cancer, according to Marc
R. Schneebaum, Genetic Therapy's chief financial officer.

   The infusion of capital cut the company's quarterly losses to $ 2.4 million,
or 18 cents a share, from $ 3.4 million, or 26 cents a share, for the same
period a year ago. "In the biotech field, that is a favorable development," Mr.
Schneebaum said.

   The company is developing gene therapy for such diseases as cancer, cystic
fibrosis, and Gaucher disease. It involves placing a genetically altered cell in
a diseased organ to fight a disease or correct a genetic defect.

   The company's stock got a boost in March when Genetic Therapy announced it
had received a patent for the process of introducing genetically engineered
human cells into patients. The stock went from $ 7.75 a share on March 16 to $
11.75 on March 22. It has drifted down, closing yesterday at $ 9.75 a share.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1995


                             324 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         May 11, 1995 Thursday, KENNER

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 1D1

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY RALLIES FOR DISABLED CHILD

BYLINE: By Christine Bordelon

BODY:

   Sometimes, it takes the concern of loved ones and friends to ease life's
hardships.

   Such is the case with the family of Matthew Bolnar, 8, of River Ridge.

   In August 1991, Matthew was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, one
of the most disabling forms of the disease.

   Matthew weighs about 100 pounds and needs the help of his parents, Debbie and
Randy Bolnar, to move him in and out of a wheelchair. It is especially difficult
maneuvering in and out of the family van, since it's not equipped for his chair.

   "For doctors appointments, it's usually up to me to take him, and he's to the
point where I can no longer get him in the van," Mrs. Bolnar said.

   Seeing the struggle, Randy's sister, Patsy, and her husband, Dennis Moreau,
decided to do something to help Matthew.

   The Kenner couple printed fliers and on Easter Sunday distributed them in
their neighborhood in hopes of raising enough money to buy Matthew a van lift.

   So far, they've raised $1,100 but need $6,000 because not only do the Bolnars
need to buy a lift, but they must have their van customized to accommodate the
lift.

   The Bolnars couldn't believe the gesture of their relatives.

   "Dennis is a go-getter," Mrs. Bolnar said. "Once he starts a project, he
doesn't end the project until he reaches his goal. He felt he needed to do this
to help get Matthew around. My husband and I were a little skeptical at first,
wondering how people would react. But, the response was really good."

   The Bolnars are also grateful for the help of local Lions Clubs and the
Muscular Dystrophy Association. Mrs. Bolnar hopes that all the research the
association is doing will be able to help Matthew one day.

   "They're doing lots of research, but the thing I hear now is they are doing
gene therapy and that's a ways off," Mrs. Bolnar said.

   Mrs. Bolnar said she had no idea Matthew had muscular dystrophy, although now
she realizes that his tripping and stumbling as a young child were indicators
that something was wrong.

   A neighbor's friend who happened to be a doctor saw Matthew from a distance
and suggested that he might have muscular dystrophy. The neighbor told Mrs.
Bolnar and she started doing research. The pieces began to fit, she said.

   Mrs. Bolnar brought Matthew to the doctor for a blood test and from there
they went to a pediatric neurologist for a muscle biopsy. Mrs. Bolnar also had a
biopsy, which determined she was the carrier of the gene for muscular dystrophy.

   Matthew, a third-grader, likes being with his friends and his dog and enjoys
drawing, video games and playing ball at Rudolph Matas, where he attends school.

   "He's quite a trooper of a child. He's quite happy child," Mrs. Bolnar said.

   The Williams Boulevard Baptist Church is holding a CPR class May 20 from 8
a.m. to noon.

   Classes in Heartsaver, pediatric CPR and health-care provider will be
offered. Heartsaver includes adult CPR and airway obstruction; pediatric CPR
teaches infant and child CPR and airway obstruction. The health- care provider
course is only for those in that field.

   All courses will be taught in accordance with the American Heart Association
guidelines.

   Cost is $2 per person. For details, call John Crowe at 443-2363.

COLUMN: INSIDE KENNER

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1995


                             325 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     May 10, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY SHOWS PROMISE IN TREATING GENETIC DISEASES

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES (AP)

BODY:

    The first attempt to treat a disease at birth with gene therapy shows early
promise, say doctors who are using the procedure on three children born with the
"Bubble Boy" immune-system disorder.

   The children, the eldest of whom turns 2 this week, are developing well and
making some normal immune cells of their own, the doctors said Tuesday.

   "The study represents a major step toward gene therapy for the treatment of
genetic diseases like sickle-cell anemia or immune deficiencies," said Donald B.
Kohn, director of the gene therapy program at Children's Hospital Los Angeles.
"If we can correct genetic defects at birth, we can prevent the severe problems
that follow."

   Kohn was to present the results of the project's first 18 months to the
Society for Pediatric Research in San Diego today.

   The children were born in May and June of 1993 with severe combined
immunodeficiency. The disease, which usually results in death from infection
before age 1, was caused by the lack of a gene that makes an enzyme called
adenosine deaminase, or ADA.

   People born without the gene must be kept isolated in a sterile environment
because their bodies are unable to fight off infections. The affliction takes
the name "Bubble Boy" disease from a boy identified only as David who spent 12
years in a sterile chamber in Houston before he died in 1984.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1995


                             326 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               May 10, 1995, WEDNESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 35; S

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy on Immune Defect Stirs Hope

BYLINE: BY JANE E. ALLEN

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   The first attempt to treat a disease at birth with gene therapy shows early
promise, say doctors who are using the procedure on three children born with the
"Bubble Boy" immune-system disorder.

   The children, the eldest of whom turns 2 this week, are developing well and
making some normal immune cells of their own, the doctors said Tuesday.

   "The study represents a major step toward gene therapy for the treatment of
genetic diseases like sickle-cell anemia or immune deficiencies," said Donald B.
Kohn, director of the gene therapy program at Children's Hospital Los Angeles.
"If we can correct genetic defects at birth, we can prevent the severe problems
that follow."

   Kohn was to present the results of the project's first 18 months to the
Society for Pediatric Research in San Diego today.

   The children were born in May and June of 1993 with severe combined
immunodeficiency. The disease, which usually results in death from infection
before age 1, is caused by the lack of a gene that makes an enzyme called
adenosine deaminase, or ADA.

   People born without the gene must be kept isolated in a sterile environment
because their bodies are unable to fight off any infections. The affliction
takes the name "Bubble Boy" disease from a boy identified only as David who
spent 12 years in a sterile chamber in Houston before he died in 1984.

   In a medical first, the Children's Hospital team used blood from the babies'
umbilical cords as a source for stem cells, which are precursors to blood and
immune cells. In adults, stem cells are harvested from bone marrow.

   Doctors took the stem cells and added a normal ADA gene that had been
transferred into a virus. The children then received transfusions of the
corrective cells for three days.

   The children also received ADA injections to help them fight off infections.

   Nearly two years later, tests show some of those altered stem cells gave rise
to normal disease-fighting cells called T-lymphocytes, the doctors said.

   Now, doctors are slowly weaning the children off the injections, hoping
they'll make more normal immune cells on their own.

   "We are now up to 3 percent of their T-lymphocytes that have picked up the
transferred genes," said Dr. Kenneth Weinberg, an immunologist and research team
member. "That represents a significant accomplishment. We don't yet know whether
it's curative."

   Dr. Dusty Miller, a specialist in gene therapy and virology at the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, said that getting the children's
bodies to generate even a few normal immune cells is a success.

   "Whether it has any therapeutic benefit is still unknown," he said.

   Miller designed the viruses used by Kohn but did not collaborate on the
study.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1995


                             327 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1995 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       May 10, 1995 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-09

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: HIV research at key juncture, AIDS expert says in Denver

BYLINE: Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:

   A "window of opportunity" exists to advance medical research by exploring how
HIV works, one of the nation's top AIDS scientists said yesterday in Denver.

   Just as the genetics revolution of 25 years ago is bearing fruit in today's
drugs and treatments, research into how to simultaneously boost the immune
system and suppress the virus will pay dividends in the future, said Dr. Anthony
Fauci.

   "We have a window of opportunity now with HIV to have an incredible impact,"
Fauci said. "That's what we try and try and try to explain to Congress" as it
considers where research money fits into a tight budget.

   Fauci is director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases. He oversees all AIDS research funded by the institute, including the $
2 million received annually by the University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center.

   The internationally known AIDS researcher is in Denver for two days of talks
to the public and medical community. Fauci's trip also includes dedication of
the Ellen Gilman AIDS Research Laboratories at the health sciences center. The
labs are named for Ellen Mackey Gilman, a member of a prominent Denver family.
She died last May 22 of an AIDS-related disease.

   Dr. Chip Schooley, head of CU's infectious-diseases program, said the
gene-therapy lab will allow researchers to "ask questions about the underlying
disease." The work, which will examine basic workings of HIV, may lead to good
targets for drugs.

    Schooley is the leader of the AIDS Clinical Trials Group, a collection of 30
groups nationwide that perform AIDS studies.

   The CU researcher said he's not sure of what will come of gene-therapy work.
"We haven't been successful in treating any disease with gene therapy," which
usually involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy one such as in cystic
fibrosis.

   Exploring HIV on a genetic level won't follow that path. Fauci noted that HIV
"is a different kind of virus since it integrates itself into a person's
chromosomes" and the very cells that are summoned to fight outside invaders.

   Last year, after an international AIDS conference in Berlin, some researchers
and the AIDS community "felt they were back to square one" in finding effective
treatments, Fauci said. He prefers to think that taking the time to understand
how the virus works will allow researchers "to develop more intelligent
approaches to vaccines and therapies."

   For example, there is excitement about infusing interleukin II to boost the
immune system and developing anti-retroviral agents to suppress the virus. Fauci
said researchers need to know what to give in what dosages and when.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Fauci

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1995


                             328 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    May 10, 1995, Wednesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: Babies treated with promising gene therapy develop normally

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES -- The first newborns to undergo gene therapy are
healthy and the inserted genes are still working normally nearly
two years after the procedure, researchers from Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles will report today.

   Dr. Donald Kohn of Childrens, head of the team that
performed the therapy, will declare the effort a success at a
meeting of the American Pediatric Society in San Diego.

   The results are encouraging for more than just the three
children who underwent the procedure in Los Angeles and San
Francisco.  This is the first time in humans that researchers have
been able to insert genes into blood cells permanently, said Dr.
French Anderson of the University of Southern California.  In all
previous cases, the insertions have been only temporary, so the
procedures needed to be repeated at regular intervals.

   Kohn said this advance represents ""a major step toward gene
therapy'' for the treatment of a broad variety of genetic diseases.

   ""If we can correct genetic defects at birth, we can prevent the
severe problems that follow. ''

   The three infants were born lacking an enzyme called
adenosine deaminase, or ADA, whose absence prevents their immune
system from fighting off viral and bacterial infections.

   That absence produces a rare, normally fatal disorder called
severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or SCID -- the same
disorder suffered by David, the well-known Houston ""bubble boy,''
who died from it in 1984 at age 12.  Since David's death,
researchers have developed a drug called PEG-ADA to treat the
enzyme deficiency, but it costs $ 250,000 per year.

   Kohn and his colleagues isolated white blood cells from the
infants' umbilical cords at birth, altered the cells so that they
began to produce ADA and re-infused the cells into the infants four
days later.

   Kohn said the Childrens team is ""very encouraged'' by the
results.  ""There are no problems from it (the gene therapy), and we
are confident that we might have a permanent benefit from it . . .

   Based on these results, we would definitely apply it to other
kids. ''
 Only about 25 children with ADA deficiency are born in the
United States each year.  But the technique pioneered by Kohn could
have much wider application.  It could be used to treat many of the
thousands of children born each year with one of the 3,000
congenital disorders caused by defective genes.

   Andrew Gobea, the first infant to receive the therapy, was
playing actively at his home Tuesday in California's Imperial
Valley and preparing for his second birthday Thursday.  ""He goes
everywhere and does anything that a normal 2-year-old does,'' said
the boy's mother, Crystal Emery.

   Andrew, who underwent the procedure in Los Angeles, is still
receiving weekly shots of PEG-ADA that were begun at birth to
ensure his health while the team studied his white cells to
determine whether the engineered cells were surviving.  When they
were confident that the cells had survived, Kohn began tapering off
the shots and hopes eventually to eliminate them altogether, much
to his mother's relief.  Andrew ""runs away from the shots,'' she
said.

   The other two children, who underwent the procedure in San
Francisco, are healthy and are living out of state, the scientists
said.


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1997


                             329 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     May 10, 1995, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words

HEADLINE: MAJOR STEP IN GENE THERAPY REPORTED;
MEDICINE: THREE CHILDREN ARE THRIVING TWO YEARS AFTER TREATMENT. PERMANENT
INSERTION OF THE MATERIAL IS BREAKTHROUGH.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   The first newborns to undergo gene therapy are healthy and the inserted genes
are working normally nearly two years after the procedure, researchers from
Childrens Hospital in Los Angeles will announce today.

   Dr. Donald B. Kohn of Childrens, head of the team that performed the therapy,
is scheduled to declare the effort a qualified success at a meeting of the
American Pediatric Society in San Diego.

   The results are encouraging for more than just the three children who
underwent the procedure in Los Angeles and San Francisco. This is the first time
that researchers have been able to insert genes into the blood cells of humans
permanently, said Dr. W. French Anderson of USC. In all previous cases, the
insertions have been only temporary, which means the procedures had to be
repeated at regular intervals.

   Kohn said this advance represents "a major step toward gene therapy" for the
treatment of a broad variety of genetic diseases. And, he concluded, "If we can
correct genetic defects at birth, we can prevent the severe problems that
follow."

   The three infants were born lacking an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or
ADA, whose absence prevents immune systems from fighting off viral and bacterial
infections. That absence produces a rare, normally fatal disorder called severe
combined immunodeficiency disease, or SCID -- the disorder suffered by David,
the well-known Houston "bubble boy," who died from it in 1984 at age 12. Since
David's death, researchers have developed a drug called PEG-ADA to treat the
enzyme deficiency, but it costs $250,000 a year.

   Kohn and his colleagues isolated white blood cells from the infants'
umbilical cords at birth, altered the cells so that they began to produce ADA,
and reinfused the cells into the infants four days later.

   In an interview, Kohn said the Childrens team is "very encouraged" by the
results to date. "There are no problems from it (the gene therapy), and we are
confident that we might have a permanent benefit from it. . . . Based on these
results, we would definitely apply it to other kids."

   Only about 25 children with ADA deficiency are born in the United States each
year. But the technique pioneered by Kohn could have much wider application. It
could be used to treat many of the thousands of children born each year with one
of the 3,000 congenital disorders caused by defective genes.

   Tuesday afternoon, Andrew Gobea, the first infant to receive the therapy, was
playing at his home in the Imperial Valley and preparing for his second birthday
tomorrow. "He goes everywhere and does anything that a normal 2-year-old does,"
said his mother, Crystal Emery. "We're very pleased with the results so far."

   Andrew, who underwent the procedure in Los Angeles, is still receiving weekly
shots of PEG-ADA that were begun at birth to ensure his health while the team
studied his white cells to determine whether the engineered cells were
surviving. When they were confident that the cells had survived, Kohn began
tapering off the shots and hopes eventually to eliminate them altogether, much
to Emery's relief. Andrew "runs away from the shots. He doesn't like them at
all," she said.

   The other two children, who underwent the procedure in San Francisco, are
healthy and live out of state, the scientists said.

   The gene therapy procedure itself is theoretically quite simple. Researchers
insert a copy of the healthy ADA gene into a common virus, called a retrovirus,
that invades dividing cells and inserts its genes into the cells' own genetic
material. They draw blood from the patient, expose the white blood cells to the
virus so that the healthy gene is inserted into the cells, and then put the
cells back into the blood-stream.

   This is the procedure that Anderson and his colleagues at the National
Institutes of Health had previously used on two older girls, Cynthia Cutshall,
now 14, and Ashanthi DeSilva, now 9. The technique restored their immunity, and
the pair have now been healthy for five years. But because white blood cells are
cleared slowly from the bloodstream, the girls have had to have the procedure
repeated every six months to two years to provide a fresh batch of engineered
cells.

   In an effort to make the "cure" permanent, researchers have attempted to
engineer stem cells, the relatively small number of white blood cells that
reside in the bone marrow and serve as the progenitors, or parents, of all blood
cells.

   But human stem cells divide very slowly, and it has proved extremely
difficult to get the retroviruses to infect them and insert the healthy gene. In
fact, Anderson said Tuesday, attempts to engineer Cynthia's and Ashanthi's stem
cells have failed.

   Many of the stem cells in newborn infants, however, are still dividing and
are readily attacked by retroviruses. Instead of collecting these cells from the
infants, Kohn chose the less invasive procedure of isolating them from the blood
left behind in the umbilical cord at birth. It was these cells that were
engineered and reinfused into the children.

   Kohn's team collects blood samples from the children each month and analyzes
them for the presence of white blood cells containing the ADA gene. He will tell
the San Diego meeting that cells containing the healthy ADA gene have remained
in the blood since birth and that the number of such cells has been growing in
recent months as physicians have tapered off the ADA replacement drug.

   Kohn concedes that the technique is not perfected. In particular, researchers
need to put the healthy gene into a much larger percentage of the patient's stem
cells than is now possible. In Andrew's case, the gene found its way into only
0.01% of his stem cells.

   But that small percentage is producing a much larger percentage (5% to 7%) of
crucial immune cells in the blood that contain the healthy gene, and they hope
that percentage will continue to grow. That is very promising, Kohn concluded,
because some studies have shown that only 10% of the normal amount of ADA is
sufficient to prevent symptoms of SCID.

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Andrew Gobea, gene therapy recipient, and mother.  GINA
FERRAZI / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1995


                             330 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      May 10, 1995 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY WORKING IN NEWBORNS

BYLINE: By JANE E. ALLEN; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   The first attempt to treat a disease at birth with gene therapy shows early
promise, say doctors who are using the procedure on three children born with the
"Bubble Boy" immune-system disorder.

   The children, the eldest of whom turns 2 this week, are developing well and
making some normal immune cells of their own, the doctors said yesterday.

   "The study represents a major step toward gene therapy for the treatment of
genetic diseases like sickle-cell anemia or immune deficiencies," said Donald B.
Kohn, director of the gene therapy program at Children's Hospital Los Angeles.
"If we can correct genetic defects at birth, we can prevent the severe problems
that follow."

   Kohn was to present the results of the project's first 18 months to the
Society for Pediatric Research in San Diego today.

   The children were born in May and June of 1993 with severe combined
immunodeficiency. The disease, which usually results in death from infection
before age 1, was caused by the lack of a gene that makes an enzyme called
adenosine deaminase, or ADA.

   People born without the gene must be kept isolated in a sterile plastic
bubble because their bodies are unable to fight off any infections.

   In a medical first, the Children's Hospital team used blood from the babies'
umbilical cords as a source for stem cells, which are precursors to blood and
immune cells. In adults, stem cells are harvested from bone marrow.

   Doctors took the stem cells and added a normal ADA gene that had been
transferred into a virus. The children then received transfusions of the
corrective cells for three days.

   The children also received ADA injections to help them fight off infections.

   Nearly two years later, tests show some of those altered stem cells gave rise
to normal disease-fighting cells called T-lymphocytes, the doctors said.

   Now, doctors are slowly weaning the children off the injections, hoping
they'll make more normal immune cells on their own.

   "We are now up to 3 percent of their T-lymphocytes that have picked up the
transferred genes," said Dr. Kenneth Weinberg, an immunologist and research team
member. "That represents a significant accomplishment. We don't yet know whether
it's curative."

   Dr. Dusty Miller, a specialist in gene therapy and virology at the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, said that getting the children's
bodies to generate even a few normal immune cells was a success.

   "Whether it has any therapeutic benefit is still unknown," he said.

   Miller designed the viruses used by Kohn but did not collaborate on the
study.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1995


                             331 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     May 10, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; HEALTH & MEDICINE; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy in newborns promising

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:


   The first attempt to treat a disease at birth with gene therapy shows
promise, say doctors who used the procedure on three children born with the
"Bubble Boy" immune-system disorder.

   The children are developing well and making immune cells of their own,
doctors said Tuesday.

   "The study represents a major step toward gene therapy for the treatment  of
genetic diseases like sickle-cell anemia or immune deficiencies," said  Donald
Kohn, director of the gene therapy program at Children's Hospital Los  Angeles.
"If we can correct genetic defects at birth, we can prevent the  severe problems
that follow."

   Kohn was to present the results of the project's first 18 months to the
Society for Pediatric Research in San Diego today.

   The children were born in May and June 1993 with severe combined
immunodeficiency. The disease, which usually results in death from infection
before age 1, was caused by the lack of a gene that makes an enzyme called
adenosine deaminase, or ADA.

   People born without the gene must be kept isolated in a sterile environment
because their bodies are unable to fight off any infections. The affliction
takes the name "Bubble Boy" disease from a boy identified only as David who
spent 12 years in a sterile chamber in Houston before he died in 1984.

   Kohn and his colleagues isolated white blood cells from the infants'
umbilical cords at birth, altered the cells to produce ADA then re-infused the
cells into the infants four days later.

   Nearly two years later, tests show some of those altered cells gave rise to
normal disease-fighting cells called T-lymphocytes. Doctors hope the children
will make more normal immune cells on their own.

   "We are now up to 3 percent of their T-lymphocytes that have picked up the
transferred genes," said Dr. Kenneth Weinberg. "That represents a  significant
accomplishment."

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1995


                             332 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                        May 9, 1995 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: SCENE & HEARD; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: GRAPEVINE

BODY:

   ACADEMIC HONORS

   Twins Andreea and George Pratal of Westlake recently took high academic
honors in their junior class at Case Western Reserve University. Andreea earned
the Delta Phi Upsilon Alumnae Prize from the College of Arts and Sciences for
maintaining a 4.0 grade-point average. George, also with a 4.0 grade-point
average, was honored with the Junior Award from the College of Arts and
Sciences. The twins are both biology majors. They are the children of Drs.
George and Ann Partal, of Westlake. The family emigrated from Romania six years
ago.

   RESEARCH GRANT

   Patrick K. McGinnis, 19, of Mentor and a University of Michigan student, has
been awarded a grant for summer research from the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Program awarded by the University of Michigan Medical School and the
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program. His research will be for gene
therapy for breast cancer. In July, he will travel to Nowy Sacz, Poland, where
he will co-direct a week seminar for international high school and college
students about the free enterprise system of the United States. He is the son of
John and Amy McGinnis of Mentor.

   JUSTICE STUDENT

   Bryan S. Mitchell of Chardon, a law enforcement student at Lakeland Community
College, was named the 1995 Ohio Outstanding Associate Degree Criminal Justice
Student by the Ohio Council of Criminal Justice Education. The award is
presented annually for academic excellence and service to the community.
Mitchell is a student security officer for the Lakeland Police Department and a
part-time security officer for the Case Western Reserve University Police
Department.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1995


                             333 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 9, 1995 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 932 words

HEADLINE: Do big egos get in way of S.D.'s health care?

BYLINE: Neil Morgan

BODY:

   San Diego has long had abundant and accessible health care, and now we are
about to suffer for it.

   Our city and Minneapolis are considered notably competitive battlegrounds of
the new managed care systems.

   With health care in turmoil, says Dr. Charles Edwards, "the big for-profit
hitters are slowly absorbing the system." Edwards has credentials.

   He headed the Food and Drug Administration and later presided over the rocky
merger of Scripps Clinic and Scripps Memorial Hospital. "By the time this nation
gets around to fixing health care," he says, "it will be owned by companies from
the outside like Columbia/HCA."

   That company, a $15 billion New York Stock Exchange company, operates in 37
states and overseas and is the largest for-profit hospital and health care
company in the nation.

   It is taking over Mission Bay Hospital, its 10th California hospital, and
still trying to acquire San Diego's nonprofit Sharp HealthCare. No publicly held
company would covet properties facing big losses unless it intended to eliminate
those losses.

   In some states the courts are already seeking to regulate the way such
takeover companies cut their losses in public care. Elsewhere, in taking over
community health systems like Sharp, such companies have diverted millions of
dollars to a foundation that pays large salaries to the sellers and is entrusted
with providing vital but unprofitable medical services like burn and transplant
centers.

   The remaining system is stripped down for profit. Monroe Trout, a retired and
outspoken health-care executive, has been fighting Columbia/HCA for years and
has a warning for San Diegans. "If we could only get past a bunch of big egos in
this town," he says, "we could do what needs to be done to avoid takeovers.

   There's duplication everywhere in San Diego medical services, sites and
research.

   That doesn't bring the usual benefit of competition.

   It raises costs and lowers quality." After a career with Sterling Drug, Trout
moved here to run American Healthcare Systems.

   Its 900 U.S. not-for-profit, church-owned hospitals achieve group buying
power and counter merger advances of companies including Columbia/HCA. "I do not
consider health care an ordinary business," argues Trout.

   "It means taking care of people.

   But I haven't sat in one meeting where anybody asked, `What's best for the
people of San Diego?' " The failure of the Clinton health reform program was the
signal for such publicly held companies to move in.

   There is no prospect that their ownership would result in better medical care
for San Diegans. But signs of panic emerge in the board rooms of San Diego's
community (not-for-profit) health care systems as revenues decline.

   Under quick-release practices, forced by federal and private agencies that
pay the bulk of America's medical bills, there are no longer enough hospital
patients to fill more than about half of the city's beds. Some patients see a
brighter side in health care as fees are forced down by insurers.

   Medical specialists have begun moving out of California's competitive
practices.

   In a typical case, an anesthesiologist's bill for $1,590 in a major surgery
at Scripps Clinic eight months ago was recently settled by Aetna Health for
$750. In the hand-wringing atmosphere that pervades, a hard strain of
commercialism is heard, and an unfortunate new vocabulary.

   Gatekeepers are those who will approve or deny a medical procedure for
payment.

   Capitation is a vision of people as money, and it has become the currency of
for-profit health care bidding.

   It is the payment-per-capita of members, on which deals are made and
shareholder profits calculated. To fend off outside control of health care in
San Diego and its attendant downgrading, Trout says, there must be more merged
hospitals, and some must close.

   He is mediating the merger of three bone marrow transplant teams, and would
like to see the three cancer research centers on Torrey Pines merged. "There are
only so many financial donors," he says, "and grants are scarcer.

   This research takes expensive equipment.

   Instead of competing, if these scientists find a way to cooperate, we could
achieve a critical mass in San Diego and become the premier cancer center of the
West." Trout would merge Mercy Hospital with UCSD Medical Center: "It makes no
sense to have two huge hospitals side by side in Hillcrest." He would merge
Green Hospital at Scripps Clinic with Scripps Memorial and UCSD's Thornton
Hospital. He would fight for UCSD's role as a public research institution and a
community safety net.

   Health care change exacerbates problems at such a public institution.

   Among many disappearing services will be "Life Flight, as we know it now."

   At UCSD, Chancellor Richard Atkinson is naming an off-campus health care
reform commission. Trout argues that UCSD brings distinguished researchers here.

   "Without it you probably wouldn't have had the biotech community.

   But the five University of California medical schools must begin
collaborating -- in gene therapy, for instance, and combining their managed-care
systems -- to be competitive." Trout met recently with an executive who is
participating in a multi-billion-dollar merger of three Catholic health-care
organizations so they may remain not-for-profit. "We can make this work," she
told Trout, "because we still have a mission to take care of our patients, and
none of us has any ego and we are all willing to step down and let somebody else
run it." Only that spirit, Trout argues, can come close to preserving San
Diego's renowned health care system. NEIL MORGAN'S column appears Tuesdays,
Thursdays and Sundays.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             334 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  May 9, 1995, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1036 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS SEEK A NEW WEAPON AGAINST AIDS

BYLINE: Roger Signor Post-Dispatch Science-Medicine Editor

BODY:


   Doctors here are planning a dramatic new way to treat people with AIDS:
rebuilding their battered immune systems.

   Doctors at Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital are in the early stages but
should finish basic research in a year. If the treatment works, a patient's
reconstructed immune system will strike back at the human immunodeficiency
virus, or HIV, which causes AIDS.

   Such a delayed counterattack may not kill all the virus in a patient with
AIDS. The goal is to prevent the potentially deadly infections and rare tumors
that arise after HIV infection.

   It is these secondary complications of AIDS that kill virtually all children
who have the disease - and most adults.

   Several new and promising ways of attacking the disease may give patients
longer and better lives. In addition to attempts to rebuild their crippled
immune systems, researchers are developing new anti-viral drugs. When used along
with standard drugs - such as AZT - this "combination therapy" may be more
effective in slowing the progress of AIDS.

   Gene therapy is also being developed to fight AIDS. It will be used in the
attempt here to rebuild patients' immune response, says Dr. Alan P. Knutsen,
director of the pediatric immunology-allergy unit at Cardinal Glennon Hospital.
Knutsen and Dr. Margaret Ruiz are co-directors of the AIDS research project.

   If government regulators approve the treatment, doctors will combine gene
therapy with infusions of cells taken from a patient's own bone marrow.
Inserting special genes in the cells will immunize them against attack by the
patient's HIV. That will enable bone marrow cells to mature into adult immune
cells, including T helper cells that direct the immune response.

   The experimental technique will be tried in adult patients first. "If it
works in adults, it will work in children," said Knutsen. Guerrilla Warfare

   Last week, Knutsen peered into a microscope in his cramped laboratory on the
second floor of the hospital's Pediatric Research Institute, 3662 Park Avenue. A
pediatrician, he crosses the street to see patients at Cardinal Glennon
Hospital.

   "Look at this," Knutsen said, stepping away from the microscope.

   Focused in its lens were living, human cells - called stem cells - taken from
bone marrow donated by patients. Under the lens, the stem cells appeared as
small smudgy circles, clustering outside pieces of gland tissue.

   Stem cells are born in the bone marrow, the cradle of all the body's
blood-cells. Some grow into red blood cells; others grow into white blood cells
and other germ-killing cells. The exception are stem cells that become T helper
cells. First, the stem cells migrate to the thymus gland for instructions. They
then become the immune system's generals, using chemical signals to direct the
immune system in attacking germs.

   When and if patients get infusions of stem cells, these genetically altered
cells will have to wage a kind of guerrilla warfare. They must fight off attacks
by HIV in the patient's bloodstream - then grow into adult immune cells to fight
off infections that are secondary to AIDS.

   The chief task before Knutsen's group is to refine techniques to ensure that
the stem cells will survive in patients.

   In his lab, Knutsen resembles a guerrilla fighter himself. His face is
somber. He wears a wrinkled shirt, sleeves rolled up to the elbow.

   He seldom looks up from his work; his answers to questions are short, simple
sentences. He's the Sgt. Joe Friday of research scientists. Patient Profile
Shifting

   Knutsen, 46, began his research for a better AIDS treatment in 1993. He'd
seen too many children die from the disease - despite the latest high-tech
medicine at his disposal.

   At first, the children he treated were hemophiliacs who'd been infected by
blood transfusions in the early 1980s. That was before it was known that AIDS
was caused by a blood-borne virus - and could be screened from the blood supply.

   Since the AIDS epidemic began in 1981, more than 270,000 Americans, including
3,500 children, have died from the disease; another 1 million have been infected
by HIV.

   In recent years, more children have been infected with HIV. In 1994, more
than 14,000 women had developed AIDS - compared with the cumulative total of 534
women in 1985. As a result, 7,000 infants are being born each year to women with
AIDS. A third of the infants have been infected in the womb and will develop
AIDS. Fatal To Chronic Illness

   Right now, the research shows three steps must be taken to give AIDS patients
new immune systems:

   Take bone marrow from each patient and extract stem cells; return them to the
patients, and watch them grow into anti-HIV cells - all purpose germ-fighters.

   Splice an HIV gene into the stem cells; the gene cannot make new virus, but
it will make faulty proteins that keep the patient's HIV from reproducing.

   Transplant thymus gland tissue into the patient before infusing the stem
cells into the patient; only thymus tissue can program stem cells to grow into
adult T helper cells.

   A small grayish-white gland, the thymus is located in the front of the chest,
just behind the sternum. Stem cells naturally migrate into the gland's network
of blood vessels. Inside the gland, the cells interact with hormones and
proteins that encode the cells with knowledge to become T cells.

   Thymus transplants should prove to be relatively simple to do, Knutsen said.
But getting the tissue will take time. That's because donated thymus tissue must
match the AIDS patient's tissue. Otherwise, his thymus graft would be rejected
by what remains of his immune system.

   If such grafts were unnecessary, doctors could save time by injecting
genetically altered stem cells directly into their patients. But recent studies
show it's "99 percent certain" that the thymus glands of AIDS patients are too
damaged to program the stem cells, Knutsen said.

   Whether or not thymus transplants are needed, there's a better than average
chance that doctors will someday rebuild the ravaged immune systems of AIDS
patients, he said.

   "We're now hopeful that AIDS will be transformed from a fatal illness to a
chronic one in a matter of years - not decades," Knutsen said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) Photo by Sam Leone/Post-Dispatch - Dr. Alan P.
Knutsen is working on a new approach to treat people with AIDS. He heads the
pediatric immunology-allergy unit at Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital. (2)
Graphic/Chart/Sketch by Anthony E. Glover/Post-Dispatch REBUILDING THE IMMUNE
SYSEM 1. Stem cells are extracted from the patient's bone marrow. The cells are
genetically altered. 2. The stem cells are infused back into the patient. 3.
They migrate to the thymus which programs them to become T helper cells. 4.
These cells are released into the bloodstream to direct immune system attacks
against HIV and other germs.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1995


                             335 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 08, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F03

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: GREEN GENES

BYLINE: Marianne Kyriakos; Kathleen Day; Jonathan D. Glater

BODY:


   The scientific secrets of life are making some biotechnology executives rich,
on paper anyway.

   Eight local biotech executives at five companies made this year's list of the
top 100 "Molecular Millionaires," published by Genetic Engineering News, a
widely read industry publication. That's up from six executives at four
companies last year.

   At Human Genome Sciences Inc. in Rockville: chairman and chief executive
William A. Haseltine, with $ 14.97 million in stock and stock options; and the
head of research and development, Craig A. Rosen, with $ 1.24 million.

   And at Human Genome Sciences' affiliate, the Institute for Genomic Research
in Gaithersburg, president and director Craig Venter, with $ 9.87 million.

   At Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg: M. James Barrett, founder, chairman
and chief executive, with $ 2.68 million in stock and stock options.

   At MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg: Wayne Hockmeyer, chairman and chief
executive, with $ 1.96 million; and Franklin Top, medical director, with $ 1.25
million.

   Oncor Inc. in Gaithersburg: chairman and chief executive Stephen Turner, with
$ 4.39 million.

   Life Technologies Inc. of Gaithersburg: Frederick Adler, director and
investor, with $ 13.68 million.

LOAD-DATE: May 08, 1995


                             336 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 5, 1995, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; editorials; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 432 words

HEADLINE: Golden;
Medical Center turns 50, faces modern challenges

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   The aging of institutions offers milestones at which to pause,
reflect and take stock.  When those establishments are great,
the years yield up numerous proofs of their value and points
of pride.  It is these pillars that, because they appear to be
so strong and secure, risk the dangers that come from being
taken for granted.  The Texas Medical Center is such an
institution and its 50th anniversary is such a milestone.

   There is so much about the Medical Center that makes it truly
a centerpiece for Houston and its economy, academic and
research institutions, and medical facilities.  The Medical
Center, with its 41 member institutions, including 15 patient
care centers, seven university systems and the country's first
High School for Health Professions, is this city's largest
employer.

   Baylor College of Medicine, the Texas Heart Institute, the
nation's first heart transplant, cutting-edge gene therapy
research, world-class cancer care, advanced treatments for
immune deficiencies in children, and a stellar international
reputation are all part and parcel of the Medical Center.  The
center operates on a combined budget of $ 4 billion and
provides indirect economic benefits to this area worth more
than $ 10 billion annually.  The worth of its service toward
relieving human suffering is immeasurable.

   The value of this jewel is magnified in light of the downturn
Houston has felt in its oil and gas, and space industries, the
city's other major economic bases.  Worrisome now are the
strong challenges the medical center will face as a result of
ongoing health-care reform.  Managed care, especially, could
offer significant threats to the center as its tradition of
education, research and cutting-edge experimental treatments
must come to grips with the rigid new realities of such things
as health maintenance insurance policies.

   If knowledge spurs diligence, then knowing all the Medical
Center offers as a legacy and as a promise for the future will
prompt Houston to nurture and cherish the treasure it has in
its midst.

   Another Houston asset, the Houston Forum, marks the Medical
Center's anniversary tonight with a special event and keynote
speech by former first lady Barbara Bush.  Bush will tell her
audience that it was the can-do spirit, ""the same spirit that
set the course for Houston to become a world-class city, that
made the Texas Medical Center a reality. '' She, of course, will
be right, and that's part of the real beauty of the Texas
Medical Center for the last 50 years, and for the next 50 as
well.

TYPE: Editorial Opinion

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1997


                             337 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                               May 5, 1995 Friday
                                 SECOND Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: DRUG MAKERS OK $7.1 MILLION MERGER

BYLINE: LAURINDA KEYS, The Associated Press <

DATELINE: FRANKFURT, Germany

BODY:

   Friday, May 5, 1995 DRUG MAKERS OK $7.1 MILLION MERGER

   Summary: Germany's Hoechst AG announces plans to buy Marion Merrell  Dow and
create the third-largest pharmaceutical company in the world

   German chemical and drug giant Hoechst AG will buy U.S. drug maker Marion
Merrell Dow Inc. for $7.1 billion in what will be one of the largest
acquisitions in pharmaceutical history.

   The deal, under discussion for several months, also is the biggest U.S.
acquisition by a German company and would advance Hoechst from the fourth- to
the third-largest drug company in the world.

   It also offers the latest example of consolidation in the drug industry,
which is under pressure from health care providers and insurers to curb rising
costs.

   Hoechst will conduct its global pharmaceutical business under the name of a
new company -- Hoechst Marion Roussel. Its North American business will be
based in Kansas City.

   The deal, which requires regulatory approval, would expand Hoechst's global
pharmaceutical business by about $3.7 billion to about $10 billion in annual
sales.

   In March, Hoechst Chairman Juergen Dormann told a news conference that the
company was studying buying Marion Merrell Dow and saw ``a lot of synergies''
between their pharmaceuticals divisions.

   Hoechst management board member Karl-Gerhard Seifert, responsible for the
pharmaceutical and diagnostics units, said a Marion Merrell acquisition would
enable Hoechst to ``build a stake in the U.S. infrastructure'' as a basis for
developing new products and doing biotechnology gene-therapy research.

   Dormann said patented drugs are no longer the only key to profits and that
Hoechst planned to expand its generic drug business. Marion has a large  generic
division.

   Currently Hoechst has a small presence in the huge U.S. drug market, which
is important not only for its sheer size but as the place where standards are
set for drug approval and manufacturing.

   Fred W. Lyons Jr., chairman and chief executive of Marion Merrell Dow, said
the deal will give the companies ``the critical mass, geographic reach and
depth of product line to be a formidable competitor in the global
marketplace.''

   Hoechst generated overall global sales of $30.6 billion in 1994, and its
companies ranked among the leading suppliers in the pharmaceutical,
agricultural and industrial chemical industries.

   Marion is one of the 15 largest pharmaceutical companies in the United
States with sales of $3.1 billion last year.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             338 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 98 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
CIBA-GEIGY AND MYRIAD GENETICS FORM ALLIANCE

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

BODY:

   Ciba-Geigy said yesterday that it had formed a five-year alliance with Myriad
Genetics Inc., valued at as much as $60 million, to seek new genes with
therapeutic capabilities. Under the agreement, Ciba will provide $32 million in
research and equity financing and a potential $28 million in milestone payments.
The collaboration will combine Myriad's gene-finding capabilities with Ciba's
United States pharmaceutical research and development facilities, Ciba said.
Myriad discovers and commercializes genes involved in disorders including
cardiovascular disease, cancer and obesity.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1995


                             339 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    April 29, 1995, Saturday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: POLK, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 170 words

HEADLINE: WalkAmerica fundraiser

DATELINE: LAKELAND

BODY:


   The 25th anniversary of WalkAmerica will be celebrated by West Central
Division, March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, with a five-mile walk to
begin at 8 a.m. today at First Presbyterian Church.

   The local walk is part o the largest fundraising event of March of Dimes,
taking place in 1,400 communities across the country and involving more than
600,000 walkers. Participants walk as teams or individuals and represent
companies, clubs and organizations.

   Sponsorships aid March of Dimes in carrying out its programs. Last year,
1,500 walkers in Lakeland raised $ 69,000.

   March of Dimes promotes use of folic acid supplements by all women of
childbearing age to prevent certain types of incapacitating birth defects,
including spina bifida. The agency educates women about risks of using tobacco
and alcohol during pregnancy.

   March of Dimes also promotes specialized care for sick and premature babies,
research on gene therapy and universal access to prenatal, childbirth and infant
medical care.

NOTES: NOTE; HEALTH NOTE

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1995


                             340 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   April 26, 1995, Wednesday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. C8, NEWS BRIEFS

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: Also in business

BODY:


   Verona-based ROBROY Industries Inc. announced that its board of directors
authorized the expenditure of up to $ 3 million in retained earnings to
repurchase shares of its Class A common stock in the open market and from the
estate of Robert G. McIlroy ... USBancorp Inc. said it would increase the
quarterly cash dividend to 27 cents a share from 25 cents beginning May 26 ...
Computer Research Inc. and Wachovia Operational Services Corp. have announced a
joint program for the conversion of CRI's software systems to an IBM computer
configuration. The software currently operates on a Honeywell Bull mainframe
platform ... Chiron Corp. said it would acquire Viagene Corp., a leading gene
therapy company, at a 67 percent premium over Viagene's closing stock price
Friday, in a deal valued at about $ 95 million.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1995


                             341 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 25, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 18C, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: American called best airline

BODY:


   American Airlines has overtaken Southwest Airlines to become the nation's
best major airline, a survey said yesterday.

   The 1995 Airline Quality Rating, compiled by researchers at Wichita State
University and the University of Nebraska, is based on a host of factors
including safety, on-time performance, age of fleet and traveler complaints.

   Dallas-based American, the nation's largest carrier, also had been rated the
best for three years before Southwest pushed it aside last year. Southwest
ranked second this year. Continental Airlines again was ranked last.

   Following American and Southwest in the ratings were United Airlines, Delta
Air Lines, USAir, Northwest Airlines, America West Airlines, Trans World
Airlines and Continental.

Pa. bank buys Reisterstown Federal

   Susquehanna Bancshares Inc. of Lititz, Pa., said yesterday that it has
completed the acquisition of Reisterstown Holdings Inc., parent of Reisterstown
Federal Savings Bank.

   The deal is the second of three planned Maryland thrift purchases by
Susquehanna. The others are Atlanfed Bancorp Inc., which was completed a month
ago, and Fairfax Financial Corp., which is expected to be finished late this
year. Susquehanna has $ 2.45 billion in assets.

Profits soar at Preferred Health

   Preferred Health Network, a privately held health maintenance organization
based in Baltimore, earned $ 434,000 in the first quarter of 1995, a nearly
ninefold increase over the same period last year.

   Revenue for the first three months was $ 18.1 million, a 28 percent increase.
The company, which is 85 percent owned by hospitals in the region, has more than
45,000 subscribers.

Chiron to acquire Viagene

   Chiron Corp. of Emeryville, Calif., said yesterday that it would acquire
Viagene Corp., a leading gene therapy company based in San Diego, at a 67
percent premium over Viagene's closing stock price Friday, in a deal valued at
about $ 95 million.

   Chiron offered a choice of $ 9 a share in cash, or the equivalent in Chiron
shares, for the roughly 83 percent of Viagene it does not already own.

Boeing outperforms projections

   Boeing Co. reported better-than-expected first-quarter earnings yesterday,
and its stock rose to its highest point in almost five years.

   While its net income fell 38 percent from a year ago, business for the
world's largest jetmaker is expected to pick up as the commercial aircraft slump
nears its end. Seattle-based Boeing said net income fell to $ 181 million, or 53
cents a share, from $ 292 million, or 86 cents, a year ago. Its shares ended at
$ 56.875, up $ 1.125.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995


                             342 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: CHIRON TO BUY VIAGENE STAKE IN DEAL VALUED AT $95 MILLION

BYLINE: By CHRIS KRAUL, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   In another example of the consolidation sweeping the biotechnology industry,
Chiron Corp. agreed to acquire the remaining 83% of stock in gene-therapy
pioneer Viagene Inc. in a deal valued at about $95 million.

   Chiron, one of the country's largest maker of vaccines and drugs, and Viagene
already collaborate on several products. Chiron, based in Emeryville, Calif.,
invested $20 million in San Diego-based Viagene in late 1993 to acquire a 17%
stake.

   Subject to shareholder approval, the deal would give Viagene shareholders the
choice of receiving about $9 cash or 0.155 share of Chiron stock for each of
their shares, although Chiron said it would only pay 40% of the total deal cost
in cash and the remainder in stock.

   The purchase price amounts to a 50% premium over Viagene's Friday close of
$5.25 per share in trading. On Monday, Viagene shares soared $3.19 to $8.56,
while Chiron edged up 25 cents to $56.75, both on the Nasdaq.

   Facing lengthy clinical trials, depressed capital markets and dwindling cash,
many small biotechnology companies are under pressure to forge alliances with
large drug companies. Founded in 1987, Viagene has no product sales, accumulated
losses of $32 million and enough cash to last two more years.

   Chiron covets the gene therapy technology that is the basis of Viagene's
therapeutic drug for HIV infection now in clinical trials, said Bear Stearns &
Co. analyst David Molowa. Viagene's is a "core enabling technology" that
facilitates the introduction of genes into the human body, and Chiron may try to
incorporate it into several new drugs in development, he said.

   No layoffs are anticipated among Viagene's 162 employees, and the operation
will remain in San Diego, Chief Financial Officer Jeff Works said Monday.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995


                             343 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
Chiron to Acquire a Gene Therapy Concern for $95 Million

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 24

BODY:

   The Chiron Corporation said today that it would acquire the Viagene
Corporation, a leading gene therapy company, at a 67 percent premium over
Viagene's closing stock price on Friday, in a deal valued at about $95 million.

   Analysts said the deal provided another example of a large drug company, or
in this case an established biotechnology concern, perceiving value in companies
that are in the early stage of development and have lost the interest of
investors.

    Gene therapy, which is the injection of DNA to prompt the production of
therapeutic proteins or to excite an immune response within the body, has
languished along with other early-stage technologies. Viagene, based in San
Diego, has seen its shares as low as $3.375 in the last year.

   Today, however, Chiron offered a choice of $9 a share in cash, or the
equivalent in Chiron shares, for the roughly 83 percent of Viagene it does not
already own.

   Viagene shares soared on the news, gaining $3.1875 a share, to close at
$8.5625 in Nasdaq trading. Chiron's shares showed little change, closing at
$56.75, up 25 cents.

   Despite Viagene's surge, "the price doesn't strike me outright as very
generous," said Paul Boni, an analyst with Mehta & Isaly, noting that 50 percent
to 100 percent premiums are the norm in such deals, placing this one at the low
end. "But what we've got now in a Chiron-Viagene, I would say, is the leading
gene therapy company."

   The deal follows a round of unsuccessful negotiations between the two
companies three weeks ago, and the announcement earlier this month of a
collaboration between Chiron and Progenitor Inc., another gene therapy company,
which is based in Columbus, Ohio.

   The union of Chiron and Viagene will create a formidable competitor in the
emerging field of gene therapy, one that is likely to create a rush for
alliances and new capital sources among the other contenders.

   Mr. Boni noted that Viagene was the first corporation to begin human
therapeutic trials of a gene therapy drug. Viagene has initiated eight Phase 1
human clinical trials, which are intended to show the safety of drug candidates,
and in late 1994 began the first Phase 2 clinical trial aimed at showing the
efficacy of gene therapy. Viagene's gene therapy products are being studied for
use in treating diseases, including malignant melanoma, kidney cancer, and HIV
infection.

   Chiron and Viagene began collaborating on the development of gene therapy for
the prevention and treatment of cancer in November 1993.

   "We believe that gene therapy is an important enabling technology that will
yield innovative health care products across a broad spectrum of indications, in
particular for cancer and infectious disease, where Chiron has longstanding
programs, products, and businesses," said William J. Rutter, the chairman of
Chiron, which is based in Emeryville, Calif., outside of San Francisco. "This
transaction further consolidates our gene therapy program."

   While gene therapy was once considered primarily useful in treating known
diseases of genetic deficiency, like cystic fibrosis or hemophilia, the early
efforts of companies like Viagene are aimed at creating immunotherapeutics,
which work like sophisticated vaccines against viral diseases and cancer. With
Chiron's focus on adult vaccines for diseases like AIDS and hepatitis, and
anti-cancer drugs, the company has a natural synergy with gene therapy.

   Jeff Works, Viagene's vice president and chief financial officer, said in a
telephone interview that the $9-a-share acquisition price actually represented a
substantial premium to the stock's trading range of $3.50 to $4 a share in most
of the last 12 months. He said the acquisition would enable Viagene to conduct
its research and development free of the difficulty of trying to raise capital
in the public markets.

   "Although we have, even today, roughly $27 million in cash, that's not going
to last two years," Mr. Works said. "So there's a real limit to what we can do
with this technology, and capital is just not readily available. On the other
hand, Chiron is able to raise considerable capital easily; it will be up to us
to convince them to spend it on gene therapy in San Diego."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995


                             344 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   As Finance Ministers Meet, Harmony Stays at Home
Public harmony was notably absent as finance ministers of seven of the world's
leading industrial nations met in Washington. A coordinated response to the
world's currency roller coaster is "not acceptable," Chancellor Helmut Kohl of
Germany has said; the Japanese see a weak dollar as an American problem that
America should deal with, and Michel Camdessus, the I.M.F.'s managing director,
blamed the Federal Reserve for failing to raise interest rates even more. The
discord has economists worried. A1.

Stronger international financial institutions were proposed by Treasury
Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Mr. Camdessus to avert Mexican-style crises. D7.

Boeing: Profit Off, Stock Up
Boeing earnings dropped 38 percent, to $181 million, or 53 cents a share, mainly
because of fewer deliveries -- 59 commercial jets, down from 82 in 1994's first
quarter. But Wall Street was expecting an even worse performance, and the
company's stock touched a 52-week high. D8.

Hillhaven Takes Vencor Bid
Hillhaven accepted a $1.4 billion buyout offer from Vencor, a much smaller
hospital chain. Hillhaven, the big nursing home chain, had just turned away
another bidder. D2.

Lloyd's: Down, Not Out
Lloyd's of London will survive, it said, responding to news reports of its
possible demise. This year looks bleak, but it has "utter confidence" for the
long haul. D10.

Phar-Mor, With or Without Haft
Phar-Mor offered two blueprints for emerging from bankruptcy. One would involve
Robert Haft, former Dart Group president, but the company filed a separate
reorganization plan in case talks with Mr. Haft fall through. D2.

Microsoft Defends Antitrust Deal
Microsoft and the Justice Department defended their antitrust settlement in a
Federal court, while opponents of the deal said a judge was right to strike it
down. D4.

Chiron Bets on Gene Therapy
Chiron will acquire Viagene in a $95 million deal, placing a big bet on a gene
therapy company the market had abandoned. D4.

Weather Lets Nynex Down
Nynex's earnings rose less than expected, and it said one culprit was the
weather. A year ago, pinned inside by an exceptionally cold winter, people
talked and talked. This year's mild winter meant mild earnings. D7.

Urging 'Brand' Appeal
For Newspapers
Newspapers should build brand identities and imitate the way American auto
makers rebuilt their good names, the president of the Newspaper Association of
America said at its New Orleans convention. The problem: even though newspapers'
revenue is high, their share of ad dollars keeps shrinking and just 62 percent
of American adults are daily readers, down from 78 percent in 1970. D4.

The Risks of Playing It Safe
For a natural gas company, it's an odd way to operate. Louis Dreyfus Natural Gas
protects itself from volatile prices by hedging heavily -- which is fine if
prices fall, but it'll lose out if prices rise. Investors are not impressed.
Market Place. D12.

Times Square Learns Chinese
Times Square has many unusual features, but one thing it lacks is a billboard
from a Chinese marketer. That's about to change, with a huge sign for China's
largest drug company. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. D11.

GRAPHIC: Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow Industrials -- 4,303.98 up 33.89
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 7.31% down 0.02
The Dollar -- 83.10 yen up 0.39

Graph: "TODAY" shows existing home sales and first-quarter earnings due for
Bethlehem Steel.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995


                             345 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 25, 1995, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 41 words

HEADLINE: Chiron Buys Viagene

BODY:

    Chiron Corp. said it will pay $ 95 million in cash and stock for the
remaining stake in San Diego- based Viagene Inc. that it doesn't already own.
Emeryville-based Chiron owned a 17 percent stake in Viagene, a gene-therapy
pioneer.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995


                             346 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 25, 1995 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 643 words

HEADLINE: Viagene tentatively accepts Chiron's buyout bid

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Viagene Inc. has tentatively agreed to be acquired by Chiron Inc. in a deal
that would give early investors in the San Diego biotechnology company a rare
opportunity: They can break even. If the deal is approved by Viagene's
shareholders, Chiron will pay $95 million in cash and stock for the 83 percent
of Viagene's shares it does not already own.

   That computes to $9 per share -- with investors choosing cash or Chiron stock
in payment -- which is exactly what investors paid for Viagene's shares during
its first public stock sale in late 1993. Those who bought stock more recently
stand to gain a return on their investment.

   Prior to yesterday, for example, Viagene's shares over the past three months
traded from $4.50 to $7.13 per share. News of the acquisition yesterday drove
Viagene's shares to $8.56, up $3.18 in NASDAQ market trading. Chiron's shares
closed at $56.75, up 25 cents. Viagene is an 8-year-old company attempting to
pioneer gene therapy treatments for a variety of diseases. The Sorrento Valley
company, which does not have product revenues, projects that it will lose $15
million this year, which would have come from the $29 million in cash the
company reported on hand at the close of 1994. Viagene currently is testing its
treatments on more than 200 patients, more -- says the company -- than any other
biotech firm.

   The company hopes that its genetic treatments will stimulate the production
of therapeutic proteins within the patient's cells, boosting normal functions or
turning off disease-causing genes. The company is testing treatments for
melanoma, kidney cancer, HIV and other diseases. "We believe that gene therapy
is an important enabling technology that will yield innovative health-care
products across a broad spectrum . . . in particular for cancer and infectious
disease," said William Rutter, Chiron's chairman. In addition to the drug
programs, Chiron finds Viagene's ability to manufacture genetic treatments
particularly attractive. "This is not like manufacturing organic compounds,
which has been done for a century, or genetically engineered treatments, which
have been manufactured for a decade," said Larry Kurtz, a spokesman for Chiron.
He said Chiron planned to keep the company's San Diego operations in place if
the acquisition is completed. Emeryville-based Chiron employs 6,200 and projects
revenues this year in excess of $1 billion. Last year, the biotech company
reported net income of $18.3 million, or 53 cents per share, on revenues of $454
million.

   The largest source of the company's revenues has been diagnostic products,
including a test for hepatitis.

   Chiron also supplies a hepatitis vaccine and a cancer treatment, and collects
royalties from the sale of recombinant insulin. Chiron was partly acquired
earlier this year by Ciba-Geigy Ltd., a Swiss company which paid $1.4 billion
for 49 percent of Chiron's shares. Viagene and Chiron's relationship began in
1993 when the companies joined together in a drug development project late in
1993. Chiron subsequently acquired about 17 percent of Viagene's shares.

   Last month, the companies said talks regarding an acquisition had broken off.
Top management teams from both companies restarted the talks in Emeryville last
weekend, however, and reached agreement within two days. David Molawa, an
analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co., said the Chiron acquisition will substantially
boost its effort in genetic therapy.

   He estimated that Chiron had about 15 people internally involved in this
treatment area. "Some of those Chiron people might ultimately be shifted to San
Diego," said Molawa. Viagene said it expects to bring the acquisition to a vote
of its shareholders within 120 days.

   The company said the proposed merger with Chiron is being supported by the
Green Cross Corp. of Japan, Viagene's second-largest shareholder with an 11
percent stake.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             347 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     April 25, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: Tampa doctor tests gene therapy to fight AIDS

BYLINE: DANIEL BERGER; Tribune Staff Writer

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:


   It might be tougher for AIDS to kill people if people can be tougher against
AIDS.

   That's the basic idea in a local researcher's test of genetic medicine to
fight acquired immune deficiency syndrome. By changing the human body itself -
by helping its immune cells identify and attack infected cells - Bienvenido
Yangco hopes to control infection for people treated early in the stages of the
disease that can last a decade or more before killing.

   Yangco, of the Infectious Disease Research Institute at St. Joseph's
Hospital, enrolled 20 infected people two months ago in a three-year trial of
HIV-IT, manufactured by Viagene Inc. of San Diego.

   Here's how it works:

   Say a city is wracked with drive-by shootings, but the gun-toting gangs ride
in cars with tinted windows rolled up. Police can't tell which cars carry gang
members and which carry law-abiding citizens - until the windows roll down and
the guns stick out, at which point police can identify and bust them.

   In human cells, "markers" protrude to outer surfaces to identify them as the
body's own and also to signal any viral infection, Yangco said. But they don't
protrude in cells infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which
causes AIDS.

   HIV-IT employs a mouse retrovirus, disabled so it can't reproduce, as a
carrier of engineered genes into cells. Once incorporated, the genes reveal
markers identifying cells as HIV-infected, which killer T-cells then can single
out and destroy.

   While HIV's frequent mutations have made it difficult to counter, HIV-IT is
potent so far against all its forms, Yangco said.

   Results from Viagene's first test group of patients, 18 months on HIV-IT,
shows them in improving condition with rising T-cell counts, indicating their
immune systems were holding their own against the disease, Yangco said.

   While showing few side effects, HIV-IT, like any genetically engineered drug,
must be watched for any sign that it causes mutation in patients' reproductive
or other cells.

   One treatment shortcoming is that the cells it addresses are short-lived, and
patients must be reinjected with the drug frequently.

   "There is no vision of this being a cure," Yangco said. "It's a drug you will
have to keep on taking indefinitely. There's no proof that, after a certain
point, you can stop the medication."

   Gene therapy for many diseases "is extremely promising if it pans out," said
Jeff Nadler, AIDS researcher and associate medical professor at the University
of South Florida.

   Several gene therapy treatments in other diseases have been tested, but none
has yielded published results yet, Nadler said.

   "We're anxiously awaiting to see if it's a viable concept. Theoretically, it
makes a lot of sense. And theoretically, it makes a lotta, lotta sense for HIV,"
he said, because existing antiviral drugs don't reach infected cells capable of
producing more viruses.

   Researchers also need to see whether HIV-IT does better over a longer term
than existing drugs, some of which already are effective for the short term,
Nadler said.

   Nadler's StratoGen infectious disease treatment center in Bradenton is one of
six sites nationally testing interleukin-12 on AIDS patients.

   A related drug, interleukin-2, was the first to yield an increase of immune
cells, results recently published in the New England Journal of Medicine, Nadler
said. But it has bad side effects interleukin-12 might avoid.

   Yangco also is participating in other AIDS drug trials.

   One tests two drugs, delaviridin and ateviridine, that keep HIV from
reproducing but, unlike the drug AZT, don't attack an infected cell's nucleus.
The other tests the GP-160 vaccine, a booster for those already infected, which
stimulates the immune system to recognize HIV.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C),
 (C) Bienvenido Yangco, who works at the Infectious Disease Research Institute
at St. Joseph's Hospital, is testing genetic medicine to battle AIDS.  GARY
RINGS, Tribune photo

NOTES: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1995


                             348 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 25, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 745 words

HEADLINE: Stock markets soar into record territory

BYLINE: Donna Rosato

BODY:

    A late rally pushed three key market barometers to records Monday.

   The Dow Jones industrial average surged 33.89 points to 4303.98 - its 20th
record this year (story, 1B). Also hitting highs: the Standard & Poor's 500
index, up 4.40 points to 512.89; and the New York Stock Exchange composite
index, up 2.08 points to 276.84. The Nasdaq composite index rose 5.47 points to
828.91. Rising stocks beat losers 1,366 to 863 on the New York Stock Exchange
where volume was 326 million shares.

   After stocks surged more than 90 points Wednesday through Friday, many market
strategists expected them to fall Monday. "Investors had every reason to do some
profit taking," says Jack Baker at Furman Selz.

   Though first-quarter earnings reports have been strong and the dollar has
stabilized, Baker says he's worried the market may be headed for a correction.

   "Everyone seems so bullish now, we could be reaching a top," Baker says.

Highlights: Technology stocks surged on optimism that demand for computers will
remain strong despite slower economic growth. Rising: Texas Instruments, 7 1/4
to $ 101; Motorola, 2 to $ 54 1/4; and Intel, 3 5/8 to $ 96 1/2.
-- Micron Technology jumped 3 7/8 to $ 80 in heavy trading after Goldman Sachs
raised 1995 earnings estimates on the semiconductor maker.
-- Xilinx jumped 3 5/8 to $ 77. The semiconductor maker said it plans to cut
prices 20% on some products.
-- Komag climbed 1 3/4 to $ 37 7/8 and Seagate Technology gained 1 1/2 to $ 39
1/2 on rumors the two computer-disk drive makers may merge.
-- Microsoft jumped 2 3/4 to $ 77 3/4 on optimism the software maker will win an
appeal of a federal antitrust ruling. Software maker Intuit, which has a merger
pending with Microsoft, soared 7 3/4 to $ 83 1/2 on expectations the deal will
proceed.
-- PeopleSoft surged 3 to $ 48 1/2. The software maker has jumped 17% since
reporting better-than-expected first-quarter earnings late Thursday.
-- Stocks of Mexican companies that trade on U.S. exchanges jumped as the peso
rose to its highest level in two months and the International Monetary Fund said
it expects Mexico's financial crisis to subside before year's end. Rising:
Telefonos de Mexico, 1 3/4 to $ 31 3/8; Grupo Televisa, 1 3/4 to $ 20 3/4; Grupo
Tribasa, 1 to $ 7 3/4.
-- Viagene rocketed 3 to $ 8. Chiron, which owns 17% of the gene therapy
company, said it will buy the rest of Viagene for $ 95 million. Chiron, which
makes vaccines and biotechnology products, rose 1/4 to $ 56 3/4.
-- Stop & Shop shot up 1 7/8 to $ 26 1/2. The supermarket chain is buying
privately held Purity Supreme for $ 255 million - nearly doubling its stores as
it expands. slid 1 3/8 to $ 31 5/8 after reporting first-quarter (earnings, 2B).

-- Premark jumped 2 3/8 to $ 48. The Tupperware maker reported
stronger-than-expected first-quarter earnings.
-- Citicasters gained 2 1/4 to $ 35 5/8. The radio-station operator reported
strong first-quarter earnings.
-- Fritz slid 2 3/8 to $ 54 5/8 after the shipping services provider reported
disappointing first-quarter earnings.
-- Marsh & McLennan fell 2 3/8 to $ 78 7/8. The insurer reported disappointing
first-quarter earnings. Another insurer, Alexander & Alexander, gained 2 1/4 to
$ 25 1/8 after reporting stronger-than-expected first-quarter earnings.
-- Home improvement retailer Lowe's sank 3 1/8 to $ 28 1/4 after warning that
first-quarter earnings would be lower than expected.

    MOST WIDELY HELD STOCKS

    Pct. change
Stock             Mon.     Chg.    Mon.   YTD
Ameritech         $ 44 1/4  +3/8   +0.9   +9.6
AT&T              $ 49 1/8   --     --    -2.2
Bell Atlantic     $ 53 1/2  -1/4   -0.4   +7.5
BellSouth         $ 61 1/8  +1/4   +0.6  +12.9
Exxon             $ 69 5/8  +3/8   +0.5  +14.6
GE                $ 55 1/2  +1/2   +0.9   +8.8
GM                $ 44 1/8  +1/2   +1.1   +4.7
GTE               $ 33 3/4  -1/8   -0.3  +11.6
IBM               $ 93 1/2  +1 7/8 +2.0  +27.2
Nynex             $ 39 3/4  -3/4   -1.8   +8.1
PG&E              $ 26 3/4  +1/4   +0.9   +9.7
Pacific Telesis   $ 30 7/8  +7/8   +2.9   +8.3
Sears             $ 54 3/8  +1/2   +0.9  +18.2
SBC Comm.         $ 43 7/8  +3/4   +1.7   +9.3
US West           $ 41 7/8  +1 1/4 +3.0  +17.5

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995


                             349 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1050 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   Vencor, a large operator of hospitals for the chronically ill, is buying
Hillhaven, the nation's second-biggest nursing home company, for $ 1.9 billion
in the health care industry's latest megadeal. The purchase should make the
company more competitive for contracts with cost-conscious managed-care groups
such as health maintenance organizations, analysts said.

   Big oil companies reported a jump in earnings for the latest quarter as a
booming chemicals market offset lower refining earnings caused by a mild winter.
Exxon said net income rose 42 percent, to $ 1.7 billion; Texaco's earnings
climbed 49 percent, to $ 301 million; Arco's profit more than doubled, to $ 322
million; and Amoco's earnings were up 31 percent, to $ 523 million.

   The FDIC voted to adopt new regulations implementing the Community
Reinvestment Act, a 1977 law that requires banks and thrifts to lend in
communities where they accept deposits in order to encourage loans in poorer
communities. Other federal banking regulators adopted the rules last week.

   Mexico's main stock market index moved above the 2000 mark yesterday for the
first time since January. The improvement, attributed to rising investor
confidence, also contributed to a strengthening of the peso as foreign investors
bought the currency to re-enter the stock market. The IPC index closed at
2017.20, up 97.78 points, or 5.09 percent, from Friday.

   T-bill rates rose.  The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills auctioned
yesterday rose to 5.66 percent from 5.56 percent the previous week. Rates on
six-month bills rose to 5.75 percent from 5.69 percent. The actual return to
investors is 5.84 percent for three-month bills, with a $ 10,000 bill selling
for $ 9,856.90, and 6.02 percent for a six-month bill selling for $ 9,709.30.
Separately, the Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury
bills, a popular index for changing adjustable-rate mortgages, fell to 6.17
percent last week from 6.28 percent the previous week.

   Boeing's first-quarter profit fell 38 percent, to $ 181 million. The company
cited a drop in deliveries of commercial aircraft, and it predicted lower
revenue for the entire year.

   DuPont's first-quarter earnings rose 49 percent, to $ 959 million, aided by
stronger foreign sales. DuPont said results were not affected by the redemption
of 156 million DuPont common shares from Seagram. That deal is expected to
increase earnings per share about 10 percent annually over the next year or two.

   Nabisco reported a 92 percent increase in its first-quarter profit, to $ 48
million, in its first earnings report since shares in the packaged food company
began trading on its own.

   U.S. Healthcare, reporting its largest three-month jump in membership on
record, said first-quarter earnings rose 6 percent, to $ 94.6 million. The
company, which operates HMOs on the East Coast, including Maryland and the
District, said membership grew 230,000, to 2.2 million, during the three months.

   Hershey Foods said its first-quarter earnings rose 14 percent, to $ 60.6
million, due to strong performance at its North American chocolate business.

   United Technologies' first-quarter earnings doubled, to $ 135 million, on
gains by its Pratt & Whitney jet engine and Otis Elevator divisions and a 1994
charge against earnings that reduced year-earlier results by $ 31 million.

   Chiron, a major maker of vaccines and biotechnology products, agreed to buy
Viagene, a partner in the development of gene therapies, in a cash and stock
deal valued at about $ 95 million.

   American Brands' first-quarter profit declined 22 percent, to $ 116.6
million. But its income from ongoing operations climbed 18 percent as sales rose
in its hardware, office products and leisure operations. The results exclude
those of Franklin Life, sold in January 1995, and American Tobacco, sold in
December 1994.

   Microsoft announced Microsoft Plus!, a companion software package for the
upcoming Windows '95 operating system that is designed to enhance its look and
performance. The software package is expected to be shipped simultaneously with
the release of Windows '95.

   3M said its first-quarter profit rose 23 percent, to $ 376 million, citing
higher sales and productivity.

   Kenneth Leventhal & Co., a real estate accounting specialist, will merge June
1 with the giant accounting and consulting firm Ernst & Young. Terms of the deal
were not disclosed.

   USX's first-quarter profit more than doubled, to $ 154 million. Rising demand
and prices for steel helped offset a 30 percent decline, to $ 77 million, in
earnings at its Marathon oil subsidiary.

   Southland Corp., parent of the 7-Eleven convenience store chain, said its
first-quarter loss narrowed to $ 962,000 from $ 8.13 million a year earlier.

   Ralston Purina's fiscal second-quarter profit fell 18 percent, to $ 51.4
million, partly due to a restructuring charge.

   International Monetary Fund chief Michel Camdessus scolded the Group of Seven
nations, saying they have not worked together to defend the dollar. As officials
met in Washington to discuss the battered currency, Camdessus, managing director
of the global lending agency, urged them to coordinate interest rate policies to
reassure worried traders.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   Integrated, a small Annapolis-based telecommunications firm, has landed a
contract worth at least $ 75 million selling telephone services for MCI.
Integrated has agreed to sell $ 250 million in MCI services over the next two
years.

   American Mobile Satellite of Reston said the antennas and solar panels on its
AMSC 1 spacecraft have been deployed successfully and the payload placed in
normal operating mode. The satellite was launched April 7 from Cape Canaveral
and is scheduled to begin providing mobile satellite services to U.S. customers
this summer.

   Orbital Sciences of Sterling received an order for a Pegasus space launch
vehicle under a previous contract with the Air Force Space Systems Division.
Terms were not disclosed.

   Alex. Brown Inc. of Baltimore said first-quarter earnings fell 29 percent, to
$ 16.4 million.

   Compiled from reports by the Associated Press, Bloomberg Business News, Dow
Jones News Service, Reuter and Washington Post staff writers


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post, Treasury Bills (This chart was not
available)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995


                             350 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    April 19, 1995, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 19C

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Oncor forms new firm for gene research

SOURCE: By A Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   Oncor Inc., which two years ago launched a subsidiary to commercialize gene
identification breakthroughs by Johns Hopkins University researchers, has formed
a second subsidiary to commercialize gene therapy research from Yale and
Princeton universities.

   Stephen Turner, Oncor's chairman and chief executive officer, said yesterday
that his company had formed OncorPharm Inc., which will search for ways to treat
genetic diseases such as sickle cell anemia.

   OncorPharm, which has 10 employees in offices a few blocks away from Oncor's
Gaithersburg headquarters, has been in development for about a year, Mr. Turner
said.

   He said the company announced the new company's creation yesterday because it
just finished a $ 3 million private placement of one third of OncorPharm's stock
with investors from Des Moines, Iowa, who provided OncorPharm with seed capital.

   Oncor, which owns the other 67 percent of the new company, contributed $ 1
million.

   Mr. Turner said he expects the new company to take seven to 10 years to find
profitable treatments from research about the way DNA strands connect. He said,
the company may find a way to treat the bone marrow of people with sickle cell
anemia with a healthy gene that replaces the disease-causing gene.

   Mr. Turner said he does not expect Oncor to form any more subsidiaries. In
1993, the company formed OncorMed Inc., which is attempting to market genetic
tests based on research by Johns Hopkins University scientists.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995


                             351 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 18, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 957 words

HEADLINE: How race factors into breast cancer statistics

BYLINE: Marilyn Elias

BODY:

    Breast cancer is not an equal opportunity disease.

   Although it's the cancer most likely to strike U.S. women of every race and
ethnicity - affecting 1 in 8 over their lifetimes - there are remarkable
differences between groups in rates of breast cancer and survival.

   White women are most likely to get it, but black women are least likely to
survive. Hispanics have the lowest incidence - only 57% the rate of whites - but
their chances of surviving are not as good.

   Overall, Asian women fare the best: They're much less likely than white or
black women to develop breast cancer, and they have the best five-year survival
rate - 87%.

   Scientists are starting to look at these differences as valuable clues that
could help unravel the mystery of breast cancer, pointing to new treatments and
the best ways to prevent it. Studies on group differences "are a growing
interest in the scientific community, and we're seeing more federal money
focused in this area," says Dr. George Alexander, chief of special populations
studies at the National Cancer Institute.

   On the breast cancer front, the gap between races apparently is widening.
NCI recently announced that white women's death rate fell 5.5% between 1989 and
1992 - the biggest drop in such a short period since 1950. At the same time,
black women experienced a 2.6% rise in deaths from breast cancer. (Figures
aren't available yet for Asians or Hispanics.)

   Group-linked differences in exposure to estrogen partly explain the varied
breast cancer rates, experts agree. The female sex hormone promotes growth of
breast tumors.

   Size alone "could make a significant difference because the principal source
of estrogen in post-menopausal women is fat cells," says Dr. Ronald Ross of the
University of Southern California's Norris Cancer Center. Ross co-directs a new
research program on racial and ethnic differences in breast cancer.

   Asians tend to weigh considerably less than females of other groups.
Moreover, women living in Japan have much lower estrogen levels than white
Americans, says Ross.

   High levels of body fat also lead to earlier puberty, which exposes women to
the estrogen released in menstrual cycles for a longer time.  Studies have found
later puberty and longer cycles (fewer periods, less estrogen) among Asian
women. All this is thought to keep their breast cancer rate down.

   Could women of other races duplicate the favorable Asian pattern by trying
low-fat diets? That's unproven so far, says Walter Willett, a nutrition and
disease expert at the Harvard School of Public Health.  Adult dietary studies
show mixed findings, but fat and calorie-laden diets certainly accelerate
childhood growth and boost breast cancer risk, he says.

   Some scientists believe fiber stimulates the body to eliminate estrogen,
perhaps helping protect against cancer. There's some evidence for this, says
Willett, but the largest study so far - the Nurses Health Study - found no link
between fiber and breast cancer.

   A pioneering, multigenerational look at Asian women's cancer rates argues
strongly that diet, lack of exercise and possibly pollutants are key culprits in
causing breast cancer.

   The NCI study of 1,563 women under 56 years old finds they face an 80%
increase in breast cancer risk within one decade of arriving in the U.S. Women
coming from rural Asia triple their risk within two decades of migrating here.

   Asian women become heavier and exercise less as they become more
Americanized, says study leader Dr. Regina Ziegler.  Their reproductive
histories also may become more like those of whites. "What this shows is that
lifestyle and environment play a major role in breast cancer. . . . The positive
here is that we're talking about factors that can be modified."

   Some other potential causes of immigrants' rising breast cancer rates:
pesticides, pollution, electromagnetic fields.

   Much more is expected to be learned from the USC Norris Center studies, which
will gather dietary and lifestyle habits from about 200,000 whites, blacks,
Hispanics and Asians, for at least 10 years.

   Least of all is known about Hispanic women, though scientists believe their
lower breast cancer risk is due mostly to early, multiple childbearing, which
cuts estrogen exposure.

   The poor survival rate of blacks, a growing concern that's drawing more
research attention, is partly caused by diagnosis at a more advanced stage, on
average, than whites. Black women are less likely to get screening mammograms.

   A recent study comparing survival of 612 blacks and 518 whites found a 2.2
times greater risk of dying among the black women. Controlling for stage lowered
this to 1.7 times the risk - still a substantial gap, says public health
researcher J. William Eley of Emory University, Atlanta.

   Blacks had somewhat more aggressive tumors and slightly poorer access to
health care (each contributed .2 of the added risk). "But the biggest single
factor is coming in when it's already advanced," he says.  Eley found no
treatment differences after diagnosis.

   Ross' USC team plans to look at possible genetic factors that could produce
more lethal tumors in black women, and might eventually be treated by gene
therapy.  Says Eley, "We need to do more work in finding out how to get them in
for earlier mammograms because then they'd have a much better chance of
surviving."

    Breast cancer incidence rates
 Hispanics          57% of whites
Asians             62% of whites
Blacks             89% of whites

5-year survival
 Japanese/Chinese   87%
Whites             84%
Hispanics          71%
Blacks             69%

Source: Latest available data from National Cancer Institute

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995


                             352 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 17, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F34

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: 86. HUMAN GENOME SCIENCES INC.

BODY:


   86. HUMAN GENOME SCIENCES INC.

   9410 Key West Ave.

   Rockville, Md. 20850

   301-309-8504

   FOUNDED: 1992

   FISCAL YEAR: Dec. 31

   REVENUE: $ 41 million

   PROFIT: $ 7.3 million

   EARNINGS PER SHARE: 47 cents

   DIVIDEND: None

   STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY: $ 83.8 million

   RETURN ON EQUITY: 9.6 percent

   STOCK: HGSI (NMS)

   ASSETS: $ 95.5 million

   CHAIRMAN: William A. Haseltine (CEO)

   EMPLOYEES: 158

   DESCRIPTION: Human Genome Sciences discovers and catalogues human genes. It
plans to collaborate with other companies to co-develop drugs based on its
discoveries or to sell intellectual property rights to them. The company gets
most of its operating funds from its major investor, drug giant SmithKline
Beecham PLC.

   DEVELOPMENTS: The company continued research toward its first products. It
also continued collaborative work with Genetic Therapy Inc., a Maryland biotech
firm that is trying to create molecular transport systems that can deliver drugs
to specific cells in the body and repair or replace defective genes in those
cells.

   Human Genome and SmithKline have an agreement that gives the larger company
exclusive rights to take many of Human Genome's discoveries to market. Some
people in the biotechnology industry have criticized that arrangement, saying
that gene discoveries should be made public to all scientists if the company
does not have a specific idea about how to turn a particular discovery into a
product.

   In September SmithKline rival Merck & Co. announced that it would make public
the gene code discoveries it makes with collaborators at Washington University.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1995


                             353 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     April 16, 1995, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: TV TOPICS

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: DID 'FRIENDS' STAR DO ROCK VIDEO?;
 WAS COURTENEY COX DANCING WITH SPRINGSTEEN?

BYLINE: By NORMA CAVAZOS, Dallas Morning News

BODY:

    Q. Is Courteney Cox of "Friends" the same girl Bruce Springsteen pulled on
stage in his "Dancing in the Dark" video? Also, what other acting has she done?
 -- S.D., Buffalo

   A. Yes, Cox danced into the spotlight in the Springsteen video. Well, kind
of. After that, she did the "Misfits of Science" series and, later, "Family
Ties" (as Michael J. Fox's second girlfriend, Lauren Miller). She now stars in
this season's hit comedy "Friends" and her real-life boyfriend is former Batman
Michael Keaton.

   Q. I say Janet Jackson played Willis' girlfriend on "Diff'rent Strokes." My
husband says it was Kim Fields. Who wins?
 -- C.L., Franklinville
 A. You're right on target with the pop superstar. Jackson, who cut her teeth as
Penny on "Good Times," played Willis' (Todd Bridges) girlfriend Charlene Dupree
during the 1981-82 season of "Strokes." Fields, three years younger than
Jackson, was playing Tootie on "The Facts of Life" during that time.

   Q. My husband and I were watching television when we learned of comedian
Dennis Wolfberg's death. Needless to say we were saddened, but we were also
surprised by the news. Please fill us in on some of the unfortunate
circumstances.
 -- R.H., Phoenix
 A. Wolfberg, a sixth-grade schoolteacher turned comic, died from cancer in
October. He was remembered by fellow comics during last month's broadcast of the
American Comedy Awards; he had been a winner in 1990. Besides his stand-up act,
Wolfberg was a frequent guest on "The Tonight Show" and had a recurring role as
a crazy scientist on "Quantum Leap." He was 48 years old. His family -- wife
Jeannie McBride and their three sons -- asks that memorial donations be made to
Dennis Wolfberg's Melanoma Gene Therapy Fund, UCLA Johnson Cancer Center
Foundation, 9-667 Louis Factor Building, 10833 La Conte, Los Angeles, Calif.
90024.

   Q. I am 12 years old and love Doris Day movies. Can you please tell me her
real name, how old she is and if she is still acting?
 -- K.T., Houston
 A. Day was born Doris Kappelhoff on April 3, 1924, in Cincinnati, Ohio. A
renowned animal lover, Day lives in Carmel, Calif. Talk of her return to
television or movies has remained just that, so far. Day, a big-band singer who
turned movie star in 1948, is one of the few screen actors to make a successful
move to TV. Her popular "The Doris Day Show" ran from 1968 to 1973.

   Q. I just discovered Gordon Elliott on Channel 29. We think he's great.
Please give us a run-down on his life and times.
 -- D.A., Grand Island
 A. Being touted, at 6 feet, 7 inches, as the "biggest talk show host ever,"
Elliott has had 17 years of television experience. He started in his native
Australia as a radio talk host, then, for six years, headed "Good Morning,
Australia." He came to the United States and reported on "A Current Affair" and
"CBS This Morning" before cutting a deal for his own show. The syndicated
"Gordon Elliott Show" airs at 1 p.m. weekdays on Channel 29.

   Send your questions about TV to Norma Cavazos, TV Magazine, Dallas Morning
News, P.O. Box 655237, Dallas, Texas 75265. No personal replies.

GRAPHIC: At 6 feet, 7 inches tall, Channel 29's Gordon Elliott is touted as the
"biggest talk show host ever."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995


                             354 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 16, 1995 Sunday

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; Pg. H-7

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: UCSD research center completed

BYLINE: Patrick McGrath

BODY:

   Construction is finished on a research facility housing laboratories for the
UCSD Gene Therapy Program, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research-San Diego,
Center for Human Reproduction and UCSD Cancer Center. The new Cellular and
Molecular Medicine East building mirrors the Cellular and Molecular West
building on the UCSD School of Medicine campus. Designed by Moore Ruble Yudell
in collaboration with Lee, Burkhart and Liu, the 54,000-square-foot building
includes three floors of office space, research labs, conference rooms and
support space. Transactions LBA Inc. has purchased the 69,924-square-foot office
building at 10251 Vista Sorrento Parkway in Sorrento Mesa for $3.77 million.

   The seller was Millcord Inc. The brokers were John Burnham & Co. and Iliff
Thorn. R.E.O.F. Limited Partnership has purchased the 29,000-square-foot office
building at 3636 Camino del Rio N. in Mission Valley for $1.12 million.

   The seller was Canada Life Assurance Co. The broker was John Burnham & Co.
Jim Wachtler and Marjorie Deniston have purchased the 20-unit apartment building
at 512 June Way and 513 La Rue for $522,000. The seller was Coast Federal Bank.
The brokers were Grubb & Ellis and CFA Properties. Tamamitsu Jinja Religious
Corp., doing business as the California Institute for Human Sciences, has
purchased an approximately 3-acre parcel at the northeast quadrant of El Camino
Real and Garden View in Encinitas for $800,000. The seller was Byron F. White.

   The broker was John Burnham & Co. WorldTravel Meetings and Incentives L.P.
has signed a five-year, $718,080 lease for 8,000 square feet of space in the
Emerald-Shapery Center at 402 W. Broadway.

   The lessor is 400 West Broadway LLC. The broker was John Burnham & Co. Team
Car Sales of San Diego Inc., doing business as Budget Rent-A-Car, has signed a
seven-year, $663,000 lease for 22,000 square feet of commercial space at 855 N.
Broadway in Escondido.

   The lessor is Hardesty Corners, Ltd. The broker was John Burnham & Co. --
Patrick McGrath [] COMMERCIAL NOTES reports on construction projects, leases and
land/building sales in San Diego County, limited to those with a value exceeding
$500,000. To submit an item for consideration, send complete information to:
Homes, San Diego Union-Tribune, P.O. Box 191, San Diego, CA 92112-4106. A form
will be provided upon request.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: New facility: The Cellular and Molecular Medicine East
building at the UCSD School of Medicine has been completed.; PHOTOBY: DAVID
HEWITT / ANNE GARRISON

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             355 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 14, 1995, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PENINSULA FRIDAY; Pg. P3; SCHOOL NOTES

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: School, Community Center Planned for Redwood Shores

BYLINE: John Wildermuth

BODY:

    An agreement between the Belmont Elementary District and Redwood City will
bring the first school and community center to the Redwood Shores area.  The new
school will be built on city-owned land at Sandpiper Park, with the city and the
school district sharing the cost of the community center that will be built
alongside it.

   Ever since Redwood Shores was developed east of the Bayshore Freeway, schools
have been an issue. Although the bayside community of about 10,000 is part of
Redwood City, children there are bused daily across the freeway to schools in
Belmont.

   The new school, which will serve 450 children in kindergarten through fifth
grade, is expected to open for the 1997 school year. The price tag for the new
school is expected to be about $ 4 million.

   .

   HALF MOON BAY: A trio of sixth-graders from Cunha Intermediate School in Half
Moon Bay were award winners during the Expanding Your Horizons Conference held
at Skyline College last month. Elizabeth Barone, Lindsay Conors and Brittany
Grant each won ''A Day With a Scientist'' with their performances in a problems
and puzzles contest. Each girl was taken to lunch by a woman scientist and given
a tour of the facility where she worked.

   .

   ATHERTON: Two students at Atherton's Menlo School have received scholarships
from the the Menlo Park Rotary Club. Sanaz Hariri of Menlo Park and Michael Ty
of Atherton each were given $ 2,000 scholarships by the club in recognition of
their scholastic achievements and overall contributions to the school and their
communities.

   Hariri and Peter Kahng of Los Altos Hills were also recognized for their
service to the school and the community, while Heather Vaughn of Hillsborough
was honored in the leadership category.

   Two Menlo School students also received awards in the San Mateo County
Science Fair last month.

   Hide Oki, a junior from Palo Alto, won first prize in the math and computers
division for his computer program of a neural network. Walter Dunn, a senior
from Cupertino and a semi-finalist in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search,
took first place in the biological sciences division, for his project on
lyposome mediated gene transfer, a new technique in gene therapy.

   .

   PALO ALTO: Palo Alto School Superintendent Jim Brown will head a statewide
committee that will review the mathematics program now being used in California
public schools.

   Delaine Eastin, state superintendent of schools, formed the committees on
mathematics and reading last week after results of a statewide test showed that
California students are not doing as well as they should.

   Brown's groups will study how districts are using the state mathematics
guidelines, or frameworks, which now put more emphasis on abstract thinking,
problem-solving and group work and less on basic computation than traditional
programs did.

   Brown has been under fire in Palo Alto from parents concerned that their
children are not being taught enough mathematical basics. While Palo Alto
students scored well in the most recent statewide California Learning Assessment
System tests, which are based on the state math framework, both parents and
teachers have been disappointed in the results of other tests, which focus on
more traditional math problems.

   .

   Information for School Notes can be mailed to The Chronicle, 401 Marshall
Street, Redwood City 94063 or faxed to (415) 299-9208.


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995


                             356 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    April 14, 1995, Friday, FLORIDA EDITION

SECTION: HEARTLAND, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 525 words

HEADLINE: Infection may hurt treatment

BODY:


   A new study suggests that some children with asthma who don't respond well to
conventional therapy may be suffering from a persistent, low-level viral
infection.

   The study conducted by a team of Slovenian researchers looked at 34 children
who had unremitting asthma even after treatment with high doses of
corticosteroids, a normally effective therapy.

   A viral complication was suspected because all the children had had at least
one prior episode of bronchiolitis, an inflammation of the small airways that is
common in infants and young children and usually viral in nature.

   Fluid samples taken from the children's lungs showed that 31 (91 percent) had
evidence of infection with an adenovirus.

   Similar tests in 20 children being treated for other lung ailments showed no
signs of adenovirus.

   The findings were reported in the American Journal of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine, which is published by the American Lung Association.

   Asthma experts say the study is significant for two reasons.

   First, it strengthens the theory that viruses may predispose some children to
develop asthma, and second, it may help to explain why some children have asthma
that is very difficult to treat.

   "Most children with asthma do very well if you give them appropriate
treatment, but there's always five to 10 percent with symptoms that are hard to
control," said Hugh O'Brodovich, chief of respiratory medicine at the Hospital
for Sick Children in Toronto.

   O'Brodovich said the finding raises the possibility of an antiviral approach
to asthma therapy in selected patients.

   He noted, however, that there are few effective antiviral agents available,
and it isn't clear that any approved drug would help children with adenovirus
and asthma.

   James Hogg, a professor with the University of British Columbia, said that
the study provides some of the strongest evidence to date that viral infections
can lead to the development of asthma.

   "Researchers showed the continued presence of viral proteins in the airways,
and some children may have an allergic reaction to these proteins that in turn
leads to asthma," said Hogg. "Viral proteins can also change the expression of
genes in the cells they invade, and these changes can produce the inflammation
and thickening of the airway wall that helps to cause asthma."

   Hogg also observed that, by demonstrating the risk of low-level adenoviral
infection, the study raises a flag of caution regarding some approaches to gene
therapy.

   Gene therapy seeks to treat genetic disorders by substituting healthy genes
for faulty or missing genetic material.

   Some researchers are now using "disabled" adenovirus - virus with its
replicative machinery removed - as a vehicle for introducing new genes into
patients.

   Hogg cautioned that if those portions of the virus that were removed are
actually present in the cells of a patient receiving gene therapy, the
adenovirus might reassemble itself, leading to an active and potentially
dangerous infection.  This information has been provided by the American Lung
Association of Gulfcoast Florida. For information, call 800-586-4872.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995


                             357 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     April 13, 1995, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: USC MEDICAL SCHOOL FACES BUDGET CRISIS;
EDUCATION: IN LETTERS TO FACULTY, DEAN SAYS THE INSTITUTION HAS AN $11-MILLION
DEFICIT AND MAY INSTITUTE LAYOFFS OR SALARY CUTS. BUILDING OF STAFF, CHANGES IN
THE HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY ARE CITED AS KEY FACTORS.

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS P. SHUIT, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Feeling a financial squeeze from health care's shift to managed care and the
hiring of star faculty members, the USC School of Medicine faces an $11-million
budget deficit and is considering faculty layoffs, officials confirmed
Wednesday.

   Dean Stephen J. Ryan broke the news to the school's more than 1,000 faculty
members in two letters mailed out in recent weeks. In one of the letters, Ryan
said the county's oldest medical school had run out of temporary fixes for
chronic budget problems and warned that measures to correct the deficit "will
hurt."

   The $11 million represents about 3% of the medical school's budget.

   Ryan said in an interview that the radical changes going on in the health
care industry have caught up with USC and the budget squeeze is structural.

   "We have to address these things, because if we don't, we may not be around.
It's that real," Ryan said.

   Committees composed of department heads and other faculty members are
studying alternatives to layoffs or salary cuts. They are scheduled to present
their recommendations to Ryan at the end of the month.

   Dr. Joseph Van Der Meulen, vice president of health affairs at USC, said the
budget problem will not interrupt service at County-USC Medical Center, the
sprawling hospital complex in Boyle Heights staffed by medical school doctors.

   "We've made it very clear that any contractual obligations we have are not to
be affected by any of this," Van Der Meulen said in an interview Wednesday. "We
have called the county and told them that."

   School officials said two factors have contributed to the crisis. Insurance
companies and health maintenance organizations that run managed care plans have
put hospitals and physicians under competitive pressure to cut rates and the
length of time they keep patients. And academic medical centers, such as USC,
are under even more pressure because they double as medical schools and research
centers, both of which carry high costs.

   Ryan chose to combat these problems in part by recruiting superstar
researchers and clinical practitioners to the medical school's faculty,
believing that was the best way to build clinical business and generate new
research dollars, which now total about $100 million a year. The medical school
has invested $27 million in new faculty and facilities over the last four years.

   Among Ryan's prize recruits are Dr. W. French Anderson, an internationally
known geneticist who directs USC's gene therapy laboratories, who was lured from
the National Institutes of Health; Dr. Vaughn A. Starnes, a heart-lung
transplant specialist enticed to USC from the Stanford University Medical
Center; and Dr. Demetrios Demetriades, a trauma surgeon who moved here from
South Africa two years ago and made a major impact, helping to lower death rates
at County-USC after taking over the medical center's trauma division.

   In a letter to USC faculty members describing the problem, Ryan said he
believes his plan is sound, but said that "not enough time has passed for us to
reap the benefits of this investment, and our short-term return is minimal."

   Sources close to the school say the budget problem has created internal
tensions between the newer faculty members and older ones, some of whom have
been at the school for decades.

   Most of the older employees are protected by tenure, but the administration
has not ruled out layoffs or salary cuts.

   "There is a morale problem among some," said one high-ranking medical school
official. "But I don't think it is anything different than that being
experienced by high-paid employees in other segments of the economy. It seems
like everyone is feeling the crunch these days."

   Dr. Timothy Stout, an ophthalmologist who specializes in retinal surgery, is
one of USC's newest faculty members. He said he and his wife, Dr. Ann Stout,
also a pediatric ophthalmologist, turned down a dozen offers from other medical
schools to come to USC. He said he thinks that academic medical centers across
the nation are facing financial problems and that USC is not unique.

   "I didn't get the feeling that by coming here I was going to a place that was
having a unique problem, nor did I think that this was an unsolvable problem,"
said Stout. "We both think this is a short-term thing."

   A veteran faculty member, plastic surgeon Dr. Randy Sherman, said, "It's a
tricky time, but we are all in this together. We all want to see the dean
succeed."

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995


                             358 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    April 12, 1995, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 17C

LENGTH: 86 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy options on Amex

BODY:


   Options in the stock of Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg will be listed
on the American Stock Exchange beginning today using the symbol "GQE," the
exchange announced yesterday.

   Genetic Therapy, which researches the use of gene therapy to cure genetic and
acquired diseases, will open with strike prices of $ 7.50, $ 10 and $ 12.50, and
position limits of 4,500 contracts. Initial expiration months will be May, June,
August and November of 1995. Genetic Therapy closed yesterday at $ 9.875 a
share.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995


                             359 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 12, 1995 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 130 words

HEADLINE: San Diego and California

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   The State Compensation Fund has obtained a judgment to collect more than $5.5
million in damages from an Orange County man who used the names of deceased
persons to obtain workers' compensation insurance policies in seven cities,
including San Diego.

   Vincent M. Marconi, 63, of Seal Beach, set up temporary employment agencies,
often using the names of dead people to apply for business licenses.

   Once the licenses were established, Marconi and his co-defendants paid only a
fraction of the proper policy premiums for the agencies. Cypros Pharmaceutical
Corp.'s common shares and redeemable Class B warrants began trading yesterday on
Nasdaq National Market System. Vical Inc. has initiated clinical testing of its
cancer gene therapy product at the Arizona Cancer Center in Tucson.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             360 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      April 10, 1995 Monday SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: Hub hospitals testing CF gene therapy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers at two Boston hospitals have begun testing gene therapy on cystic
fibrosis patients for the first time in New England.

   CF is caused by a defective gene that allows abnormally thick fluids to build
up in the lungs.

   The study, underway at Massachusetts General Hospital and the Floating
Hospital for Children at New England Medical Center, seeks to deliver corrected
copies of the bad gene into patients' lungs.

   The idea is that the good genes can overcome the damage being caused by the
abnormal genes, making patients' lungs function close to normal and stop the
decline in lung function that comes with the disease.

   The study is looking at the safety of the treatment. Once proven safe,
researchers can start studying how well it works against the disease - a process
that could take several years.

   "We're hoping that once we put the corrected gene into the cells, patients
will make enough normal protein cells to function normally," said Dr. Henry
Dobkin, director of the Cystic Fibrosis Center at New England Medical Center,
and a co-investigator in the study.

   The idea is that patients could get the gene treatment every month or so to
maintain their lung function.

   "It won't help those with end-stage CF, but it could stop progression of the
disease in those with relatively good lung function left," he said.


LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1995


                             361 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 10, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F11

LENGTH: 1047 words

HEADLINE: Global Perspective Aids Search for Pharmaceutical Executives

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   From his office window at 17th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue in the
District, headhunter John Hawkins sees Gaithersburg and Tokyo on the same
horizon.

   The cities might as well be next door to each other when it comes to finding
top executives for the pharmaceutical industry, which these days range from drug
industry giants to tiny biotech pioneers, a large number of which are clustered
in Maryland.

   "The drug business is a small, small world," said Hawkins, the top executive
recruiter for the drug and life sciences division of New York-based Russell
Reynolds Associates Inc., the second largest executive search firm in the world.

   When he is not traveling, which is half the time, Hawkins splits his days
among offices in the District and Manhattan and his home office near Baltimore.

   Computers, telephones and fax machines help him operate primarily from the
Washington region in his global quest for top management talent. So does this
region's proximity to New York, New Jersey and Boston, which have key
concentrations of major U.S. drug companies, and the budding biotechnology
corridor along suburban Maryland's Interstate 270, where executives often
mention Hawkins as one of the people most attuned to their industry.

   But a change in customer thinking also has helped Russell and his family live
in the place they like best.

   "Clients are less concerned about where you are located," said Hawkins, who
will be 41 in June. The industry is so global, Hawkins said, that he would have
to travel no matter where he was based. The U.S. pharmaceutical world is spread
mostly along the East and West Coasts. Europe, especially England, Germany and
Sweden, is home to many giant drug firms. And markets in South America, Asia and
the Pacific Rim are exploding.

   Hawkins oversees a staff of 20, which has doubled from two years ago. Staff
members are based in New York, Washington, London, Tokyo, Dallas, San Francisco
and Melbourne, Australia.

   He joined Russell Reynolds -- and the headhunting field -- five years ago
after eight years in the life sciences industry, first as an investment banker
with Alex. Brown & Sons Inc. in Baltimore, where he helped several biotech firms
go public, and then as chief financial officer at Invitron Corp., a St. Louis
biomedical company that was a spinoff from Monsanto Co.

   A graduate of the University of Virginia and the Amos Tuck School of Business
at Dartmouth College, Hawkins -- and his colleagues -- in recent years placed
Carl Feldbaum as president of the Washington-based Biotechnology Industry
Organization trade group; Michael Casey as president of Genetic Therapy Inc., in
Gaithersburg;, and Bernard Canavan, president of drug giant American Home
Products Corp., as a director of the tiny biotech firm of Magainin
Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Plymouth Meeting, Pa.

   Those are among the more than 300 completed searches his group conducted in
the past two years, spread evenly among North America, Europe and the
Asia/Pacific region. His current work includes a search for someone to head the
$ 500 million Japanese division of one of the world's five biggest drug
companies -- he can't say which one.

   Discretion, in fact, is an essential characteristic of a headhunter, he said,
both to protect potential job candidates from the ire of their current employers
and to shield the executives who aren't aware of a search to replace them.

   The catbird's seat that headhunters occupy will be especially eventful in the
near future for Hawkins and others specializing in the drug industry, where cost
cuts in health care are causing a consolidation that will eliminate an estimated
25,000 jobs this year alone.

   These changes, coupled with the increasing trend toward lack of allegiance
among employees, has helped the headhunting business in drugs boom in the past
few years.

   Russell Reynolds was founded in late 1960s to specialize in headhunting for
the financial services industry. Now health care searches, which are expected to
grow by 10 percent to 15 percent a year for several years, are among the
fast-growing business areas for the firm, Hawkins says. Wall Street analysts
estimate Russell Reynolds has annual revenue of $ 100 million to $ 150 million a
year, with about 10 percent of it coming from the health care.

   Hawkins say that the average search takes 120 days. Clients are charged an
upfront retainer ranging from $ 100,000 to $ 200,000, which, once the search is
completed is subtracted from a charge equal to 35 percent of the recruited
person's first-year cash compensation. And these days, top executives routinely
earn six-figure salaries, not uncommonly even seven-figure ones.

   The higher up the job being filled, Hawkins said, the easier is the search,
because the pool of qualified candidates is smaller and easier to pick from.
Also, most of those qualified candidates are likely to want the job.

   Hawkins said his job requires him to play several roles:

   The counselor who listens as carefully to the concerns of spouses as to those
of candidates, and who remembers to send flowers or provide other touches to
help woo potential hires.

   The market analyst who sizes up situations, and who matches people by talent
and temperament to the needs and corporate cultures of particular clients.

   The private eye who detects shaky hands (that recently revealed an alcoholic
among three candidates who had made it to the final round) and coaxes out the
information that perhaps is hardest to obtain, namely honest evaluations from
former employers and co-workers of a candidate's weaknesses and strengths.

   The investment banker who puts together deals, often for money, as when he's
matching executive and company. Sometimes the deal is done for free, and is a
way to engender goodwill among clients, as when Hawkins recently got two client
companies talking about the possibility of one buying the subsidiary of the
other.

   The most common mistake candidates that top executive jobs make? "They're
overly arrogant," Hawkins said. "Self-esteem is important. Humility's also
important."

   His advice for headhunters: Don't ignore the wife or husband.

   "One of the biggest mistakes you can make," he says, "is to take a spouse's
approval of a new job for granted." *


GRAPHIC: Photo, larry morris, In recruiting, John Hawkins's roles include
counselor, market analyst and private eye.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1995


                             362 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 9, 1995, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1974 words

HEADLINE: 10,000 cases, and AIDS endures;
As the epidemic reaches a milestone, awareness and indifference grow

BYLINE: By Pamela Ferdinand, Contributing Reporter

BODY:

    The death certificate for a man in his late 30s puzzled Boston funeral
director Kenneth F. Bennett when he saw it 13 years ago. It read, "acquired
immune deficiency syndrome," and a mystified Bennett remembers calling a state
health official to ask precisely what that meant.

   "He indicated that this was the beginning of a very serious epidemic,"
Bennett recalled.

   That case, in 1982, was one of the state's first reported AIDS-related
deaths. Today, Bennett handles three such deaths a week at his Kenmore Square
funeral home.

   Last month, the state passed a grim milestone when the 10,000th person in
Massachusetts was diagnosed with AIDS, of whom some 6,000 have died. Another
30,000 have tested positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that
causes the disease.

   Now the leading cause of death for those aged 25-44 in the United States, the
face of AIDS has changed dramatically in Massachusetts and the nation. Women
account for 50 percent of new infections. The percentage of cases among
heterosexuals increased from 9.2 percent in 1993 to 10.3 percent in 1994. The
as-yet uncurable disease has produced a social culture bound by fear, loss and
love. It has led to medical breakthroughs, anti-discrimination laws, improved
sex education and expanded social services.

   Nearly 2,000 people living with AIDS or HIV celebrate Thanksgiving together
each year in Hynes Auditorium. Hundreds pray in an annual healing service every
winter at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross in the South End.

   Awareness has grown, with admissions by celebrities like Greg Louganis and
Magic Johnson. But so has indifference. Kids can recite virus facts and bodily
fluids - but don't change their sexual behavior. Discrimination persists, and
some fear compassion will dwindle in a climate of funding cuts.

   Larry Kessler, executive director of the AIDS Action Committee, said of the
state's 10,000th diagnosis of AIDS: "It's a good reminder that while you weren't
paying attention, something has been happening, and 10,000 is no small potatoes.
They are your neighbors, your co-workers and your friends. And now they have
AIDS."
 Robert Allen, 36, of Methuen, had three sexual partners in his lifetime. He was
diagnosed with HIV in 1985.

   A slender man with blue eyes, reddish-blond cropped hair and a moustache,
Allen thought he was going to die several years ago. So he spent his savings on
gifts for nieces and nephews and trips to Puerto Rico and Mexico.

   Now he is a longtime survivor, living in a public housing development filled
with elderly residents because his savings were depleted. His mother hasn't
spoken to him since he went public with his homosexuality by making an AIDS
quilt panel in memory of his partner of seven years, Steven, who died in 1991
and whose photo remains on the side of his refrigerator.

   Allen has had meningitis and suffers badly from neuropathy, which makes his
muscles ache, and occasional night sweats, which drench his sheets. But he still
volunteers for an AIDS agency three times a week and takes a daily handful of
pills.

   "I take really good care of myself, plenty of sleep, make sure I eat right
and make sure people don't stress me out," says Allen. "I stopped going to
funerals unless it's a really close friend. I just can't do any more funerals."
 In 1983, people diagnosed with HIV typically lived six months. Now they live an
average of 30 months from diagnosis, doctors say.

   Improved doses and combinations of drugs such as AZT and 3TC help, and
antibiotics prevent related infections, including pneumocystis, which causes
severe pneumonia. Researchers are also testing new drugs and investigating gene
therapy, and they recently reported the first case of an infant infected at
birth who fended off the virus by his first birthday.

   An informal poll by the Harvard AIDS Institute last year showed 50 leading
AIDS scientists and policy makers believe that AIDS will eventually be
effectively treated and cured. Many are also calling for efforts to develop
international vaccines and surveillance of lethal, foreign HIV strains. At a
conference Wednesday, institute chairman Max Essex called for national screening
to see if yet more infectious HIV subtypes are moving into the United States.

   Generally, someone infected with the HIV virus in the last two years with a
white blood cell count above 200, who eats properly and exercises, stands a
decent chance of maintaining a good quality of life, said Jerome Groopman, a New
England Deaconess Hospital hematologist and Harvard University professor of
medicine.

   "The disease is not cured, but I think we are on the right road," Groopman
said. "There's much better understanding and empathy on the part of the academic
community and more trust on the part of the HIV-infected community, so that has
removed a lot of the conflict that led to people rejecting mainstream
treatment."

   In Massachusetts, dozens of clinics and social service agencies have sprung
up since AIDS first appeared in the early 1980s. In Cambridge, for instance,
with the highest number of AIDS cases in Middlesex County, the Zinberg Clinic
saw 50 people in 1990. It now treats 400 people with HIV annually, a quarter of
whom have AIDS.

   The state budget for AIDS-related services, slated to remain level next year,
increased to $ 37.5 million in 1995 from $ 18.2 million in 1992, Department of
Public Health figures show.

   About 1,300 injection drug users participate in pilot needle exchange
programs in Cambridge and Boston. New residences for people with HIV and AIDS
are planned for the Fenway and Beacon Hill. Religious groups opposed to
homosexuality and contraception run support groups, meals, hospices and special
functions for those with AIDS, including the annual Catholic Church healing
service at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross.

   "Last year, the cardinal went to one young man holding a 2-year-old," said
Sister Zita Fleming, director of the Archdiocese of Boston's Office of Aids
Ministry. "I was close enough to say, 'Which one is to be anointed?' and the
father said, 'Both.' You just weep."

   Increasingly, the courts will have to determine the rights of HIV-infected
people, from issues of confidentiality and mandatory testing to definitions of
"reasonable accommodation" when employees with HIV or AIDS miss work, said
Janice H. Platner, executive director of Gay and Lesbian Advocates and
Defenders.

   "We've had discrimination cases in emergency rooms and all sorts of places
that should know better," Platner said. "People are discriminating and not
apologizing for it."
 Catherine Gaudette, 25, of Milford, says she suffered for months with chronic
pain because doctors accustomed to treating men failed to detect her
gynecological infections. She contracted HIV after her college freshman year
through unprotected sex with her fiance. She tested positive in 1990 and was
diagnosed with AIDS in August 1992.

   By then, she had discovered that the former fiance, who told her he had
cancer, had been keeping two secrets: He was a heroin addict and he had a gay
lover.

   Gaudette says she transferred to four colleges to complete a psychology
degree, twice because of discrimination. One professor told AIDS jokes in class.
Two roommates broke into her locked file cabinets, discovered HIV pamphlets and
tried to get her thrown out of school.

   "Being a straight woman with this disease has been very lonely because people
automatically assume that I'm a drug user," said Gaudette, who speaks to
children about AIDS and appears healthy at 5-feet-7 and 165 pounds. "I'm not
sick looking. It scares the crap out of them, actually, because they're just
like, 'I thought you could tell by looking.' "
 AIDS has become an illness transmitted without regard for sexual identity,
gender or race. Half of the state's residents with AIDS now live outside Greater
Boston, up from 33 percent in 1986. But many suburban professionals are
reluctant to come forward, said Madelaine St. Amand, executive director of
Strongest Link.

   While state officials say the disease has shifted to new populations, others
say recent statistics reflect greater attention to minority communities still in
need of housing, culturally sensitive education and medical treatment.

   In one case, HIV-related lesions on a Latino man's skin were not recognized
because they were brown, not purple, said Nicolas P. Carballeira, director of
the Latino Health Institute. That has changed to the extent that "a thin Latino
coughing very often is misdiagnosed with HIV or AIDS because people now expect
minority communities to be infected," he said.

   "AIDS is directly killing the minority community," said Jeffrey Beard,
executive director of the Cambridge Men of Color Task Force, who lost his
brother to AIDS. "The challenge is outreach, to get to where people are."

   Injection drug users, many of whom are female and minority, represent a
growing segment of the AIDS population as the purity of heroin increases and its
price falls. Statistics show AIDS transmission through injections statewide have
nearly tripled in the past 10 years to 47 percent of all cases diagnosed in
1994.

   Crack smoking and oral sex are also "extraordinarily dangerous" because the
pipe leaves burns in the mouth, said Mark Kleiman, associate public policy
professor at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government.

   He suggested that police crack down on places where people shoot heroin,
rather than arrest those who illegally circulate clean needles, to prevent
sharing. Massachusetts requires prescriptions for needles and syringes, and
police respond they are merely enforcing the law.

   Said Kleiman, "The law enforcement community has not been interested in AIDS
control, and the AIDS community has not been interested in law enforcement."
 Rafael Fainz, 21, a gay Latino man from Haverhill with jet black hair and brown
eyes, estimates that he had sex with 200 partners, including many strangers at
highway rest stops, but had unprotected sex with only two or three of them.

   "That's the important thing. It's not the quantity, it's the quality of sex
that you have with each one," says Fainz, who was diagnosed with HIV at age 18.
"When you're out in the woods and stuff, you really don't have the availability
of condoms."

   In his Catholic home and parochial school, Fainz says no one ever spoke to
him about sex and told him AIDS was a "gay thing." What little he learned he
learned through the Boston Alliance for Gay and Lesbian Youth.

   The youngsters Fainz speaks to as a health educator at the Latino Health
Institute either believe AIDS can't happen to them or are absolutely convinced
it will, he says: "They think, 'It's hopeless, so why not just do it and have
fun and go out with a smile?' "
 A new generation is at risk, and some suggest AIDS activism has been misguided,
treating the symptom and not the disease.

   "Don't have sex outside of marriage, and don't do drugs," said Nancy Sutton,
executive director of Family First in Needham. "The conventional wisdom is that
if you use condoms and sterilized needles, you won't have any problems. But
that's ridiculous. Eventually condoms break and needles get dirty." While AIDS
activists push for condom use and safe-sex education, others, like Sutton, say
abstinence is the only answer.

   Felicia Swan, 17, says she knows not to have sex without a condom. But the
Boston teen-ager adds, "Guys know about AIDS, but they think they're too good to
catch it."

   At J.S. Waterman & Sons funeral home in Kenmore Square, more lovKNOTT / Marc
Silver, who was diagnosed with HIV in 1989, is blessed at a Catholic service in
the South End.(COLOR) 2. GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/JANET KNOTT / HIV-positive
congregants gather for a service at the Jesuit Urban Center at the Church of the
Immaculate Conception in the South End.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1995


                             363 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 9, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Editorials; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY;
Promising research is expensive but offers hope

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Brilliant minds in Houston are applying themselves in
dramatic new ways to the search for cures to the world's dread
cancers, inherited diseases and chronic and life-sapping disorders.

   In a special section last Sunday, Chronicle medical writer Ruth
SoRelle and photographer Carlos Antonio Rios surveyed this frontier
and the doctors, nurses, researchers and technicians who are
exploring it.  They had the perfect perch from which to observe the
research: Houston is a world leader in the promising and mysterious
medical field of genetic therapy that offers so much hope for
health.

   As is often a reality in life, however, money is an object.

   Gene therapy is incredibly expensive and competition for limited
research grants is fierce.  The National Institutes of Health, the
provider of much of the seed money for such cutting-edge research,
faces $ 2.5 billion in cuts by Congress, which must reduce the
federal deficit.  The country's budget problems are severe enough to
make putting even the funding of worthy projects out of harm's way
difficult to justify.  Still, lawmakers should think very carefully
before making cuts in NIH funding.  In the long run, cures are far
cheaper than long treatments for incurable diseases.  Most
important, cures also alleviate human suffering.

   Moreover, continued funding of this vital research will help
Houston doctors and researchers make the great leap from experiment
to application on actual patients.  In this regard, insurance
providers must develop a more humane view toward paying medical
bills for experimental treatments.  Only through human trials will
seemingly miraculous treatments become commonplace.  In the long
run, again, aiding in the search for cures will provide bottom-line
benefits for insurance companies.

   Private foundations and endowments, which have traditionally
invested millions of dollars in the important endeavor of building
schools and hospitals, also could do much toward developing
fruitful gene therapies by providing money for research.  If
Congress must cut government research funding, foundations and
endowments could go a long way toward filling the resulting gaps.

   Entrepreneurs would do well to invest in biotechnology firms -- in
effect investing in future treatments.  SoRelle, a lay expert in
this field, likens investing in gene therapies to investing in the
companies that were cutting-edge earlier in this century but are
blue chips today.

   The amount of work going on locally is astonishing, as the
section, which has received national attention pointed out.  Baylor
College of Medicine is developing genetic therapies, which doctors
will test some day at Methodist, St.Luke's, Veterans or at the
Harris County Hospital District.  The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center has two treatments and two trials to mark
cells with genes under way.  Texas Heart Institute and UT Health
Science Center are gearing up for gene therapy programs.  UT likely
will test its findings at Hermann, St. Luke's, Texas Heart
Institute and Lyndon B. Johnson hospitals.

   Research on this level attracts the brightest students,
researchers and doctors to Houston.  It is a magnet and a beacon for
desperate patients.  Continued funding for and attention to this
research will continue to bring Houston ever greater rewards in
terms of economy, prestige and lives saved.

TYPE: Editorial Opinion

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1995


                             364 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 9, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Viewpoints; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 53 words

HEADLINE: Good journalism genes

BYLINE: ANNE STEWART HELTON

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:

   Reporter Ruth SoRelle and photographer Carlos Rios have managed
to top their usual excellence (""The gene doctors,'' Chronicle,
April 2).

   Ruth's scholarly attention to the story of gene therapy came
alive with obvious empathy to the human side of the research.

   This special report by the Chronicle is a keeper.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Laboratory coordinator Lap Huynh displays specially processed
bone marrow to which a gene will be added; Carlos Antonio Rios/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1995


                             365 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     APRIL 8, 1995, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: DAILY DATEBOOK; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: DNA GOES TO THE DOGS
 Canine study part of huge genetics exhibition at Exploratorium

BYLINE: DAVID PERLMAN, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    A couple of frisky dogs whose purebred genes endowed them with different
shapes, sizes and attitudes have created a motley family of descendants that
offer scientists -- and the public -- a chance to study genetics in action.

   Gregor Mendel is a 37-pound male Border collie whose hereditary lot in life
is herding sheep. His mate is Pepper, a 90-pound web- footed female
Newfoundland, born and bred to be a vigorous ocean swimmer.

   They and their 16 descendants live in homes throughout the Bay Area,
including that of Jasper D. Rine, a molecular geneticist at the University of
California at Berkeley who is studying how canine genes vary as breeds mix and
their generations reproduce. Eventually, Rine hopes to analyze the genetic
characteristics of more than 100 descendants of Gregor and Pepper in a kind of
Canine Genome Project.

   Later this spring Rine will demonstrate and discuss the genetic diversity of
this dog dynasty at the Exploratorium, San Francisco's hands-on science museum,
where a blockbuster show on genetics opens today and runs through September 4.

   Although obscure to most people, the DNA revolution is already affecting
everyone's life for better or worse, and the Exploratorium's new exhibition --
one of the most ambitious in the museum's 25-year history -- hopes to make the
world of living DNA clear to everyone.

   DNA, a single molecule that exists in almost infinite variety, is the stuff
of genes and the basis of heredity. It's a chemical that has launched a
revolution in science, health and industry.

   Cancer, alcoholism, Alzheimer's, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis and
dozens of other diseases can all be caused -- at least in part -- by defective
genes. Gene therapy experiments are already attacking disorders as varied as
malignant melanoma and hereditary birth defects, and other tools are helping to
warn people of inherited diseases before they strike.

   After months of preparation, the Exploratorium is staging ''Diving Into the
Gene Pool'' to bare the secrets of the genes that govern the form and function
of every living thing.

    In all, the Exploratorium's life sciences department has created 30 novel
exhibits to explain what DNA is and how it carries its load of genetic
information. Some demonstrate the tools researchers use to probe genes and
reveal their function. Some show how other living species are related to humans.
And some shed light on evolution -- from the DNA of insects entombed in amber
millions of years ago to the genes of chimpanzees today.

   The wide-ranging program fea tures dramatic exhibits, animated films and
hands-on interactive experiments that nonscientists of all ages can mess around
with for minutes or hours.

   Also scheduled is a series of panel discussions with leading scientists and
ethicists, and a series of Sunday special events that will allow visitors to see
lively examples of the science of genetics. Genetically engineered vegetables
will be cooked one day, for instance, and rose growers will fill the air with
the scent of cross-bred blooms on another.

   Gregor, Pepper and a number of their offspring will show off their
similarities and differences on Sunday, June 25.

   Exploratorium visitors on another Sunday can pick up free packets of
''heirloom'' seeds to take home so they can plant vegetables whose diversity is
fast disappearing. Some of these, such as purple string beans, red carrots,
lemon cucumbers and other weird veggies, will be on the museum menu for a DNA
dining festival in August.

   The Gene Pool exhibition will also include a demonstration of DNA
fingerprinting, the identification technique that has provided more conclusive
evidence in murder trials. (DNA extracted from blood samples is in the news
right now, in the O.J. Simpson case.)

   The twisted, ladder-like molecules of DNA form the basis of all the genes in
every human being. Every human cell carries somewhere between 50,000 and 150,000
genes, which contain a total of about 3 billion bits of information that govern
the forms and functions of all human tissues and determine all human heredity.

   As part of a worldwide effort, the United States is now in the midst of a $ 3
billion Human Genome Project whose scientists are hoping to map the location and
determine the chemical structure of every gene hidden inside every human cell.

   In the Bay Area, scientists are at work on the project at Stanford, the
University of California in San Francisco and UC's Lawrence laboratories at
Berkeley and Livermore.

   The important ethical issues emerging from the explosion of genetics research
will be examined by scientists and ethicists in a series of three Wednesday
evening forums at the Palace of Fine Arts Theater, adjoining the Exploratorium.

   On April 19 at 7:30 p.m., a panel headed by Leroy Hood, the inventor of
gene-sequencing technology, and ethicist-physician William Atchley will address
''The Myths and Promises of the Human Genome Project.''

   On April 28, a second panel will consider issues of race and privacy, with
geneticist Mary-Claire King and sociologist Troy Duster of UC Berkeley and
Genome Project ethicist Michael Yesley.

   The third Wednesday forum, on May 17, will consider the biotechnology
industry with discussion by David Martin of the Chiron Corp., pediatrician
Norman Frost of the University of Wisconsin and geneticist Anne Walker of UC
Irvine.

    'DIVING INTO THE GENE POOL'

   ''Diving Into the Gene Pool'' starts today and runs through September 4 at
the Exploratorium, 3601 Lyon Street, San Francisco. The museum is open Tuesdays
through Sundays. For hours and ticket prices call (415) 353-0423; for
information on the Wednesday discussion series at the Palace of Fine Arts
Theater, tickets $ 10, call (415) 392-4400 or (510) 762-BASS. For information
online: http://wwwexploratorium.edu

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (6),(1) Border collie Gregor Mendel (right) and Newfoundland
Pepper (at his feet) are the proud parents and grandparents of 16 descendants,
some of whom are pictured with them; below, a sampling of their family genealogy
shows a second and third generation , BY JERRY TELFER, THE CHRONICLE,(2)
Grandmother , Pepper, (3) Grandfather , Gregor Mendel, (4) Mother , Minsky,(5)
Daughter , Dixie, (6) Son , Leika

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1995


                             366 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       April 7, 1995 Friday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: Business Breifcase

BODY:

   RATES: Fixed-rate, 30-year mortgages averaged 8.41 percent this week, up from
8.38 percent last week, according to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
One-year adjustables averaged 6.41 percent, up from 6.37 percent, while 15-year
mortgages averaged 7.99 percent, from 7.96 percent.

   MERGER: The boards of the New England Medical Center and New England
Deaconess Hospital on Wednesday voted to re-affirm their intent to merge the two
institutions and authorized their management teams to begin the regulatory
filings needed to complete the merger.

   GRANT: TECnet, a cooperative computer resource of Tufts University, has
received a $ 981,490 grant from the U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Sen.
Edward Kennedy's office announced yesterday. The award will enhance the network
that links 44 manufacturing technology centers nationwide with TECnet's
database. The free centers allow small firms to get information on new
technology and other business help.

   NEW PREZ: A media joint venture of Bell Atlantic Corp., Nynex Corp. and
Pacific Telesis Group, has named Fox Broadcasting Co.'s Sandy Grushow president
of the venture. Grushow, 35, helped create the TV hit "Melrose Place" as Fox
Entertainment Group president. The new network will offer traditional
programming as well as interactive and informational services delivered over
phone lines. The venture plans initially to compete head-on with cable TV
operators in six of the seven top markets.

   GENZYME: Researchers at two Boston medical centers, in collaboration with a
local biotechnology company, yesterday announced that they have begun the first
cystic fibrosis (CF) gene therapy human research in New England. The two-part
protocol will be performed at both the Floating Hospital for Children at New
England Medical Center and Massachusetts General Hospital, in collaboration with
Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1995


                             367 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            April 6, 1995, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: BIOMEDICAL FIRM REACHES MARKETING DEAL

BYLINE: Bill Henson, Dispatch Business Reporter

BODY:


   Progenitor Inc., a local start-up biomedical company, has entered into an
agreement with California-based Chiron Corp. to develop and sell Progenitor's
gene therapy technology.

   The agreement has a potential value of $ 50 million to Progenitor, said
Douglass B. Given, its president and chief executive. Progenitor has research
offices in Columbus and Athens, Ohio.

   Given said the venture will provide the Ohio company and its scientists with
the resources to ''accelerate clinical and commercial development'' of its
medical technologies.

   Progenitor, a subsidiary of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Lexington,
Mass., was established in 1992 to commercialize cellular and genetic therapies
developed by researchers at Ohio University's Edison BioTechnology Institute.

   One researcher, Thomas E. Wagner, the scientific founder of Progenitor,
developed key elements of the gene therapy technologies. International rights to
the patent application for the technology were licensed by the company from Ohio
University in 1993.

   Under the Chiron agreement, Progenitor retains all rights to the cell therapy
technologies which Chiron will use in making various drugs for treatment of
cancer, heart ailments and infectious diseases.

   The Edison institute is an affiliate of Cleveland-based Edison BioTechnology
Center, an organization of more than 85 medical institutions and businesses. It
is involved in promoting the biotech industry in Ohio and is partially funded by
the state Department of Development. The institute at Ohio University receives
funding for research from companies and government grants, including the
National Institutes of Health.

   In November, Progenitor was awarded a $ 2 million grant from the U.S.
Department of Commerce to develop genetically engineered universal donor cells.

   A company spokesman said Progenitor also is in contract negotiations with
another large pharmaceutical company. He declined to identify the drug
manufacturer but said an agreement could be reached within the next ''two to
four weeks.''

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1995


                             368 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 5, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 78

LENGTH: 137 words

HEADLINE: Progenitor unit in pact;
BUSINESS, BRIEFLY

BYLINE: By Ronald Roseberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    PROGENITOR INC., a subsidiary of Lexington-based Interneuron Pharmaceuticals
Inc., and Chiron Corp. agreed to collaborate in the development and
commercialization of an experimental gene therapy technology to treat certain
cancers and other diseases in a deal worth as much as $ 50 million. After a
letter of intent is signed, Progenitor will receive $ 2.5 million under the pact
that calls for Progenitor, of Columbus, Ohio, and Chiron, one of the nation's
largest biotechnology companies, based in Emeryville, Calif., to jointly
continue development of Progenitor's lead gene-therapy product to treat
solid-tumor cancers. Both companies will also explore working together to create
drug therapies to treat cardiovascular disorders and infectious diseases for
which Chiron gains manufacturing and marketing rights.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1995


                             369 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       APRIL 3, 1995 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1540 words

HEADLINE: NEW SURGICAL FRONTIER: OPERATING ON FETUSES SOON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL,
TOO, WILL HOST COMPLEX OPERATIONS ON THE UNBORN. CRITICS SEE ETHICAL PROBLEMS.

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The patient was diagnosed with spina bifida, a common birth defect that can
cause paralysis and a lifetime of special care.

   Doctors decided to operate. But the patient had yet to be born.

   What unfolded last fall at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville,
Tenn., was a pioneering operation on a 22-week-old fetus to repair a spinal
defect while it was still in its mother's womb.

   In December, a vigorous 6-pound, 8-ounce boy was born.

   While the long-term outlook for the child is not known, the experimental
operation is one of the most dramatic examples to date of an evolving and
promising field of medicine - fetal surgery.

   Not so long ago, parents had no way of learning whether their baby would be
born healthy or sick. The fetus was shut off from medical observation in the
warmth and darkness of the womb.

   But with sophisticated prenatal screenings such as ultrasound exams and new
genetic tests, doctors are diagnosing more and more problems before birth - and,
in some cases, treating them.

   "You have to think in terms of the fetus as a patient," said Dr. N. Scott
Adzick, who does fetal surgery at the University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF).

   Adzick will move this summer to Children's Hospital of Philadelphia to become
surgeon-in-chief and establish the area's first fetal surgery program. He said
he would collaborate with experts in maternal-fetal medicine at the Hospital of
the University of Pennsylvania.

   Already, doctors at UCSF and several other centers have operated on fetuses
with conditions that would have caused them to die before birth. They operated
to relieve urinary tract obstructions; to repair hernias that caused the
contents of the abdomen to press on the lungs and stunt their development; and
to remove large cysts from fetal lungs, a condition that hinders lung growth and
can lead to heart failure.

   The experimental fetal surgery has had mixed results, including fetal deaths.
Even if the surgery succeeds, there's a big risk of premature labor, which also
can affect survival.

   Dr. Frank Manning, who maintains an international fetal surgery registry at
the University of Manitoba in Canada, said there also had been several attempts
at heart surgery in fetuses. Adzick's team has experimented with placing a
pacemaker in a fetus.

   To their amazement, doctors have found that when fetuses are operated on,
there is little or no scarring of the skin - a fact that could make it
attractive to repair less serious problems, such as cleft palates, before birth.

   Doctors are looking toward the day when they can not only fix physical
defects in utero with confidence, but also use techniques of gene therapy and
blood cell transplants to correct inherited disorders such as thalassemia,
Tay-Sachs disease and cystic fibrosis. Early research toward that goal is
already under way.

   "There are mind-boggling implications because this could affect thousands and
thousands of fetuses," Adzick said.

   *

   The Vanderbilt doctors have declined to publicly discuss their attempt to
repair spina bifida in the baby born last December. They plan to do a total of
five fetal repairs and then report the results in a medical journal, according
to Doug Williams, a hospital spokesman. A second fetus has undergone the
operation, he said.

   A Vanderbilt hospital newsletter reported that the surgical procedure and
subsequent delivery of the seemingly healthy baby went smoothly, but it would
not be known for some time how the child would fare.

   While details of the surgery have not been released, some of the same
Vanderbilt doctors reported in 1993 in the journal Neurosurgery on a technique
for repairing spina bifida, which they tested on sheep.

   In their sheep experiment, the doctors cut open the abdomen of a pregnant ewe
and then operated through tiny holes made in the uterus, using long- handled
instruments and a viewing instrument called an endoscope to see inside. They
covered the opening in the fetal spine with a skin graft from the mother.

   If such surgery were proven to work in humans, the benefits could be
enormous.

   Spina bifida is the most common debilitating birth defect, affecting one of
every 1,000 births.

   The defect occurs early in pregnancy when the development of the spinal cord
goes awry. Part of one or more of the spine's vertebrae fails to develop and
close completely, leaving a portion of the spinal cord, the body's central track
of nerves, exposed. The spinal defect and resulting nerve damage can cause loss
of movement in the legs; hip and leg deformities; loss of bladder and bowel
control; and hydrocephalus, a buildup of fluid within the skull that can cause
brain damage.

   Pregnant women are now routinely offered a blood test called AFP at the 16th
week of pregnancy to check for elevated levels of a protein called alpha-
fetoprotein, which can signal the possibility that the fetus has spina bifida.
Many women decide to have an abortion if spina bifida is confirmed by ultrasound
examination. Babies born with spina bifida usually are operated on soon after
birth, but the damage already done to the nerves cannot be undone.

   Adzick said the rationale for repairing the defect before birth is based on
the belief that the nerve damage occurs when the spinal cord is exposed to the
amniotic fluid surrounding the fetus.Damage also can happen when the unprotected
spinal cord bumps up against the uterus, Adzick said.

   If the exposed spinal cord is covered in utero, Adzick said, the nerves would
be protected from the amniotic fluid and damage could be prevented.

   In the current issue of the journal Nature Medicine, published Saturday,
Adzick and his colleagues at UCSF report doing such an experiment in sheep. They
created spinal defects in fetal sheep similar to those found in humans with
spina bifida and the fetuses were then returned to the womb.

   The fetal sheep were operated on again 25 days later to place a covering of
muscle tissue over the spinal defect. When the lambs were born, the researchers
reported, they had near-normal motor abilities and other neurologic function. In
contrast, lambs in which spinal defects were created but not repaired in the
womb were born with the physical impairments of spina bifida.

   "Spina bifida repair in utero may rescue neurologic function at birth and
could be a revolutionary approach to an unsolved problem," the researchers
concluded.

   Still, Adzick said in an interview last week, his team is "nowhere near to
doing this with humans."

   Adzick said more research was needed because it was not yet clear at what
week of pregnancy it would be best to do the surgery. It is technically easier
to operate on a larger fetus, he said, but in the case of spina bifida, the
procedure would have to be done before significant nerve damage occurs.

   Dr. Mark Magnusson, director of the spina-bifida program at Children's
Hospital, said that while the research was fascinating, it remained to be proven
whether doing fetal surgery in humans could indeed prevent nerve damage and
improve function after birth.

   *

   Up to now, doctors have reserved fetal surgery for cases in which the fetus
is unlikely to survive. Spina bifida is different. It is not usually life-
threatening.

   Because of that, the ethical considerations - the risks to the mother and
fetus vs. the potential benefits to the fetus - may be more complicated.

   Arthur Caplan, a medical ethicist at the University of Pennsylvania, said he
believed spina bifida was a severe enough condition to justify attempting to
correct it before birth.

   "There is no doubt that spina bifida is so debilitating and such a
significant impairment that it makes sense to at least present to parents and
mother their choices about whether they want to impose certain risks on the
fetus and certain risks on themselves to try to treat it," Caplan said.

   Caplan said the issues confronting prospective parents would only get more
confusing as more and more fetal treatments became available.

   For Todd and Jill Crosland, of Salt Lake City, Utah, the decision was clear
two years ago when a routine ultrasound at the 20th week of Jill's pregnancy
showed that a large cyst was growing in their baby's lung, preventing it from
developing. Typically, fluid builds up in the fetus' chest, signaling the
beginnings of heart failure.

   The Croslands were told their baby had little chance of making it. But they
learned of the surgery at UCSF and flew there for an evaluation.

   "I felt that this was my only chance to save him," Jill Crosland said. "He
was going to die anyways so I was willing to take the risk."

   In her 24th week of pregnancy, Crosland and her fetus were anesthesized, and
Adzick and a surgical team made an incision in her abdomen and uterus. The fetus
was partially removed from the womb, the large cyst was cut out, and the fetus
was returned to the womb.

   Crosland was put on medication and bedrest to stave off labor, but the baby,
named Benjamin, was born prematurely, six weeks after the surgery. He initially
needed help with breathing, but soon began to thrive.

   "He's perfectly normal," Crosland said last week of her 2-year-old son. "He's
doing all the things normal toddlers do."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DIAGRAM;

PHOTO (1)
1. Dr. N. Scott Adzick, who has done fetal surgery, will soon move to
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia from the University of California, San
Francisco. He plans to set up a fetal surgery program here. (For The Inquirer
, SAM MORRIS)
DIAGRAM (1)
1. Spina Bifida (SOURCE: Children's Hospital of Philadelphia; The
Philadelphia Inquirer, CRISTINA RIVERO)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             370 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 03, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F31

LENGTH: 1401 words

HEADLINE: Mini-Bull Market Gives a Boost to Small Companies

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Wow, we needed that! After such a dreary 1994, it was refreshing to see stock
prices rise for a change -- and stay up there. The advance, as usual, was led by
the big-blue chip Dow stocks. But, unlike last year, the rally extended to
small-company stocks -- giving them a solid and long-awaited boost.

   The mini-bull market in the first quarter -- January, February and March --
was especially welcome in the Washington region, where stock prices spent most
of last year in a downward spiral. Here, as elsewhere, the decline was caused by
the Federal Reserve's decision early last year to raise interest rates. Now that
the Fed seems to have finished pushing rates higher, investors are returning.

   One of the surprising things about the rally was that so few market
strategists expected it. At the start of the year, the consensus was that the
market would do poorly early in the year, but much better later on. So much for
crystal ball gazing.

   The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 4157.69 on Friday for a gain of
8.4 percent. The New York Stock Exchange composite was close behind with an 8
percent gain while the Standard & Poor's 500 index climbed 9 percent. The Nasdaq
composite gained 8.9 percent.

   In the Washington region, the Johnston Lemon index of 30 area blue-chip
stocks was up 6.4 percent for the first quarter. The Washington Business stock
index rose 11 percent. Gainers outnumbered losers by more than 2 to 1.

   Here are the regional stocks, selling for $ 2 or more, that did the best and
the worst in the first quarter. The name of each company, its stock symbol and
location, are followed by its stock prices on Dec. 30, 1994, and March 31, and
the percentage of gain or loss.

   First, the winners:

   Data Measurement Corp. (DMCB), Gaithersburg. ($ 4.75, $ 10; up 110.5
percent). A maker of computerized measurement and control systems, the firm's
sales and profit improved substantially last year, thanks to more sophisticated
machinery and a pickup in international business.

   FastComm Communications Corp.  (FSCX), Sterling. ($ 3.50, $ 6.94; up 98.3
percent). The firm, which sells equipment used in data communications networks,
continues to struggle for profitability. After falling 71.7 percent last year,
FastComm shares have rebounded. The company recently raised $ 1.2 million from
private investors, including company officers.

   CD Radio Inc. (CDRD), Washington. ($ 2.03, $ 3.94; up 94.1 percent). The
Federal Communications Commission recently set the stage for a new industry,
Digital Audio Radio Service, which can deliver multiple channels of
satellite-based audio entertainment and information. CD Radio is one of four
companies that have applied for digital radio service licenses.

   MedImmune Inc.  (MEDI), Gaithersburg. ($ 3.50, $ 6.38; up 82.3 percent). In a
classic biotech story, MedImmune's shares soared to $ 36 a share in 1993 on
expectations the firm would win approval from the Food and Drug Administration
for RespiGam, a drug designed to prevent respiratory infections in infants. When
the company failed to get approval, the stock crashed. The company is redoing
its tests.

   Univax Biologics Inc. (UNVX), Rockville. ($ 4.25, $ 7.63; up 79.5 percent).
The FDA has cleared the way for Univax Biologics to sell a drug to treat blood
disorders. Anticipating FDA approval, biotech investors flocked to Univax
shares.

   Penril DataComm Networks Inc. (PNRL), Gaithersburg. ($ 2.50, $ 4.13; up 65.2
percent). Penril, which makes data communications equipment, has been reporting
losses as it struggles to compete in the fast-moving, competitive world of
bridges and routers. The stock bounced back after a 60 percent drop last year.

   American Mobile Satellite Corp. (SKYC), Reston. ($ 12.75, $ 19.75; up 54.9
percent). Things will be looking up for this company on Wednesday, when it is
scheduled to launch a communications satellite from Cape Canaveral, Fla. The
satellite will provide voice, fax and data services to customers on land, sea
and in the air. Investors have been betting on a successful launch.

   Manugistics Group Inc. (MANU), Rockville. ($ 8, $ 11.75; up 46.9 percent). A
computer company, Manugistics develops software to help corporations manage
their business operations. This relatively new part of Manugistics' business is
boosting its sales and prompting favorable analyst reports on the company.

   USAir Group (U), Arlington. ($ 4.25, $ 6.13; up 44.2 percent. After a long,
long slide -- USAir once sold for $ 54.75 a share -- the airline's stock
rebounded after pilots' negotiators agreed to accept layoffs and pay cuts to
save money.

   Resource Mortgage Capital Inc. (RMR), Richmond. ($ 10.63, $ 15.25; up 43.5
percent). Rising interest rates have had a negative impact on the earnings and
dividends of this real estate and investment trust, which invests in residential
mortgage loans. But after a sharp decline, the stock has begun to come back.

   Genetic Therapy Inc.  (GTII), Gaithersburg. ($ 7, $ 10; up 42.9 percent).
Shares of this biotech firm soared recently when it won the exclusive right to
commercialize a gene therapy technique that it developed with the National
Institutes of Health. NIH won a patent for the technique. Gene therapy is seen
as a possible treatment for cancer, cystic fibrosis and AIDS.

   Here the losers:

   Infodata Systems Inc. (INFD), Fairfax. ($ 6.75, $ 3.63; down 46.2 percent).
The top gainer of 1994 -- up 259 percent -- Infodata was the biggest loser for
the first quarter. Although profit is returning, the company has been burdened
by the costs of changing its business strategy and moving into electronic
document management. The company said it expects improved sales and profit in
the second half of the year.

   Government Technology Services Inc.  (GTSI), Chantilly. ($ 10.75, $ 6.25;
down 41.9 percent). Sales were up 18 percent but the firm's profit dropped 70
percent in 1994. And that was enough to chase investors away from GTSI, which
resells computer products to the federal government.

   Cosmetic Center Inc. (COSCA), Savage, Md. ($ 13.75, $ 9.25; down 32.7
percent). Business was soft at Cosmetic Center during the Christmas season,
causing the stock to back off. While sales appear to have picked up, the stock
remains depressed. The company is a discount retailer of fragrances, cosmetics
and beauty aids.

   Allied Research Corp. (ALR), Vienna. ($ 5, $ 3.50; down 30 percent). The
munitions and weapons business hasn't been too good recently and the company has
been trying to find niches for itself in environmental cleanup and the home and
business security field.

   Fairchild Corp. (FA), Chantilly. ($ 3.75, $ 2.63; down 29.9 percent). An
aerospace company, Fairchild has seen a downturn in its core business --
supplying rivets, bolts and other fasteners to aircraft manufacturers. The firm
expects growth in its communications and industrial products divisions.

   North American Vaccine Inc. (NVX), Beltsville. ($ 8.38, $ 6; down 28.4
percent). North American, which develops vaccines for childhood diseases, has
expanded its testing of a whopping cough vaccine, causing a medical newsletter
editor to question whether the company is having problems with its tests. The
company said no.

   Interstate General Co. L.P. (IGC), St. Charles, Md. ($ 4.50, $ 3.25; down
27.8 percent). IGC, a real estate company, has spun off its horse-racing unit,
Equus Gaming Co., to stockholders. Since then, IGC shares have dropped but Equus
shares are up, so those who hold both shares have lost only 17.5 percent.

   Smithfield Foods Inc. (SFDS), Smithfield, Va. ($ 32, $ 24.50; down 23.4
percent). Profit at Smithfield, the leading pork processor in the mid-Atlantic
region, has been trimmed because of the cost of putting a new plant on line.
Smithfield's profit also tends to go up and down with hog prices.

   TelePad Corp. (TPADA), Reston. ($ 6.63, $ 5.22; down 21.3 percent). TelePad
produces a hand-held, multi-use computer that can be used by sales people and
others who work in the field. Production of TelePad 3 has been delayed but is
expected to begin soon.

   Micro-Integration Corp. (MINT), Frostburg, Md. ($ 4.50, $ 3.75; down 16.7
percent). This small company, which sells software and hardware for computer
networks, went public last year at $ 7.50 a share. The company recently reported
losses, mostly from the cost of closing its Belgium operations.  *


GRAPHIC: Chart, WASHINGTON BUSINESS SELECTED AREA STOCK INDEX (This chart was
not available)

LOAD-DATE: April 03, 1995


                             371 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: The language of life

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Here are definitions of terms associated with gene therapy.

   Cell: The basic unit of all living tissue, made up of a
nucleus, cytoplasm and small structures called organelles held
together by a cell membrane.

   Enzyme: A protein that speeds up or causes a chemical
reaction in living matter.

   RNA (Ribonucleic acid): An acid that carries the genetic
information for protein formation from the nucleus of a cell to its
cytoplasm.

   Protein: A group of complex organic compounds made up of
linked amino acids.  They are essential to carrying out activities
of a cell and to maintaining the life of an organism.Gene Therapy:
Medical treatment involving addition of a functioning gene to cells
to alleviate the symptoms of a genetic disease, to enhance
treatment or to make particular tissues targets for lethal drugs.

   Germ line therapy changes the genes of future generations; somatic
therapy treats a specific problem in an individual.

   Translocation: A genetic mishap in which one piece of a
chromosome attaches to another, different chromosome.

   Virus: An infectious agent smaller than bacteria and not
visible through a light microscope that lacks independent
metabolism and cannot grow or reproduce outside of living cells.

   The complete particle usually contains only DNA or RNA, not both,
and is usually covered by a protein shell that protects the nucleic
acid.

   Nucleus: The central unit that controls actions of a living
cell.  It contains the DNA that is the genetic code for
continuingthe life of an organism and ensuring its growth and
reproduction.

   Cytoplasm: All of the substance of a cell outside of the
nucleus.

   Vector: A virus used to carry a foreign gene into a cell.

   Retrovirus: A virus in which the genetic material is RNA.

   Through the action of an enzyme called reverse transcriptase, the
RNA is converted into DNA.  This conversion allows the genetic
information from the virus to be integrated into the genetic code
of the cell it infects.  Infection with a retrovirus is permanent.

   HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS, is a form
of a retrovirus.  Less virulent viruses can be made harmless and
incapable of reproducing for use as tools in gene therapy.

   Adenovirus: Double-stranded DNA virus that develops in the
nuclei of infected cells in mammals and birds.  In humans, it is one
of the viruses that cause colds.

   Clone: A copy of a piece of DNA, usually produced in a
laboratory.

   Chromosomes: Rod-shaped structures in the nucleus of a cell,
each consisting of a length of DNA.  Most normal human cells contain
23 pairs of chromosomes.

   DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid): The material that contains the
blueprint of cellular life, and exists in the familiar,
helix-shaped molecule.  Its four chemical components are adenine,
thymine, guanine and cytosine.

   Nucleic Acid: A chemical compound carrying the hereditary
characteristics of a cell.

   Gene: One of the units located at specific points on a
chromosome, containing the programming that determines and
transmits specific characteristics of an organism.  A human has
about 100,000.

   Lymphocyte: A white blood cell, which protects the body
against disease organisms such as bacteria and viruses.

   MDR-1: The multidrug resistance gene type-1, discovered in
the National Institutes of Health laboratory of Dr.Michael
Gottesman in 1986, which makes cells resistant to chemotherapy
agents used to treat cancer.  Its use to protect bone marrow against
the negative effects of chemotherapy is being studied in Houston.

   RCR (Recombination Competent Retroviruses): Viruses that can
reproduce in a cell.

   Thymidine Kinase Gene: A ""suicide gene'' that makes a tumor
cell a target for an anti-virus drug called ganciclovir.


GRAPHIC: Drawing: Parts of a cell (color)

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1995


                             372 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1478 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
DNA Structure: the double helix

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Broken down to its most basic components, DNA consists of a sugar,
a phosphate and four nitrogen containing compounds called bases.

   The bases are adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine.  The
combination of one base, one sugar molecule and one phosphate group
is called a nucleotide.  Molecules of the sugar, called deoxyribose,
and the phosphate form intertwined spirals -- the famous ""double
helix'' of the DNA molecule.

   The nucleotides form structures called ""base pairs,'' in
which adenine (A) always attaches to thymine (T) and cytosine (C)
always attaches to guanine (G).  These pairs span the two strands of
the double helix like rungs on aladder.


   DNA duplication: key to heredity

    DNA exists in the nucleus of cells, and its structure makes
replication easy.  At the onset of cell division, the fundamental
act of reproduction, the helix splits down the middle, separating
the A from the T and the C from the G

   New bases attach themselves to the newly bared nucleotide
bases, along with the sugar-phosphate strands, so that two DNA
molecules exist where one had been.

   Thus each side of the split DNA serves as a perfect template
for duplication.

   But sometimes the DNA structure is altered.  One change in a
single base pair out of an estimated 3 billion per cell can cause a
devastating disease.

   PROTEIN SYNTHESIS -- the genetic code translated

   Complex organic compounds called proteins make up the structural
components of cells, and help them carry out the processes that
maintain life.  A cell continuously generates proteins, and the
proteins make the cell carry out its specific function -- as a
blood cell, a brain cell, or any of thousands of others.  Some kinds
of cells live a few hours and others live as long as the organism
of which they are part.

   The primary unit of the protein-making process is the codon.

   A codon is a group of three adjacent nucleotides along one strand
of the DNA helix (called the ""sense strand. '') Each codon carries
the recipe for one of 20 amino acids, and these amino acids join to
form proteins.  The smallest protein consists of two linked amino
acids, specified by two adjacent codons.A chemical relative of DNA
called mRNA (messenger ribonucleic acid) acts as a portable
template, traveling to the cytoplasm outside the cell's nucleus.

   Here it is attached to structures called ribosomes, which are the
cell's protein factories.

   RNA is identical to DNA in all but two ways: It has a different
sugar and it substitutes another substance, uracil, for the
nucleotide thymine.

   Another type of RNA (tRNA or transfer RNA) temporarily bonds to an
amino acid in order to position it along the correct portion of the
mRNA strand.

   The order of the codons along the RNA determines the sequence of
amino acids that make up the protein.  Series of codons are genes --
the basic units of heredity.  Special sequences of nuclotides signal
beginning and ending points of genes along the strand.

   On the string of DNA containing a billion codons, there are
only 100,000 genes.  Long stretches of ""junk DNA'' are interspersed
between and within genes.

   Each gene tells the cell how to make one protein or enzyme
necessary to cell life or function. (An enzyme is a protein that
acts as a catalyst within a cell, causing a reaction to occur or
speeding it up.) And these instructions determine the
characteristics of the organism.

   A single gene, the multidrug resistance gene (MDR-1), is the key
to the experimental treatment of ovarian cancer now under way at
the University of Texas M.D.Anderson Cancer Center.

   DIFFERENTIATION -- specialized cells

   A cell is the smallest unit of life.  A human body contains millions
of cells.  In all higher organisms, the cells have differentiated
and carry on highly specialized activities, but each cell contains
the same entire genetic code.  Differentiation of cells
(""morphogenesis'') occurs because the organisms genetic program
causes different proteins to be produced at various stages of
development.

   An alteration or omission of even a single amino acid in a
single cell's protein can spell disaster.  Such a change is a
mutation and may be caused by repeated exposure to toxic substances
or radiation.  Such malfunctions are implicated in most cancers,
heart diseases and even infections such as AIDS.

   Progenitor or ""stem'' cells are developmental matriarchs;
highly specialized tissues like bloos and lymph are descended, by
cell division, from them.  Genetic damage to a progenitor cell is
especially critical because the mutation will be passed on to all
of the offspring cells in a specific tissue.

   Conversely, the beneficial results of a deliberate genetic
alteration of a sick patient's stem cells will be amplified during
successive cell divisions.


   The therapy: attack on cancer

    Somatic gene therapy attempts to intervene in the genetic
process when that process turns against a patient.  Its techniques
fall into three categories: gene replacement when a gene is
lacking; inactivation of a harmful gene; and gene augmentation.

   In their experimental treatment of ovarian cancer, the
Anderson team is attempting augmentation.

   The multidrug resistance gene produces a protein
(P-glycoportein) that acts as a small pump to remove toxic drugs
from a cell.  Researchers at the National Institutes of Health
discovered the gene while trying to determine why tumor cells
became resistant to chemotherapy.

   The Anderson team wants use MDR-1 to protect fragile bone
marrow from the disastrous effects of anti-cancer drugs, which
frequently attack the marrow first.  Healthy bone marrow is crucial
to survival because it generates white blood cells, the warriors of
the immune system that protect the body against infection.

   The patients underwent five days of chemotherapy with two
anti-cancer drugs.  The effect was twofold: it reduced the size of
their tumors and it killed some bone marrow.  The latter action
stimulated the stem cells of the marrow to begin dividing to
replace cells lost in chemotherapy.

   When the stem cells began dividing, the patients underwent a
surgical bone marrow harvest, in which marrow was removed from the
hip bone.

   The marrow cells were spun in a centrifuge, then run through a
specially designed column.  In the column, the stem cells stuck to
beads coated with an antibody that attracted them.  Having
identified the stem cells, technicians added the viral vectors
containing the MDR-1.  The cells were then incubated for a time and
frozen.  Two weeks of testing determined how many of them took the
virus.  At least one percent of cells must be genetically modified
for the experiment to proceed.

   When the patients -- six so far -- recovered from the first
round of chemotherapy and the bone marrow harvest, they returned to the hospital
for three days of high dose chemotherapy that
destroyed what marrow they had remaining.  They then received an
infusion of the genetically altered marrow.

   They had to remain in the hospital and undergo daily blood
tests until the new marrow began to generate blood cells again.

   Once the white blood cell counts were high enough, treatment
with Taxol began.  Over the next year, each woman will receive 12
courses of the drug at higher and higher doses.  The hope is that
the multidrug resistance gene in the altered bone marrow will
enable the patients to withstand the higher doses that have a
better chance of wiping out their cancer.


   The viral vector: a "good' infection

   After obtaining a sample of MDR-1 gene from the National Institutes
of Health, Anderson researchers began to build a viral vector -- a
retrovirus that will take the MDR-1 gene into bone marrow cells.

   This construction process involved mixing an enzyme with a solution
containing the virus.  The enzyme chemically cut out portions of the
virus necessary to its reproduction.  Researchers then added the
MDR-1 gene to replace the reproductive portion of the virus.  The
resulting viral vector carried the MDR-1 gene, but could not make
more virus.  This engineered virus containing MDR-1 actually infects
the bone marrow cell.  But instead of killing it, it makes it
stronger.

   The next challenge was to make usable quantities of the
vector, since it had been deprived of its ability to reproduce
itself.  The team used what is called a packaging cell line, a
special culture of cells containing the genes necessary for viral
replication.  When the viral vector was introduced into this
culture, it made copies of the viral vector.  The virus particles
released were collected and frozen.

   Once researchers had enough of the viral vectors, they
tested the gene in mice.  The genetic alteration was constant.  Then
it was time to perform the experiment in women with ovarian cancer.

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Structure of DNA parts (color); Court Smith/Chronicle,
Sources: Griffiths, Miller, SUzuki, Lewontin and Gelbart, ""An Introduction to
Genetic Analysis'', Sedivy and Joyner, ""Gene Targeting'', Victor Ling Ph.
D.""Lexicon Universal Encyclopedia,'' University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1995


                             373 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
The therapy: attack on cancer

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Somatic gene therapy tries to intervene in the genetic process
when that process turns against a patient.  Its techniques fall
into three categories: gene replacement when a gene is
lacking; inactivation of a harmful gene; and gene
augmentation.  In their experimental treatment of ovarian
cancer, the Anderson team is attempting augmentaton.

   The multidrug resistance gene produces a protein
(P-glycoprotein) that acts as a pump to remove toxic drugs
from a cell.  Researchers at the National Institutes of Health
discovered the gene while trying to determine why tumor cells
became resistant to chemotherapy.

   The Anderson team wants to use MDR-1 to protect fragile bone
marrow from the disastrous effects of anti-cancer drugs. which
frequently attack the marrow first.  Healthy bone marrow is
critical to survival because it generates white blood cells,
the warriors of the immune system that protect the body
against infection.

   The patients underwent five days of chemotherapy with two
anti-cancer drugs.  The effect was twofold: it reduced the size
of their tumors and it killed some bone marrow.the latter
action stimulated the stem cells of the marrow.  The later
action stimulated the stem cells of the marrow to begin
dividing to replace cells lost in chemotherapy.

   When the stem cells began dividing, the patients underwent a
surgical bone marrow harvest, in which marrow was removed from
the hip bone.

   The marrow cells were spun in an centrifuge, then run through
a specially designed column.  In the column, the stem cells
stuck to beads coated with an antibody that attracted them.

   Having identified the stem cells, technicians added the viral
vectors containing the MDR-1.  The cells were then incubated
for a time and frozen.  Two weeks of testing determined how
many of them took the virus.  At least one percent of the cells
must be genetically modified for the experiment to proceed.

   When the patients - six so far - recovered from the first
round of chemotherapy and the bone marrow harvest, they
returned to the hospital for three days of high dose
chemotherapy that destroyed what marrow they had remaining.

   They then received an infusion of the genetically altered
marrow.

   They had to remain in the hospital and undergo daily blood
tests until the new marrow began to generate blood cells
again.

   Once the white blood cell counts were high enough, treatment
with Taxol began.  Over the next year, each woman will receive
12 courses of the drug at higher and higher doses.  The hope is
that the multidrug resistance gene in the altered bone marrow
will enable the patients to withstand the higher doses that
have a better chance of wiping out their cancer.

   Chemotherapy sequences: First application kills some tumor and
marrow cells.  Surviving marrow is harvested, treated with
viral vector.  Second chemotherapy kills most of marrow and
tumor.  Genetically altered stem cells are injected.  New marrow
forms.  Third chemotherapy kills remaining cancer, but
P-glycoprotein protects marrow by pumping anti-cancer drug out
of cells.


GRAPHIC: Drawing: An illustration of the chemotherapy sequence (color); Court
Smith/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995


                             374 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
A long road

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Researchers go through a lengthy and complicated approval process
before they can test a new treatment protocol on humans.  These are
the steps required of a gene therapy protocol proposed by
researchers at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center:
1) Anderson's Institutional Biosafety Committee

   Reviews safety of testing procedures

   Reviews animal testing to ensure that it is done humanely.


   2) Anderson's Institutional Review Board

   Includes Anderson experts and community representatives.

   Examines the protocol proposed for use in people, determining
whether experiments have a reasonable chance of proving a
scientific principle or of helping patients.

   Attempts to make sure that the potential benefits outweigh
risks.

   Reviews information provided to the patient to make sure it is
clear and accurate about the procedure and its risks.


   3) Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of
Health
 Established in the 1970s amid concerns that genetic studies
might release harmful bacteria or viruses.  Now under study by an
outside panel to determine if it has overstepped its charge.

   Reviews every aspect of the experiment -- from the scientific
methods to the grammar on the consent form -- in a contentious
process that can take a year or more.

   Determines patient costs and whether the procedure is
available to patients regardless of income.

   Determines who is liable if a patient is harmed.


   4) U.S. Food and Drug Administration

   Examines a lengthy document describing the experiment provided
by the researchers.  The document also goes to the Cancer Therapy
Evaluation Program, an arm of the FDA.

   In a review that can take as long as a year, the agency puts
special emphasis on the manufacture of the viral vectors that
transmit modified genes to cells.  The viral vector is considered a
drug and must be manufactured with the same concerns for safety,
sanitation and contamination that govern drug manufacture by
pharmaceutical companies.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995


                             375 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Stalking our most relentless killer;
Houston cardiologist hopes to engineer anti-clotting agent to fight heart attack

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   THE COMMON METAPHOR for the heart is mechanical -- a pump
that tirelessly contracts to keep blood flowing through the body.

   But the metaphor fails in describing the biology of the
arteries, veins and muscles that power that pump, and the myriad
factors that cause high blood pressure, heart attack and the
various ailments to which the heart is prone.

   Dr. James Willerson, chairman of medicine at the University
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston and a leader in research
in heart disease at the Texas Heart Institute, has spent his
professional life looking for better ways to prevent heart attack.

   The catastrophe strikes 1.5 million Americans a year and
kills nearly 500,000.  In the United States, heart disease kills
someone every 34 seconds.

   Willerson knows that fixing the heart requires better
understanding of the molecules that make up the very cells of the
heart and of the blood delivery system it powers.

   Based on his understanding of those molecules, he is looking
at genetic ways to forestall heart attacks.

   Another team at UT and the heart institute is seeking
genetic solutions to a chronic problem with a mechanical heart
assistant pump.

   A heart attack occurs when a coronary artery narrows to the
point that blood can no longer flow through it.  Without the
nourishment that blood brings to the heart muscle, cells begin to
die.

   Willerson and other experts believe that the narrowing
begins after an injury to the lining of the artery wall, called the
endothelium.  That injury can be caused by high blood pressure,
cigarette smoking, excess fats circulating in the blood, diabetes
or other factors.

   After the endothelium is hurt, platelets -- the components
of the blood responsible for clotting -- begin to aggregate at the
injury site.  The injury also attracts hormones called growth
factors that cause cholesterol and other materials in the blood to
collect at the injury area.

   Willerson and Dr. Kenneth Wu, also of UT, hope to insert
into cells of the arterial wall a gene that causes production of
prostaglandin -- a substance that inhibits blood clots.  Heading off
the clots, they reason, might prevent heart attacks.

   They are testing the technique in pigs, using an adenovirus
-- a deactivated form of a virus that causes colds -- to take the
gene right into the injured cells of the artery.

   Willerson said the animal studies are promising.

   His proposal is still years from use in patients, he said.

   He has not yet determined what kinds of patients would benefit from
the gene therapy or how to apply it.

   But he is far ahead of a group that is trying an imaginative
approach to making artificial heart pumps safer.

   Dr. Ward Casscells and Dr. Timothy Scott-Burden at UT and
the Texas Heart Institute are trying to develop a lining for the
interior of a heart-assistant pump known as the left-ventricular
assist device, or LVAD.

   The biggest drawback to using such pumps is that they cause
blood clots.  The clots can cause strokes that either kill the
patient or injure the brain.

   Sometimes the clots are microscopic, but even those pose
significant hazards to patients, Scott-Burden said.

   The researchers propose growing a protective lining for the
pump from the patient's own cells.

   Endothelial cells from artery walls are known to produce
factors that inhibit clot production, said Casscells and
Scott-Burden.  But these cells do not grow well in culture.  And
there is no certainty that they would adhere to the pump's
polyvinyl surface.

   Scott-Burden proposes using smooth muscle cells, which grow
easily in culture and adhere to polyvinyl, but lack the
clot-inhibiting factor.

   To these cells he would insert genes that cause cells to make
nitric oxide and prostacyclin -- the hormones that prevent clotting.

   ""We are turning the smooth muscle cell into something like
an endothelial cell,'' said Scott-Burden.

   Both heart gene therapies are now in the very early phases
and no human trials are planned.

   ""I guess it is a little far-fetched for the average
person,'' said Scott-Burden.

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Above, Dr. James Willerson, chairman of medicine at the
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston and a leader in research in
heart disease at the Texas Heart Institute, with a model of the human heart
(color); 2. Dr. Ward Casscells, left, and Dr.David Engler run a fluid analysis
at the Texas Heart Institute (color); All by Carlos Antonio Rios/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995


                             376 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
The thread of life;
Classical ideas illuminate modern therapy

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   The thread-like molecule of deoxyrigonucleic acid -- DNA --
has spun the story of life on Earth since its beginning.  When the
world was new and organisms primitive, the moleculear structure was
short.  As organisms became more complex, their genetic blueprint
lengthened.  But the basic structure of DNA remained, spinning a
tale that began with our primordial ancestors.  Had they known of
this continuity, the Greeks might have included DNA in their myth
of the Fates, three goddesses controlling the destiny of each man,
woman and child.  The first, Clotho (the spinner), reels the thread
of life from her spindle.  Lachesis (the despenser of lots) takes
that life's thread, twists it, adds knots, loops and spirals.  It is
she who decides the course that a life will take.  Finally, there is
Atropos (the inexorable) who wields te scissors and cuts the thread.

   The Fates at work with DNA weave thread too small to be seen
through powerful microscopes, certainly invisible to the ancients.

   But the ancients did suffer from cancer, and had they known
about DNA they might have thought that as Lachesis twists and turns
the fiver, she introduces those bumps, tears and deletions in the
genetic code that scientists have come to associate with cancer.

   And Atropos can do nothing with the fine tangle but cut it --
ending a life as cancer often does.

   Now science has come up with a kinder cut.  When doctors cut
the DNA thread, they hope to introduce a new genetic message that
will undo the knots and straighten the loops.

   But while doctors hope to stay the cut of Atropos with gene
therapy, they do not wish to usurp the role of Clotho.  Germline
gene therapy -- which might alter the characteristics of future
generations -- has been declared taboo by the community in which
these gene therapists operate.

   Today's scientists concentrate instead on what they call
somatic gene therapy.  It treats a specific problem by curing the
code, correcting flaws in the genetic code of an individual,
without affecting progeny.


GRAPHIC: Drawing: 1. Clotho spins the thread (color); Photo: 2. Electron
micrograph of DNA strand (b/w)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1995


                             377 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Funding gene therapy;
Health costs put squeeze on experimental treatment

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   When Betty Moser had a chance to receive genetic therapy
for her recurrent ovarian cancer, she faced a problem common to
patients who are candidates for cutting-edge treatments:

   Her insurer, alerted by the red flag term ""experimental,''
refused to pay for her care.

   Funding is dwindling for this ""translational'' research --
so called because it translates laboratory knowledge to the
bedside.  And scientists warn that a dearth of dollars to pay for
such clinical care may delay and eventually stymie progress
altogether.

   It certainly delayed treatment for Moser and for Celia Leard,
the third and fourth patients chosen to test a gene therapy for
ovarian cancer being pioneered at the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center.

   Doctors had never used the treatment in humans before, and
they offered no promises.  But to Moser, there were two benefits.

   She might get better.  And even if she did not, what was
learned from her care might help other women in the future.

   Drs.  John Kavanagh and Albert B. Deisseroth accepted her and
three others for the treatment last fall.  Two of the patients began
treatment in October.

   But Moser and Leard fought insurance wars for almost three
months.  All that time, their CA-125 levels -- a measurement of a
protein typically found in ovarian cancer cells -- were rising.

   Each began to feel fluid accumulate in her abdomen, a sure sign
that the cancer was progressing.

   ""It was very frustrating,'' said Leard, from Central Texas.

   And after her insurer denied her treatment for a second time she
became afraid.  ""I was afraid I might pass the point where it
wouldn't matter anymore,'' said Leard.

   Moser, who lives in the Houston area, was even more
frightened as each day passed.  ""I felt lost in the paperwork. ''

   It was late December before the women's insurance companies
capitulated.

   On Dec. 23, an Anderson official sent a letter to the
insurer laying out the terms of the agreement that had been worked
out.  The hospital would not bill for the cost of the experimental
portion of the treatment -- putting a multidrug resistance gene
into bone marrow to protect the patient against the toxic effects
of chemotherapy.

   Kavanagh and Deisseroth agreed to waive their professional
fees.  A home health care agency agreed to provide services for
free, if the insurer would not pay.  Anderson agreed to limit
Moser's charges to a maximum $ 180,000.

   That is the average cost of caring for an ovarian cancer
patient in the terminal stages of the disease.

   Moser said the long hard months have left scars on her and
her family.

   Her 5-year-old grandson called her in the hospital recently.

   ""Are you going to die? '' he asked in a quavering voice.

   Neither Leard nor Moser wanted the names of their insurance
companies used.

   But those companies are not unique.  The rising cost of health
care has many health insurers digging in their heels at paying for
treatment deemed ""experimental. ''

   As both government and private insurers try to squeeze health
care budgets, experts warn that they risk wringing out the medical
advances key to the cures of the next century.

   Basic scientists are worried about the implications as well,
said Dr. Frederick F. Becker, Anderson's vice president for
research.

   ""It is devastating to discover something and then find you
can't make it applicable to patients,'' Becker said.

   Doctors looking for dollars to pay for their experimental
therapies have to swallow their pride, said Dr. Mark Hughes, chief
of reproductive and prenatal genetics at the National Center for
Human Genome Research.

   ""You beg,'' he said.

   Where once hospitals could use their excess revenues to cover
the costs of experimental treatment, these margins have gotten
thinner.  And that leaves physicians, scientists and administrators
scrambling for dollars to pay for costs.

   Across the Texas Medical Center, at almost every
institution, a variety of researchers are pursuing gene therapy.

   A handful of biotechnology companies have sprung up from
that effort, some actually spun off from the academic research
centers.

   But their findings will mean nothing if they cannot be
translated rapidly to benefit patients.  Both types of research are
important -- research in the laboratory and research at a patient's
bedside.

   Maintaining the infrastructure to keep Houston at the
forefront of gene therapy research will require a special
commitment from both government and the private sector, said Dr.
William T. Butler, president of Baylor College of Medicine.

   ""First society will have to decide the extent to which gene
therapy will benefit it,'' Butler said.

   Then the federal government, private foundations and
endowments as well as hospitals will have to determine the extent
to which they will fund gene therapy.

   And if money is to come from the federal government, it will
have to be new funds -- not funds taken from the basic research
budget, said Butler.

   Baylor has made a commitment to the field with its Center
for Gene Therapy under the direction of Dr. Savio L.C. Woo.

   Butler has set aside $ 1 million for use in Woo's program.

   Baylor and Texas Children's Hospital funded the construction
of a modern laboratory in which viral vectors -- the combination of
viruses and genes used to transmit engineered genes to cells -- are
manufactured to the same specifications as any drug made for human
use.  Operating that laboratory costs $ 300,000 per year, a cost the
two institutions share.

   ""It is an investment in the future,'' said Butler.  When the
time comes, he will seek funds to take the findings to the bedside,
he said.

   At Anderson, Dr. Charles LeMaistre has targeted genetic
research and therapies as a major thrust, even at a time when the
institution itself is strapped for money.

   And at UT Health Science Center at Houston, Dr. M. David
Low, its president, has invested in the future by establishing the
Institute of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human Disease
at a cost of $ 27.5 million.

   But when the discoveries from that institute are ready for
people, he will still have to find funding to pay for patient
treatment.

   ""In the new world of managed care, we have to provide a
source of funds for this bedside research,'' he said.

   Pharmaceutical companies could be a source of that money,
because of the potential for developing profitable, proprietary
substances.

   Some pay all the costs of experimental treatments.

   But more often, the companies pay for the medication or
device being studied.  The patient must foot the bill for ancillary
services: hospital costs and other medications.

   And most gene therapies are being developed in small
biotechnology companies that lack the money to pay for the big
dollar tests.

   Had national health care reform gone through, it would have
helped solved the dilemma.  Most plans contained a clause that would
have set aside 1 percent of insurance premiums to pay for
experimental care.

   But as it is, more and more programs are competing for a
dwindling pot of federal money.  The bedside research must compete
with laboratory research.  Anderson's Becker fears that many scientists have a
preference for laboratory experimentation, and that the human side
-- patient care -- may be second in line as funds shrink.  ""It is
likely that everything up to and including the mouse research gets
the funds,'' he said.

   For more information about the gene therapy trials for breast
and ovarian cancer taking place at the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, call 792-7953.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Betty Moser shows granddaughter, Ashley Linder, 2, and daughter
Shelley Linder a wig that Moser may wear if she loses her hair during
chemotherapy for ovarian cancer (p. 31); Carlos Antonio Rios/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1995


                             378 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 162 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Seeking cures on medicine's frontier

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Medicine is poised on the threshold of a new era, venturing
into a region too small to see, yet too vast to comprehend.  For two
centuries, doctors have viewed disease at the cellular level,
fighting the bacteria and viruses that invade cells. Now,
researchers are peering deeper, working with particles invisible or
almost invisible even to a microscope.  As they unravel the
Mysteries of life's basic fiver, the DNA molecule, they are finding
ways to fix flaws in the genes that shape life.  And they are
bringing new hope to the fight against cancer and other devastating
diseases.



   On the cover
In a photo montage by graphic artist Kellye B. Sanford, a model of
a DNA molecule is intertwined with images of gene therapy
researchers Elie Hanania, looking through the microscope, and
Albert B. Deisseroth, displaying genetically engineered bone marrow.

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. In a montage a model of a DNA molecule is intertwined with
images of gene therapy researchers Elie Hanania, looking through the microscope,
and Albert B.Deisseroth, displaying genetically engineered bone marrow (color);
Kellye B. Sanford montage/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             379 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
About this section

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Houston Chronicle medical writer Ruth SoRelle and staff
photographer Carlos Antonio Rios spent more than a year tracking
gene therapy experiments at the Texas Medical Center.  They observed
lab work, attended weekly progress meetings and recorded the
triumphs and frustrations of the researchers. When one of the
experiments received approval for human testing, SoRelle and Rios
became personally acquainted with patients and their families.  They
donned surgical masks and gowns to watch the procedures that
represented the true purpose of the gene research -- use of the
knowledge to save people's lives.



   Section staff
Don Mason    project editor.

   Hank Glamann     design/copy editor.

   Marc Schneider     project art director.

   Court Smith      graphics editor.

   Fred Bunch        photo editor.

   Kellye B. Sanford, Bruce Oren     graphic artists.

   Project editor        Don Mason.

   Design/copy editor      Hank Glamann.

   Project art director    Marc Schneider.

   Graphics editor    Court Smith.

   Photo editor     Fred Bunch.

   Graphic artists      Kellye B. Sanford, Bruce Oren.


GRAPHIC: Mugs: 1. Ruth SoRelle (color); 2. Carlos Antonio Rios (color)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             380 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 5548 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
THE SPLICE OF LIFE;
Dedicated research team engineers a cutting-edge treatment for cancer

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   LONG BEFORE THE GERM of cancer took root in Earlene Scruggs'
ovary, Dr. Albert B. Deisseroth was on a quest for a better way to
treat her.

   Before her malignancy was diagnosed in 1992, Deisseroth
and his colleagues in Houston found a way to introduce a special
gene to protect bone marrow -- a gene that eventually would offer
her hope.

   When her cancer recurred in 1993, the researchers were
testing their gene therapy in animals.  In the autumn of 1994, when
Scruggs' cancer came back yet again and her Arkansas doctors could
do no more, the team at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center was ready.

   They had a treatment.  Now they needed a patient.  It was
the end and the beginning of a long road for Earlene Scruggs -- and
for Albert Deisseroth.

   ""The chance to do gene therapy is the reason I came to
Houston,'' he said.

   His clear blue eyes take on a dreamy quality when he
considers why doing gene therapy is so important to him: ""I am
doing this because it is my destiny. ''

   A slight man of medium height, Deisseroth is given to
enthusiasm.  ""Fantastic'' is his favorite word, and he bestows it
liberally on people and data.

   With a small neat beard and always dressed in a fresh
starched white shirt, tie and suit, he is caught between the duties
of administrator, educator, doctor and scientist.  But it is clear
where his dream lies.

   Albert B.Deisseroth was born in Middletown, a small farming
community in rural New York.  He did not come from a wealthy or a
medical family.

   A chemistry and French major at the University of
Rochester, he spent his junior year in Paris, where he was affected
by the philosophy of existential writers -- Jean Paul Sartre,
Gabriel Marcel, Albert Camus.

   ""I decided to commit my life to pursuing creativity -- to
producing things rather than acquiring them,'' he said.

   After finishing medical school and earning a Ph.D.in
biochemistry, he went to the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md.  In his second year there, he found a place in the
crowded laboratory of Dr. Marshall Nirenberg, the Nobel laureate
who had cracked the genetic code, translating the pattern of
nucleotides into the amino acids that form proteins.

   Nirenberg's lab attracted the brightest minds in molecular
biology -- C.Thomas Caskey of Baylor College of Medicine here; Dr.
Joseph Goldstein of Dallas, who became a Nobel laureate; and gene
therapy pioneer W. French Anderson.  Deisseroth gravitated toward
Anderson's field, and he worked two years setting up cell cultures
into which genes could be introduced.

   Just as the genes change the life cycles of cells,
Deisseroth's exposure in Anderson's lab put a fever in his blood.

   ""Ever since, I've been involved in the quest for genetic
therapies,'' he said.

   Deisseroth, chief of hematology at Anderson, deals mainly
with blood and the disabling maladies that can afflict it.  But his
first attempt at gene therapy involved a solid tumor that affects
only women -- ovarian cancer.  If you ask him why, he will tell you
about a colleague who developed ovarian cancer.  When it came back
for the last time, nothing could be done.  ""She looked fine, but
she was just going to die,'' he said, his tone flat and bleak.

   Ovarian cancer is a vicious, sneaky disease that silently
subverts the organ that most defines a woman.  If discovered early,
the chance for cure is high -- approaching 90 percent.  But only 23
percent of ovarian cancers are found early.

   The rest are found too late.  Even with the best treatment,
only about 8 percent of women with advanced disease are still alive
10 years after diagnosis.  Only half of those show no sign that the
disease has come back.  Most patients live no more than two years.

   After the first treatments fail and the tumor comes back,
women come to Dr. John Kavanagh, chief of gynecologic medical
oncology at Anderson.  He is their doctor, their therapist, their
counselor, and their hope.  And sometimes, he must lead them to the
realization no more can be done.

   Caring for cancer patients gives Kavanagh the chance to be
a complete doctor -- and that is what he has wanted since he was
attracted to medicine after military duty in Southeast Asia.  ""One
of my first encounters (in medical school) was with cancer
patients,'' he said.  ""They had many problems -- serious problems. ''

   A solid man whose expertise is in demand worldwide, he
depends on the aid of his closest colleagues -- Drs.  Andrzej
Kudelka and Creighton Edwards.

   Edwards is characterized by the courtly manner that
endears him to his female patients.  But it is Kudelka, his serious demeanor
overlaying a fine sense of humor, who dispenses hugs along
with medicine.

   These are some of the gene doctors at M.D. Anderson, the
ones working on a genetic treatment for ovarian cancer.  Kudelka put
the science in perspective the day it received the final federal
go-ahead.  ""Now we can find some patients this might help,'' he
said.

   But before the patients could be treated, the researchers
had to answer questions in the laboratory.

   First, they had to find the best way to introduce genes into
cells.  Key to that effort was Dr. Siqing Fu, a physician in his
native China who is completing studies for a doctorate in molecular
biology.

   Fu came to Houston in 1989 -- leaving China right before
the government temporarily stopped travel abroad in the wake of the
Tiananmen Square protests.  Fu is not political and was not involved
in that furor.  He came to the United States to learn to do gene
therapy, and he may take what he learns home someday.  But most
important to Deisseroth, Fu is a genius in the tedious process of
making viral vectors -- the transportation systems that carry
engineered genes to their cellular destinations.

   He joined Deisseroth's lab in 1991, and in 1992, he began
working with Elie Hanania on making the vectors to be used in the
studies with the multidrug resistance gene -- MDR-1.  The gene has
been a stumbling block to successful therapy because it tells a
tumor cell to make P-glycoprotein.  This large molecule passes
through the cell membrane many times, acting as a pump that spews
anti-cancer drugs out of cells as fast as doctors inject them.

   Increasing levels of P-glycoprotein are the reason that
chemotherapy works well at first but has declining efficiency when
tried repeatedly.

   Deisseroth came to Anderson with the idea that he would
turn the gene's negative into a positive.  He saw a way to use the
gene to increase the effectiveness of chemotherapy against ovarian
cancer.  Early treatments with chemotherapy seem to wipe tumors out,
but they return, indicating that vestiges of cells remained after
treatment.

   Deisseroth and Kavanagh wanted to give a big blast of
conventional chemotherapy and follow that with a bone marrow
transplant containing MDR-1 genes.  Then as soon as possible, they
wanted to begin treatment with Taxol, a drug made from the bark of
the Pacific yew tree.  Taxol is a potent ovarian cancer killer, but
it plays havoc with the bone marrow, limiting the doses patients
can take.  Bone marrow generates blood cells, including the white
ones that protect against disease.

   If the MDR-1 gene could be used to pump Taxol out of the
marrow, the two doctors thought they might be able to use higher
doses of Taxol to attack cancer.

   The big doses might at least give patients a longer-lasting
remission from the disease.

   The work hit an early snag when one company opted not to
work with Deisseroth on the commercial development of MDR-1.

   However, he forged a partnership with San Francisco-based Ingenex,
another biotech firm.  The collaboration was essential because it
costs millions to develop gene therapy treatments.  Ingenex has
invested more than $ 1.7 million in the MDR-1 project so far.

   Deisseroth opted to build the vectors for the first
studies in his own lab because it translated his work from the lab
to the bedside quickly, benefiting Anderson's patients first.

   Hanania obtained the lab's first copy of MDR-1 from the
laboratory of Dr.Michael Gottesman at the National Institutes of
Health, where some of the first work with MDR-1 had been done.

   Building a vector is a ticklish business that really is a
series of biochemical steps, not a construction project.  But when
Fu describes his vectors, it seems as simple as making a Lego
model.  ""What he does always works for him,'' said his colleague
Cyndi Lane.  ""We accuse him of using a secret Chinese potion. ''

   Working in Deisseroth's second-floor lab is an adventure
in itself.  Space is at a premium, glassware crowds shelves and
experiments are back-to-back.

   On most Fridays, Deisseroth and 15 or 20 lab associates
sit on chairs, trash cans and the floor to go over their progress.

   The MDR-1 gene therapy protocol is one of many.

   Experiments in the lab cover everything from AIDS to leukemia,
tumor suppressor genes to cytokines (proteins that kill invading
cells).  What one scientist cannot do, another has done before.  Some
are doctoral students; others are doing post-doctoral work.  They
are there late at night and on weekends.

   In a hospital like Anderson, research is patient-driven.

   Patient rooms are never more than a few hundred feet from
laboratory doors.  In the halls, researchers see people in beds,
wheelchairs, pushing their IV poles.  It puts a certain impetus, an
urgency, into everything they do.

   It was the kind of urgency Earlene Scruggs was feeling the
weekend before her husband Tommy's birthday on Aug. 24, 1992.  In a
small town on the outskirts of Fayetteville, Ark., Scruggs, then
45, was beginning the long road that would lead her to gene
therapy.  ""I felt so bad,'' she recalled.  ""I got so bloated I
looked like I was seven months pregnant. ''
 She told her family that it was probably a side effect
from the antibiotics she was taking for an abscessed tooth.  But in
her heart, she knew something was seriously wrong.  She tried to
walk the fluid off.  ""I waddled,'' she said.  Nothing worked.

   The following Monday, she went to her family doctor, who
immediately put her in the hospital.  He drained 5 1/2 quarts of
fluid from her abdomen and then did surgery.  But the ovarian tumor
was too widely spread, and he could not remove it.

   Instead, he referred her to Dr.Malcolm Hayward in
Fayetteville.  There she underwent her first six months of
chemotherapy.

   Fu and Hanania have never met Earlene Scruggs, but they made
their new vector with the thought that it would be used in patients
like her.  They started with the workhorse of gene therapy, a
retrovirus that came from the lab of Dr. A. Dusty Miller in
Seattle, a pioneer of molecular biology.

   Retroviruses are ideal because they take genes into cells
as part of their own genetic code, then permanently insinuate
themselves and any genes they carry into the cell's genetic code.

   If the gene is MDR-1, the cell will make extra P-glycoprotein, the
cellular pump, as long as it lives.  And if it divides into new
cells, those will have the MDR-1 gene as well.

   The retrovirus had been inactivated -- meaning that it
lacked genes critical to its own replication.  Using proteins called
restriction enzymes that cut the virus's genetic structure at known
points, Fu and Hanania cut a small portion from the middle of the
virus and inserted the MDR-1 gene.

   ""It was a retroviral vector.  It was not yet a virus,''
said Hanania.

   It became a virus in a cell culture that Hanania calls a
packaging cell line.  These cells contained the genes the vector
lacked to make the virus complete.  Inside these cells, Fu and
Hanania grew copies of the virus for use in animal experiments.

   Just making this vector took six months.  The road to
producing the vector for use in people would be longer.  But the
animal experiments were critical, and Deisseroth turned to Hanania,
whom he describes as a world-class expert at working with mice, the
small silent soldiers of animal research.

   Hanania, 31, grew up in Jerusalem with a bent toward
science that showed early.  When his mother said a chemistry set was
too dangerous, he saved his money and bought it himself.

   He did his undergraduate work at Birzeit University on the
West Bank.  But as a Palestinian, he found that opportunities for
graduate school were limited, so he opted to come to the United
States.  He ended up at the UT Medical Branch in Galveston ""because
I prefer hot to cold,'' he said.  That's where he got his Ph.D.in
human genetics and molecular biology.

   Deisseroth met him at the 1991 meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research, where Hanania, only a graduate
student, was attracting all the attention with his work with the
retinoblastoma gene.

   For Hanania, who wanted to do gene therapy, moving to
Deisseroth's lab was a natural step.  Deisseroth realized he had
found the perfect person to do his animal research.

   Hanania had to answer two questions: Could he put the MDR-1
gene into the bone marrow of mice and have that bone marrow engraft
successfully when he gave it to the animals?  Would the transplanted
bone marrow with the MDR-1 gene protect the animals from the toxic
effects of Taxol?

   The answer in each case was a resounding yes.

   Hanania took marrow from mice and put the gene into it -- a
process called transduction.  He gave the marrow to mice, which then
were treated with doses of Taxol that would be lethal to normal
animals.  The mice thrived.  In fact, one mouse lived so long that
Hanania had to soften its food when the mouse got too old to chew.

   Even more exciting, Hanania found that he could take the
MDR-1 marrow from a treated mouse and transplant it into another
mouse.  When he gave that mouse lethal doses of Taxol, it survived
-- proving that it had received the MDR-1 gene in the transplanted
marrow and that the gene was still protective.  He repeated the
process with a fourth, fifth and sixth mouse.  All were protected
against Taxol's deadly effects.

   As Hanania and Fu perfected their vector and the way they
grew the virus, Hanania began new experiments.  Experiments with new vectors and
new viruses are ongoing.  Animal experimentation is a
crucial part of gene therapy.  It cannot be duplicated in cell
cultures or through computer simulation.

   By December 1992, Hanania was testing his ability to get the
vector into human cells in the test tube, using small samples saved
from patients who had undergone bone marrow transplants.  At the
same time, Deisseroth was planning to go to the National Institutes
of Health's Recombinant Advisory Committee to gain approval for
human tests.  The pace of research picked up as deadlines for
approval loomed.

   On Jan. 20, 1993, the institutional review board at Anderson
approved the plan.

   Hanania remembers that he was doing experiments the night
before they flew to Washington, D.C., to present their proposal to
the RAC on March 3, 1993.

   But the RAC did not approve the plan, a disheartening but
expected event.

   ""They liked the idea,'' said Hanania.  ""But they saw some
shortcomings. ''

   For the next three months, the lab worked on answering the
RAC's questions about the bone marrow transplant, the starting dose
of Taxol and the informed consent document required to inform
patients about the risks of experimental treatment.  Of particular
importance to the RAC was a clear description of how the vector was
made.

   The RAC is a 15-member body of scientists, physicians,
ethicists, lawyers and laypersons charged with making sure that
proposed gene therapy experiments are scientifically valid and fair
to patients, and that potential benefits outweigh the risks to
patients and the public.

   Born out of concerns in the 1970s about accidental releases
of the products of genetic engineering, the RAC's priority is
protecting the public.  Members take their jobs seriously, and the
exchanges between committee members and researchers can be charged
and sharp.

   While the bureaucrats wrangle, the patients wait.

   Cancer patient Earlene Scruggs' disease was taking a typical
course.  Six months of chemotherapy caused the tumors to shrink, and
on Feb. 20, 1993, she underwent surgery to remove her uterus,
ovaries and any residual cancer.  At the behest of her physician,
she came to Anderson in March of that year for a second opinion.

   But Anderson doctors could suggest nothing better than the
treatment offered by her hometown doctors.

   She told her family physician, Dr. Jerry Dorman, ""I'm not
going to travel all over looking for a cure. ''

   She didn't have to.  On June 7, 1993, Deisseroth returned to
Bethesda and won RAC approval.  He could treat 10 patients.  The
major thrust would be determining if the treatment was safe for
humans.

   By then, he knew of three other teams worldwide that were
also pursuing this kind of gene therapy.  It was a kind of
scientific race, but one in which mistakes could cost patient
lives.  The next step was that final sieve for those as-yet-unseen
errors -- approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

   That federal agency requires that a viral vector used in
patients be so carefully prepared that it could qualify as a drug
under FDA rules.

   To leap that hurdle, Deisseroth brought in Dr.Richard Giles,
whose expertise in drug manufacture would prove invaluable in
meeting the FDA's requirements.

   For nearly a year, Hanania, Giles and Lucetta Caston, with
help from others in the lab, concentrated on making the viral
vector to the careful specifications set by the FDA.  Part of the
work was done in the isolation rooms at an Anderson lab on Knight
Road, near the Astrodome.

   In the fall of 1993, when the leaves on the hardwoods near
Earlene Scruggs' Arkansas home looked like red and gold tissue
paper and the mornings were brisk as Tommy opened the store and
garage they operated together, she began to feel fluid building up
in her abdomen.  She returned to Hayward in Fayetteville and he
prescribed more chemotherapy.  ""But he said it would be bad if it
came back within a year,'' she said.

   During the Thanksgiving weekend of that year, Deisseroth,
Hanania, research associates Michael Thomas and Tao Wang worked a
marathon four days trying to produce quantities of the virus for
use in the human trials.

   ""It was like a factory,'' said Hanania.  They ended up with
20 liters of the material containing the virus.

   But soon they learned that minute quantities of virus were
recombination competent.  In other words, the virus -- which should
not be able reproduce itself -- had somehow, in a very few cases,
acquired the genes that allowed it to replicate.

   Multiple cell divisions had generated 100 billion cells and
the problem existed in only a minute percentage.  That was enough,
though, to set back the experiment.

   It was a devastating blow.  But they quickly saw the error.

   They needed to reduce the number of times the cells would have to
divide.  Instead of one big batch, they produced nine smaller ones.

   They hashed the plans out during one of their Friday lab meetings.

   Finally, by March, they had made clean virus in the nine
separate lots.

   But it was May 13 before they finished the testing, and
submitted an 1,100-page document describing their process to the
FDA for approval.

   All there was to do then was wait.

   A month later, the FDA asked for more information, in effect
putting a hold on the project.  The answers were submitted in July.

   By August, Deisseroth had word that the protocol would be approved,
and written confirmation came Sept. 13, 1994.

   Kavanagh, Kudelka and Edwards began looking for the first
patient.  They had won the scientific race.  Anderson would be the
first in the world to use this kind of gene therapy.

   The first weeks of autumn were the worst in Earlene Scruggs'
life.  She could feel the fluid gathering in her abdomen.  When
Hayward did a test for CA-125 (a protein found in ovarian cancer
cells), he found that the level was elevated.  Scruggs' cancer had
come back a third time.

   ""They told me there was nothing they could do,'' she said.

   But Hayward had called Kavanagh and both doctors wanted
Scruggs in Houston as soon as possible.

   ""They ganged up on me,'' she said.

   Home is comfort to Earlene Scruggs.  She thrives in the midst
of family -- Tommy, two grandchildren, her daughter, son-in-law,
sisters, brothers, nieces and nephew -- her friends, her church and
the girls softball teams she coaches at the high school each year.

   Houston, particularly when she was sick, seemed like exile.

   Tommy Scruggs was quiet.  They have been married 29 years,
and he knew Earlene would make up her own mind in her own way.

   That's why they were sitting outside Station 82, high in the clinic
building of Anderson on Oct. 6, 1994 -- waiting for Kavanagh, who
had had a flat tire on the way in.

   Earlene did not look frightened, but she was.  As usual, she
held her emotions inside, revealing them only to her best friend,
Tommy.

   She did not know it, but she represented the ideal patient.

   She was young and healthy other than the cancer.  Her tumor was
still small.  And her insurance would cover the cost of the
treatment.

   But Earlene was a person as well as an ideal patient.  She had
doubts and life outside her disease.

   Until she was a grandmother, Earlene, a Delaware Pawnee and
proud of her Native American heritage, wore her thick brown-black
hair straight and long, below her waist.  But at age 40, she decided
she was too old and had it cut, so it just brushed her shoulders
with curving gray wings framing the deep brown eyes and high
cheekbones that give her face a chiseled elegance.

   She listened carefully and asked good questions.  But even
after talking to Kavanagh and Deisseroth, she was unsure.  She and
Tommy flew home to struggle with the decision.

   ""But I prayed on it,'' she told Joy Hamer, the research
nurse who is Deisseroth's liaison with patients.  ""I'm coming. ''

   Joy Hamer is the kind of nurse you want if you are really
sick.  She came to nursing late in life, and it appears to be her
true calling.  She does whatever has to be done -- from typing up
orders to nurses on the floor to drawing blood to fighting with
insurance companies.  She will spend the night by a patient's
bedside if she is needed.

   It was Oct. 26 before everything was ready for Earlene.  In
the meantime, three more patients had applied for the treatment.

   Barbara Malicoat from Roswell, N.M., was scheduled to come a week
after Earlene.

   But the two other women were mired in insurance problems.

   Three months would pass before they could start their
treatment.

   Earlene arrived with her eyes red and swollen.  ""I am here
because God wants me to be,'' she said.  ""But I'm afraid, I'm
afraid. ''

   She slept little before she left home for Anderson and not
at all her first two days in Houston.  In the weeks between her
decision and her appointment at Anderson, she and Tommy bought
Christmas gifts and made the creamy fudge that her family and
friends expect during the holidays.

   She mixes and stirs as long as she can and then turns the
fudge over to Tommy, who stirs and mixes until it is ready to pour.

   They are a team in that as they are in so many things.

   Tommy had no intention of leaving Earlene's side.  ""We
started this together and we will finish it that way,'' he said
flatly.

   Their love story spans three decades.  Now in their late
40s, they held hands in the waiting room.  Earlene curled up in the
chairs like a teen-ager and Tommy fetched and carried.  He is a mild
man with a laid-back demeanor.  Tommy watched her sleep, his face loving and
resigned.

   The treatment took place in three stages.

   First, Earlene received two drugs -- cyclophosphamide and
VP-16 -- over a five-day period.  This destroyed some of her marrow
cells.  To fill the void, her body made more of the very early
immature stem cells.

   These ""progenitors'' of the blood system take five weeks to
develop into more mature cells with specific functions.  As these
cells, distinguished by a marker protein called CD34, divided and
reproduced themselves, they were more receptive to the desired
infection by the gene-carrying retrovirus.

   The first day of tests drained Earlene.  When she tried to
swallow the bubble-gum-pink ""milkshake'' required before
undergoing a CT scan of her abdomen, her body rebelled and she
retched.  It was 7 p.m., and she was tired.  They rescheduled the
test for the next morning.

   Both Deisseroth and Kavanagh were out of town when she was
admitted.  Kavanagh, in particular, was irked by having to attend a
conference in India when his patient needed him.

   But gentle Kudelka reassured Earlene.  Soon she was ensconced
in a sunny room on the second floor with a tall silver IV pole
festooned with bags of medication -- some for the treatment, some
for nausea.

   Outside, Houston was drying out after devastating fall
floods.

   The days passed slowly.  The chemotherapy sapped Earlene's
vitality, painting faint gray shadows along the strong planes of
her face.  She did not lose her temper, but she became more silent,
more stoic as the strong chemicals raced through her bloodstream,
targeting the deadly tumor growing in her abdomen.

   After a few days, she was released from the hospital and
went to the Rotary House, Anderson's hotel across the street.

   Even after the chemotherapy ended, the drugs continued to do
their work.  Despite Earlene's hopes, her hair started to fall out
and within a few days she was bald.

   She lived by the results of blood tests done every other
day.  When her white cell counts began to rise, Deisseroth would
schedule the bone marrow pull.

   She was not the only patient by then.  Barbara Malicoat began
her chemotherapy as Earlene was finishing hers.

   By mid-November, Earlene's white cell counts began to
skyrocket.  She went from virtually no white cells on a Wednesday to
more than 14,000 per milliliter by the next Monday.

   On Nov. 16, Earlene and Tommy arrived early at the Anderson
outpatient surgery area.  Deisseroth was running a few minutes late
that day because he stopped for doughnuts.  But by 7:30 a.m., garbed
in the cool green of surgical scrubs, he was reassuring Tommy and
Earlene that everything would go well.

   Earlene was given anesthesia at about 8 a.m  Asleep, she
seemed small, fragile.

   Deisseroth and Dr. David Claxton stood on each side of her
and began the arduous process of removing marrow from her hip
bones.  By 8:30 a.m., the first bag was full and on its way to the
laboratory.  Soon they would know if Earlene was making enough of
the progenitor cells for the treatment to work.

   When the results came back from the lab, the news was better
than good.  The single bag contained twice the number of cells
needed for an engrafting dose -- the amount needed to repopulate
the bone marrow.

   By the time three bags were filled, they had a six-fold
engrafting dose.  The bags were delivered to the seventh floor,
where they were spun in a centrifuge and run over a column of beads
coated with a material to which the CD34-positive progenitor cells
bond.

   The other cells collected at the bottom and were drained
off.  Then the CD34 cells were washed off.

   ""It's like going to a shooting gallery,'' said Deisseroth.

   ""By purifying the cells, you give the virus a better chance of
hitting the right ones. ''

   A parade of nurses, doctors and technicians followed the
cells as they traveled throughout the hospital.

   In the crowded back room of the second-floor lab, Giles,
Castron, Deisseroth, Hanania and Fu clustered around while Tao Wang
and Debra Ellerson carefully drew the liquid containing the virus
into long, thin tubes, then dropped it into the marrow cells.

   Hamer, however, was in a room on the second floor, taking
care of Malicoat.  She had come down with a raging fever, indicating
a violent infection.

   Ellerson, one of Deisseroth's earliest recruits to the lab,
counted the numbers of viable cells.  But the really crucial tally
would be the total of cells that were infected with the virus
carrying the MDR-1 gene.

   If at least 1 percent of the cells had the virus, the
experiment could continue.  The question would take two weeks to
answer.

   The sun had already set by the time the parade took
Earlene's cells down to the fifth floor, where they were carefully
frozen in liquid nitrogen.  At 8:30 p.m., the crowd left
reluctantly, their spirits high.

   ""We were the first in the world to do this,'' said
Deisseroth.

   ""I'm going to buy a lottery ticket,'' said Ellerson.

   Hamer stayed until almost 10 p.m., trying to get Barbara
Malicoat's fever down.

   Earlene and Tommy Scruggs woke early on Nov. 19.  She was
still sore from the procedure, but they would be home for the
holidays.

   Thanksgiving was quiet, and Christmas boisterous with
family.  Tommy and Earlene returned to Anderson on Dec. 28, ready
for the home stretch.  It would be five weeks before they returned
to Arkansas.

   They entered the hospital on a Friday evening and by
Saturday morning, the big doses of chemotherapy -- cyclophosphamide
and thiotepa -- were already flowing into Earlene's veins.

   The thiotepa was excreted through her pores, and she had to
shower frequently so that the medication would not burn her skin.

   As the treatment continued, she began to tire easily, making
every activity a chore.  Everyone who came through her door wore a
yellow paper mask, so it took a few seconds for her to recognize
visitors.

   By the end of the three days, she had no white cells.  She
was low on platelets -- the components of the blood that cause
clotting.  If she had gotten an infection, it would have been
difficult to control.  So she and Tommy stayed in the bright corner
room of the 10th floor, playing Scrabble, reading, watching old
movies on cable.

   It was difficult for an active woman like Earlene to accept
the boredom.  The flurry of activity on Jan. 9, when she received
her bone marrow infusion, was almost welcome.

   Doctors, nurses, photographers and technicians crowded
around her in the small room.  She was almost invisible and a little
fearful of receiving the genetically altered cells.

   ""I don't know what is going to happen,'' she said.

   Deisseroth, however, was confident.  The tests on the bone
marrow showed that between 1 percent and 3 percent of cells had the
MDR-1 gene in them.  As the marrow was removed from the freezer, he
held the vial high.  ""This is the million-dollar tube,'' he said.

   Infusing it into Earlene took a little more than 15 minutes.

   Now they all crossed their fingers and waited for the marrow
to engraft and her blood counts to go up.

   Nine days after the bone marrow infusion, her counts were
high enough that she could leave the hospital.  She rushed across
the hall to tell Barbara Malicoat, who was a week behind her in the
treatment schedule, and then almost skipped to the Rotary House
across Holcombe Boulevard.

   When she visited with Deisseroth on Jan. 20, he told her,
""Anyone else who got the therapy you did would still be in the
hospital on IV fluids. ''

   On Monday, Jan. 30, she and Tommy expected to start the
Taxol treatment early.  This was the third and final phase.  More
than anything, Earlene wanted to get it over with so she could go
home.

   But, like most medical procedures, it took longer than
expected.  The IV did not start until 5:30 p.m., meaning she could
not be released until late the next evening.

   A friend of hers had a bad reaction to Taxol, and Earlene
was a little nervous about it.  Kudelka returned that evening to sit
with her as the drug slowly dripped into her veins.

   She and Tommy now know the quickest way to get to Hobby
Airport, and they were there early Feb. 1. After five weeks, they
were going home.

   Earlene Scruggs will return 11 times -- every three weeks --
for higher and higher doses of Taxol.

   If the MDR-1 works, the Taxol will kill only those marrow
cells that do not contain the protein pump.  Slowly, the genetically
altered cells will become the predominant population of cells in
her bone marrow.  That will reduce the toxic effects of Taxol as it
attacks the cancer cells.  Some of these cells have low levels of
the resistance gene, but the doctors hope that the genetically
strengthened bone marrow will allow doses of Taxol high enough to
kill even resistant cancer cells.

   At a regular meeting that morning, Deisseroth said: ""Things
are really looking good therapeutically.  The patients are
recovering faster than usual.  The tumors are responding.  We do not
see any Taxol side effects. ''

   But it is still too early to know if it worked.

   On the last day in the hospital, Tommy Scruggs said: ""They
will not talk her into doing this again.  She won't leave home for
five weeks ever again.

   ""You know, she didn't do this because she thought it would
help her.  But she has a daughter and a granddaughter -- and there
are all those other women with this.  That's why she did it. ''

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Siqing Fu, a physician in his native China who is completing
studies for a doctorate in molecular biology, examines a ""gel'' representation
of genetic structure in his laboratory (color); 2. Dr. Elie Hanania displays
mice about to be used in the MDR-1 experiment (color); 3. Bone marrow is removed
from the hind leg of a laboratory mouse (color); 4. Hanania works on a computer
graphic model of the experiment (color); 5. In this photo illustration, an image
of the human blood-producing system is projected onto Dr.Elie Hanania as he
inspects cell cultures containing the MDR-1 viral vector (color, p.3); 6.
Earlene Scruggs just after her first admission to M.D. Anderson (color, p. 3);
7.Earlene Scruggs undergoes her first round of chemotherapy at Anderson, as
powerful chemicals course through her bloodstream to kill the tumor growing in
her abdomen (color, p. 3); 8.Dr. Albert Deisseroth strides down a corridor at
Anderson. The flier in the foreground announces a conference on gene therapy
(color, p. 3); 9. Tommy Scruggs has been his wife's constant companion
throughout her treatment (color, p. 3); 10. Dr. Albert Deisseroth explains bone
marrow extraction to Earlene and Tommy Scruggs (color, p. 4); 11. Bone marrow is
extracted from Earlene Scruggs' hip by Dr.David Claxton, left, and Deisseroth,
assisted by nurse Sonja Tucker (color, p. 4); 12.Research associate Tao Wang and
Dr. Elie Hanania insert the viral vector carrying the MDR-1 gene into Earlene's
bone marrow (color, p. 4); 13. Dr. John Kavanagh, chief of gynecologic medical
oncology at Anderson, examines CT scans of Earlene's pelvis (color, p. 4); 14.
Dr. Andrzej Kudelka gives Earlene Scruggs a hug as she prepares to go home after
the procedure (color, p. 4); 15. Tommy and Earlene Scruggs pace the halls
(color, p. 5); 16. Dr. Albert Deisseroth, foreground, leads a team meeting
(color, p. 5); 17. Earlene Scruggs ponders what lies ahead (color, p. 5); 18.
Joy Hamer tells Earlene and Tommy Scruggs they might not be home for the
holidays (color, p.5); 19. Lab director Julia Walker warms a supercooled tube of
Earlene Scruggs' genetically altered bone marrow (color, p. 8); 20. Dr. Albert
Deisseroth and nurse Lynora Metoyer give Earlene Scruggs her first infusion of
altered marrow (color, p. 8); 21. Earlene Scruggs waits for the treatment to
take hold (color, p. 8); 22. Earlene Scruggs goes shopping for scarves to cover
her hair loss (color, p. 8); 23. Nurse Beth Finnegan wishes Earlene Scruggs well
upon releasing her after five weeks of treatment (color, p. 8); 24.Earlene
Scruggs is told she must undergo more tests (color, p. 8); All by Carlos Antonio
Rios/Chronicle

NOTES: Copyright 1995, Houston Chronicle Publishing Co.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             381 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORSA long road

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Researchers go through a lengthy and complicated approval process
before they can test a new treatment protocol on humans.  These are
the steps required of a gene therapy protocol proposed by
researchers at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center:
1) Anderson's Institutional Biosafety Committee

   Reviews safety of testing procedures

   Reviews animal testing to ensure that it is done humanely.


   2) Anderson's Institutional Review Board

   Includes Anderson experts and community representatives.

   Examines the protocol proposed for use in people, determining
whether experiments have a reasonable chance of proving a
scientific principle or of helping patients.

   Attempts to make sure that the potential benefits outweigh
risks.

   Reviews information provided to the patient to make sure it is
clear and accurate about the procedure and its risks.


   3) Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of
Health
 Established in the 1970s amid concerns that genetic studies
might release harmful bacteria or viruses.  Now under study by an
outside panel to determine if it has overstepped its charge.

   Reviews every aspect of the experiment -- from the scientific
methods to the grammar on the consent form -- in a contentious
process that can take a year or more.

   Determines patient costs and whether the procedure is
available to patients regardless of income.

   Determines who is liable if a patient is harmed.


   4) U.S. Food and Drug Administration

   Examines a lengthy document describing the experiment provided
by the researchers.  The document also goes to the Cancer Therapy
Evaluation Program, an arm of the FDA.

   In a review that can take as long as a year, the agency puts
special emphasis on the manufacture of the viral vectors that
transmit modified genes to cells.  The viral vector is considered a
drug and must be manufactured with the same concerns for safety,
sanitation and contamination that govern drug manufacture by
pharmaceutical companies.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             382 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Stalking our most relentless killer;
Houston cardiologist hopes to engineer anti-clotting agent to fight heart attack

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   THE COMMON METAPHOR for the heart is mechanical -- a pump
that tirelessly contracts to keep blood flowing through the body.

   But the metaphor fails in describing the biology of the
arteries, veins and muscles that power that pump, and the myriad
factors that cause high blood pressure, heart attack and the
various ailments to which the heart is prone.

   Dr. James Willerson, chairman of medicine at the University
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston and a leader in research
in heart disease at the Texas Heart Institute, has spent his
professional life looking for better ways to prevent heart attack.

   The catastrophe strikes 1.5 million Americans a year and
kills nearly 500,000.  In the United States, heart disease kills
someone every 34 seconds.

   Willerson knows that fixing the heart requires better
understanding of the molecules that make up the very cells of the
heart and of the blood delivery system it powers.

   Based on his understanding of those molecules, he is looking
at genetic ways to forestall heart attacks.

   Another team at UT and the heart institute is seeking
genetic solutions to a chronic problem with a mechanical heart
assistant pump.

   A heart attack occurs when a coronary artery narrows to the
point that blood can no longer flow through it.  Without the
nourishment that blood brings to the heart muscle, cells begin to
die.

   Willerson and other experts believe that the narrowing
begins after an injury to the lining of the artery wall, called the
endothelium.  That injury can be caused by high blood pressure,
cigarette smoking, excess fats circulating in the blood, diabetes
or other factors.

   After the endothelium is hurt, platelets -- the components
of the blood responsible for clotting -- begin to aggregate at the
injury site.  The injury also attracts hormones called growth
factors that cause cholesterol and other materials in the blood to
collect at the injury area.

   Willerson and Dr. Kenneth Wu, also of UT, hope to insert
into cells of the arterial wall a gene that causes production of
prostaglandin -- a substance that inhibits blood clots.  Heading off
the clots, they reason, might prevent heart attacks.

   They are testing the technique in pigs, using an adenovirus
-- a deactivated form of a virus that causes colds -- to take the
gene right into the injured cells of the artery.

   Willerson said the animal studies are promising.

   His proposal is still years from use in patients, he said.

   He has not yet determined what kinds of patients would benefit from
the gene therapy or how to apply it.

   But he is far ahead of a group that is trying an imaginative
approach to making artificial heart pumps safer.

   Dr. Ward Casscells and Dr. Timothy Scott-Burden at UT and
the Texas Heart Institute are trying to develop a lining for the
interior of a heart-assistant pump known as the left-ventricular
assist device, or LVAD.

   The biggest drawback to using such pumps is that they cause
blood clots.  The clots can cause strokes that either kill the
patient or injure the brain.

   Sometimes the clots are microscopic, but even those pose
significant hazards to patients, Scott-Burden said.

   The researchers propose growing a protective lining for the
pump from the patient's own cells.

   Endothelial cells from artery walls are known to produce
factors that inhibit clot production, said Casscells and
Scott-Burden.  But these cells do not grow well in culture.  And
there is no certainty that they would adhere to the pump's
polyvinyl surface.

   Scott-Burden proposes using smooth muscle cells, which grow
easily in culture and adhere to polyvinyl, but lack the
clot-inhibiting factor.

   To these cells he would insert genes that cause cells to make
nitric oxide and prostacyclin -- the hormones that prevent clotting.

   ""We are turning the smooth muscle cell into something like
an endothelial cell,'' said Scott-Burden.

   Both heart gene therapies are now in the very early phases
and no human trials are planned.

   ""I guess it is a little far-fetched for the average
person,'' said Scott-Burden.

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Above, Dr. James Willerson, chairman of medicine at the
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston and a leader in research in
heart disease at the Texas Heart Institute, with a model of the human heart
(color); 2. Dr. Ward Casscells, left, and Dr.David Engler run a fluid analysis
at the Texas Heart Institute (color); All by Carlos Antiono Rios/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             383 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 843 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
An experiment in hope

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   The experimental treatment that doctors hope will benefit ovarian
cancer patient Earlene Scruggs and others began in research labs
almost a decade ago.  If the treatment works as planned, Scruggs'
genetically altered bone marrow cells will be able to tolerate
stronger doses of the cancer-fighting drug Taxol.  Bone marrow
produces the white blood cells that are the key infection-fighters
in the body's immune system.  Here are some key dates in the history
of the treatment:

   1986-1991 -- Scientists discover the phenomenon of multidrug
resistance, which causes some cells to survive strong doses of
chemotherapy, and identify the multidrug resistance gene type 1
(MDR-1).

   1992-93 -- Drs.  Albert Deisseroth, Siqing Fu and Elie Hanania of
M.D. Anderson begin efforts to develop a viral vector -- a virus
that can take a foreign gene into human cells.

   April 1992 -- The Anderson team obtains a clone of the MDR-1 gene
and begins planning experiments in animals.

   May 1992 -- Fu and Hanania start building the vector they will use
in their animal experiments.

   June 30, 1992 -- Hanania transplants bone marrow containing the
MDR-1 gene into mice.

   July 1992 -- The Anderson team begins giving animals chemotherapy,
and tries various viral vectors to determine which is best at
getting the MDR-1 gene to cells.

   August 1992 -- Earlene Scruggs of rural northwest Arkansas is
diagnosed with ovarian cancer and begins chemotherapy.  Her tumor is
too widespread for immediate surgery.

   December 1992-May 1993 -- The Anderson researchers begin trying to
put the MDR-1 gene in human bone marrow in the test tube.

   Jan. 20, 1993 -- Anderson's Institutional Review Board, which must
approve all research involving patients, approves the protocol.

   Feb. 20, 1993 -- Surgeons in Arkansas remove Earlene Scruggs'
cancer and perform complete hysterectomy.

   March 3, 1993 -- Deisseroth presents the treatment proposal to the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which must approve protocols
for experimental genetic treatments on humans.  The RAC identifies
some shortcomings and recommends further experiments.

   June 7, 1993 -- The RAC approves the protocol.  It still requires
approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   September 1993 -- Earlene Scruggs' cancer recurs.  She undergoes
another six months of chemotherapy in Arkansas.

   November 1993 -- The Deisseroth team suffers a setback after a
marathon of lab work over the Thanksgiving weekend fails to produce
usable vectors in large quantities.  Cells in 648 flasks had picked
up the genes needed to reproduce themselves -- an unacceptable
characteristic in viral vectors.

   February 1994 -- The researchers resume the vector production
operation, growing the virus in smaller quantities.  The process
produces a clean virus by March.

   Sept. 13, 1994 -- The FDA approves the experiment.

   October 1994 -- Scruggs' doctors say her cancer is coming back
again and they persuade her to go to Anderson, where they know
Deisseroth is considering gene therapy.

   Oct. 6, 1994 -- Deisseroth and Dr.John Kavanagh, his collaborator,
invite Scruggs to be the first patient for the experimental
treatment.

   Oct. 17, 1994 -- Scruggs consents to the treatment.

   Oct. 26, 1994 -- Scruggs and her husband, Tommy, arrive at
Anderson, where she undergoes a grueling 10 hours of tests.

   Oct. 28-Nov. 1, 1994 -- Scruggs receives her first round of
chemotherapy at Anderson.  Doctors wait for her blood counts to come
back up -- a sign that her blood is full of the progenitor cells
that give rise to blood cells, and which the doctors hope to
strengthen genetically.

   Nov. 16, 1994 -- With Scruggs under general anesthesia, Deisseroth
and colleague David Claxton collect bone marrow from her hip.  It is
processed to isolate the progenitor cells.  These cells are taken to
Deisseroth's lab to be genetically modified, then frozen.  It will
be weeks before the doctors know how many of the cells contain the
MDR-1 gene.

   Dec. 28-31, 1994 -- Scruggs returns to Anderson and receives a
second blast of chemotherapy that attacks her tumor but also kills
her white blood cells.

   Jan. 9, 1995 -- Scruggs receives a transplant of the bone marrow
removed in November and genetically altered to increase its
resistance to chemotherapy.

   Jan. 18, 1995 -- Scruggs leaves her 10th-floor isolation unit for a
hotel room across the street.  It is the earliest anyone has ever
left the hospital after a bone marrow transplant.

   Jan. 30-31, 1995 -- Scruggs receives the first course of Taxol --
the final stage of her treatment.  It is a 24-hour infusion that
ends shortly before 6 p.m. The dosage is low.

   Feb. 1, 1995 -- Earlene and Tommy Scruggs return to Arkansas.

   Feb. 19, 1995 -- Scruggs returns for a second round of Taxol.

   March 13, 1995 -- Scruggs receives her third round of Taxol.  She
eventually will receive 12 courses of the drug.  The doctors hope it
will destroy all of her cancer, while healthy cells are protected
from the powerful drug by the MDR-1 gene.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             384 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 2530 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
They're on a suicide mission -- inside the brain;
Team must first hack its way through jungle of research

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   SAVIO L.C. WOO would rather be right than first.

   In the high-stakes competition of gene therapy, his insistence
on rigorous science could pay off.

   He may be the first to be right.

   And if he is, 11,000 Americans diagnosed every year with a
deadly brain tumor called a glioma could be the real winners.

   Woo, the head of Baylor College of Medicine's gene therapy
center, and Dr. Robert Grossman, chairman of the school's
neurosurgery department, want to use a ""suicide'' gene to kill
gliomas in patients when conventional therapies fail, as they
usually do.

   Surgery, radiation and anti-cancer drugs can, in most cases,
give patients only about an extra 10 months of life.

   An operation cannot remove all of the tumor, which
infiltrates like a spider web into the fissures and tissues of the
brain.

   The use of radiation's killing beam is limited because it
destroys brain tissue along with the tumor, and brain cells do not
regenerate.  And the blood-brain barrier presents a formidable
biological wall that keeps most anti-tumor drugs out.

   Doctors may use all these weapons once, but when the disease
comes back, they have little else to offer.  But the team built by
Grossman and Woo is working on a new weapon.  For the past two
years, they have met to discuss their progress every Thursday
morning at 8:30 in a sixth-floor conference room of the main Baylor
building.

   The plan is the brainchild of a young post-doctoral student
who came from Taiwan to study under Woo, whose fame as a gene
therapy pioneer has spread through Asia.

   With a bright new Ph.D. in tumor biology, Shu-Hsia Chen
sought out her mentor in the fall of 1992.  ""I told him I wanted to
do gene therapy,'' she said.  Chen, diminutive and with a guileless
face that belies her 32 years, might be mistaken for an
undergraduate.  But Woo, who had met her at a meeting in Hong Kong,
knew that she possessed the kind of bright mind needed to tackle a
new field.

   Her knowledge of tumor biology and his expertise in
biochemistry combined for a productive partnership.

   More than two years after they began working together, his
respect continues.

   ""She is brilliant,'' he said.

   As Chen considered possible projects, she zeroed in on a
brain cancer treatment that already was under way at the National
Institutes of Health.  Doctors were taking a gene from a herpes
virus (the kind of organism that causes cold sores) and attaching
it to an inactivated retrovirus -- a virus that can insert its own
message into a cell's genetic code.

   The doctors, led by Edward Oldfield at the National Cancer
Institute, used the retrovirus to insert the gene into the cells of
gliomas.  The gene caused the tumor cells to make the enzyme
thymidine kinase, known by the shorthand TK, which attracts a drug
lethal to the tumors.

   When rats with brain tumors received the TK gene in this way
and then were treated with the antiviral drug ganciclovir, the
results were startling.

   Attracted by the TK ""suicide gene,'' the molecules of
ganciclovir attacked the TK cells like heat-seeking missiles
locking onto a hot target.  The drug destroyed the cells, and the
tumors shrank dramatically.

   The technique worked well in laboratory cultures and small
animals.  But the initial results in humans disappointed
researchers.  Tumors have shrunk, but not always disappeared, in
eight of the first 15 patients who underwent the treatment.

   One stumbling block is the virus.

   Because they can only infect dividing cells, retroviruses
take a gene into a small percentage of tumor cells.  And since the
viruses used for this purpose are altered so they cannot replicate
in the body, they do not spread from one cell to another.

   Chen came up with a new twist.  Why not use an adenovirus -- a
form of the virus that causes sore throats and cold symptoms?

   It was an inspired choice.  Adenoviruses are highly infective,
and a cell does not have to be dividing for an adenovirus to enter
it.

   David Shine, a molecular neurobiologist, has taken the
scientific lead in the neurosurgery department.  He remembers the
day when he, Dr.Clay Goodman and Grossman met with Woo and Chen.

   ""They asked us if we could participate,'' he said.  ""We
said, "Of course. ' Then we went back and tried to figure out if we
really could. '' While Shine and others, including
surgeons-in-training Drs.  Todd Trask and Mick Perez-Cruet, wanted
to work in the field of gene therapy, his lab had less experience
dealing with cancer research.

   Chen took on the onerous task of building the vector -- the
genetically altered virus that takes the ""suicide gene'' into
tumor cells.  Constructing a vector is often portrayed as simply
sticking blocks of DNA together.  It is much more difficult.

   It builds on years of research in other places with
scientists trying to figure out how an adenovirus replicates.  Chen
was able to start with other vectors that had been developed by
other scientists.

   For example, Dr. Bing Liang Fang in Woo's lab had altered a
vector from an outside lab.  That vector contained only fragments of
the adenovirus.  To that, Fang added a piece of DNA called a
promoter -- one that would turn a gene on.

   Then, Chen deleted a portion of that vector and added the TK
gene.

   The process took advantage of the natural affinity between
the building blocks of DNA -- the nucleotides called adenine,
thymine, cytosine and guanine.  Adenine always links with thymine;
cytosine with guanine.

   Using a catalyst called a restriction enzyme that cuts the
DNA at a specific point, she carefully removed an extraneous gene.

   The restriction enzyme does not cut the double strand of DNA
evenly.  Instead, it leaves dangling portions that scientists call
""sticky ends,'' the exact complements of the ends of DNA on the TK
gene that Chen wanted to insert.  If there was an adenine on the
""sticky end'' of the virus, there was a corresponding thymine on
the TK gene.

   It's as if the DNA were a sentence -- ""Mary had a little
lamb. '' The enzyme cuts the sentence between the two t's in
""little. '' When the incomplete sentence automatically seeks an
ending, it changes the message.  Inserting the TK gene, in this
case, could change the sentence to say ""Mary had a litter bag. ''

   This process left Chen with a partial adenovirus, containing
the crucial ""suicide gene'' but not capable of carrying it to the
target cells.

   To make a complete adenovirus, she used co-transfection: She
put the incomplete adenovirus into a cell culture and added another
vector containing all the missing regions of the adenovirus and a
piece of ""junk'' DNA that prevents replication.

   Most of the time, the cells produced in the culture
contained either the incomplete adenovirus or the other vector, but
not both.  But on rare occasions -- no more than once in a million
cell divisions -- the two vectors exchanged DNA.  The result was a
new vector -- an adenovirus that contained the TK gene and all other genetic
components except those needed for replication.

   Shine advised working with a brain cancer culture called C6
that he already had in a freezer in his laboratory.  In that
culture, the treatment was especially potent.  More than 90 percent
of the cells died.

   Moving from lab cultures to living animals, Chen collaborated
with Shine.

   They are an odd couple joined by the intensity of their
combined interest.

   Shine, a native Texan, grew up wanting to be a scientist.  As
a teen-ager, he filled his mother's garage with the trappings of a
laboratory.  In 1968, he drove from Temple to Houston to display his
science fair project at a meeting of the Texas Medical Association.

   He is the experiment's detail man, with an obsession for
making sure that all the i's are dotted and the t's are crossed.

   By contrast, Chen is still learning the craft of being a
scientist.  It was not always her goal, and she laughs as she
explains that when she was a youngster, she told her teachers she
wanted ""to be a mother because my own mother was so wonderful. ''
 Her family's support got her through the long years of
graduate school, and they stood behind her desire to continue her
work in the United States.  It became clear that biology and
research would be the driving forces in her life.

   She is consumed by her project but not to the point that she
is without a private life.  About a year ago, she asked the group to
forgo a project meeting.  ""I was planning to get married that
day,'' she told Woo.

   Chen's enthusiasm was complemented by Shine's experience and
expertise as they began testing gene therapy in mice.

   In his fourth-floor lab, Shine had tiny stereotactic
frames in which to fit the heads of the mice.  The frames allow the
scientists to measure injection locations precisely in three
dimensions.

   A single one of the tiny, pink, hairless mice Shine and Chen
used costs $ 17.  They are bred without immune systems, an advantage
in this work.  If the treatment worked in them, it would be because
TK-ganciclovir was a potent tumor killer -- not because the
animal's immune system obliterated the foreign tumor tissues.

   In each of their experiments, Shine and Chen used 20 of the
animals.

   The researchers worked for hours hunched inside biohazard
hoods that kept the virus from blowing into the lab itself.

   Anesthetizing and injecting a single animal can take as
long as an hour.  The ganciclovir treatments must be monitored
carefully for days.

   They ""blinded'' the last two mouse studies.  Chen did not
know if Shine was injecting the TK virus or a control virus used
for comparison.  Shine did not know which animals received
ganciclovir.

   Goodman, who did the pathology on the animal brains, knew
nothing when he analyzed the results.

   But on Sept.21, 1993, the three met in Goodman's office and
broke the code that told them which animals had been treated and
which had not.

   The results were clear.  The treatment worked.  The trio broke
open a bottle of champagne to celebrate, a bottle they all signed
and Shine keeps treasured on a shelf.

   Shine and Perez-Cruet then injected tumor cells into Fischer
rats.  The experiments included gliomas, which originate in the
brain, and breast cancer tumors, which can metastasize, or migrate,
to the brain.

   These rats had immune systems, which the researchers hoped
would enhance the TK-ganciclovir treatment.  They were right.  Both
types of tumors disappeared, and their sites contained evidence
that the animals' immune systems had helped in the treatment.

   But before Grossman was willing to inject a virus into a
human patient's brain, he had to test the system in primates, whose
response would more closely approximate that of humans.

   The baboon colony at the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research in San Antonio provided a natural site.

   On a foggy morning last May 3, Shine and resident surgeon
Todd Trask carried their cooler of virus onto a plane bound for San
Antonio.  Both were sleepy -- Shine because he had mulled over
everything that could go wrong and Trask because he had been up
since 5 a.m., making rounds at Methodist Hospital before he drove
to the airport.

   Shine was not sure that the trip would be fruitful.  They were
going to push the dose of the virus high to see where the treatment
became toxic.

   Dr. Dee Carey, a research veterinarian who heads his own
department at the Southwest Foundation, met them with his team.

   They donned scrubs and bright yellow throwaway paper gowns to go
into the secure area where the tests would be carried out.  No one
wanted to risk releasing the adenovirus into the atmosphere.

   Baboons are big animals -- bigger when they are under
anesthesia and limp.  Just getting them situated in the upright
stereotactic unit took hours.

   While Trask, gowned, masked and completely covered, stood
behind the baboon, Shine began to warm the virus.  The whir of the
drill as Trask made the small burr hole in the animal's head
sounded loud in the quiet room.  Each time, Shine injected the virus
-- slowly, carefully, so that it would not leak into the
surrounding brain.

   Two animals received moderate doses of the virus followed by
ganciclovir -- the treatment that most closely matched that planned
for humans.  Two received high-dose virus with ganciclovir and two
received high-dose virus alone.

   The injections took two days, and Trask left San Antonio
certain that all was well.  But the whole team was momentarily
shaken when one animal died spontaneously five days later and
another become so ill that it had to be killed 10 days after
treatment.

   Both had received high virus doses with ganciclovir.  In
each, a small area of the brain died, causing acute inflammation
near the injection site.

   But Woo found a bright spot.

   ""This is exactly what the FDA wanted,'' he told the team,
referring to the federal agency that regulates medications.  ""We
wanted to see toxicity.  We saw toxicity. ''

   It is his role to find the positive in negative results and
to push hard for more results when projects seem stalled.  The group
was dejected in September when it appeared that a group from
Pennsylvania had beaten them in getting approval from the NIH's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to use the treatment on humans.

   But Woo kept them to a steady course.

   He has pushed hard to find more collaborators to test the
treatment in other solid tumors -- breast, colon and liver, among
others.  And it is his job to lose his temper when his younger
colleagues skip important steps, the steps needed to take the
treatment to human patients.

   When Woo and Grossman appeared before the RAC in December,
committee member Dr. Richard Samulski called the baboon results ""a
bombshell. ''
 And he said that the findings of the Baylor group would have
a clear impact on the decisions made about the Pennsylvania group
that appeared to have beaten Woo's in receiving approval.  Both
groups have been asked to do more studies.

   Woo anticipates that human tests will begin before the end of
1995.

   But the pace of science and bureaucracy is slow.  Grossman
makes no promises.  He remembers the 28-year-old woman with
7-year-old and 3-year-old children who came to him more than eight
months ago with numbness on the right side of her body.  Her glioma
could not be removed surgically and he had little else to offer her.

   Such patients drive Grossman to participate in this kind of
research.  But he will not hold out false hope.  When people measure
the lengths of their lives in months, he cannot promise what will
not be delivered in their lifetimes.

   Woo is as much philosopher as scientist.  He sees the ebb and
flow of the research in his laboratory as something natural.  He
supervises several such projects and he must look to the future.

   It is realistic to expect one of his groups to achieve its
aim, but even if gene therapy for glioma is not achieved in his
professional lifetime, he leaves a legacy in young scholars.

   Shu-Hsia Chen is only one of many who promise to become formidable
leaders in their fields.


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. David Shine injects virus into a rat's brain (color); 2. Rat
brain cross-section with metastasized tumor after control treatment (b/w); 3.
Rat brain cross-section after TK-ganciclovir (b/w); 4. Rat brain cross-section
with glioma after control treatment; 5. Rat brain cross-section with after
TK-ganciclovir (b/w); 6. Dr. Robert Grossman with stereotactic frame (color);
7.Shu-Hsia Chen, left, with colleagues Xiao Hong Li and Andreas Block (color);
8. Dr. Savio L.C.Woo (color); 1, 6-8. Carlos Antonio Rios/Chronicle, 2-5.Baylor
College of Medicine

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             385 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 992 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
"We were the right people in the right place at the right time'

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   VAN DeSILVA is all passion, belief and mother's love.

   Her husband, Raj, combines an engineer's precise logic with a
wise man's acceptance.

   But from their differing perspectives, they have come to a
single conclusion: The life of their second daughter, 8-year-old
Ashanthi, is nothing less than a miracle.

   ""I think we are lucky,'' said Raj.  ""Really.  We were the
right people in the right place at the right time. ''
 Even though she was born with a life-threatening disease,
Ashanthi now has a bright future.  Four years ago, she was the first
person anywhere to undergo a new procedure called gene therapy.

   It was a landmark event.

   Just before 1 p.m. on Sept.14, 1990, when Dr. Kenneth
Culver slid a sharp, shiny needle into the intravenous tubing that
led to a vein in Ashanthi's left hand, he knew that it was history
in the making.  A crowd in the room at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., watched as he pushed the plunger down on
the syringe attached to the needle, pushing genetically altered
blood cells down the tube and into the 4-year-old's veins.

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese, one of Culver's collaborators, says
that those simple actions opened the door to a new era in medicine.

   It took a medical triumvirate, including gene therapy pioneer
Dr. W. French Anderson, to shepherd the project over the scientific
hurdles and through the regulatory barricades.

   And they had to beat their own colleagues to be first.

   At one point, there were more people working on the disease
-- adenosine deaminase deficiency -- than there were children in
the world who suffered from it.  Patients lack the gene that makes a
crucial enzyme, adenosine deaminase, or ADA.  Without it, they have
a severe combined immune deficiency and no protection against
viruses and bacteria.

   So far, Ashi, as her family calls her, has shown the most
benefit, said Blaese.

   But the second patient -- Cindy Cutshall -- is doing better
than expected.

   And while he is cautious about the prognoses of both
children, Blaese is confident about the field of gene therapy.

   ""This will be a significant part of the future of medicine.

   It gives us tools we've never had before,'' said Blaese, director
of the clinical gene therapy unit at the National Center for Genome
Research.

   But the tools are still primitive, and the public is
champing at the bit.  The success of this first experiment has had
one unfortunate byproduct.  ""It raised expectations so high,'' said
Blaese.

   ""People need to understand that these are experiments.  Gene
therapy is still an experiment in every case,'' he said.

   The DeSilvas and Cutshalls understood that.  But, as Raj
DeSilva said, ""What choice did we have? ''

   One potential choice was a drug called peg-ADA that was
being used to substitute for the missing enzyme ADA.  But it does
not fully reconstitute the immune system and Ashanthi had already
shown signs that she did not respond well to the medication.

   Cindy's parents considered it a stopgap.

   During a visit to Houston last fall to celebrate Ashanthi's
first treatment -- an event celebrated annually by the Immune
Deficiency Foundation -- both sets of parents said they were
enthusiastic when approached about gene therapy.

   Before the treatment, Ashanthi did not grow normally.  The
quiet child with a stoic demeanor was house-bound by the threat of
infection.  Her childhood was interrupted constantly by diarrhea,
vomiting, rashes and infections.

   The gene therapy enabled her to grow rapidly.  She entered
school and is an honor student.  Her illnesses have followed the
same course as those of any other child, said her parents.  Still
quiet, she smiles when she talks to the only other person with whom
she can really share her feelings -- Cindy Cutshall.

   Cindy, now 13, also was once far below normal growth for
her age.  But after receiving gene therapy in January of 1991, she
is now 5 feet 4 inches tall.  Her ADA deficiency was not diagnosed
until she was 5, but she quickly began to get sicker.

   She and Ashi received some ""booster'' treatments after the
first treatments, but neither has had a new infusion in over a year.

   No one will say that either girl is cured.  At present, the
only real cure for ADA deficiency is a bone marrow transplant from
a brother or sister whose marrow is a perfect tissue match.

   Ideally, for gene therapy to be effective, the ADA gene
should be inserted in the long-lived stem cells of the patient's
bone marrow -- where the lymphocytes that fight infection are made.

   But four years ago, when Ashanthi and Cindy needed treatment,
physicians had not yet perfected techniques to isolate stem cells.

   So Culver, Blaese and Anderson settled on modifying the
lymphocytes.

   The doctors reasoned that genetically correcting the
lymphocytes could improve immune function.  Periodic infusions over
the years would sustain the effect.

   The doctors found that the lymphocytes containing the ADA
gene lived longer than the deficient lymphocytes, and that the
effect of the genetic modification was long-term.  Other immune
indicators improved in both children as well.

   Both girls also continue to receive peg-ADA, and many
researchers believe that this taints the results.

   The improvement may come from the enzyme and not the gene,
they say.

   But Culver and Blaese believe that the therapy worked for
both girls.  A special test called polymerase chain reaction shows
that 30 percent of Ashanthi's cells contain the ADA gene, said
Culver.  In Cindy, he said, the percentage of modified cells is much
smaller but enough to allow her to develop immunity after
undergoing a series of vaccinations against childhood diseases.

   Solving the problem of ADA deficiency benefits no more than
100 children directly.

   But by taking that first step, the trio of researchers --
Blaese, Culver and Anderson -- led the march into a new era of
medicine.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cindy Cutshall, left, and Ashanthi DeSilva play with soccer
balls during a recent immunology conference in The Woodlands at which their
cases were discussed (color)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             386 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 914 words

HEADLINE: Studies cast a ray of hope on array of dark diseases

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO

BODY:

   SAN ANTONIO -- Pediatrician Julie Katkin's patient was asleep
and breathing too fast.

   This not an unusual problem for Katkin; most of the people
she treats are children with the genetic disorder cystic fibrosis.

   But on this particular summer day, Katkin had a different
kind of patient and a different kind of problem.  He was a young
baboon, asleep.  His inhalations were shallow and rapid.

   He does not have cystic fibrosis, but he is critical to a
treatment being considered for it -- gene therapy.  Cystic fibrosis
is one of several ailments against which gene therapy holds
promise.  Also in experimental stages are gene therapy treatments
for muscular dystrophy and AIDS, among others.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs when a child is born with two faulty
genes that tell cells to make a protein called the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR.

   In most cases the infant's parents each carry one defective
gene.  Because they also have a normal gene, the parents do not have
cystic fibrosis.  But their children have a one-in-four chance of
being born with the disastrous disease.

   It is a fatal condition that smothers the lungs in a thick
blanket of mucus, providing a medium in which bacteria grow
readily.  Cystic fibrosis frequently kills its victims before their
24th birthdays.

   Katkin is part of the team formed by Baylor College of
Medicine Professor Arthur Beaudet.

   Now interim head of Baylor's department of molecular and
human genetics, Dr. Beaudet has concentrated on studying the
biology of cystic fibrosis for years.

   But now he is going for broke.  He is going to try to
correct the disease at its most basic level -- the gene that has
gone wrong.

   Katkin came to the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical
Research in San Antonio to test Beaudet's plan for overcoming one
of the major problems in gene therapy -- getting the gene into the
tissues where it will do the most good and getting it into enough
cells to have an effect.

   Researchers such as Dr. C. Tom Caskey, who just left Baylor,
are facing similar problems in trying to get a corrected gene for
muscular dystrophy into muscle cells.

   And Dr. John Belmont and his cohorts, who are looking for
ways to fight the human immunodeficiency virus, must devise methods
to insert beneficial genes into enough cells of the immune system
to block the virus, which causes AIDS.

   ""We have to come up with a way to keep the immune system
from collapsing,'' said Belmont.

   In the laboratory, when he substitutes defective forms of
the normal HIV genes called rev and tat, he prevents key viral
information from leaving the cell's nucleus and replicating.

   He is wrestling with the issue of whether laboratory studies
are enough to prove the safety of the technique or if he should go
the costly route of testing it in animals first.  ""I think the
money is better spent in human testing,'' he said.

   Beaudet and Katkin, however, face the difficult task of
getting the corrected gene into hard-to-reach lung tissues.  They
want to make sure that what they are doing works before they put
patients at risk.

   The plan is to put patients in a plastic tent where they
will breathe aerosol droplets that contain the gene.  It is
attached, oddly enough, to an adenovirus, a virus that usually
causes colds.  In this case, the adenovirus has been deactivated.  It
will not cause disease, but it will invade the cells of the lung
and take a normal CFTR gene in with it.

   After the treatment, the patient will leave the tent and
shower to remove any leftover, genetically modified adenovirus.  The
tent will be collapsed from the inside, keeping the genetically
modified material there, thus avoiding the possibility of
contaminating the world outside.

   The baboon experiment was a test of this approach, using an
aerosol saline solution instead of genetically modified adenovirus.

   But the animal, strapped into a child's car seat, was not
sitting up straight.  His tongue seemed to be impeding his
breathing.  His life was not in danger.  But when Katkin took a
sample of his blood, the oxygen level was too low.  She and
veterinarian Dee Carey tried different positions, different masks
to deliver the saline.  Nothing worked.

   It is not a problem she will face with human patients, who
will be awake and vertical during the treatment.  But to get to
humans, she has to prove the treatment works in animals.

   Heads on the palms of their hands, they squatted on the
floor, looking up at the patient.  ""Why is he doing this? '' Katkin
asked.

   The day ended in disappointment, but the baboon trials
eventually worked.  And despite such setbacks, Beaudet's program is
proceeding apace.

   But now Beaudet and his co-workers have to decide how to
proceed.  ""Is what we learn from baboons applicable? '' he asks.

   He is one of several scientists concentrating on cystic
fibrosis, which affects 50,000 people worldwide.

   When treatments start going into people, he worries that
""there will be high hopes.  They will probably be higher than
justified.  I will not be a party to encouraging false hope. ''

   Katkin agrees.  ""I have mixed feelings about this,'' she
said.  ""Many of my patients are too old.  Once you have the lung
disease, it's like a 20-year smoker.  The emphysema doesn't go away.

   ""But we diagnosed four infants with cystic fibrosis last
month.  They are the ones this will help.  Then it becomes more
urgent. ''

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. In search of an effective therapy for cystic fibrosis, Drs.
Dee Carey, left, a veterinarian, and Julie Katkin, a pediatrician, prepare a
young baboon for experimental treatment at the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research in San Antonio (color); 2.Veterinary technician Michael
Strauss keeps an eye on the anesthetized baboon (color); 3.Julie Katkin slumps
onto the laboratory floor in frustration during the experiment (color); Photos
by Paul S. Howell / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             387 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 2, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1594 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Yes, scientists can engineer genes -- but should they?;
The ethical issues on this new frontier are as twisted as a DNA strand

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   I will use treatment to help the sick according to my
ability and judgment but never with a view to injury and
wrongdoing.  In whatsoever houses I enter, I will enter to help the
sick and I will abstain from all intentional wrongdoing and harm,
especially from abusing the bodies of man or woman, bond or free.

   -- Hippocrates
---------------------
ON DEC. 2, 1993, Nobel laureate and retrovirus expert Howard Temin
asked a question.

   His simple, seven-line missive to Nelson Wivel, director of
the National Institutes of Health's office of recombinant DNA
activities, raised a technical point about retroviruses used in
gene therapy and whether they might be able to replicate under
specific conditions.

   The letter prompted a flurry of letters and opinions from a
host of experts in industry and academia.  Now that they thought
about it, they wrote, it was possible -- but highly improbable.

   But Temin's mild letter illustrates an important point about
the new era of gene therapy.  Everyone recognizes that no one has
all the answers.  The real issue is whether all the questions have
been asked.

   Jeremy Rifkin, a lawyer and perennial gadfly of the
genetics experts, does not think so.

   ""I would like to see a full-scale discussion of the
possibility of changing the blueprint for human life,'' said
Rifkin, who has criticized and occasionally taken legal action over
genetic experiments for years.

   ""This is the most dramatic medical technique in history,
yet there is almost no discussion around the long-term ethical
implications. ''
 That might have been true 15 years ago when Martin Cline
prematurely attempted to transplant genes into the bone marrow of
patients suffering from the blood disease thalassemia.  His
experiment, carried out in Italy and Israel when he could not
obtain approval at the University of California at Los Angeles,
created a furor.  The experiment did no harm, but it was ineffective
against thalassemia and was done without appropriate safeguards.

   It led to a requirement that proposed gene therapy trials be
reviewed by the NIH's own Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, or
RAC -- ""the rack'' -- and a newly formed Human Gene Therapy
subcommittee.  The RAC, an appointed panel of scientists involved in
genetics and molecular biology, historians, ethicists,
sociologists, lawyers and laypersons, validates more than the
science of each proposal brought before it.

   The members also explore the ethics of the experiment, the
completeness of the informed-consent document that each patient
must sign, the rationale for exposing patients to the procedure and
its potential for harm or benefit.

   The often-contentious process criticizes everything from the
basic lab work to the grammar and writing in the proposal.

   It is also the most open forum for scientific discussion in
the world.  Four times each year, would-be gene therapists come to
defend their treatment plans before the assembled skeptics.

   The experimental data are available to the public before
the meetings.

   But the RAC process is under attack from those who want the
therapies and those who seek to develop them.  They say the process
needlessly delays approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and use of the treatments in people.  But FDA
approval takes place behind closed doors.

   Dr. Tony Marcel, a Parisian observer of the RAC, advised that
the process remain open, saying, ""The only country in the world
where we know what is going on in gene therapy is the United States
of America. ''

   The public light will become more important as proposed
therapies shift from life-threatening diseases to physical
""enhancements'' or changes that affect an entire population
instead of individuals.

   So far, gene therapies have targeted the tough diseases:
cancer, hereditary diseases, heart disease, even arthritis.  But in
the future, the RAC may have to deal with tougher issues.

   As long as gene therapy is directed at the cells of tissues
-- tumors, muscles, lungs, bone marrow -- the RAC can concern
itself with whether the treatment is safe for the patient and
whether there is a danger that the virus used to take the gene into
the tissues poses a danger to the environment.

   These are somatic therapies, and conscientious scientists
have limited themselves to those techniques so far.

   But ethicists warn that the issue of germ-line therapy --
changing the genetic code in the eggs and sperm -- will arise
sooner or later.  And those changes affect not only the individuals
but their progeny.

   ""You could argue that it is inefficient to do somatic
therapy,'' said Mark Rothstein, director of the University of
Houston's Health Law Institute.  ""Why not go in there and fix
things once and for all? ''

   But current science has not progressed far enough to ensure
that such measures could be taken safely without causing more
problems than they solve.

   And how does one define a genetic disease?

   Scientific claims that the genes for obesity or
homosexuality have been found blur the definition of ""genetic
disorder. ''
 Are these really diseases that should be cured?  Davis Suzuki
and Peter Knudson pose the question in their book Genethics: The
Clash Between the New Genetics and Human Values.

   In an editorial last May in the professional journal Human
Gene Therapy, Dr. David M. Danks, director of the Murdoch Institute
for Research into Birth Defects at the Royal Children's Hospital in
Melbourne, gave a resounding thumbs-down to the prospect of
germ-line therapy.

   ""I can see no significant place for germ-line gene therapy
in the treatment of genetic disease,'' he wrote, ""and it is quite
wrong to suggest that the present methods of gene therapy would
allow corrections to carry on through future generations.

   ""In fact, the only application I can really imagine for
germ-line gene therapy would be in attempting to alter normal
characteristics. ''
 The other major issue involves defining which diseases get
attention first.

   There is no more vocal critic of the current direction of
gene therapy than Abbey S. Meyers, a RAC member and president of
the National Organization for Rare Disorders.

   ""Seventy percent of the approvals are for treatment for
cancer or AIDS,'' she said.  ""Gene therapy itself was conceived as
a way to cure genetic disease.  But that is not going to happen
unless the gene disease community can get similar resources to
those available to the cancer community. ''

   ""The commercial aspects seem to be driving where it's
going,'' she said.  ""There is an absence of federal policy. ''

   Scientists should follow the scientific opportunities, not
the money to be gained from treating a particular disorder, she
said.  ""Right now, the commercial sector is so involved and Wall
Street is such a factor that even if a scientist sees an
opportunity (to develop a treatment for a rare disease), he'll
never get a grant to pursue it. ''
 Scientists defend their activities, saying that what they learn
in cancer, AIDS and heart disease can eventually be applied to
cures for the rare disorders.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, a pioneer gene therapist who once
took that position, reversed his stand in a recent editorial in
Human Gene Therapy.  ""I emphatically argue that the NIH must begin
to support academic investigators to carry out gene therapy clinic
protocols that have a strong basis in science but not in
marketability,'' he wrote.

   Perhaps the most troubling issue is the cruelty of raising
false hope in desperate patients.

   Gene therapy techniques are primitive, and they don't always
work.  But the public that reads about such treatments in the
newspaper and hears about them on television expects a lot,
probably too much, said Dr. Krishna Dronamraju, the only RAC member
from Houston.

   The RAC attempts to ensure that patients aren't misled about
proposed treatment, said Dronamraju.  But there is no control over
the public media.

   In 1993, a California woman asked U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin,
D-Iowa, to intercede with the NIH so that she could undergo a gene
therapy protocol that had been turned down by the RAC on scientific
grounds.  Dr. Bernadine Healy, NIH director at the time, overruled
the RAC and approved the therapy's use on that one patient.

   Dronamraju said the incident demonstrated the problems that
occur when false expectations are raised.

   Meyers is even more emphatic.  ""There seems to be a
perception that this is a last-chance therapy,'' she said.  But the
studies are designed only to determine if the treatments are
harmful, she said.

   ""There is no expectation that this will be therapeutic. ''

   Because the California investigators got special approval,
they had no responsibility to report their results to the RAC.

   That circumvents the committee's value, said Meyers.

   ""The reason that there is a RAC is public accountability,''
Meyers said recently.  ""This is a new technology that raises
ethical questions of a different proportion than other questions
about other areas of science.  And so if the protocols are not
reviewed in public, if there is no opportunity to go over them, my
biggest fear is that there would be nobody to protect the patient.

   ""By that I mean the investigator needs to protect his
career and his university, the FDA has to protect their regulatory
authority, the company or the manufacturer actually has an economic
interest in it succeeding, and there is nobody there to care about
the patients. ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tao Wang, Elie Hanania and Debra Ellerson leave M.D. Anderson
after a long but successful day treating Earlene Scruggs' bone marrow (color);
Carlos Antonio Rios/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995


                             388 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      March 31, 1995, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: Boston panel to air regional AIDS issues;
DAVID NYHAN

BYLINE: By David Nyhan, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Phil Johnston went to a funeral Tuesday for a 38-year-old wasted by AIDS. A
boyhood chum of the deceased, himself HIV positive, said to him: "I'm going to
law school - now, if they only figure out something to keep me alive."

   People used to worry about nuclear destruction and brood about what that
could do to their children. I have no polling numbers on the subject, but my
guess is that more parents today worry about a kid contracting AIDS than almost
any other calamity that can befall a family.

   Because AIDS is expanding worldwide, leaping through the population with
fearsome impact, and because it is still expanding in Massachusetts and New
England, though at a slower rate, the communities most intent upon fighting the
disease assemble Wednesday, April 5, from 9 to 4 at the John F. Kennedy Library
in Dorchester.

   The conference, "Changing Times, Changing Strategies: AIDS in New England,"
is regional and specific. Medical, research, government people and care
providers will hear about needle exchange in Connecticut, rural linkage in
Maine, how many Massachusetts prisoners have AIDS, what New Hampshire teens find
when they need AIDS help, what Rhode Island can do for women with AIDS and how
Vermont gets services to folks outside of town.

   Dr. Max Essex, chairman of Harvard's AIDS Institute, will explain the
epidemic's expansion via HIV subtypes. Patsy Fleming, the Clinton
administration's AIDS "czarina," will address the national policy picture.

   One workshop confronts the issues of mandatory testing and disclosure
policies.  A panel of researchers will assess biomedical developments, gene
therapy and vaccines. A panel of experts will assess the potential cutbacks in
federal money for research and treatment, the Ryan White CARE Act and other
sources of money.

   Mary Fisher, the founder of the Family AIDS Network, who addressed the last
GOP national convention on what it's like living with AIDS, will be the
concluding speaker.

   Guiding the discussions will be Jackie Jenkins-Scott, president of the Dimock
Community Health Center in Roxbury and Loretta McLaughlin, retired Globe
editorial page editor, who spent more ink and newsprint on AIDS than on any
other single topic. She's now at the Harvard AIDS Institute, which sponsors the
conference, along with Phil Johnston, New England director of the US Department
of Health and Human Services, and the Massachusetts Public Health Association.

   "New England happens to be a center - maybe the center - for AIDS research
generally," said Johnston. "Boston is also a center for AIDS services; it's a
supportive community."

   "We are fighting AIDS on two fronts," said McLaughlin, "the
medical-scientific one and the political one. AIDS is not going down yet; it is
still spreading, and while there is greater hope now on the treatment front, on
the other side of the coin some of the subtypes appear to be more efficient
heterosexually."

   When it comes to spreading the viruses, greater efficiency means more
contagious. And some AIDS strains have a very great potency when spread to
heterosexual women by infected males during sex. As many as a half-million
Americans are known to have contracted AIDS, and half of them are dead.

   Researchers, care givers and, not coincidentally, patients are worried that
the furious budget-chopping underway in Washington might jeopardize AIDS money
at a time when there seems to be some progress afoot.

   While no one sees a vaccine on the near horizon, there have been gains in the
treatment of the other illnesses that take hold when AIDS wears down a person's
system. AIDS patients are living longer thanks to AZT and other drugs.
Worldwide, the estimated number of humans infected by AIDS passed 26 million in
January. There were 4 million HIV infections last year, half of them in
sub-Saharan Africa. Last year found 1.6 million people developing AIDS,
including 300,000 children. The toll is horrific, particularly in the developing
countries.

   McLaughlin says "enormous advances" have been made in studying the disease.
Treatment cannot yet cure it, but "has improved the quality of life, minimized
complications and lengthened survival time" in advanced nations.

   Education on sexual contact is still crucial, she maintains. Taboos about
discussing condoms, sex and clean drug tools means more people get sick and die.
The AIDS battlers here are mobilized. Massachusetts cases passed the 10,000 mark
about a month ago. How many more before we get serious about education and give
kids the straight talk they need to survive?

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1995


                             389 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     MARCH 30, 1995 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: STUDY: IBUPROFEN SLOWS CYSTIC FIBROSIS IT BREAKS THE CYCLE IN
CHILDREN'S LUNG DAMAGE. DOSAGE MUST BE SUPERVISED.

BYLINE: John Schwartz, WASHINGTON POST, This article includes information from
the Associated Press.

BODY:

   A popular over-the-counter painkiller is remarkably effective in fighting the
progression of cystic fibrosis in children, researchers have found.

   Ibuprofen - the generic name for the drug found in Motrin, Nuprin, Advil and
other common products - slows the deterioration of the lungs that is a
hallmark of cystic fibrosis, according to a report in today's issue of the New
England Journal of Medicine.

   During a four-year study of 85 patients ages 5 to 39, the rate of
deterioration for those taking ibuprofen slowed by 60 percent compared with
other patients, and slowed by 88 percent for patients under 13.

   "It's a very important development for individuals with cystic fibrosis and
their families," said Robert J. Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal inherited disease in the United
States. It afflicts more than 30,000 children and young adults, and more than
1,000 new patients are diagnosed with the ailment annually. A genetic defect
causes dense mucus to accumulate in the lungs, clogging the bronchi and
pancreatic ducts and leading to breathing difficulties and a host of other
medical problems.

   In the lungs, patients develop a "vicious cycle" of mucus buildup, infection
and inflammation by the body's own defenses that causes structural damage of the
lungs over time, said pediatrician Michael Konstan of Rainbow Babies &
Children's Hospital in Cleveland, the principal author of the study.

   Ibuprofen breaks the cycle by reducing inflammation. "What we're trying to do
is prevent lung damage," he said.

   Patients taking ibuprofen also maintained a healthier weight than members of
the control group, who tended to be malnourished. Half of the study subjects
took as much as 1,600 milligrams of the drug (equivalent to about eight
over-the-counter pills) twice a day; the rest received a placebo.

   At a time when new drug therapies almost invariably come with a dose of
sticker shock, the ibuprofen treatment is surprisingly inexpensive. Researchers
estimated that a prescription would cost less than $200 annually.

   By comparison, a year's supply of Pulmozyme, a drug approved in 1993 that
helps break up the pulmonary congestion, costs an estimated $10,000 per year.
Patients generally have to take a combination of treatments, including
antibiotics and pancreatic enzymes, and have to take the medications for the
rest of their lives.

   "This really adds another nice tool to the armamentarium" against the
disease, said Judith Fradkin, who heads cystic fibrosis programs at the National
Institute of Diabetes, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases at the National
Institutes of Health, which helped fund the study.

   But patients should not try to treat themselves, researchers warned.
Because cystic-fibrosis sufferers metabolize drugs differently from healthy
people, doctors must help the patients determine the proper dose through blood
tests.

   Ibuprofen also can have harmful side-effects if used incorrectly. It can
damage the stomach and kidneys, and interfere with other drugs used to treat
cystic fibrosis, said pediatrician Pamela Davis, a co-author of the study.

   "One of the things we're worried about is that the drug is available over the
counter. We would absolutely not suggest that CF patients go down to the
drug store and buy the drug and start popping it," she said.

   Scientists have been trying for years to find a safe way to fight the
inflammation that accompanies cystic fibrosis. In a previous study, researchers
tried to combat lung inflammation with corticosteroids but halted the study
because of the drug's side-effects.

   Great strides have been made in combating the symptoms of cystic fibrosis and
extending the life span of patients. Thirty years ago, half of the children
diagnosed with the disease died before the age of 5. Today the mean survival is
30 years.

   Techniques to correct the defect in the CFTR gene that causes the disease are
being tested; 50 patients are receiving experimental gene therapy, in which
their lung cells get reprogrammed with new genetic instructions.

   The possibility of a future cure makes the ibuprofen treatment especially
important, Beall said. "These therapies will put patients in a much better
holding pattern" until genetic therapies can be employed on a wide scale, he
said.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             390 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      March 30, 1995 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: IBUPROFEN AIDS CHILDREN WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By LAURA YEE; PLAIN DEALER HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:

   Local researchers have found that big doses of the over-the-counter drug
ibuprofen slow lung deterioration in children with cystic fibrosis.

   The result "can add years of life to these individuals," said Robert J.
Beall, medical director and president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in
Bethesda, Md.

   The foundation and the National Institutes of Health provided more than $1
million in grants to determine whether ibuprofen could reduce lung inflammation,
which contributes to lung damage.

   Researchers at the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine saw
potential in the drug because it reduces inflammation associated with muscle
aches and headaches.

   Their four-year study found that the earlier the children began the therapy,
the greater the impact. In children between the ages of 5 and 13, ibuprofen
reduced the rate of lung deterioration by 88 percent.

   The results appear in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   "In older children, the lung damage has already occurred," said Dr. Michael
Konstan, co-author of the study and co-director of the cystic fibrosis center at
Rainbow Babies and Childrens Hospital. "The key here is prevention."

   Some 85 children with cystic fibrosis and mild lung problems were recruited
through Rainbow and the Children's Hospital Medical Center in Akron.

   Half the children received up to 3,200 milligrams of ibuprofen a day, while
the other half got a placebo.

   Overall, the drug slowed the rate of lung decline by 60 percent. The drug -
sold under the brand names of Advil, Motrin and Nuprin - was taken in
conjunction with conventional treatments.

   Cystic fibrosis, which affects about 30,000 people nationwide, is a genetic
disorder characterized by chronic lung infections. Antibiotics have
significantly reduced mortality, but the disease can still be fatal.

   A few years ago, other researchers tested steroids in an attempt to reduce
inflammation in cystic fibrosis. The results were similar to those of the
ibuprofen study, but researchers were concerned the steroids would harm
development.

   Participants in the ibuprofen study reported some burning sensations in the
stomach, but none of the symptoms was severe, according to the study.
Gastrointestinal burning and abdominal pain are common side effects of
ibuprofen, and researchers do not know the long-term effects of the drug in high
doses.

   Konstan and other experts warned that ibuprofen should not be taken without
medical supervision. Too low a dose can worsen lung inflammation while too much
of the drug can intensify kidney and gastrointestinal problems.

   "For the last decade, we've had a limited arsenal for fighting CF," Beall
said. "That's changing."

   Some 50 patients are enrolled in gene therapy and two drugs aimed at reducing
mucous buildup in the lungs are awaiting approval by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1995


                             391 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    March 30, 1995, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 669 words

HEADLINE: Common Painkiller Shown to Slow Progression of Cystic Fibrosis

BYLINE: John Schwartz, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A popular over-the-counter painkiller is remarkably effective in fighting the
progression of cystic fibrosis in children, researchers have found.

   Ibuprofen -- the generic name for the drug found in Motrin, Nuprin, Advil and
other products -- slows the deterioration of the lungs that is a hallmark of
cystic fibrosis, according to a report in today's issue of the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   During a four-year study of 85 patients ages 5 to 39, the rate of
deterioration for those taking ibuprofen slowed by 60 percent compared with
other patients and slowed by 88 percent for patients under 13.

   "It's a very important development for individuals with cystic fibrosis and
their families," said Robert J. Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal inherited disease in the United
States. It afflicts more than 30,000 children and young adults, and more than
1,000 new patients are diagnosed with the ailment annually. A genetic defect
causes dense mucus to accumulate in the lungs, clogging the bronchi and
pancreatic ducts and leading to breathing difficulties and other problems.

   Patients develop a "vicious cycle" of mucus buildup, infection and
destructive inflammation response by the body's own defenses that causes
structural damage of the lungs over time, said pediatrician Michael Konstan of
Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital in Cleveland, the principal author of the
study.

   Ibuprofen breaks the cycle by reducing inflammation. "What we're trying to do
is prevent lung damage," Konstan said.

   Half the study subjects took as much as 1600 milligrams of the drug
(equivalent to about eight over-the-counter pills) twice a day; the rest
received a placebo.

   At a time when new drug therapies almost invariably come with a dose of
sticker shock, the ibuprofen treatment is surprisingly inexpensive. Researchers
estimated that a prescription would cost less than $ 200 annually. By
comparison, a year's supply of Pulmozyme, a drug approved in 1993 that helps
break up the pulmonary congestion, costs an estimated $ 10,000 per year.
Patients generally have to take a combination of treatments, including
antibiotics and pancreatic enzymes, for the rest of their lives.

   "This really adds another nice tool to the armamentarium" against the
disease, said Judith Fradkin, who heads cystic fibrosis programs at the National
Institutes of Health, which helped fund the study.

   But patients should not try to "Nupe it" on their own, researchers warned;
doctors must help the patients determine the proper dose through blood tests.
"You can't just go out and buy Motrin and start taking it," Fradkin said.

   Scientists have been trying for years to find a safe way to fight the
inflammation that accompanies cystic fibrosis. In a previous study, researchers
tried to combat lung inflammation with corticosteroids but halted the study
because of the drug's side effects. Ibuprofen generally has fewer side effects
than steroids, although gastrointestinal complaints are fairly common. Recent
studies have shown that the drug is safe for children at low doses.

   Great strides have been made in combating the symptoms of cystic fibrosis and
extending the life span of patients. Thirty years ago, half the children
diagnosed with the disease died before the age of 5. Today the mean survival is
30 years.

   Techniques to correct the defect in the CFTR gene that causes the disease are
being tested; 50 patients are receiving experimental gene therapy, in which lung
cells get programmed with new genetic instructions.

   The possibility of a cure makes the ibuprofen treatment especially important,
the foundation's Beall said. "These therapies will put patients in a much better
holding pattern," he said.

   The mother of one patient, Kathy Glotz of Sugar Grove, Pa., said her son's
health did not deteriorate during the four-year trial. "If we can slow down the
destruction in the lungs, we're kind of like buying time," she said.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1995


                             392 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 29, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: Firms keep eye on legality of new gene therapy patent;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Biotechnology companies doing gene therapy research are watching for
potential legal challenges to a broad gene therapy patent issued last week and
assigned to a Maryland biotech firm.

   "We are in the process of looking into and evaluating the patent," said Gail
Maderis, vice president and business manager of cystic fibrosis and gene therapy
programs at Genzyme Corp. in Cambridge.

   At issue is a patent owned by the National Institutes of Health, where the
initial gene therapy work began, and exclusively licensed to Genetic Therapy
Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md. It covers a fundamental approach to gene therapy,
specifically the removal of genes in cells from the patient, modifying them in a
lab and reinserting them into the body to correct such genetic disorders as
cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and cancer. This removal of cells, correcting the
genes, possibly adding a missing gene in a lab and putting everything back in
the patient is called "ex-vivo" gene therapy.

   Gene therapy is sometimes considered the fourth great advance in health care
after sanitation, anesthesia and pharmaceuticals.

   The Genetic Therapy patent is viewed as broad, raising concerns among some
participants of whether it will hold up to any legal challenges and just how
Genetic Therapy will work with companies seeking to license it. Currently, there
is no Food and Drug Administration-approved gene therapy program.

   Some Wall Street analysts say the patent is so broad that it will require
some gene therapy companies to obtain Genetic Therapy licenses - a situation
that gives the small company a leg up in obtaining licenses of other biotech
patents from firms. Typically, a licensed patent can cost a company 3 to 5
percent in royalties, and a gene therapy treatment is expected to require
licensing a series of patents.

   The Genetic Therapy patent will affect Genzyme, which is working with
researchers at the University of Pittsburgh and with a small Netherlands company
on an ex-vivo gene therapy treatment of Gaucher's disease, a rare inherited
disorder that causes enlarged spleens. Currently, Genzyme has Ceredase, and
Cerezyme, its successful treatment of the disease in which the drug is given to
patients by an intravenous drip.

   The patent, however, does not affect Genzyme's gene therapy program for
cystic fibrosis, which affects more than 30,000 Americans who experience severe
breathing problems. Instead of removing a patient's cells, Genzyme proposes to
provide patients with new types of gene drugs inserted into the body, called "in
vivo" gene therapy.

   "The vast majority of our gene therapy programs are in-vivo," said Maderis
who talked to Genetic Therapy officials.

   Still others are skeptical whether the patent will hold up in potential court
challenges.

   "I've heard arguments that the claims on the Genetic Therapy patent are
overly broad," said Dennis Panicali, president of Therion Biologics Corp. of
Cambridge, adding his firm is working primarily on "in vivo" drug treatments.

   One company that is doing "ex vivo" work but claims to be exempt from the
patent is Cellcor Inc. of Newton, which is developing a treatment for patients
with kidney cancer.

   "We don't alter the patient's genes the way the patent reads," said president
Richard R. D'Antoni of the company's cell removal treatment. "We activate the
patient's T-cells, the generals of the immune system, so ours is a cellular
therapy - not a gene therapy."

MIT hopes biomedical center will help spur partnerships

    A powerhouse in academic biology and engineering, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology has created a Center for Biomedical Engineering that it
hopes will forge new research partnerships between biologists and engineers.

   The center's director is Douglas A. Lauffenburger, a professor in the
department of chemical engineering.

   He said MIT has done biomedical research to improve health care, but it has
not been coordinated through one center. Research at the center will be
organized in molecular engineering, led by professor Paul T. Matsudaira of the
biology deparment and the Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research; cell and
tissue engineering, led by Robert S. Langer, chemical engineering professor, and
physiological systems engineering led by professor Ian Hunter of the mechanical
engineering department.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1995


                             393 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 29, 1995 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1984 words

HEADLINE: RECOGNIZING the ENEMY;
VACCINES TEACH THE IMMUNE SYSTEM HOW TO FIGHT CANCER

BYLINE: SUSAN DUERKSEN, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The skin cancer crisscrossing Sandy Hawley's back had outwitted all available
medical tools.

   His expected life span was measured in weeks. The only hope, Dr. Malcolm
Mitchell figured when he first saw Hawley eight years ago, lay in sharpening a
natural weapon Hawley carried with him all along: his own immune system. Hawley,
one of the world's top-ranked jockeys, still comes to San Diego five times a
year for shots of Mitchell's experimental melanoma vaccine. In the years since
beginning the treatment, he has gotten married, fathered two sons and won
another 1,300 races, putting his lifetime total of 6,300 wins on a par with only
eight other jockeys in history. "I feel very confident that I'm over it,"
Hawley, 45, said of his cancer, while in town recently for his shot.

   "I feel very strong and healthy now." He is among several hundred melanoma
patients Mitchell has treated with a concoction designed to rev up natural
immune defenses so they recognize and zero in on cancer cells. The idea of a
vaccine against cancer has been kicked around for decades, but recently Mitchell
and others have begun building evidence that it can work. With a boost from a
vaccine, many researchers believe, the immune system may prove a highly potent
weapon against tumors.

   It would certainly be nontoxic because the system's specialty is seeking out
and destroying specific cells that don't belong, while leaving normal cells
alone. Vaccines are part of a growing research focus on "biological therapies"
-- treatments using natural substances that should do far less harm to the
patient than the conventional cancer therapies of radiation, chemotherapy and
surgery. "It's the ultimate way to go," said Dr. Donald Hunt of the University
of Virginia.

   "If you can train the body to eliminate this disease, that is the optimal way
to do it." Although cancer vaccine research has centered on melanoma so far,
many other tumors may be vulnerable to the method.

   Breast, prostate, cervical, ovarian and kidney cancers have proved
susceptible to immune attack in the test tube, said Dr. Nicholas Restifo, an
immunologist at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) in Bethesda, Md. Vaccines
are being tested on lymphomas, and Mitchell said he plans to begin a test on
breast cancer at UCSD Cancer Center next month. Perhaps someday vaccines against
major cancers will be given to the general population to prevent the diseases
from ever developing -- as vaccines are given for measles or influenza. But such
general vaccination will be "in the very far future," said Dr. Steven Rosenberg,
NCI's chief of surgery and a leading gene therapy researcher.

   For now, the vaccines are being tested as shields against the recurrence or
spread of cancers already established in the body. From months to years
Mitchell, who moved his research program to the UCSD Cancer Center last year
from the University of Southern California in Los Angeles, has treated only
patients in advanced stages of the deadly skin cancer who were not expected to
live out a year.

   After receiving his vaccine, 20 percent have had tumors disappear or shrink,
he said. Melanoma, the deadliest of skin cancers, usually can be cured by
surgery when caught early.

   But in the advanced stages, when it spreads to internal organs, even
radiation and chemotherapy are considered useless against the disease.

   Melanoma causes about 7,200 deaths a year in the United States. For patients
in the final stages of melanoma, a 20 percent response is "excellent" compared
with current treatments, the National Cancer Institute's Rosenberg said, but
it's far from good enough.

   Mitchell agreed but said the results are significant enough to prove that
people can be immunized against cancer. At John Wayne Cancer Institute in Santa
Monica, Dr. Donald Morton has had similar results treating melanoma patients
with a different vaccine. "When you see a tumor shrink, go away and people live
who would have died, then you know you've got something that works," Mitchell
said.

   "People are living seven, eight years now with melanoma, who used to live six
months. Even though it's anecdotal, I've seen so many of them now." Further
studies comparing Mitchell's vaccine to treatment with interferon are under way
at several medical centers.

   It is expected to take years before any cancer vaccine is available outside
clinical studies, partly because research has been slowed by cutbacks in federal
funding, Mitchell said. To help a greater percentage of patients, many leading
vaccine researchers believe a more specific method will be needed.

   Many, including Mitchell, now are working to design more effective vaccines
using only certain molecules or genes from tumor cells. Revving up to fight As
with other vaccines, the idea is to prime the immune system defenses against a
particular invader, stimulating the production of blood cells specifically armed
to find and attack that enemy. Mitchell's vaccine contains chopped-up pieces of
melanoma cells taken from two former patients.

   Morton uses whole cancer cells that have been deactivated with radiation.
Injected into a patient's body along with a substance that boosts immune system
activity, the disarmed cancer cells or cell fragments attract the attention of T
cells, a type of white blood cell responsible for fighting off infections and
other intruders. The T cells proliferate wildly in response to the foreign
invasion, and they teach all their progeny to remember certain protein segments
that are displayed on the surface of melanoma cells.

   If the tumor shows up again anywhere in the body, those proteins wave the
enemy flag and hoards of T cells descend. At least, that's how it is supposed to
work.

   The elevated immune response was measured in 58 percent of the first 110
patients who received Mitchell's vaccine.

   In the other 42 percent, the T cells didn't respond, perhaps because the
tumor had so weakened the patients' immune systems that even the vaccine
couldn't rouse it, he said. And the buildup of immune forces doesn't always
translate to defeat of the cancer.

   Among the 58 percent with an immune response to the vaccine, only about a
third -- or 20 percent of the total -- had a significant reduction in their
tumors. Mitchell said he has recently begun giving some patients the natural
protein interferon along with the vaccine, a combination that seems to improve
the results.

   Along with many other effects, interferon boosts tumor cells' display of
identifying proteins so they can be more easily located. "As soon as we gave
them a target (with the interferon) they went like gangbusters," Mitchell said
of the mobilized T cells. Even without any help, the immune system often mounts
some defense against cancer, but rarely manages to fight it off as it does a flu
or cold virus. Hunt said he believes that since tumors arise from within the
body, they neutralize the attack by sending T cells a signal that makes the
tumor cells appear as part of the same team. Toward gene therapy Vaccine
research is now moving beyond the relatively crude methods using partial or
deactivated cancer cells.

   However remote, some danger exists that such cells could retain some of
cancer's negative effects, such as suppressing the immune system, Rosenberg
said. Instead, many scientists are attempting to precisely identify the peptides
-- or protein segments -- on a tumor cell's surface that elicit an immune
response and clone the genes that make those proteins.

   That approach allows more control of the immune response, Restifo said. A
handful of such genes have been cloned at NCI, and two are expected to be tested
in patients within the year.

   The genes are inserted into vaccinia, a harmless virus, which will be
injected into patients.

   In the bloodstream, the virus will infect normal cells.

   The gene the virus carries will then direct the cells to produce tumor
proteins, hopefully stimulating an immune response. "Finally we have these
genes," Restifo said.

   "We have a lot more capability and power than we did just a few years ago.

   We'll know within the next couple of years whether these strategies are going
to pay off." In tests in mice, 80 percent or 90 percent of the animals developed
an immune response when injected with similar genes, he said, and about 10
percent or 20 percent were completely cured of cancer. But melanoma cells have
at least a dozen identifying peptides, if not more. The assortment varies among
individuals, so a vaccine ideally should contain as many of the genes as
possible to make sure it works for everyone. To Morton, in Santa Monica, the
gene therapy efforts are taking the long road to achieving what his
radiated-cell vaccine has been doing for 10 years. Because Morton's vaccine uses
whole tumor cells, it includes all the peptides.

   Besides tumor reduction in 20 percent of patients, he said, his vaccine slows
tumor growth and prevents the spread of cancer in many more patients. Mitchell
said some of his patients also continue to have cancer but "it's not running
rampant anymore."

   He believes new or growing tumors are cut off by the immune memory. Most of
his patients get monthly shots.

   With those who have survived for years, Mitchell isn't sure the shots are
still needed, but the patients are loathe to give them up. `I get to live' Laura
Abrams, who lives in North Park with her husband and seven cats, is his longest
survivor.

   She began shots of his vaccine in May 1986, after other doctors told her she
had maybe six months to live.

   The melanoma that had begun as one pea-sized mole had spread all over her
right leg and into her lungs. After six weeks on the vaccine, an X-ray showed no
sign of a lung tumor that had previously been as big as a golf ball, Abrams
said. Abrams also has survived the spread of the disease to her brain, usually
rapidly fatal for melanoma patients.

   The brain tumor was surgically removed in 1988, and she underwent radiation
treatments. About twice a year, small tumors appear in the scar tissue of her
leg, but they never grow much, and most that have been removed later proved to
be inactive, indicating immune cells had been at work. Years on the vaccine have
taken some toll, apparently by pushing her immune system into permanent
overdrive, Abrams said.

   She said she often feels arthritic or fatigued and achy, the symptoms
normally caused by the immune system fighting off a virus. "The minor
inconvenience and discomfort is more than made up for by the fact that I get to
live," said Abrams, now 44.

   "The (vaccine) treatment does not interfere with your life.

   It's different from burning, cutting and poisoning (of standard cancer
treatments.)" In Hawley's case, the disease was in its final stage when he was
diagnosed nine years ago.

   At that stage, melanoma usually kills within a few months. Hawley said he was
worried about taking the vaccine at first, because it was unproved. "I felt like
I didn't really have any other choice," he said.

   "Now, I feel that it works.

   I figure he (Mitchell) saved my life." Hawley said he considers himself cured
but continues the vaccine just to be sure.

   He stops in San Diego for shots when he's in the neighborhood for races at
Santa Anita, near Pasadena. "When I first started getting the vaccine shots," he
said, "I started winning a few races down here, and some of the trainers were
saying, `I don't know what that shot is that you're getting, but I'd like to
give it to my horses.' " Hawley's racing schedule determined his
five-times-a-year vaccine regimen. He is the only patient so far to have shots
less than monthly. Mitchell said he can't answer whether the long-term patients
are cured, whether booster shots are really needed monthly, yearly or at all, or
whether the cancer will eventually overcome the immune defenses. "When you get
into this kind of thing, you're alone," he said.

   "I let the patients know at the beginning that they and I were partners in
this and I didn't know where I was going."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1 DIAGRAM; CAPTIONS: 1. HOW A MELANOMA VACCINE WORKS 2.
Injection: Sandy Hawley, one of the most successful jockeys in history, gets a
shot of the melanoma vaccine he credits with saving his life, administered by
UCSD nurse Jeneane Sandoval. Hawley has been taking the experimental vaccine for
eight years, since shortly after he learned he was in the final stages of the
deadly skin cancer and probably would live only a few months. (E-4) 3. Dr.
Malcolm Mitchell: The UCSD Cancer Center specialist has treated several hundred
late-stage melanoma patients with a vaccine designed to prevent the spread or
recurrence of their cancers. (E-4) 4. Long ordeal: Laura Abrams of North Park
describes her nine-year battle with melanoma that doctors said should have
killed her long ago. Every month, she gets shots of an experimental vaccine she
believes has primed her immune system to keep the disease at bay. (E-4);
PHOTOBY: 1. Source: U.S. News and World Report, Scientific American, Dr. Malcolm
Mitchell | Union-Tribune / DON ASMUSSEN 2. Union-Tribune / JIM BAIRD 3.
Union-Tribune / JIM BAIRD 4. Union-Tribune / JERRY RIFE

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             394 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     March 28, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 741 words

HEADLINE: Hopkins to inject patients with own cancerous cells

BYLINE: Diana K. Sugg, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   In a novel approach to treating cancer, Johns Hopkins researchers plan to
begin using prostate cancer patients' own tumor cells -- and gene therapy -- to
enable the men's immune systems to kill the cancer.

   The treatment, involving a complicated gene manipulation, has been proven to
work in animals with prostate and kidney cancers.

   Researchers believe it could be effective against other malignancies, such as
colon cancer and melanoma.

   The treatment might offer the patient a kind of vaccination to ward off
future attacks by a specific type of cancer.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recently approved human trials of the
therapy for prostate cancer, and Hopkins researchers plan to enroll eight
patients in the next several weeks, a Johns Hopkins spokeswoman said yesterday.
Approval of the prostate cancer trial became public this weekend at a New
Orleans conference for science writers.

   About 40,400 men are expected to die this year from prostate cancer, the
second most common cause of cancer death in men.

   Hopkins researchers are already testing the method with a group of kidney
cancer patients. Those results will not be made public until later this spring.

   Experts say the therapy offers promise, particularly in cases where pieces of
a tumor break off and travel through the body, spreading the cancer.
Essentially, the therapy would train a person's immune system to seek out and
destroy those small pieces -- possibly for a lifetime.

   To do that, doctors remove cancer cells from the patient's tumor and then
insert into those cells a copy of a gene that stimulates the immune system.

   The cells are next irradiated, so they won't multiply, and injected back into
the patient. Theoretically, the introduction of the genetically altered cells
activates the patient's immune system to kill the cancer. The process takes
several weeks.

   "This is one of those things that is very exciting. It has the potential of
being very significant, and it's something that I really think we have to try,"
said Dr. Otis Brawley, a prostate cancer specialist at the National Cancer
Institute.

   Even so, researchers warned that the treatment is experimental and the
studies are in preliminary stages. The therapy is not available to the general
public.

   To be involved in the prostate trial, patients must be newly diagnosed with
an advanced stage of the cancer and previously untreated. If all goes well with
the first eight patients, the trial will be expanded, the spokeswoman said.

   The lead researcher, Dr. Jonathan Simons, assistant professor of oncology and
urology at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, was not available for comment
yesterday.

   "The idea is to make a vaccine that will stimulate the body to generate
immune cells that go on a search-and-destroy mission to eradicate any prostate
cancer cells that remain in the patient's body," he told the Associated Press
Sunday.

   Dr. Harmon Eyre, the American Cancer Society's chief medical officer, who
discussed the therapy with Dr. Simons, is very optimistic.

   "It represents a new approach to the treatment of cancer that has yet to be
tried and that works very well in animals," Dr. Eyre said. "This is the first
type of therapy that's ever been found to cure prostate cancer in mice."

   New therapies are urgently needed for prostate cancer, Dr. Simons said.
Roughly 100,000 men each year have their prostate glands removed because of
cancer. But in 30 percent to 40 percent of these men, pieces of the tumor break
off and spread, frequently to the lungs. The pieces are often so small they
can't be detected by imaging techniques or X-rays. Even if detected, no
chemotherapy, radiation or hormone therapy has been successful in stopping the
cancer, and the men die.

   In the new therapy, scientists believe they may be able to turn that around
by inserting one of the human body's most powerful immune system boosters -- the
gene known as GM-CSF, the Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor.

   Researchers don't know how long the immune system might retain the "memory"
of how to fight the cancer, and the long-term outcome of participants in the
Hopkins trials won't be known for years.

   The prostate cancer treatment would be very expensive, possibly as much as $
30,000 per patient, because it would be tailored to the individual. For
instance, one person's cancer cells couldn't be used to make the therapy for
another patient.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995


                             395 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     March 28, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: FDA approves first Univax drug

BYLINE: Timothy J. Mullaney, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   Univax Biologics Inc. said yesterday that it has won federal marketing
approval for its first drug, a treatment for a common AIDS complication, and
analysts said sales of the drug could near $ 100 million by 1999.

   The drug could make the 7-year-old Rockville company Maryland's only
profitable publicly held biotechnology/drug development company, depending on
whether it can beat Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg and Martek Biosciences
Corp. of Columbia into the black.

   "I think it's a very exciting step, absolutely," said Matthew Geller, an
Oppenheimer & Co. analyst who added Univax's stock to the firm's list of about
145 most-recommended companies after the announcement. "It will take a while to
get profitable while they ramp up, but they are one of the few biotechnology
companies with an approved product."

   Univax said the U.S. Food and Drug Administration licensed Rh Pharmaceuticals
of Winnipeg, Canada, to manufacture WinRho SD, an intravenous immune system
supplement based on proteins.

   Under a 1992 agreement with Rh Pharmaceuticals, Univax has exclusive U.S.
marketing rights to the drug, developed by the Canadian company, for 10 years.
In exchange, Univax helped Rh Pharmaceuticals with the FDA application and will
give the company a 60-40 split of the first $ 50 million of profits and a 50-50
split of additional profits, said Judith Hautala, Univax vice president for
communications.

   The product will be on the market in six to eight weeks.

   Maryland officials have hoped for years that biotechnology companies would
mature into a cornerstone of an economic development strategy built around life
sciences. Academic and business leaders agree that life science research at
Maryland facilities like Johns Hopkins Hospital and the National Institutes of
Health should foster biotech growth here, but results for the 200 or so
biotechnology companies in the area have been unspectacular so far.

   WinRho SD has two applications. The more lucrative is using it to treat ITP,
or immune thrombocytopenic purpura, an autoimmune disorder that causes the body
to destroy its own platelets, thus reducing the body's ability to stop bleeding
and resist bruising.

   Dr. Hautala said the disease occurs in about 68,000 U.S. patients a year,
including 50,000 who develop the syndrome as a complication of HIV infection.
She said about 5 percent of the HIV-positive population suffers ITP
complications annually.

   Edward Hurwitz, an analyst with Robertson, Stephens & Co. in San Francisco,
said WinRho is likely to take over a big chunk of the ITP treatment market very
quickly. WinRho costs an estimated $ 7,000 per year per patient; competing
therapies cost twice as much. And Mr. Hurwitz said WinRho can be administered in
five minutes or less, compared with up to eight hours for the competition.

   WinRho will also be used to treat the immune reaction common when a pregnant
woman's blood has a negative Rh factor and her fetus' blood is Rh-positive.
Women who are Rh-negative and have an Rh-positive child develop antibodies that
attack the red blood cells of their next fetus.

   The reaction, sometimes called "Blue Baby Syndrome," can damage the brain,
cause jaundice in the fetus, or even cause death.

   Drugs to fight the so-called Rh Baby Syndrome, known as Rh isoimmunization,
have come onto the market since the 1960s, Dr. Hautala said. But the therapies
posed a potential threat because they are made from plasma donated by up to
thousands of people, and isolated cases had been reported of patients
contracting hepatitis C or other diseases from the therapy.

   WinRho SD is the first drug for the Rh baby syndrome that is "virally
inactivated," a process that purifies the drug before use.

   Between the two markets, Mr. Geller estimates, Univax will sell about $ 100
million of WinRho annually by 1999.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995


                             396 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      March 28, 1995 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 9E

LENGTH: 676 words

HEADLINE: SEEKING SAFE BIRTH-DEFECT TEST

BYLINE: By LAURIE GARRETT

DATELINE: NEWSDAY

BODY:

   Diana Bianchi first caught the intellectual bug that was to become her
mission in life in 1977, when she was a student at the Stanford School of
Medicine. That was when Dr. Michael Iverson talked Bianchi into driving all over
Northern California to draw blood samples from pregnant women.

   Iverson was convinced that a then-new laser technology, called Fluorescence
Activated Cell Sorting, or FACS, could be used to diagnose genetic birth defects
in fetuses without endangering either the mother or baby with amniocentesis or
chorionic villi sampling, both of which require injecting needles into a woman's
uterus.

   If he could get FACS to work, Iverson said, it would be possible to extract
fetal cells from samples of the mother's blood, and then analyze the fetus'
genes for such defects as Down syndrome, the lethal blood disorder
beta-thalassemia and Rh blood incompatability.

   Bianchi and Iverson toiled over the FACS blood test all through 1977, 1978,
1979.

   Eventually, Iverson moved on to other labs, but Bianchi was hooked. For 17
years she has toiled to perfect the FACS blood test. And her efforts may be
paying off. So much so, that the National Institutes of Health has put Bianchi,
now a professor at the Tufts Medical School in Boston, in charge of a
multicenter test comparing the accuracies of the FACS blood test, amniocentesis
and CVS in predicting the genetic outcomes of 3,000 pregnancies.

   If the FACS approach proves reasonably accurate, it could revolutionize
obstetrics care, experts say, because there are no risks involved for the mother
or child. All diagnosis is based on a single, small maternal blood sample drawn
from the mother's arm.

   The concept is deceptively simple. Though few fetal cells are present in a
mother's blood at any given time, they are genetically different from the
woman's cells because they represent a composite of the mother's and father's
genes. Thus, fetal cells should bear unique protein markers on their surfaces.

   If scientists can find an ideal marker, make antibodies against that protein
and then attach fluorescent molecules to those antibodies, the laser FACS device
will rapidly separate fetal cells out of a maternal blood sample. After that,
analyzing the genes inside those fetal cells for possible defects is a
relatively simple matter.

   Even though that basic concept has remained unaltered throughout Bianchi's
quest, there have been snags.

   "First of all," Bianchi told physicians in a recent presentation to the staff
of North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., "there is only about one
fetal cell for every 10 million maternal ones, and all protocols result in huge
maternal contamination."So Bianchi's search is focused on looking for fetal
blood cells that bear two markers: the Y chromosome and the transferrin receptor
protein.

   Bianchi showed by accident that the technique could find male fetal cells in
maternal blood as early as the fifth week of gestation.

   "We came at this in a backhanded way," she said. "A woman in our lab was
acting as the [non-pregnant] control in our studies. But we kept getting male
DNA contamination in her blood samples. Very frustrating. Weeks later, she
learned that she was pregnant with a boy."

   Since that breakthrough, researchers have shown that male fetal cells can be
recovered from maternal blood as early as the fourth week. But in the first pool
of 36 pregnant women tested by Bianchi's group, eight came up as false positives
for male fetuses.

   Today Bianchi has refined her technique, using powerful monoclonal antibodies
to spot transferrin receptors.

   The ultimate goal, Bianchi said, is to refine the technique to such a degree
that it can routinely be used on all pregnant women.Bianchi is convinced that
her quest is nearing its end. "I'm a pediatrician," Bianchi said recently. "And
my goal is treatment. I hope one day to be able to withdraw fetal cells, spot
genetic defects and fix them. This is all aimed towards a future with gene
therapy, with correcting defects, with saving these babies."

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995


                             397 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    March 27, 1995, Monday, JOURNAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS, Pg. 6C

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: Study urges screening of blacks for prostate cancer

BYLINE: Anne Rochell; STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: New Orleans

BODY:


   Black American men die of prostate cancer more often than any other men in
the world, but that could change if they were routinely screened and the cancer
was caught at an earlier stage, a new study says.

   Contrary to previous findings, researchers at Missouri's Washington
University found no racial differences in the stage at which prostate cancer was
diagnosed when they screened a group of white and black men who had never been
tested. The screening was free and aggressively promoted by community groups
such as churches.

   "The difference in mortality rates is due to differences in the stage at
which the cancer is found," said study author Dr. Arnold Bullock, a urologist at
Washington University.

   Screening alone will not save lives, however, unless the men also have
information about treatment and access to the health care system, warned
Bullock, who spoke Sunday at the American Cancer Society's Science Writers
Seminar. Lower-income blacks do not seek the treatment they need, even after
they have been screened.

   The black men living in low-income areas who were screened were three times
as likely as whites of the same economic status to ignore an abnormal blood test
and seek no further testing, the study found. And those who did get diagnosed
with prostate cancer were three times as likely as the white men to reject
surgery and opt for other, possibly less useful, forms of treatment.

   Bullock plans to continue studying this group, which includes 600 black men
and 15,400 white men. There are fewer blacks because they are harder to recruit,
Bullock said.

   "We are trying to find out why these men don't take advantage of free
screening, and why even the men who are covered by Medicare don't get
treatment," he said.

   Also on Sunday, Dr. Jonathan Simons of Johns Hopkins University said he is
beginning human trials of a genetically-engineered vaccine to treat prostate
cancer. It is the first gene therapy for prostate cancer that has been approved
by the government for testing in humans.

   Cancer of the prostate, a male sex gland, is the most common major cancer
diagnosed in the United States, and it is the second most common cause of cancer
deaths in men. There will be about 244,000 new cases of prostate cancer this
year, and more than 40,000 men will die from it, ACS estimates.

   Men who are 40 and older should have a digital rectal exam annually, the ACS
says. Men over 50 should have an annual blood test called a prostate-specific
antigen, or PSA.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             398 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                  March 27, 1995, Monday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS, Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: Study urges screening of blacks for prostate cancer

BYLINE: Anne Rochell; STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: New Orleans

BODY:


   Black American men die of prostate cancer more often than any other men in
the world, but that could change if they were routinely screened and the cancer
was caught at an earlier stage, a new study says.

   Contrary to previous findings, researchers at Missouri's Washington
University found no racial differences in the stage at which prostate cancer was
diagnosed when they screened a group of white and black men who had never been
tested. The screening was free and aggressively promoted by community groups
such as churches.

   "The difference in mortality rates is due to differences in the stage at
which the cancer is found," said study author Dr. Arnold Bullock, a urologist at
Washington University.

   Screening alone will not save lives, however, unless the men also have
information about treatment and access to the health care system, warned
Bullock, who spoke Sunday at the American Cancer Society's Science Writers
Seminar. Lower-income blacks do not seek the treatment they need, even after
they have been screened.

   The black men living in low-income areas who were screened were three times
as likely as whites of the same economic status to ignore an abnormal blood test
and seek no further testing, the study found. And those who did get diagnosed
with prostate cancer were three times as likely as the white men to reject
surgery and opt for other, possibly less useful, forms of treatment.

   Bullock plans to continue studying this group, which includes 600 black men
and 15,400 white men. There are fewer blacks because they are harder to recruit,
Bullock said.

   "We are trying to find out why these men don't take advantage of free
screening, and why even the men who are covered by Medicare don't get
treatment," he said.

   Also on Sunday, Dr. Jonathan Simons of Johns Hopkins University said he is
beginning human trials of a genetically-engineered vaccine to treat prostate
cancer. It is the first gene therapy for prostate cancer that has been approved
by the government for testing in humans.

   Cancer of the prostate, a male sex gland, is the most common major cancer
diagnosed in the United States, and it is the second most common cause of cancer
deaths in men. There will be about 244,000 new cases of prostate cancer this
year, and more than 40,000 men will die from it, ACS estimates.

   Men who are 40 and older should have a digital rectal exam annually, the ACS
says. Men over 50 should have an annual blood test called a prostate-specific
antigen, or PSA.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             399 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     March 27, 1995, Monday, HOWARD EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Tests slated to begin soon on prostate cancer vaccine

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:


   NEW ORLEANS -- Johns Hopkins developers of the first vaccine for prostate
cancer plan to begin testing within a month, opening up an entirely new approach
to treating a malignancy that kills 40,400 American men annually.

   Prostate cancer is second only to lung cancer as a cancer killer of American
men. There is no effective therapy once the tumor has spread beyond the prostate
gland.

   Many doctors believe the best hope of a cure is to cut out the prostate as
soon as a blood test reveals it is cancerous. But 30 percent to 40 percent of
patients discover the cancer to have spread despite the painful operation.

   The new treatment would be given to these men after the operation to prompt
their immune systems to hunt down cancer cells throughout their bodies.

   "We are trying to prevent the cancer from coming back," said Dr. Jonathan W.
Simons of Johns Hopkins Medical School in Baltimore.

   The treatment is called a vaccine because it manipulates the body's own
natural disease fighters to combat an illness. Unlike most vaccines, which are
given to prevent sickness from occurring, this one is intended for use after a
disease is already established.

   Dr. Simons described his approach yesterday at a conference sponsored by the
American Cancer Society.

   "This is the first gene therapy approach for prostate cancer," said Dr.
Harmon Eyre, the cancer society's research chief.

   Dr. Simons said his team will give the vaccine to three patients within about
four weeks. In all, eight men will get the treatment in an initial test of its
safety, and 30 to 40 more will receive it as doctors assess its effectiveness.

   About 100,000 American men had their prostate glands removed last year for
cancer.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1995


                             400 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                      March 27, 1995, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: VACCINE WILL BE TESTED ON PROSTATE CANCER PATIENTS;
 TREATMENT AFTER SURGICAL REMOVAL OF GLAND WOULD AIM TO PREVENT MALIGNANCY FROM
SPREADING

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY, Associated Press

BODY:

    NEW ORLEANS -- Developers of the first vaccine for prostate cancer plan to
begin testing within a month, opening up an entirely new approach to treating a
malignancy that kills 40,400 American men annually.

   Prostate cancer is second only to lung cancer as a cancer killer of American
men. There is no effective therapy once the tumor has spread beyond the prostate
gland.

   Many doctors believe the best hope for a cure is to cut out the prostate as
soon as a blood test reveals it is cancerous. But the surgery is controversial,
since doctors can't be certain beforehand whether the cancer is still confined
to the prostate. Thirty percent to 40 percent of patients discover the cancer to
have spread despite the painful operation.

   The new treatment would be given to these men after the operation to prompt
their immune systems to hunt down cancer cells throughout their bodies.

   "We are trying to prevent the cancer from coming back," said Dr. Jonathan W.
Simons of Johns Hopkins Medical School in Baltimore.

   The treatment is called a vaccine because it manipulates the body's own
natural disease fighters to combat an illness. Unlike most vaccines, which are
given to prevent sickness from occurring, this one is intended for use after a
disease already is established.

   Simons described his approach Sunday at a conference sponsored by the
American Cancer Society.

   "This is the first gene therapy approach for prostate cancer," said Dr.
Harmon Eyre, the cancer society's research chief.

   Simons said his team will give the vaccine to three patients within about
four weeks. In all, eight men will get the treatment in an initial test of its
safety, and 30 to 40 more will receive it as doctors assess its effectiveness.

   About 100,000 American men had their prostate glands removed last year
because of cancer. Simons said that if the treatment proves useful, doctors may
give the vaccine routinely to about half of all such patients.

   To make the vaccine, doctors first save cancer tissue that is removed during
cancer surgery. Next, they insert a copy of a gene into these cancer cells that
makes a protein that activates disease-fighting white blood cells.  This
protein, called granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor, is not
ordinarily produced by prostate cancer.

   Then doctors kill the genetically modified cancer cells with radiation and
inject them into the patient's body. If all goes as planned, the blood protein
will alert the body's immune system to recognize the tumor as foreign.
Disease-hunting blood cells then will seek out the cancer wherever it has
spread.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995
