
                             1801 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

          October 6, 1998 Tuesday, 5E WEST HARTFORD/FARMINGTON VALLEY

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 300 words

HEADLINE: A HIGH-TECH ROAD SHOW;
OUR TOWNS;
FARMINGTON & NEIGHBORS

BODY:

   Connecticut must do all it can to keep up with the demands of the state's
rapidly growing biotechnology industry.  Laboratories dedicated to gene therapy,
drug design and related sciences are popping up like cells in a Petri dish.

   But this promising industry won't flourish without a steady supply of trained
workers, from lab technicians to Ph.D.s. And not enough young people are showing
an interest in science careers.

   At Farmington High School, science teachers from all over the state took a
creative step toward solving that shortage recently. They boarded a visiting
mobile science lab outfitted with state-of-the-art equipment and discovered
fresh ways to pique students' curiosity. Selected students got a chance to solve
"The Mystery of the Crooked Cell," an exercise in analyzing hemoglobin for
sickle cell anemia, using the same sort of micro-tech pipettes that are used in
real- life labs.

   CityLab is run by the Boston University School of Medicine. It is in high
demand. Massachusetts is a center for biotechnology that swallows up skilled
workers. If Connecticut is to compete with its neighbor, it must have this sort
of hands-on resource available permanently. No one knows that better than the
folks at CURE -- Connecticut United for Research Excellence, an industry group
dedicated to nurturing a biotechnology base. They co-sponsored the mobile lab's
visit.

   The wheels are also in motion for a stationary regional science lab that high
school students from all over Greater Hartford will be able to share. It is to
be a major component of Trinity College's learning corridor. Until it's built,
however, a roving replica of CityLab, which costs about $200,000, would give
budding scientists a start on their biotech careers and plant the seeds of
economic growth.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1998


                             1802 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      October 5, 1998 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 035

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: MONDAY PEOPLE; O'Malley to head Scudder Retirement Services

BYLINE: By Clay Siegert

BODY:

   Scudder Kemper Investments Inc. in Boston named Lorie O'Malley president of
its Retirement Services.

   EMC Corp., Hopkinton computer storage company, appointed Paul Noble Jr.
executive vice president of products and offerings.

   CardioTech International Inc. in Woburn appointed Dr. John Hudson as director
of operations.

   Arthur Andersen in Boston hired Richard Gleason, Suzanne Sergi and Courtney
Sullivan for its change enablement team.

   Eastern Bank in Lynn named Andrea Kantaros assistant vice president of retail
banking.

   Endgen Inc., Woburn biomedical research company, elected Charles Burke Ph.D
to its board of directors.

   Tremont Brewery in Boston appointed Peter Terhune marketing manager.

   Hawley-Sandler, Boston advertising and marketing firm, hired Brandy Bechina
as an account executive and Daniel Mokoski as director of new media.

   Caristas Norwood Hospital appointed Cristina Diaz M.D. as its new chief of
obstetrics-gynecology.

   Caristas Medical Group in Waltham hired Ann Marie Canelas M.D. as a
specialist in internal medicine.

   Allmerica Financial in Worcester appointed William Hicks III vice president.

   Tocci Building Corp. in Boston hired Charles Govatsos as senior project
manager.

   Pro Media, Natick media management company, hired Don Carlin as senior vice
president of account services.

   Tofias, Fleishman, Shapiro & Co. P.C., Cambridge public accounting and
business consulting firm, elected four new principals: Todd Berry, Merrill
Puopolo, Frank Seymour and Barry Simpson.

   Global Knowledge Network Inc., Burlington IT education company, promoted
Duncan Anderson to president and chief executive.

   US Trust appointed six regional presidents: Richard Fernandez, Michael
O'Neill, William King, Ray Eisenbies, Charles Clark, and Peter Brown.

   GZA GeoEnvironmental Inc., Newton Upper Falls consulting group, hired James
Cleveland as vice president.

   Caritas OB-GYN Group in Brookline said Karen Poley M.D. has joined the staff.

   Seachange International Inc., Maynard video software company, named William
Fielder chief financial officer.

   Epicon Inc., Waltham application deployment solutions company, hired John
Marchese as vice president of strategic accounts.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Cambridge biotech company, appointed Dr. Thomas
Schuetz director of clincal affairs.

   Symmes Maini and McKee Associates, Cambridge architecture firm, appointed
Marie Fitzgerald senior associate and director of interior design.

   Liberty Funds Distributor in Boston appointed James Bozek regional vice
president of sales.

   Newbury Comics in Allston promoted Ken Gatliff to vice president of store
operations.

   Concord Consulting Group in Concord hired Jean Bonney as an associate member.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, attn: Clay Siegert, One Herald
Square, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865. No phone calls,
please.

   Photo Caption: O'MALLEY

   Photo Caption: NOBLE

LOAD-DATE: October 05, 1998


                             1803 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                 October 5, 1998 Monday, 7 HARTFORD NORTH FINAL

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 299 words

HEADLINE: A HIGH-TECH ROAD SHOW;
OUR TOWNS;
GREATER HARTFORD

BODY:

   Connecticut must do all it can to keep up with the demands of the state's
rapidly growing biotechnology industry. Laboratories dedicated to gene therapy,
drug design and related sciences are popping up like cells in a Petri dish.

   But this promising industry won't flourish without a steady supply of trained
workers, from lab technicians to Ph.D.s. And not enough young people are showing
an interest in science careers.

   At Farmington High School, science teachers from all over the state took a
creative step toward solving that shortage recently. They boarded a visiting
mobile science lab outfitted with state-of-the-art equipment and discovered
fresh ways to pique students' curiosity. Selected students got a chance to solve
"The Mystery of the Crooked Cell," an exercise in analyzing hemoglobin for
sickle cell anemia, using the same sort of micro-tech pipettes that are used in
real-life labs.

   CityLab is run by the Boston University School of Medicine. It is in high
demand. Massachusetts is a center for biotechnology that swallows up skilled
workers. If Connecticut is to compete with its neighbor, it must have this sort
of hands-on resource available permanently. No one knows that better than the
folks at CURE -- Connecticut United for Research Excellence, an industry group
dedicated to nurturing a biotechnology base. They co-sponsored the mobile lab's
visit.

   The wheels are also in motion for a stationary regional science lab that high
school students from all over Greater Hartford will be able to share. It is to
be a major component of Trinity College's learning corridor. Until it's built,
however, a roving replica of CityLab, which costs about $200,000, would give
budding scientists a start on their biotech careers and plant the seeds of
economic growth.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1998


                             1804 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      October 4, 1998 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 1J

LENGTH: 1732 words

HEADLINE: PLAYING GOD;
SCIENTISTS CLOSE TO ALTERING FUTURE GENERATIONS

BYLINE: By KAREN R. LONG; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Take a fetus. Fix a lethal gene in utero. Alter the inheritance of all that
fetus' descendants.

   The third step in this proposed sequence is the jaw-dropper. For the eight
years that medical researchers have pursued experimental human gene therapies -
with very modest results - all their tinkering was guaranteed to die with the
individual who undertook the risk.

   Now, Dr. W. French Anderson, a University of Southern California genetics
pioneer, wants to cross this ethical and generational divide. For two days in
late September, Anderson hashed out the "pre-protocols" of experimental
therapies he wants to try on fetuses with two kinds of catastrophic inherited
diseases. In each case, his genetic interventions would most likely affect the
chromosomes in the sperm and eggs of his research subjects, altering the DNA of
their future children.

   "He doesn't expect us to bless or condemn these pre-protocols at this point,"
said professor Eric T. Juengst, a Case Western Reserve University bioethicist
who serves on the federal advisory committee that is hearing Anderson out. "He's
committed to having the public understand this field as it evolves, and to win
public support."

   At best, that support is several years away, Juengst said. "Both of the
specific pre-protocols French floated were pretty thoroughly shredded by the RAC
[Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health]," he
said.

   In one proposal, Anderson's team hopes to cure ADA deficiency, a rare immune
disease that can require children to live circumscribed lives in "bubbles." In
the other, the team would attempt to fix the genetic defect causing alpha
thalassemia, a severe form of anemia, common in Asia, that kills the fetus
before birth.

   Unexpected consequences

   The technology - inserting functioning genes into the rapidly dividing cells
of second-trimester fetuses to replace defective DNA - contains the possibility
of unexpected, downstream consequences for both the developing fetus and its
children. Researchers call this kind of experimentation germ line gene transfer.

   "Germ line gene transfer raises the prospect of passing on genetic changes to
unconsenting, unsuspecting future generations," said professor Thomas H. Murray,
director of the CWRU Center for Biomedical Ethics. He and other scholars also
worry that polishing Anderson's technology will eventually allow doctors to
engineer babies for attractive traits, not just cure disease.

   Closer at hand is the risk that tampering with the human genome in utero
might create a cascade of serious birth defects, scientists said.

   "French clearly sees his allegiance to the children who would be born if not
for fatal, prenatal disease," Juengst said. "But people on the committee still
think it's likely to go wrong more than it's likely to work. We can't say what
will happen to these newly integrated genes in mitosis, division, development
and expression.

   "One scientist, Dr. Jon Gordon [a neurobiologist at the Mount Sinai School of
Medicine in New York City], raised the problem of insertional mutagenesis. That
is how a new gene integrated in the wrong place interrupts an existing gene's
function. If that gene has already done its work in the fetus and has shut off,
that infant will never feel any effect of insertional mutagenesis. But its
children would be seriously messed up."

   A much less exotic technology, in vitro fertilization, has already saddled
many families with enduring birth defects, said Ronald M. Green, director of the
Ethics Institute at Dartmouth College Medical School.

   "In Europe and the United States, IVF has resulted in a great increase in the
rate of higher-order multiple births, with their associated toll of birth
defects and prematurity," he said. Some describe the sharp increase in infants
struggling in neonatal intensive care units due to these fertility treatments as
a new epidemic.

   Lack of long-term support

   Such families rarely get long-term help from the medical establishment, said
Robin S. Gunning, an ethicist and pediatric nurse. She worries about what
societal supports will exist for those who live with the consequences of ever
more experimental technologies.

   "I have seen how these new technologies, which seem so wonderful, go bad and
affect so many," said Gunning, who serves on ethics committees at Health Hill
and Rainbow Babies & Children's hospitals. "Right now, society doesn't have the
inclination to focus on the long-term follow-up care, especially in the era of
HMOs. Where is society's responsibility when we give people the 'right' to all
these technologies?'

   Murray seconded Gunning's apprehension: "I think we have big enough problems
with the consequences of IVF right now." He said many people also look at the
approaching germ line scenarios and accuse scientists of "playing God,"
tampering with the "wisdom of evolution," or violating the "integrity of the
genome."

   Maxwell J. Mehlman, director of the CWRU Law-Medicine Center, isn't one. "To
me, we play God all the time trying to avoid illness," he said. "If God didn't
want us to intervene, he wouldn't give us the tools."

   Murray, Mehlman and Juengst organized a recent workshop of scientists,
lawyers and scholars to explore the options society might exercise as germ line
experimentation presses forward.

   "The problem is this: In germ line gene transfer, we seem to have a public
policy dominated by procrastination," Murray said.

   A decade ago, researchers assumed they would work out the kinks in somatic
cell gene therapy - the experimental approach of gene corrections that die with
recipients - before venturing into germ line work. The problem is that somatic
cell therapies for such inherited diseases as ADA deficiency and cystic fibrosis
have worked only partially or not at all. That led Anderson to propose in utero
attempts, when fetal chromosomes are more apt to respond to his interventions.

   A risk or benefit?

   Anderson argues that fixing a mutation that causes a catastrophic disease and
passing that correction to new generations would be a benefit, not a risk. But
even that assessment is uncertain. Scientists have determined that inheriting
one gene for sickle cell anemia protects an infant against malaria, but
inheriting two - from both mother and father - gives the child the disease.
Likewise, a single mutation for cystic fibrosis may protect a child against
cholera, but inheriting two defects results in disease.

   "As one of the basic philosophical questions, we'll have to take a stand
about whether a germ line gene transfer to eliminate a disease is a risk or a
benefit," Juengst said, referring to the federal advisory panel.

   A key worry of many scholars, including Juengst and Murray, is the
unregulated context in which reproductive technologies now emerge in the United
States.

   "With more than 300 infertility programs, the United States is now the
world's leading provider of infertility services," Green observed. When Congress
eliminated federal funding for human embryo research in 1995, it also eliminated
federal reviews and controls, putting infertility research in the unregulated
hands of entrepreneurs.

   The ironic result is that in an arena the public cares about deeply - the
creation of human life - the anti-abortion and conservative forces in Congress
hamstrung the ability of the federal government to exercise oversight, or even
protect the health and safety of women and children undergoing these procedures,
Green said.

   "We've witnessed the growth of a proprietary infertility industry that
appears to be driven more by profit than science," Murray said."The funding of
infertility research is not disciplined by the sort of intense peer scrutiny to
which applications to the National Institutes of Health are subjected."

   Lack of oversight

   In other words, Juengst said, an individual researcher, hoping to help a
desperate couple, might decide on his or her own to pursue germ line gene
transfer.

   Already, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine awarded its prize
paper last year to a research team that inserted the nucleus of an older woman's
ovum into a younger woman's egg cell from which the nucleus had been removed. In
such cases, the younger woman's mitochondrial DNA - stored in cytoplasm outside
the nucleus - would be passed along to the older woman's infant. An infant
created this way would pass the donor woman's mitochondrial DNA to all his or
her progeny - a kind of germ line gene transfer.

   The Anderson pre-protocols and the mitochondrial genome mixing have opened
the back door to germ line gene transfer. "So now we are faced with it," Murray
said. "What should our policy approach to these interventions look like?"

   Great Britian has a much firmer grasp on its reproductive technologies than
does the United States, said Ruth Chadwick, a professor of moral philosophy at
the University of Central Lancashire in Preston, England.

   "The Human Fertilization and Embyrology Authority, which we set up in 1990,
can close down laboratories and has," she said. Murray and Juengst consider the
British exercise of safety and ethical controls a better approach than the
American free-for-all, but Mehlman said such a board of overseers would be
politically impractical in the United States.

   "I don't have much faith in stopping science," said Christopher A. Cullis, a
CWRU biology professor. "I think we will see French Anderson's protocols move us
down the road quite a way."

   Charles Weiner, professor emeritus of the history of science and technology
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said passivity on the part of
society now would be a grave error.

   "We aren't dealing with a neutral body of scientists here," he said. "They
have a personal arrogance about influencing evolution. They are also people who
have very high stakes in this work, economic stakes, and believe in it deeply."

   Juengst said germ line gene transfer, as it is proposed now, must wait.

   "There is still an awful lot to be done in animal research and basic
knowledge to determine what happens when genes are introduced, passed around and
re-integrated in cell division," he said. "We are too ignorant to do anything in
humans yet."

   But interest is accelerating. A gene therapy policy conference is scheduled
in January at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. The public is
welcome.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations by Andrea Levy

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1998


                             1805 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     OCTOBER 2, 1998, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1030 words

HEADLINE: Bay Area Stocks Slashed by 21%

BYLINE: Chronicle Staff Report

BODY:
Oomph.

    Bay Area stocks had the wind knocked out of them in the third quarter. On
average, they fell a crippling 21.36 percent for the three months ending
September 30.

    That's more than twice as severe as the 10.3 percent decline in the Standard
& Poor's 500 index and the 10.6 percent fall in the Nasdaq composite.

    "A lot of the Bay Area companies are considered growth stocks. And growth in
all industries has been called into question in the last three to six months,"
said David Stadlin, portfolio manager with Davis Skaggs Investment Management in
San Francisco.

    Small companies were hit especially hard, he added, "but even the icon
stocks, the Ciscos, are being called into question."

    Only 66 out of 298 Bay Area stocks tracked by Davis Skaggs posted a gain for
the quarter.

    The biggest winners were two Internet stocks, Inktomi and Yahoo.

    Inktomi, a San Mateo developer of search-engine technology and software,
soared 89 percent during the quarter.

    "To quote one analyst, we're the universal arms merchant for the Internet,"
Inktomi CEO David Peterschmidt said. "We're the guys providing everyone with the
infrastructure technology necessary for the Web to thrive."

    Inktomi went public in June at $18 per share and ended the quarter at
$66.94.

    Shares of runner-up Yahoo of Santa Clara were up 64.4 percent. The Internet
directory firm, which also ranked among the 10 best-performing stocks in the
previous quarter, is expected to announce its fourth straight profitable quarter
on Wednesday. It's benefitting from being the best-known name on the Internet.

    Ranking fourth was MIPS Technologies, which went public on the last day of
the second quarter at $14 per share and ended the third quarter at $19.88, up 48
percent. MIPS, which makes chips for Nintendo machines, was spun off from Silion
Graphics.

    Quickturn Design Systems Inc. of San Jose rose out of the chip-equipment
swamp and landed in the No. 9 spot, thanks to a hostile bid from rival Mentor
Graphics of Wilsonville, Ore. Quickturn is fighting the bid, and has called a
shareholders meeting for January 8.

    Telecommunication stocks, which had been enjoying an impressive run, hit the
wall in the third quarter after industry leaders like Alcatel and Northern
Telecom said their earnings would be disappointing, said Stadlin.

    Two telecom equipment companies -- Advanced Fibre Communications of Petaluma
and Premisys Communications of Fremont -- were the Bay Area's worst-performing
stocks during the quarter, falling 83 percent and 72 percent respectively.

    Both were squeezed by declines in orders from big telephone companies and
increasing price competition. Analysts said the two firms should be on the
upswing this quarter, bolstered by stronger growth in sales to CLECs, or
competitive local exchange carriers.

    Corsair Communications of Palo Alto, which makes software for the wireless
communications market, was hurt by weaker international sales, particularly in
Asia and Latin America.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------


   CHART:
   TOP, BOTTOM BAY AREA STOCKS FOR THIRD QUARTER
.
    TOP 10
.
Company Name               Market Value  Price  Price      %Increase
Headquarters / Business     $ Millions    6/30   9/30     (decrease)
.
Inktomi Corp.
San Mateo/Internet Software     1,715.2  39.75  75.25          89.31
.
Yahoo Inc.
Santa Clara/Internet Content   12,319.4  78.75  129.5          64.44
.
Power Integrations
Sunnyvale/Integrated Circuits     161.9   9.13  13.56          48.63
.
Mips Technologies Inc.
Mountain View/Computer Chips      733.5  13.44  19.88          47.91
.
Granite Construction Inc.
Watsonville/Construction          845.8  20.42  29.44          44.18
.
Biotime Inc.
Berkeley/Biotechnolgy              96.9   6.26   9.00          44.00
.
Smart Modular Tech Inc.
Fremont/Computer Devices          929.3  14.63  20.56          40.60
.
Longs Drug Stores Inc.
Walnut Creek/Drug Stores        1,590.3  28.88  40.19          39.18
.
Quickturn Design Sys Inc.
San Jose/Chip Equipment           182.6    7.3  10.00          36.75
.
Veritas Software Co.
Mountain View/Computer Software 2,694.0  41.38  55.25          33.53
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     BOTTOM 10
.
Advanced Fibre Comm Inc.
Petaluma/Telecommunications       506.7  40.06   6.88         -82.84
Premisys Comm Inc.
Fremont/Telecommunications        181.8  24.88   7.00         -71.86
Vantive Corp.
Santa Clara/Business Software     165.8  20.50   6.00         -70.73
Crown Vantage Inc.
Oakland/Paper Products             33.1  10.50   3.38         -67.86
Symphonix Devices Inc.
San Jose/Hearing Devices           47.0  11.50   3.75         -67.39
Corsair Comm Inc.
Palo Alto/Telecom Software         55.5   9.31   3.06         -67.11
Cygnus Inc.
Redwood City/Drug Delivery         79.7  10.44   3.50         -66.47
Cell Genesys Inc.
Foster City/Gene Therapy           96.3   8.56   3.19         -62.77
Cylink Corp.
Sunnyvale/Networking              136.1  12.00   4.50         -62.50
Somnus Med Tech Inc.
Sunnyvale/Medical Devices          43.1   8.19   3.13         -61.83
.
Screening criteria: 1. Market value over $3 million. 2. Shares
selling at more than $3 on 6/30/98 and 9/30/98. 3. Does not
include limited partnerships and real estate investment trust
companies.
Source: Davis Skaggs Investment Management


GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE END OF TEXT

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1998


                             1806 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 30, 1998, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: Gene studies find key to rare illness;
Flaw believed to make normally harmless Epstein-Barr virus fatal in boys

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Scientists have found a gene defect that causes a rare, lethal disease in
boys, rendering them helpless to attack from a virus that most people harbor
harmlessly.

   By adulthood, about 90 percent of the population have become chronically
infected with the Epstein-Barr virus, or EBV, which lives in the immune system
of most adults without causing trouble, although in adolescence or later it can
cause infectious mononucleosis.

   But about one in a million boys inherits a mutant form of the newly
discovered gene, a gene for a protein that acts as an important on-off switch
for a part of the immune system, according to researchers at Harvard Medical
School and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Working independently, a large
collaboration of European laboratories also found the gene.

   The immune disease it causes is called X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome,
or XLP. "X-linked" means the gene is on the X, or female, chromosome and it is
inherited by boys from their mothers.

   The boys with the damaged gene are so sensitive to the Epstein-Barr virus
that when they encounter it - usually after the age of 2 1/2 - the immune system
often unleashes a violent but ineffective response that succeeds only in
ravaging the liver, bone marrow and other organs. When it doesn't result in that
kind of acute reaction, the virus can trigger a deadly cancer, lymphoma, in
susceptible youths. No one with XLP syndrome lives beyond age 40.

   Now that they have discovered the single flawed gene, scientists hope to find
out just how it makes the difference between holding EBV harmlessly at bay in
most people and allowing it to send the immune system into an unregulated
frenzy.

   A report on the discovery, by Cox Terhorst, chief of immunology at Beth
Israel Deaconess, his co-author Joan Sayos, and others is to appear in
tomorrow's issue of the journal Nature.  Terhorst said the gene is an important
player in a cell-signaling system that normally keeps the immune system in
check.

   The protein made by the gene is known as SAP, and it turns out to be a
natural inhibitor of the immune response. When it's defective, SAP can't bind
to, and inhibit, another protein called SLAM, that sits on the surface of immune
B-cells and T-cells and signals them to proliferate and go on the attack.
Without the inhibiting protein, SLAM's signals continue unchecked.

   "As a result, the response to these EBV-infected cells probably goes out of
control, and that's why the boys die," said Terhorst in an interview.

   The discovery explains "how it is that almost all of us live with the EBV
virus, and it's quite remarkable that more of us" aren't devastated by it, said
Terhorst.

   In a commentary accompanying the report in Nature, researchers George Klein
and Eva Klein of the Karolinska Institute in Sweden wrote that the finding "may
improve the diagnosis of a severe but enigmatic disease with variable
manifestations, and it may in time lead to treatments."

   Such treatments might include gene therapy, suggest the authors of a
commentary accompanying the report by the Europeans in the journal Nature
Genetics yesterday.

   The hope is that a correctly functioning version of the defective gene could
be inserted into the blood cells of a patient with XLP syndrome, said the
authors.  That approach was suggested by Dr. Michel Sadelain of the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and Dr. Elliott Kieff of Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1998


                             1807 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          September 30, 1998 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. E10

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: IDEA COULD CURE LACTOSE PROBLEM

BODY:

   Wednesday, September 30, 1998 IDEA COULD CURE LACTOSE PROBLEM

   An international research team has developed a possible genetic cure  for
lactose intolerance, an inability to digest dairy products that afflicts  half
the worlds population.

   Lactose intolerance is a largely adult condition that can cause chronic
nausea, bloating and diarrhea as well as calcium deficiencies.

   It stems from a genetic deficiency that prevents the body from metabolizing
lactose, or milk sugar. It is the most common genetic disorder in the world.

   However, researchers in the United States and New Zealand said that
injecting a gene involved in the breakdown of milk sugar into the digestive
tract of lactose-intolerant rats allowed the animals to handle lactose.

   The findings were published in Tuesdays issue of the journal Nature
Medicine.

   Lactose intolerance affects more than 50 percent of the population,
including 100 percent of some Asian ethnic groups. In the United States, 50
million people are lactose intolerant, including up to 75 percent of blacks  and
Native Americans.

   People with the condition can avoid any effects by staying away from dairy
products. Also, low-lactose milk is widely available in supermarkets, as are
over-the-counter tablets that aid in milk digestion.

   "It makes it rather unlikely that gene therapy will be widely used for
treating lactose intolerance," said Eric W.F.W. Alton of England's National
Heart and Lung Institute.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1808 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 29, 1998 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1098 words

HEADLINE: FINANCING GROWTH GETS EASIER;
NORTHEAST OHIO ENTREPRENEURS ARE ATTRACTIVE TO VENTURE CAPIALISTS HUNGRY FOR
INVESTMENT

BYLINE: By TERESA DIXON MURRAY; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Mark Williams faced the challenge last year of finding more than $2 million
for his 2-year-old software company, Virtual Hold Technology Inc. He had four
employees. He was in a brand new industry. And he was 26 years old.

   Despite that, Williams, whose software helps companies save money on incoming
1-800 calls, quickly found himself in the enviable position of shopping for
financing with ease like most of us shop for shoes. During the next 18 months,
Williams talked with 32 interested investors, both venture capital firms and
private investors. In August he closed a funding deal for $2.5 million, and it
was on his terms.

   While Williams' situation was extreme, it's an indication of the current
venture capital climate: If a savvy executive has a high-growth company with
potential to go public, he can probably weigh multiple offers and find he
doesn't have to sell his soul to finance growth.

   "There has never been more money available than there is today," said Rolph
Selvig, director of business development for San Francisco-based VentureOne
Corp., the nation's leading provider of information and analysis on the venture
cap industry.

   Nationwide, deals this year are closing at a pace of $1 billion a month. "We
have a record number of interested investors," Selvig said.

   Jon Dick, managing partner at Primus Venture Partners in Mayfield Heights,
one of the region's two largest venture cap firms, is more blunt. "If you have a
good management team and a good business plan, you ought to be able to get
money."

   While the sexy technology and biomedical firms on the East and West coasts
are the most common recipients of funding, companies across Northeast Ohio are
finding they're nearly as attractive to investors.

   "I don't know of any company that's having trouble raising money. We sure
haven't had any trouble raising money," said Robert Butz, president of
Copernicus Gene Systems Inc. of Cleveland, which focuses on gene therapy, or
inserting genes into human cells to treat diseases.

   Copernicus, founded in 1995 with $775,000 in seed money from private
investors, obtained $4.6 million in venture capital in December 1997 and a
second round of $3 million in July. Copernicus was able to choose from two
different offers each time. Butz won't disclose the percentage of ownership by
venture cap investors, but said, "At this stage of development, at least half is
normal."

   The company has used its funding to expand its staff to 20 people, cover
patent filing costs and rent two facilities covering 8,000 square feet.

   Most young companies-a full three-fourths in fact-finance early growth
through loans from relatives or through their own high-interest credit cards.
That was how Williams of VHT funded his initial $80,000 start-up in 1995. It's
the next level of funding that entrepreneurs often struggle with.

   Williams' search was eased because he has a patented high-technology product
in the booming telephony industry. VHT's software is aimed at companies with
large numbers of customer calls on toll-free numbers.

   The software allows a call center to hold calls in "virtual queues" so they
don't rack up phone charges, or allows customers to be called back
electronically. The process saves the company money, saves the customer time and
improves a customer's impression of the company. VHT's biggest customers include
IBM Corp. and Allstate Corp.

   Williams believed he'd obtain venture funding without much problem, but he
never dreamed he'd field so many offers under his terms, which included
maintaining his Akron headquarters, having experienced investors who could
strengthen operations and limiting the investors' ownership to 30 percent.

   James Wilcosky, partner of the middle market group at PriceWaterhouseCoopers
in Cleveland, agrees it's a good time to need money. "What we're seeing is that
the venture capitalists are paying a little more attention to the development
stage company. I think there are more opportunities than there were in the past.

   "Companies still have to work to get the money," he added. "They just don't
have to work as hard to find someone to talk to them."

   Maria Coyne, project manager for the Access to Capital Initiative, a local
clearinghouse associated with the Greater Cleveland Growth Association's Council
of Smaller Enterprises, said the current environment empowers small companies.
"You might not have to jump at the first person who says, 'I like your business
plan.'"

   Ed Tromczynski found himself in such a position this year when he sent out 75
business plans and had 50 venture cap companies "seriously interested."

   His company, PlanSoft Corp. of Twinsburg, is among a small number that has
actually figured out how to make money through the Internet. PlanSoft's
proprietary system could revolutionize the $92 billion meeting and hospitality
industry by allowing meeting planners, convention facilities and hotels to
design and communicate meeting specifications electronically, said Tromczynski,
who received $11.25 million this spring from three different venture cap
sources.

   One of those three was Primus, and it's an investment Jon Dick is excited
about. "For us to make any investment, we expect to make three to five times our
investment in three to five years."

   The other key, the company's potential market, has to be large enough to
support a public company. If a company was in a market with only a $20 million
potential, "we would never be able to go public and get liquid on it ... We want
to see industries with at least a half-billion-dollar market potential," Dick
said.

   Steve Lindseth, CEO of CPR Prompt in Warrensville Heights, said he's evidence
that venture capital opportunities aren't limited to high-tech firms. His
75-employee company, started this year, offers CPR training to companies and
individuals. It has used $15.7 million obtained this spring in venture cap in
part to finance nationwide acquisitions. "It was relatively painless," he said,
"but I'm glad we got it done when we did because the valuations are coming
down."

   Selvig of VentureOne said the recent stock market slowdown could dampen
enthusiasm among venture capitalists, if they think the window for an IPO is
closing and threatens the investors' exit strategy.

   Wilcosky and Dick both disagree. Dick said Primus remains actively interested
in new deals. The money has already been raised and it will be available, at
least for the next couple of years, he said.

   Wilcosky added, "If there is an opportunity to go public, that opportunity
will exist regardless of what the market does."

GRAPHIC: BOX: VENTURE CAPITAL DEALS; SOURCE: Price Waterhouse Coopers LLP;
GRAPHICS BY: PLAIN DEALER; PHOTO BY: JAMES A. ROSS / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER;
Mark Williams, left, waited more than three years to draw a salary from his
company, Virtual Hold Technology Inc. Now, as he demonstrates a VHT system with
chief R&D engineer Gregory Nightingale, Williams says securing venture capital
means he can grow his company and get a regular paycheck.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1998


                             1809 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     September 28, 1998 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: SMALL DOSES

BODY:

   Ovarian cancer lurks

   It has vague symptoms, no consistently reliable diagnostic tests. It is often
discovered only after it has spread. That's why "It whispers ... so listen" is a
perfect motto for the National Ovarian Cancer Coalition.

   These are all good reasons to make noise about ovarian cancer so women will
listen.

   Begin your self-education by watching a WVIZ Channel 25 special at 4 p.m.
Sunday, "Surviving Ovarian Cancer." It is hosted by Liz Tilberis, author of "No
Time to Die" and editor of Harper's Bazaar magazine. Cut through the stories of
ovarian cancer survivors and you will learn the range of symptoms, who it
afflicts, how it is treated and prospects for early diagnosis, treatment and
cure.

   Next, you will want to call 1-888-OVARIAN to get a brochure that carefully
defines what every woman needs to know about ovarian cancer. Or check out the
Web site: http:www.ovarian.org

   Meanwhile, learn your family history of ovarian, breast and colon cancer, and
if you are over 18, insist on an annual recto-vaginal exam along with a Pap
smear. (By the way, the green and gold symbol is the emblem of the National
Ovarian Cancer Coalition.)

   Baby-food rumor

   If you hear a rumor about the "Gerber Baby Food settlement," let it go in one
ear and out the other.

   The rumor is based on antitrust lawsuits alleging that infant formula
manufacturers were fixing prices. As part of the "punishment," Gerber would send
a $500 savings bond to parents of children born in the mid-'80s to mid-'90s. All
parents had to do was send a copy of the child's birth certificate and Social
Security card to a Minneapolis post office box.

   Repeat: The rumor is false, according to the Minnesota attorney general's
office, Minnesota being the home of Gerber. Save your stamp.

   Museum headlines medicine

   Medical research doesn't move fast enough for you? Surely you will feel
differently after you visit "Medicines: The Inside Story," the new exhibit at
the Health Museum of Cleveland, 8911 Euclid Ave. It opens Saturday, when hours
are 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. (Sunday hours are 12-5 p.m., weekday, 9 a.m.-5 p.m.)

   The exhibit explores American medical history, from the 1880s - when doctors
first began washing their hands between patients to stop the spread of germs -
through today's gene therapy. A section called "Claim vs. Proof" examines the
drug approval process required by the Food and Drug Administration, and the
display on the evolution of medical technology includes that dandy antique
medical case, shown here.

   If you have always wondered how aspirin can get to your headache one day and
to your sore back the next, here's your chance for enlightenment.

   (Museum admission is $4.50 for adults, $3 for students and seniors, free for
children under 3.)

   Saving your skin

   Premature skin aging - argghhhhhhh! And at what age might skin aging no
longer be considered premature? It's a funny world we live in.

   While you think about your unwillingness to show your age, consider the
misconception that being indoors makes you safe from ultraviolet-A rays - which
are the kind that cause wrinkling and other such premature aging signs. Testing
done by Roche Vitamins Inc. found that UV-A radiation was present in a
windowless office lit by fluorescent light and outside on rainy days and even
under a parasol, because of light reflection.

   Apparently, you are seldom safe from UV-A radiation, unless you use skin-care
products containing a UV-A filter. The latest, Parsol 1789, approved by the FDA
in April 1997, is said to protect from the longest of the UV-A rays. It is,
coincidentally, manufactured by Roche.

   Parsol has been used in European, Canadian and Australian skin-care products
for years, and is now being used in American products, including Shade UV-A
Guard, Avon's Age Block Daytime Defense Cream, Lancome Soleil Expert Sun Care,
among others.

   Indoor skin damage. It's always something, isn't it?

COLUMN: SMALL DOSES

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1998


                             1810 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 September 27, 1998, Sunday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A8

LENGTH: 730 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS ASK HEALTH PANEL TO APPROVE GENETIC TESTS ON HUMAN FETUSES
IN WOMB

BYLINE: The Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Two scientists have asked a federal advisory panel to weigh the medical and
ethical implications of their plan to conduct the world's first genetic
experiments on human fetuses in the womb.

   Their unprecedented proposal, still under development, is to cure fetuses
afflicted with genetic diseases by giving them new genes before they are born,
thus preventing prenatal death or lifelong disability. Until now, the federal
government has allowed experimental genetic therapies to be conducted only on
adults, or on children in a few instances.

   "What we're shooting for is a born child who needs no other therapy" for its
entire life, said W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California,
who would lead the novel series of studies with Esmail Zanjan i, of the
University of Nevada.

   Although that would open a new era in medicine, the proposal has stirred
international controversy because of concerns that the untested treatment might
harm the mother or the developing fetus, or perhaps even lead to the birth of a
partly cured but severely disabled child who otherwise would have died naturally
long before birth.

   Equally troubling to some, the team has determined that there is a "distinct
possibility" that the technique will cause not only the intended genetic changes
in the fetus' body but also inadvertent changes in the fetus' "germline" cells -
its eggs or sperm. Federal regulations preclude scientists from making human
germline alterations, in part because any genetic errors that may be
accidentally be introduced could be passed down indefinitely for generations.

   Nonetheless, regulators said Thursday that they were willing at least to
examine the proposals since any germline changes would be unintentional. At the
same time, they said they had no intention of deciding the issue any time soon -
probably not within the next two or three years.

'Many difficult issues'

   "There are many difficult issues to consider," said Lana Skirboll, associate
director for science policy at the National Institutes of Health, which oversees
gene therapy experiments. Thursday's presentation before the health panel's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee was conducted, she said, "to stimulate public
discussion."

   There was no shortage of that. The committee already had received scores of
letters and e-mails from people all around the world, virtually every one in
opposition to granting Anderson and Zanjani permission to conduct their
experiments. Others came to the meeting on the health panel's campus in
Bethesda, Md., to express those sentiments in person. And the committee members
themselves expressed many reservations at the meeting, ranging from a lack of
confidence that the technique would work to questions of whose health is most
important to consider when weighing risks - the mother's, the fetus' or that of
the child who may be born.

   Anderson, who led the world's first tests of human gene therapy in 1990,
stressed that he was in no hurry to get the go-ahead for human in utero
experiments. He and Zanjani submitted their "pre-proposal," he said, to get
feedback from other scientists, ethicists and members of the public as to what
kinds of laboratory and animal experiments they ought to do first before asking
formal permission to proceed in people.

   "If it's not possible to reduce the risks to an acceptable level, we will not
go forward," Anderson said.

   The scientists propose treating fetuses that have inherited a serious and
often fatal immune system disorder called ADA deficiency, and those with a blood
disorder called alpha thallasemia, which almost always kills fetuses long before
they reach term.

   The researchers hope to inject genetically engineered viruses into the
abdominal cavity of a developing fetus with ADA. The viruses would be endowed
with healthy human ADA genes, which the viruses would deliver to the fetus'
immune system cells.

   In theory, the technique would work better than a similar approach already
tried in children because fetal immune system cells are still dividing rapidly
and so are more amenable to being genetically repaired in numbers large enough
to actually improve health.

   Among the risks of the procedure is the chance that some of the new genes
might get incorporated into the wrong cells, where they may disrupt normal organ
development or perhaps cause cancer.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1998


                             1811 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 26, 1998 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: STEALING A MARCH ON CANCER

BODY:

   The progress made in the last quarter-century ought to be enough to convince
anyone that medical science could someday beat cancer.

   Numerous forms of the disease no longer are considered certain killers.
Detection and treatment techniques have improved with every passing year. The
advent of gene therapy offers tremendous hope for new methods to restore
patients' health with fewer painful and debilitating side effects.

   Other genetic research is identifying "markers" that indicate hereditary
tendencies toward certain kinds of cancer, improving the chances of early
detection.

   Even with all of that progress, won with more than $30 billion worth of
publicly funded scientific research, the National Cancer Institute predicts that
cancer will surpass heart disease within the next five years to become the
United States' No. 1 killer.

   Cancer is diagnosed in about 1.2 million Americans a year, and this year,
565,000 are likely to die from some form of it. In that same period, many more
lives will be altered.

   Collisions with cancer are by no means always fatal. Many people will be
witnesses to a loved one's illness. Others will battle the disease and survive
to face a lifetime of uncertainty in which every ache or pain may conjure mortal
dread.

   Cancer survivors - people living that sort of life - are meeting this weekend
in Washington, D.C., to heighten the nation's awareness of how far medical
science must yet go to subdue cancer.

   Although organizers of The March aren't saying so in so many words, it
appears that they believe cancer and its sufferers have been overshadowed in the
political arena by the campaign to fight AIDS. In any case, the marchers have
taken a page out of the AIDS activists' political strategy book by turning to a
more militant form of public relations.

   It's an unfortunate fact of life that choices have to be made, even when it
comes to doling out big-money research grants. In Washington, $30 billion spent
over a quarter-century is comparatively little.

   Maybe these marchers, like a lot of cancer researchers, are on the right
track.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1998


                             1812 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   September 25, 1998, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: Scientists solicit ethics input for fetal testing ;
Geneticists propose to cure diseases in womb

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: RICK WEISS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Two scientists Thursday asked a federal advisory panel to weigh
the medical and ethical implications of their plan to conduct the world's first
genetic experiments on human fetuses in the womb.

   Their unprecedented proposal, still under development, is to cure fetuses
afflicted with genetic diseases by giving them new genes before they are born,
thus preventing prenatal death or lifelong disability. Until now, the federal
government has allowed experimental genetic therapies to be conducted only on
adults, or on children in a few instances.

   "What we're shooting for is a born child who needs no other therapy" for its
entire life, said W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California,
who would lead the novel series of studies with Esmail Zanjani of the University
of Nevada.

   Although that would open a new era in medicine, the proposal has stirred
international controversy because of concerns that the untested treatment might
harm the mother or the developing fetus, or perhaps even lead to the birth of a
partially cured but severely disabled child who otherwise would have died
naturally long before birth.

   Equally troubling to some, the team has determined that there is a "distinct
possibility" that the technique will cause not only the intended genetic changes
in the fetus's body but also inadvertent changes in the fetus's "germline" cells
- its eggs or sperm. Federal regulations currently preclude scientists from
making human germline alterations, in part because any genetic errors that may
be accidentally introduced could be passed down indefinitely for generations.

   Nonetheless, regulators said Thursday they are willing at least to examine
the proposals because any germline changes would be unintentional. At the same
time, they said they have no intention of deciding the issue any time soon -
probably not within the next two or three years.

   "There are many difficult issues to consider," said Lana Skirboll, associate
director for science policy at the National Institutes of Health, which oversees
U.S. gene therapy experiments. Thursday's presentation before the NIH's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) was conducted, she said, "to stimulate
public discussion."

   There is no shortage of that. The RAC already had received scores of letters
and e-mails from people around the world, virtually every one in opposition to
granting Anderson and Zanjani permission to conduct their experiments. Others
came to the meeting on the NIH campus in Bethesda, Md., to express those
sentiments in person. And RAC members expressed many reservations at the
meeting, ranging from a lack of confidence that the technique would work to
questions of whose health is most important to consider when weighing risks -
the mother's, the fetus's or that of the child who may be born.

   Anderson, who led the world's first tests of human gene therapy in 1990,
stressed that he was in no hurry to get the go-ahead for human in utero
experiments. He and Zanjani submitted their "pre-proposal," he said, to get
feedback from other scientists, ethicists and members of the public as to what
kinds of laboratory and animal experiments they ought to do first before asking
formal permission to proceed in people.

   "If it's not possible to reduce the risks to an acceptable level, we will not
go forward," Anderson said.

   The scientists propose treating fetuses that have inherited a serious and
often fatal immune system disorder called ADA deficiency, and those with a blood
disorder called alpha thalassemia, which when severe almost always kills fetuses
long before they reach term.

   The researchers hope to inject genetically engineered viruses into the
abdominal cavity of a developing fetus with ADA. The viruses would be endowed
with healthy human ADA genes, which the viruses would deliver to the fetus's
immune system cells.

   In theory, the technique would work better than a similar approach already
tried in children because fetal immune system cells are still dividing rapidly
and so are more amenable to being genetically repaired in numbers large enough
to actually improve health.

   Among the risks of the procedure is the chance that some of the new genes
might get incorporated into the wrong cells, where they may disrupt normal organ
development or perhaps cause cancer.







LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1998


                             1813 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                 September 25, 1998, Friday, Southland Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA: NEWS AND INSIGHT ON BUSINESS IN THE GOLDEN STATE;
 THE STATE / BIOTECHNOLOGY

BODY:


   Cell Genesys Inc. said it will fire 25 employees, or about 20% of its work
force, and reduce operating expenses by 30% as it concentrates on clinical
testing of its gene therapies. Fremont-based Cell Genesys, which had revenue of
$ 23.8 million last year, said it hopes to save about $ 10million annually from
the job cuts and reductions in spending on laboratory studies. The company is
trying to get its most promising treatments to the marketplace, including AIDS
and cancer treatment therapies.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1814 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 25, 1998, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA: NEWS AND INSIGHT ON BUSINESS IN THE GOLDEN STATE;
 THE STATE / BIOTECHNOLOGY;
 TRIAL BEGINS ON RIVAL TO AMGEN'S EPOGEN

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and Hoechst Marion Roussel are about to begin
late-stage human trials on a rival version of Amgen Inc.'s top-selling drug, the
anemia treatment Epogen, Transkaryotic's chief executive said. The two companies
will start the last of three trials needed to apply for Food and Drug
Administration approval "within a matter of days," said Richard Selden. They're
taking the move after a U.S. District Court in April gave them permission to
test the drug after a 1997 patent infringement suit filed by Thousand Oaks-based
Amgen, the world's largest biotech company. The judge who issued that ruling
didn't rule on whether Cambridge, Mass.-based Transkaryotic can sell its version
of the drug. About half of Amgen's 1997 revenue of $ 2.4 billion came from
Epogen, which spurs the growth of red blood cells. Selden declined to discuss
specifics of the trials, saying the companies will soon issue a statement
detailing them. Hoechst Marion Roussel is a unit of Germany's Hoechst. While the
April ruling in the patent case allows Transkaryotic and Hoechst to complete
human trials on their version of the drug, both sides have said further
litigation will be required to determine whether Epogen's would-be competitor
will make it to market. Amgen shares fell $ 2.50 to close at $ 75.50, and
Transkaryotic shares fell 75 cents to $ 27.50. Both trade on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1815 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 25, 1998 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:7,8; B-2:1,2,3,4,5,6

LENGTH: 738 words

HEADLINE: Surf contest will boost spinal cord research;
Longboarders will compete tomorrow

BYLINE: Terry Rodgers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The wave was just like a thousand other glistening, waist-high swells that
Tony Mezzadri had surfed. Except at the end of this ride, he fell awkwardly.

   His head hit the ocean floor, snapping his neck. Another surfer paddling out
near the Ocean Beach pier saw Mezzadri floating helplessly in the shore break
and saved Mezzadri's life.

   Mezzadri was alive, but the world he'd previously known had reversed its
rotation. That was four years ago. Today, Mezzadri, 28, lives with his parents
in Point Loma and attends Mesa College.

   The quick-thinking surfer who saved his life, Brendan McInerney, continues to
be an honored guest each year at the Mezzadri family's Thanksgiving Day dinner.
Just a few weeks ago, Mezzadri gained enough strength in his upper arms to
operate his wheelchair on his own. But that's not the end of the Tony Mezzadri
story.

   It's really only the beginning. Mezzadri has some special friends.

   They're a rag-tag group of men and women known as the Sunset Cliffs Surfing
Association.

   They adopted him -- made him a life-member of their surfing club -- after his
catastrophic injury. The Sunset Cliffs surfers offered more than moral support.

   They organized a competition to help Mezzadri's family buy a
specially-equipped van. In recent years, the surfing contest continued to be
held as an annual fund-raiser for people down on their luck.

   But something was missing. Mezzadri realized that the event, which is named
in his honor, needed a sharper focus. The fifth annual Tony Mezzadri Longboard
Contest will be held tomorrow morning at the same place, the Ocean Beach pier,
but with a more clearly defined goal and beneficiary. Money raised at the
tournament will be donated to spinal cord research being conducted at UCSD by
Dr. Mark Tuszynski. The research scientist first met Mezzadri more than a year
ago when Mezzadri, in pursuit of a college research paper, asked for an
interview. Mezzadri became fascinated with Tuszynski's research project, which
involves the injection of laboratory engineered cells containing growth factors
into paralyzed rats.

   Once introduced into the injured portion of the spinal cord, the genetically
modified cells appear to enhance recovery in the injured rodents. Ultimately,
researchers envision a procedure where they would take cells from a person with
a spinal injury, genetically alter the cells to make the growth factors, then
put them back in the same person. "Two things need to happen before we take this
approach to humans," Tuszynski said.

   "The first is that other labs have to repeat our experiments and get the same
kind of results to prove they are valid. "The second is that these experiments
should be repeated in larger animals to establish the validity and practicality
for trying this approach in humans." Tuszynski, a specialist in the human
nervous system, has been thinking about finding a cure for spinal cord injuries
since he was a student at Poway High School. He's not a surfer. "I wish I was,"
he said.

   "I went out once, but I need some lessons." He's flattered that the Sunset
Cliffs surfers have singled out his project, which involves one of about 20 labs
in the country doing research on spinal cord injuries. "It motivates us more to
know that people are concerned enough to get personally involved," he said.
Mezzadri, meanwhile, dreams of the day he will be offered a chance to take
experimental drugs or gene therapy that might help him walk away from his
wheelchair. But his hope is rooted in reality. "I feel I have a very good
quality of life now, thanks to the incredible support I receive from my family
and friends," he said.

   "I can accept what I have to deal with now.

   If that's the way it is 20 or 30 years from now, so be it." To learn more: []
To learn more about spinal chord injuries, you can contact the California San
Diego Paralyzed Veteran Association at (619) 450-1443. [] Sign-ups for the Tony
Mezzadri Longboard Contest can be done at the contest site, the Ocean Beach
pier, beginning at 6:30 a.m. tomorrow. [] Companies that wish to offer
sponsorship or donate raffle prizes for the contest should contact Greg Cox at
the South Coast Longboard Shop in Ocean Beach.

   The phone number is (619) 223-8808. [] Donations to Dr. Tuszynski's spinal
cord research project can be sent to the UCSD Research Office at 9500 Gilman
Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0696. The phone number is (619) 534-9898. Checks should
be made payable to the UCSD Foundation.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Tony Mezzadri: He's fascinated with UCSD
research project. 2. To learn more; PHOTOBY: 1. PEGGY PEATTIE / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1816 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 25, 1998, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 906 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Seek Panel's Advice on In-Womb Genetic Tests; Researchers'
Request Is Precursor to Experimentation to Prevent Prenatal Deaths, Lifelong
Disabilities

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   Two scientists yesterday asked a federal advisory panel to weigh the medical
and ethical implications of their plan to conduct the world's first genetic
experiments on human fetuses in the womb.

   Their unprecedented proposal, still under development, is to cure fetuses
afflicted with genetic diseases by giving them new genes before they are born,
thus preventing prenatal death or lifelong disability. Until now, the federal
government has allowed experimental genetic therapies to be conducted only on
adults, or on children in a few instances.

   "What we're shooting for is a born child who needs no other therapy" for its
entire life, said W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California,
who would lead the novel series of studies with Esmail Zanjani, of the
University of Nevada.

   Although that would open a new era in medicine, the proposal has stirred
international controversy because of concerns that the untested treatment might
harm the mother or the developing fetus, or perhaps even lead to the birth of a
partially cured but severely disabled child who otherwise would have died
naturally long before birth.

   Equally troubling to some, the team has determined that there is a "distinct
possibility" that the technique will cause not only the intended genetic changes
in the fetus's body but also inadvertent changes in the fetus's "germline" cells
-- its eggs or sperm. Federal regulations preclude scientists from making human
germline alterations, in part because any genetic errors that may be
accidentally introduced could be passed down indefinitely for generations.

   Nonetheless, regulators said yesterday they were willing at least to examine
the proposals because any germline changes would be unintentional. At the same
time, they said they had no intention of deciding the issue any time soon --
probably not within the next two or three years.

   "There are many difficult issues to consider," said Lana Skirboll, associate
director for science policy at the National Institutes of Health, which oversees
U.S. gene therapy experiments. Yesterday's presentation before the NIH's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) was conducted, she said, "to stimulate
public discussion."

   There was no shortage of that yesterday. The RAC already had received scores
of letters and e-mails from people worldwide, virtually every one in opposition
to granting Anderson and Zanjani permission to conduct their experiments. Others
came to the meeting on the NIH campus in Bethesda to express those sentiments in
person. And RAC members themselves expressed many reservations at the meeting,
ranging from a lack of confidence that the technique would work to questions of
whose health is most important to consider when weighing risks -- the mother's,
the fetus's or that of the child who may be born.

   Anderson, who led the world's first tests of human gene therapy in 1990,
stressed that he was in no hurry to get the go-ahead for human in utero
experiments. He and Zanjani submitted their "preproposal," he said, to get
feedback from other scientists, ethicists and the public as to what kinds of
laboratory and animal experiments they ought to do first before asking formal
permission to proceed in people.

   "If it's not possible to reduce the risks to an acceptable level, we will not
go forward," Anderson said.

   The scientists propose treating fetuses that have inherited a serious and
often fatal immune system disorder called ADA deficiency, and those with a blood
disorder called alpha thallasemia, which almost always kills fetuses long before
they reach term.

   The researchers hope to inject genetically engineered viruses into the
abdominal cavity of a developing fetus with ADA. The viruses would be endowed
with healthy human ADA genes, which the viruses would deliver to the fetus's
immune system cells.

   In theory, the technique would work better than a similar approach already
tried in children because fetal immune system cells are still dividing rapidly
and so are more amenable to being genetically repaired in numbers large enough
to actually improve health.

   Among the risks of the procedure is the chance that some of the new genes
might get incorporated into the wrong cells, where they may disrupt normal organ
development or perhaps cause cancer.

   In the case of thallasemia, the team hopes to remove some blood cells from
the fetus, add new genes to those cells, then reinfuse the "fixed" cells into
the fetus, where some of them would settle into bone marrow and make healthy
blood forever. Several RAC members expressed concern about what would happen if
that therapy proved just effective enough to ensure fetal survival and birth,
but not effective enough to allow for a childhood survival.

   Moreover, mothers carrying fetuses with alpha thallasemia are at increased
risk for several complications so severe that such fetuses are usually aborted
even before they naturally succumb to the disease. Any therapy that prolongs the
gestational period would add to that maternal risk -- more than could be
justified, some said, if the child is not assured of being cured.

   Anderson and Zanjani face additional questioning today but said they look
forward to proceeding with experiments in mice, sheep and monkeys over the next
two years to make their case for an eventual effort in people.

    W. French Anderson, University of Southern California




GRAPHIC: Photo, ANNALISA KRAFT for The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1817 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

               September 24, 1998, Thursday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 03D

LENGTH: 359 words

SERIES: Home

HEADLINE: Health Watch;
NEWS & NOTES

BODY:


   Meningitis bacteria becoming resistant: A germ that causes meningitis is
becoming resistant to the drug most often used to treat the deadly disease.
Meningitis, an infection of the linings of the brain and spinal cord, often is
caused by neisseria meningitidis, bacteria that usually live harmlessly in the
nose and throat and can be spread by sneezing or direct contact. Drug-resistant
strains of type B neisseria meningitidis were found in 11 patients in Vietnam
and one patient in France from 1987 to 1996, a report in today's New England
Journal of Medicine says. They were resistant to chloramphenicol, the standard
treatment in developing countries, but they responded to penicillin and
tetracycline. Changing genes in a fetus? A genetics pioneer wants to try gene
therapy on fetuses. Scientists and ethicists on a National Institutes of Health
committee plan to debate the experiment in meetings today and Friday. The
experiment, proposed by Dr. W. French Anderson, a researcher with the University
of Southern California, is controversial because it has the potential to change
genes in generations to come. Anderson wants to inject a healthy gene directly
into fetuses to try curing ADA, which renders the body unable to fight
infections and is best known as the ''bubble boy disease''; and alpha
thalassemia, a type of anemia that in severe cases kills the baby inside the
womb. The risk in the fetal research is that the new gene could accidentally get
into the fetus' reproductive cells and be passed on to that person's children.
Gravy mix recalled: A Cajun dressing mix distributed in nine states, including
Georgia, has been recalled because of possible salmonella contamination after 62
people fell ill. Savoie's Sausage & Food Products Inc. is voluntarily recalling
about 500,000 pounds of frozen ''Real Cajun! Savoie's Dressing Mix.'' Consumers
should return the product to the place of purchase. Candlelight vigil: Cancer
Survivors candlelight vigil, 8 p.m. Friday, DeKalb Medical Center's main campus,
2701 N. Decatur Road, Decatur; reading of cancer survivors names. Information:
404-501-3279. --- From staff and news services

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1818 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 24, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 263 words

HEADLINE: Scientist calls for debate on treating fetuses' genes; Changes in
heredity could be permanent

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- A genetics pioneer wants to try gene therapy on fetuses in
hopes of curing them of deadly diseases before they're ever born. But first he's
asking scientists and ethicists to debate the experiment -- because it could,
for the first time, alter a person's genes in a way that the changes are passed
on to future generations.

   "We're talking about something that is a radical departure from anything
that's ever happened before in medicine," said Dr. W. French Anderson, who
performed the first gene therapy in 1990 and now hopes to try it on fetuses.
"This is something with profound ethical implications."

   A federal panel of genetics experts begins reviewing Anderson's research
plans this week. He's still two to three years away from the first experiment on
human fetuses. But Anderson requested the unusual early review to force a
national debate on whether society's ready.

   The debate likely will be hot.

   "Society needs to face these problems," said Abbey Meyers of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders, who praises Anderson for tackling the issue.
"No one has talked about it -- what are the long-term implications of changing
genes unalterably for future generations?"

   Anderson wants to inject a healthy gene directly into fetuses during the
second trimester of pregnancy to try curing two rare diseases: ADA, which
renders the body unable to fight even mild infections and is best known as the
"bubble-boy disease"; and alpha thalassemia, a type of anemia that in severe
cases kills the baby inside the womb.

   Pub Date: 9/24/98

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1819 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 24, 1998, Thursday, HOWARD EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL (NEWS), Pg. 10B

LENGTH: 1353 words

HEADLINE: Cord blood used to fight a rare disease; Chronic granulomatous disease
affects one in 1 million persons

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- Six-year-old Derek Kuhs sleeps in his Power Rangers pajamas, a
rag doll in one arm, as Dr. Mitchell Cairo hooks a small bag to the IV tube in
his chest. Slowly, blood drips into Derek's body.

   This is not ordinary blood. It's a bag of special cells taken from the
umbilical cord of a newborn in Barcelona, Spain, that - with a little luck -
could cure the incredibly rare immune disease that threatens to soon kill Derek.

   It's not a dramatic operation. Nobody even clears the toys off his bed. But
it's so unusual that doctors and nurses crowd the glass wall of Derek's sterile
room at Georgetown University Hospital to watch. His mother, grinning but
teary-eyed behind a surgical mask, videotapes the blood's slow drip and then
hugs the doctor who made it happen.

   "It's taken five years of constant effort to keep him alive, and to think
this blood could cure it all," says Gloria Kuhs of Laguna Hills, Calif.

   Derek's is a story of the hope of umbilical cord transplants, how his doctors
and parents took a chance on a highly experimental treatment when there was no
record of anyone with his disease ever having received cord blood - and how
scientists are working to prove the therapy's promise and store enough of the
precious blood for desperate patients.

   Derek has a genetic disorder called chronic granulomatous disease, or CGD. It
strikes just one in 1 million people. His white blood cells lack the protein
they need to produce chemicals that kill bacteria. Any germ can cause a deadly
infection.

   The 3 ounces of blood inside umbilical cords - collected at a baby's birth
and quickly deep-frozen - contain stem cells, the building blocks of blood. The
hope is that these transplanted stem cells will survive in Derek's bone marrow
and produce healthy white blood cells, thus curing his CGD.

   A last resort

   Cord blood transplants have been used as a last resort to treat leukemia and
certain other killers more than 500 times worldwide, said Dr. Paul McCurdy, who
oversees the technology for the National Institutes of Health.

   Sometimes they work, sometimes they don't. Nobody knows what disease is best
treated with cord blood, or the odds of success, because most transplants
haven't been scientifically studied, McCurdy said. Small studies suggest,
however, that cord blood is a good alternative to bone marrow transplants, which
also infuse stem cells.

   The NIH has begun a five-year study at Georgetown and other hospitals to
answer such questions and increase the cord blood available for transplants.
There are millions of potential bone marrow donors but just 25,000 units of
stored cord blood.

   That shortage made Derek even more of a challenge. Cord blood should closely
match the patient's genetic characteristics - a difficult when patient and donor
are not related but made worse because Derek has a rare blood type. A worldwide
search turned up the Barcelona match.

   Why gamble on the transplant?

   A handful of CGD patients have been cured by bone marrow transplants. But
bone marrow appears better at treating cancer than immune diseases, and may be
riskier than cord blood, Cairo says. His parents concluded cord blood was
Derek's best chance.

   Infection strikes

   Derek seemed healthy at birth, but soon suffered unexplained fevers. His
first life-threatening infection struck at 18 months. Fighting it off took six
months. The 11 specialists the Kuhs consulted were baffled.

   A year later, infection almost killed Derek again. This time, Cairo, a
hematologist then at Children's Hospital in Orange County, Calif., was on duty.
He had trained with the world's leading CGD expert, and found the symptoms
unmistakable. "It was a relief to know, because then we could do something about
it," said Gloria Kuhs.

   CGD once killed all its victims. But five years ago, scientists discovered
the drug gamma-interferon helped prevent the worst infections. The drug
apparently helps white blood cells produce bacteria-killing chemicals.

   Gamma-interferon plus powerful antibiotics took Derek out of the hospital. It
wasn't a normal life: A toddler's usual cuts and bumps required immediate
cleansing. The IV tube in his chest meant no swimming. And up to 20 times a day
his mother had to carefully open the tube, risking airborne germs, to infuse
more antibiotics. At school, playmates were warned not to cough on Derek.

   "He's 6, and he knows the names of more antibiotics than you do," sighed his
father, Rick Kuhs.

   "That was the price we paid for as normal a life as we could get," Gloria
Kuhs said. "But he's great at medical management. He doesn't know life any
different."

   5% chance of survival

   The drugs, however, slowly lost their effect. Cairo put Derek's chances of
surviving another two years at just 5 percent.

   A lab worker dons insulated gloves and reaches into a liquid nitrogen tank
keeping the blood, flown from Spain, in a deep freeze. She runs warm water over
the bag, bringing it to body temperature - 98.6 degrees. The cells take two
hours to drip into Derek's body.

   Waiting for surgery, Derek would often race his red Big Wheel down
Georgetown's halls, his mother, running behind with his IV pole. Now after the
transfusion, he lies inside a sterile, specially ventilated room until his
immune system - which doctors have suppressed even more so he won't reject the
blood - can recover.

   His parents must swab videos with alcohol before bringing them in for him to
watch. If his stuffed animals fall on the floor, out they go to be resterilized.
He and his little brother can talk only by videophone. "We want to take them
scuba diving and rock climbing, all the things we could never do," says his
mother, crossing her fingers, red and chapped from scrubbing them every time she
enters Derek's room.

   Umbilical cord blood actually contains few stem cells, so most transplants
have been restricted to small children. Cairo, who used cord blood in an
unsuccessful attempt to save baseball great Rod Carew's daughter from leukemia,
is about to try multiplying the cells to get enough for teen-agers and adults.

   Cord blood shows significant promise: In addition to helping rare diseases,
it might cause fewer complications than bone marrow transplants, and it may aid
gene therapy. So part of Cairo's mission is to get more women to donate their
newborns' cord blood into blood banks.

   How it works

   Blood from a newborn's umbilical cord once was routinely thrown away. Now,
doctors know it contains stem cells, the building blocks of blood that also are
found in bone marrow.

   More than 500 cord blood transplants have occurred worldwide to treat a
variety of diseases, such as leukemia. It's a promising treatment; some doctors
consider it a preferred therapy.

   Private companies often urge expectant mothers to bank their babies' cord
blood in case they need it later in life. But experts say that's an expensive
option that, unless there's already a sick family member, is unlikely to be
needed.

   The National Institutes of Health hopes to encourage mothers to instead
donate their babies' cord blood to banks that distribute it to unrelated, sick
patients just like donated blood. Expectant mothers can ask their doctors to
arrange donation before delivery; collecting the blood does not hurt baby or
mother.

   The NIH is funding Georgetown University, Duke University and the University
of California, Los Angeles, to quickly collect 15,000 units of donated cord
blood for studies to determine which diseases and which patients it best helps.
Most transplants so far have not been part of scientific studies on how best to
use cord blood.

   Among scientists' questions:

   * Can patients successfully receive genetically mismatcheed cord blood
transplants something not possible with bone marrow with less risk of a
life-threatening complication called graft vs. host disease?

   * Would some patients do better with bone marrow than cord blood? Leukemia
patients who survive graft vs. host disease, where transplanted cells attack the
patients' own cells, may have less risk of cancer recurring.

   Pub Date: 9/24/98

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1820 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 24, 1998, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

HEADLINE: USC DOCTOR PROPOSES GENE THERAPY IN WOMB;
 MEDICINE: RESEARCHER SAYS HE WANTS 'PUBLIC DEBATE' ON THE UNTRIED TECHNIQUE.
HIS PLAN TARGETS TWO DISEASES.

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   A pioneering USC research physician today will publicly present bold
proposals to conduct the first gene therapy experiments in the womb, opening a
risky and controversial new chapter in human genetic engineering.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, who in 1990 did the first gene therapy experiments on
a human being, is considering using two different DNA-splicing techniques,
perhaps within a few years, to attempt to cure two inherited genetic diseases in
fetuses.

   He and his scientific co-workers are scheduled to discuss--and defend--their
preliminary plans at landmark meetings today and Friday at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Experimental gene therapy, which involves inserting a functioning gene into
the DNA of a patient to replace a missing or defective one, has been performed
on about 2,000 adults and children. But scientists, physicians and ethics
specialists have balked at permitting the technology to be applied before birth
because of unprecedented questions and concerns.

   Theoretically, the procedures to treat the two conditions--ADA deficiency
disease and alpha-thalessemia--could relieve a great deal of misery if
successful, but they also raise the specter of "partially" cured babies with
profound defects who would not have otherwise been born.

   And it hints at a new frontier where people are outfitted with engineered
genes that affect not only them but their descendants, maybe for generations to
come.

   Anderson, director of the gene therapy laboratories at the USC School of
Medicine, said he is airing these "pre-proposals" precisely to spur discussion.
"What I really wanted was to have a public debate about this," he said in an
interview. "We have to take into account all the risks and benefits" before
proceeding.

   In some ways, the medical debate has been shaped by abortion politics. For
one thing, the federal prohibition against research on embryos has hampered
understanding of the precise steps in fetal development that could be vital to
effective insertion of genes in the womb. Anderson said that this area of his
team's research, which has focused thus far on animals, has been funded entirely
by private donations to USC.

   Also, antiabortion sentiment might highlight gene therapy in the womb as an
alternative to abortion for coping with a confirmed prenatal genetic defect,
said Dr. Jon Gordon, a reproductive biologist and medical geneticist at Mt.
Sinai School of Medicine.

   But Gordon, who is a member of the NIH recombinant DNA advisory committee
that is reviewing the proposals, said abortion will probably for a long time
remain a preferred option for a woman known to be carrying a fetus with a
genetic defect. Better to end a troubled pregnancy and hope for a normal,
subsequent one, he said.

   The two procedures that Anderson is proposing would be applied after prenatal
genetic testing confirms a gene defect in the fetus. Beyond that, the techniques
differ radically--and thus elicit different reactions from medical experts.

   The one that raises the most profound questions entails injecting genetic
material directly into the tissues of a developing fetus. It is intended to
alleviate a rare disorder called ADA deficiency disease, so named because the
patient lacks the gene for a crucial enzyme called ADA.

   That can result in an immune system deficiency so profound that a child must
live in an antiseptic plastic bubble to prevent deadly infections. It was this
disorder that Anderson and co-workers first treated with gene therapy--achieving
only limited success-- in a young girl eight years ago.

   To treat it in the womb, Anderson and co-workers propose injecting a stretch
of DNA containing the gene for the ADA enzyme into the fetus early in the second
trimester of pregnancy. In theory, the researchers say, the foreign genetic
material will induce many fast-dividing fetal cells to take up the gene,
endowing the future child to overcome its inherited deficiency.

   But that raises the possibility, as Anderson and other researchers say, of
inserting some of the engineered gene into those fetal cells that give rise to
sperm or eggs, enabling the artificial gene to be passed along to the patient's
descendants.

   Although some experts argue that altering human genes for posterity would be
beneficial, most oppose doing so on principle. "I don't think our generation has
the right to be putting human DNA into the gene pool until we really know it's
not going to have a bad effect," said Dr. Donald Kohn, a medical geneticist at
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   The Council for Responsible Genetics, a watchdog group, criticized the new
proposals as "ominous" and a step toward a pernicious use of prenatal genetic
engineering to create "designer babies."

   "If this first proposal is accepted," it said in a statement, "how much
longer will it be before . . . any child who doesn't measure up to some
arbitrary standard of health, behavior or physique is seen as flawed?"

   Other medical experts argue against this procedure on the grounds that it is
unnecessary, given that other therapies, including postnatal bone marrow
transplantation, are available.

   Dr. M. Louise Markert, a pediatric immunologist at Duke University and a
member of the NIH panel reviewing the proposal, cited the availability of a
known, effective therapy as a reason to consider another disease as a candidate
for the first prenatal gene therapy.

   In the other experimental procedure under consideration, the researchers
would target the disorder called alpha-thalessemia, which results in
miscarriages because the fetus cannot develop the vital blood protein
hemoglobin.

   To treat that problem, the researchers propose removing cells from the fetus
in the first 20 weeks, adding the missing gene to those cells, and planting them
back into the fetus. The newly endowed cells would theoretically multiply and
perhaps compensate for the disease. This procedure does not appear likely to
cause genetic alterations that could pass down the generations.

   Among the concerns voiced about this approach is the prospect of "partial"
success--a risk Anderson acknowledges. "The worst thing that could happen would
be to help these fetuses to be born alive but with serious anomalies," he said.

   Several members of the NIH genetics engineering committee who have reviewed
the proposals said that much further research on animals is necessary to address
the outstanding questions before such proposals could be formally submitted.

   "What comes through loud and clear from the scientists is that it would be
premature to initiate these experiments because there is not enough adequate
animal data," said Ruth Macklin, a medical ethics professor at the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1998


                             1821 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       September 24, 1998 Thursday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 6

LENGTH: 260 words

HEADLINE: Researcher makes proposal for genetic therapy in womb
 Plan for DNA splicing targets genetic diseases but raises ethical issues

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: Los
Angeles

BODY:

   A pioneering University of Southern California research physician will
publicly present bold proposals today to conduct the first gene therapy
experiments in the womb, opening a risky and controversial chapter in human
genetic engin eering.

   W. French Anderson, who in 1990 performed the first gene therapy experiments
on a human being, is considering using two different DNA-splicing techniques,
perhaps within a few years, to attempt to cure two inherited genetic diseas es
in fetuses.

   He and his scientific co-workers are scheduled to discuss and defend their
preliminary plans at landmark meetings today and Friday at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Experimental gene therapy, whic h involves inserting a functioning gene into
the DNA of a patient to replace a missing or defective one, has been performed
on about 2,000 adults and children. Yet scientists, physicians and ethics
specialists have balked at permitting the technolo gy to be applied before birth
because of unprecedented questions and concerns.

   Theoretically, the procedure could relieve a great deal of misery if
successful, although it also raises the specter of "partially" cured babies with
profound defects who would not have otherwise been born.

   And it hints at a new frontier in which people are outfitted with engineered
genes that affect not only them but their descendants, maybe for generations.

   Anderson, director of t he gene therapy laboratories at the USC medical
school, said he is airing these "pre-proposals" to spur discussion.


LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1822 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1998 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1324 words

HEADLINE: FACULTY LOSING JOBS AT ALLEGHENY / PROFESSORS DENOUNCE THE CUTBACKS

BYLINE: Andrea Gerlin and Karl Stark, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Some professors at Allegheny University of the Health Sciences have been told
by their department heads in the last week that they are likely to be out of
jobs as a result of the university's planned reorganization.

   University leaders confirmed this week that professors would be let go,
although it is unclear exactly when.

   Donald Faber, chairman of neurobiology and anatomy and president of the
Committee for the University, estimated that up to 25 of the 160 tenured faculty
and an unspecified number of non-tenured faculty would lose their jobs as the
university seeks to reorganize and emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.

   MCP-Hahnemann School of Medicine dean Barbara Atkinson said: "Ultimately
there will be more [than 25 losses]. I think we're in the process of putting
those lists together."

   The looming cuts come to light as university leaders work to complete a
budget and reorganization plan to submit to U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Pittsburgh.
Some faculty and students fear that an inferior institution will be the result.

   "The model they're working on is a Caribbean medical school," said Haggai
Rottenberg, a tenured professor of pathology and biochemistry, in reference to
the offshore medical schools that are widely viewed by their American
counterparts as skimping on resources.

   Rottenberg, a full professor at the university for 17 years, was told on
Friday that his job is at stake.

   The prospect of job cuts is already splintering the university community.
About 25 professors held an emergency meeting yesterday, at which they denounced
the cuts and discussed how they could protect their jobs - but they ultimately
failed to reach a consensus on taking action.

   "We knew there would be changes, but thought everything would be done with
due process," Rottenberg said. "It turns out now that that is not the case."

   Faber said the elected Committee for the University, which represents
faculty, students and staff, had agreed to advise the university board to follow
its by-laws in making decisions about tenure, though he stressed the court could
act otherwise. The by-laws provide for tenured faculty to be terminated due to
cause, programmatic changes or financial exigency.

   "We are in financial exigency, and we have to make programmatic adjustments,"
Faber said.

   He said affected faculty would receive at least one year's notice after being
given "clear criteria for evaluation." However, some faculty members said they
had been told they would not have jobs in two months.

   About 800 non-tenured faculty were sent letters of non-reappointment on June
30, in which they were told they would be notified by Sept. 30 about whether
they would continue to be employed after June 1999.

   The university probably won't file its reorganization plan with the court by
Tuesday, as planned, when eight of Allegheny's Philadelphia-area hospitals are
scheduled to be auctioned by the court. Instead, Faber said the university would
probably wait until after the results of the hospital auction are known.

   The university comprises the medical school and schools of health
professions, public health and nursing. The Allegheny system sought protection
under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in July, listing $1.3 billion in
liabilities owed to as many as 80,000 creditors.

   Rottenberg and four professors in the pathology department were told on
Friday by chairman James England that their jobs were in jeopardy.

   "In pathology, five of eight researchers have been zero-budgeted," said Jerry
Schwaber, a tenured associate professor who has spent eight years in the
department. "I'm not included in the budget."

   Three other non-tenured faculty who were told their jobs would be cut said
they were vulnerable because they are between grants. One of them, associate
professor Brian Balin, said that his lab had been promised a "significant" grant
for its research into the cause of Alzheimer's disease from drug-maker Eli Lilly
& Co., but that Lilly backed away when it learned about Allegheny's financial
problems.

   "We as researchers didn't put ourselves in this position," Balin said.

   Among those who also learned that their jobs are in jeopardy was Jeffrey E.
Fletcher, a tenured anesthesiology professor who has more than 120 published
articles to his credit.

   "I'm basically closing my office at this time," Fletcher said. "I sat down
with my chairman and was told that basic research will no longer be a component
of our department."

   Several researchers said the planned cuts appeared to target basic scientists
within departments that treat patients. Rottenberg said he believes that
Allegheny only wants to keep enough of the scientists to remain accredited.

   Atkinson said the cuts were difficult but necessary to maintain the
university, which lost an estimated $25 million last year. She said department
chairmen decided which jobs to eliminate.

   But she denied that the cuts would jeopardize the university's commitment to
research. A recent budget proposal forecasts that the university will have $52
million in annual research grants, placing the school in the top half of U.S
medical schools, Atkinson said.

   The Liaison Committee on Medical Education, a national group that accredits
medical schools, visited Allegheny's medical school this month to review its
status. The committee is to meet Oct. 11 and 12 to decide whether to continue
Allegheny's accreditation.

   Atkinson told several hundred students yesterday that she did not expect the
Liaison Committee to withdraw Allegheny's accreditation. "They might put us on
probation because of our financial situation but not because of our educational
status," she said.

   A group of students in Allegheny's M.D.-Ph.D. program, which fully funds
their education, yesterday questioned whether they would receive good educations
in basic science and research if their professors are fired or leave.

   "When we first came into this school, there was quality education," said John
Po, one of the students. "Post-bankruptcy, are we still going to have the same
quality of education we had when we first came into the program?"

   Jason Halegoua, another student, said half of the faculty on his dissertation
committee were told their jobs would be gone, which would disrupt his work.
"Labs are being cleared out, and researchers are being fired," he said.

   Carla DiGirolamo, who said she passed up a similar offer to go to the
University of Massachusetts five years ago, said the only reason she didn't
regret coming to Allegheny was that she has had the chance to work with
internationally known geneticist Darwin Prockop at the Center for Gene Therapy.
The Inquirer reported on Sunday that $310,000 of a $360,000 diabetes research
grant to Prockop was among funds taken by Allegheny administrators earlier this
year. University insiders worry that Prockop will leave.

   That could put students such as DiGirolamo in a difficult position. They
might be obligated to repay the six-figure cost of their educations if they
follow their professors to other institutions and don't complete Allegheny's
degree programs.

   The faculty members who met yesterday considered Rottenberg's suggestion that
they retain a bankruptcy lawyer to protect their rights at an initial cost of
$10,000. After lengthy debate, only six voted to support the measure.

   The group reserved some of its harshest comments for the Committee for the
University, which includes about 35 elected students, faculty and staff who are
working with the administration to devise a plan to enable the university to
emerge from bankruptcy as an independent, free-standing institution.

   "We made the assumption when we elected the Committee for the University that
they would protect the interests of the faculty," Rottenberg said. "The
committee has elected to ally itself so closely with the administration of the
university."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Allegheny University associate professor Brian Balin (left) and colleagues Todd
Abrams and Denah Appelt have been told their research jobs will be cut. Balin
said they were vulnerable because their research laboratory had lost a
"significant" grant. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, APRIL SAUL)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1823 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                  September 24, 1998, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHER PLANS TO EXPERIMENT GENE THERAPY IN WOMB

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:


   A pioneering University of Southern California research physician today will
publicly present bold proposals to conduct the first gene therapy experiments in
the womb, opening a risky and controversial new chapter in human genetic
engineering.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, who in 1990 did the first gene therapy experiments on
a human being, is considering using two different DNA-splicing techniques,
perhaps within a few years, to attempt to cure two inherited genetic diseases in
fetuses.

   He and his scientific co-workers are scheduled to discuss - and defend their
preliminary plans at landmark meetings today and tomorrow at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Experimental gene therapy, which involves inserting a functioning gene into
the DNA of a patient to replace a missing or defective one, has been performed
on about 2,000 adults and children. But scientists, physicians and ethics
specialists have balked at permitting the technology to be applied before birth
because of unprecedented questions and concerns.

   Theoretically, the procedure could relieve a great deal of misery if
successful, but it also raises the specter of ''partially'' cured babies with
profound defects who would not have otherwise been born.

   And it hints at a new frontier where people are outfitted with engineered
genes that affect not only them but their descendants, maybe for generations to
come.

   Anderson, director of the gene therapy laboratories at the USC School of
Medicine, said he is airing these ''pre-proprosals'' precisely to spur
discussion. ''What I really wanted was to have a public debate about this,'' he
said in an interview. ''We have to take into account all the risks and
benefits'' before proceeding.

   The two procedures that Anderson is proposing would be applied after prenatal
genetic testing confirmed a gene defect in the fetus. Beyond that, the
techniques differ radically - and thus elicit different reactions from medical
experts.

   The one that raises the most profound questions entails injecting genetic
material directly into the tissues of a developing fetus. It is intended to
alleviate a rare disorder called ADA deficiency disease, so named because the
patient lacks the gene for a crucial enzyme called ADA.

   That can result in an immune system deficiency so profound that a child must
live in an antiseptic plastic bubble to prevent deadly infections. It was this
disorder that Anderson and co-workers first attempted to treat with gene therapy
in a young girl eight years ago.

   To treat it in the womb, Anderson and co-workers propose injecting a stretch
of DNA containing the gene for the ADA enzyme into the fetus early in the second
trimester of pregnancy. In theory, the researchers say, the foreign genetic
material will induce many fast-dividing fetal cells to take up the gene,
endowing the future child to overcome its inherited deficiency.

   But that also raises the possibility, as Anderson and other researchers say,
of inserting some of the engineered gene into those fetal cells that give rise
to sperm or eggs, enabling the artificial gene to be passed along to the
patient's descendants.

   Although some experts argue that altering human genes for posterity would be
beneficial, most oppose doing so on principle.

   In the other experimental procedure under consideration, the researchers
would target the disorder called alpha-thalessemia, which results in
miscarriages because the fetus cannot develop the vital blood protein
hemoglobin.

   To treat that problem, the researchers propose removing cells from the fetus
in the first 20 weeks, adding the missing gene to those cells, and planting them
back into the fetus. The newly endowed cells would theoretically multiply and
perhaps compensate for the disease.

   Among the concerns voiced about this approach is the prospect of ''partial''
success - a risk Anderson acknowledges. ''The worst thing that could happen
would be to help these fetuses to be born alive but with serious anomalies,'' he
said.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1998


                             1824 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 24, 1998 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: PROPOSAL EXPECTED FOR THE FIRST GENE THERAPY IN WOMB

BYLINE: By TERENCE MONMANEY; LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   A pioneering University of Southern California research physician yesterday
will publicly present bold proposals to conduct the first gene therapy
experiments in the womb, opening a risky and controversial new chapter in human
genetic engineering.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, who in 1990 did the first gene therapy experiments on
a human being, is considering using two different DNA-splicing techniques,
perhaps within a few years, to attempt to cure two inherited genetic diseases in
fetuses.

   He and his scientific co-workers are scheduled to discuss - and defend -
their preliminary plans at landmark meetings today and tomorrow at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Experimental gene therapy, which involves inserting a functioning gene into
the DNA of a patient to replace a missing or defective one, has been performed
on about 2,000 adults and children. But scientists, physicians and ethics
specialists have balked at permitting the technology to be applied before birth
because of unprecedented questions and concerns.

   Theoretically, the procedure could relieve a great deal of misery if
successful, but it also raises the specter of "partially" cured babies with
profound defects who would not have otherwise been born.

   And it hints at a new frontier where people are outfitted with engineered
genes that affect them and their descendants.

   Anderson, director of the gene therapy laboratories at the USC School of
Medicine, said he was airing these "pre-proprosals" precisely to spur
discussion. "What I really wanted was to have a public debate about this," he
said in an interview.

   The two procedures that Anderson is proposing would be applied after prenatal
genetic testing confirmed a gene defect in the fetus.

   The one that raises the most profound questions entails injecting genetic
material into the tissues of a developing fetus. It is intended to alleviate a
rare disorder called ADA deficiency disease, which can cause an immune system
deficiency so profound that a child must live in an antiseptic plastic bubble to
prevent deadly infections.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1998


                             1825 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                           September 21, 1998, Monday

SECTION: Health & Fitness; Pg.  31

LENGTH: 921 words

HEADLINE: A DOSE OF DNA: GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By SUSAN FERRARO Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:


   This is the second in a Daily News series on New York's leading medical
researchers the scientists who are working on the cures of tomorrow.

   "You can talk about prevention of disease by genetic screening until your
face turns blue," says Dr. Savio Woo, who specializes in the molecules of human
genes. "The problem is, what do you do with patients who manifest disease at
this moment?"

   Woo thinks genes can do more than tell people whether they are at high risk
for disease. He thinks that one day, a full understanding of the most basic cell
mechanisms will cure many common illnesses from cancer and diabetes to heart
disease.

   His therapy for colon cancer that migrates to the liver is in preliminary
trials on humans done to make sure that a technique is safe before doctors test
to see if it works.

   Woo starts with viruses infectious organisms that are adept at invading human
cells. "Viruses have co-evolved with us," he says. "Transferring their genetic
material into our cells is how they survive. They do it very efficiently."

   Woo uses different viruses, including one that triggers the common cold.

   First, he and his 12-person lab team strip viruses of harmful elements. Then
they load them with better genes material from healthy genes available to
researchers as a result of earlier studies. Finally, the team injects them as
"vectors" what Woo calls "transfer vehicles" that ferry the improved genes into
the cells.

   If they perfect the technique, they will be able to use it "to treat a whole
bunch of genetic diseases," Woo says. He works with mice, rats even a group of
hemophiliac dogs in North Carolina to test basic approaches to cancer, diabetes
and hemophilia.

   In the dog study, Woo has put a gene that encodes a blood clotting factor
into the livers of hemophiliac canines. As a result, the dogs are "making a
sufficient level of clotting factor, which has partially corrected [their
disease] for over four years," Woo says. Though one animal's treatment has been
especially successful, the dog is notably ungrateful "The dog doesn't like me,"
the genial scientist says, with a laugh. But the animal "is looking very smart,
very good." Woo's next step is to make the treatment last longer.

   With diabetes, Woo is doing something different. "If patients have diabetes
because they lack the ability to produce insulin from the pancreas, why not
deliver the insulin gene to other organs, to help the patient produce insulin?"
he says. Because too much insulin can be deadly, "We need to produce a way to
regulate it, too."

   Gene therapy for cancer is more complicated, Woo says, because there are so
many kinds of the disease. His innovative approach works well in animals that
have cancer of the colon, breast, brain and ovary: He delivers toxin genes that
make tumor cells sensitive to usually ineffective drugs.

   "The [genes] don't hurt the healthy tissues, and they kill the bad ones a
different way of doing chemotherapy," Woo says. "We ask the cells politely to
commit suicide."

   Though the method buys time for patients, the cancers recur. And "the suicide
gene is not very effective with metastasis," Woo says. "So the idea is, why not
deliver, along with the suicide gene, some genes that will take the immune
system into action?"

   When the initial trial is complete on the suicide gene, "We want to do Phase
1 studies on the combination approach hopefully, later this year."

   The possibilities seem endless. "Can we deliver a gene or two to correct or
alleviate symptoms?" the scientist wonders. "Let's say a patient has heart
disease can we deliver a gene to a patient, so we can help the patient get rid
of [high] blood cholesterol? Why not?"

   According to Dr. Michael Blaese, at the Human Genome Research Project in
Bethesda, Md., Woo strives to "apply fundamental science" to the treatment of
various human diseases. "What they are doing is very hard, and it is also very
early in the process of trying to use the tools that genetic engineering has
given us. It is sort of like Christmas morning, and you tear the paper off the
package and there is this wonderful shiny thing and you don't know what to do,
but it sure looks great."

   Woo was born in China but studied medicine in the United States. He spent 20
years at Houston's Baylor University before coming to Mount Sinai in 1996.

   In his free time, Woo enjoys museums and the city's cultural opportunities.
But he spends hours trying to secure financing for his research. Most of the
money, including his salary, comes from the National Institutes of Health.

   For Woo, research is a process. In 1983, he cloned the human genome for PKU,
a genetic disorder that leads to retardation. Today he has developed PKU mice,
"and we have been delivering the normal gene into the livers of these mice, and
we can correct the PKU [problem]," Woo says. "But we need a more efficient
vector because it works only temporarily."

   So now, in addition to everything else, he is working on ways to make better
vectors.

   SIDEBAR:

   THE HUMAN NUMBERS

   An estimated 16 million Americans have Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes, 5.4 million
of whom don't know it, according to the Joslin Diabetes Center; 5% to 10% have
Type 1 diabetes, formerly known as early onset or juvenile diabetes.

   564,800 people will die of some form of cancer in 1998, says the American
Cancer Society; it is the No. 2 cause of death in the U.S.

   16,959 Americans have a form of hemophilia, according to the Centers for
Disease Control.


GRAPHIC: COREY SIPKIN DAILY NEWS DR. SAVIO WOO, Director, Mount Sinai Institute
for Gene Therapy and Molecular Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Interest: The delivery of new genes to tissue to correct disease

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1998


                             1826 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 21, 1998 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 987 words

HEADLINE: WHAT'S NEW IN RESEARCH ON BLOOD PRESSURE / ONE GROUP REPORTED ON AN
ATTEMPT TO PREVENT STROKE WITH GENE THERAPY.

BYLINE: Stacey Burling, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   As blood pressure experts from around the country convened in Philadelphia
last week, the topics ranged from Vitamin C to gene therapy, from prevention to
treatment.

   While there were no ground-shaking breakthroughs announced, the conference of
the American Heart Association's Council for High Blood Pressure Research
yielded some interesting new work.

   Two groups of researchers examined the role of ANP - atrial natriuretic
peptide - in stroke. ANP is a powerful hormone produced in the upper chambers of
the heart. It helps to lower blood pressure - high blood pressure is a major
risk factor for stroke and heart disease - by causing blood vessels to widen and
helping the body to get rid of excess salt.

   At Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, researchers used gene
therapy to deliver a gene for producing ANP to rats with high blood pressure.
This was the first known attempt to prevent stroke with gene therapy, said Lee
Chao, a biochemist involved in the study.

   Two weeks after the therapy, the rats' blood pressure had dropped by about 15
percent. Three weeks after the experiment began, more than half the rats who had
not gotten the gene therapy had died of stroke, compared with only 16 percent of
the treated group. The treated rats who did have strokes seemed to have milder
ones. Within about a month of the treatment, however, the rats' immune systems
had cleared away most of the virus used to deliver the ANP genes and the therapy
stopped working.

   The South Carolina group is working to find a virus that can survive longer
in the body. "We are very confident that in the near future, the effective
period can be significantly lengthened," Chao said.

   In another study, led by Klaus Lindpaintner of Brigham and Women's Hospital
in Boston, researchers found a mutation of the ANP gene that appears to double
the risk of stroke in humans. Ultimately, this may help identify people who are
at high risk for stroke and target them for lifestyle changes or other medical
treatment, Lindpaintner said.

   Suzanne Oparil, a former president of the American Heart Association who
participated in a panel discussion with Lindpaintner, said many doctors have
found it frustrating to talk to patients about high blood pressure and stroke.
"Physicians get tired of delivering a message that gets ignored," she said. If
knowledge about a patient's genes could allow a doctor to say, "You have a 90
percent chance of dying in 10 years because of this gene," she said, that
patient might be more willing to lose weight, exercise and cut back on salt.

   Other notable research findings include:

   * African American teenagers in Virginia were able to lower their nighttime
blood pressures by eating foods rich in potassium, perhaps lowering their
chances of developing high blood pressure as adults. The teenagers who responded
most to the diet were salt sensitive - meaning their blood pressure rose when
they ate salty foods - and "non dippers," meaning their blood pressure does not
dip by the normal 10 percent each night. Both salt sensitivity and non dipping
increase the risk of developing high blood pressure. The study is proof that
relatively simple diet changes may be a way to prevent high blood pressure, said
lead researcher Dawn Wilson, a health psychologist at Virginia Commonwealth
University's Medical College of Virginia. Teens in the study were asked to eat
six to eight potassium-rich foods each day. Those include many fruits and
vegetables, nuts, raisins, milk and yogurt and tomato-based foods such as
spaghetti sauce.

   A related study, to be released today in the journal Circulation, looked at
the relationship between a high-potassium diet and the risk of stroke in adults.

   * Eating more foods high in phytoestrogens - natural estrogen-like compounds
found in soy products, beans, lentils and cereals, including wheat, rice and
bran - may help protect men and women from high blood pressure and heart
disease, according to a study by Raghvendra Dubey, a biochemist who works at
both the University of Pittsburgh and University Hospital in Zurich. In
laboratory work involving blood vessel cells, he found that phytoestrogens
extracted from soy products inhibit the abnormal growth of cells that line blood
vessels. These can build up and block blood flow. Unlike the estrogen
supplements used by many postmenopausal women, phytoestrogens do not appear to
have cancer-causing side effects in women or feminizing effects in men, Dubey
said, although more study on their precise impact on the body is needed.
Scientists became interested in phytoestrogens, he said, after noticing that
cardiovascular diseases, some types of cancer and the hot flashes associated
with menopause were less common in Asian countries where the diet typically is
high in foods containing these compounds.

   * Blood pressure and heart rates drop significantly within just one week of
stopping smoking, Japanese researchers reported.

   * Vitamin C helps blood vessels dilate, or widen, according to Italian
researchers. People with high blood pressure often have blood vessels that do
not relax as much as those of normal people, but Vitamin C helped their blood
vessels respond more normally.

   * The sympathetic nervous system - the part of the nervous system that
regulates heart rate and blood vessel tone - appears to play a greater role in
high blood pressure among obese people than among those who are thin, according
to research by Marion Wofford, an internist at the University of Mississippi
Medical Center. When given drugs that block the sympathetic nervous system,
obese, hypertensive patients had a bigger drop in blood pressure than thin
patients who also had high blood pressure. The research, Wofford said, is "one
way to unravel the mechanisms of hypertension in obese people." It was not
intended to determine what types of medicine people should be given, she said.

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1827 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 21, 1998, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-12

LENGTH: 952 words

HEADLINE: PITT RESEARCHER PROPOSES AIDS VACCINE USING ALTERED HIV

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Fear is often spelled with three letters: HIV. While many infected people
have staved off the ravages of human immunodeficiency virus with a three-drug
cocktail, experts say that effective vaccines are the only hope of putting their
fear to rest..

   But vaccine invention is complicated the need to give enough of the virus to
stimulate an immune response, but not so much that the vaccine itself puts
people at risk for AIDS.

   A local researcher has come up with a potential HIV vaccine that may lie at
the edge of that precipice.

   In doing so, he worked with an idea that is being touted in gene therapy
circles. Researchers have been studying highly altered versions of HIV with an
eye toward using them to deliver beneficial genes into cells. This might enable
them to treat genetic diseases, thus turning the virus from deadly to
life-saving.

   Now Dr. Frank Tung of the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public
Health proposes using these altered viruses, called replication-defective HIV,
as a possible vaccine against HIV. In this month's issue of the journal AIDS
Research and Human Retroviruses, he became the first scientist to publish
findings on creating and testing HIV vaccines based on these viruses

   Although the experiments are in the early stages, the proposed vaccine has
the potential to not only mount a strong attack against HIV, but also minimize
the risk of the vaccine itself causing the disease.

   An HIV vaccine now being tested in humans, called AIDSvax, uses viral
proteins, instead of the virus, to create targets for the body's
disease-fighting immune system. The vaccination should cause immune system cells
called B-cells to generate antibodies that are able to recognize HIV proteins as
foreign and neutralize the virus before it enters cells.

   Other proposed vaccines use a live, attenuated virus, which multiplies in the
body and incites a stronger immune response against HIV. Not only can it
generate antibodies, it also can stimulate cell-mediated immunity, a strategy
that allows the body's T-cells to recognize other cells that have been infected
by the virus and kill them.

   However, it is feared that over time such a modified virus will replicate or
mutate to the point that it could cause disease, despite the changes that have
been engineered for the vaccine.

   A study from the Harvard School of Medicine, reported this summer at the
World AIDS Conference in Geneva, found that of 15 monkeys that received an
attenuated-virus vaccine, four later became ill or died of simian AIDS. Still,
more than 300 members of the International Association of Physicians in AIDS
Care said they were still willing to act as guinea pigs to test the vaccine.

   ''To address those safety issues,'' Tung said, ''I designed this
replication-defective vaccine, hopefully to do the same job as a vaccine but not
cause any safety risk.''

   The virus Tung engineered can stimulate both B-cell and T-cell immune
responses but has no genes for multiplication, so theoretically it cannot cause
disease. He also attached parts of another virus, which usually infects cows, to
the modified HIV. This would allow the vaccine virus to infect cells of
different animals, making possible more extensive animal testing of the vaccine
prior to human studies.

   Replication-defective HIV was created by gene therapy researchers who were
hoping to create a safe version that could be used as a vector, an agent that
carries genes into cells.

   Many viruses have been considered as vectors. Most are able to get genetic
material into the chromosome, but only in cells that are replicating. So in
order to do a gene transfer, researchers have to extract cells, treat them to
make them multiply, infect them with a virus and the gene it carries, and then
deliver them back to the animal.

   ''This is not efficient,'' said Dr. Tal Kafri, a researcher at the Salk
Institute of Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif.

HIV, however, has the ability to infect cells in the body that rarely divide,
such as nerve, liver or muscle cells. While a few other viruses can also
accomplish this in-body transaction with non-dividing cells, HIV provides
another advantage: It can transport larger genes than other vectors can.

   ''It actually goes in and the virus becomes part of the chromosome, so that
cell has the virus for the rest of its life,'' said Paul Robbins, a Pitt
professor of molecular genetics and biochemistry.

   Discussions with federal agencies are already under way to get permission to
use replication-defective HIV as a vector.

   Kafri and his colleagues have done extensive lab and animal experiments with
an HIV-based vector that has been modified so much that it won't ever cause
disease, he said.

   The changes also make the vector less able to stimulate a significant immune
response to the naturally occurring virus, so it would not likely be good HIV
vaccine.

   Robbins said replication-defective HIV is likely to be used first as a vector
for treating genetic diseases, not as HIV vaccines.

   ''This is all theory now. Until these go into the clinic and are tested, who
knows what will be seen,'' he said. ''But all the safety studies so far look
promising.''

   Using the replication-defective HIV as a vaccine for humans is a long way
off. Lab and mouse experiments suggest Tung's candidate can make the immune
system target HIV.

   Monkey studies of the vaccine began recently. The monkeys are given a vaccine
based on simian immunodeficiency virus and then given a dose of SIV.

   Because monkeys can take six to 18 months to develop disease, it will likely
take some time to see results of the vaccination, and even longer before it can
be tested in humans.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Steve
Thomas/Post-Gazette: (Fighting HIV with; HIV)

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1998


                             1828 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       September 21, 1998, Monday , METRO

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1, Part D

LENGTH: 1788 words

HEADLINE: Tracking the 'silent killer' Among gynecological diseases, ovarian
cancer is a deadly enigma, but there's room for optimism

BYLINE: Marina Pisano; Express-News Staff Writer

BODY: The scary thing is, you can feel perfectly fine.

   "You can work. You can pick up the kids. You can fix dinner. You can feel
great, and you have no idea you're in very big trouble," recounts cancer
survivor Judy Palans. "Ovarian cancer is a silent killer."

   Cancers of the lung, breast, colon and pancreas affect more people and take
the lives of more American women every year. But for many, ovarian cancer is
most frightening because it is so insidious - and because there is no routine
screening test. Annual Pap smear tests, so effective in detecting cervical
cancer, don't catch it.

   Only about one-fourth of ovarian cancer cases are diagnosed in Stage I, when
the five-year survival rate is almost 93 percent. More often, by the time a
woman goes to the doctor with symptoms, the cancer is in a later stage - III or
IV - having spread beyond the ovary into the abdomen and other organs.

   In short, ovarian is the most malignant, most deadly of all gynecological
cancers. Cancer specialists say three-fourths of the women diagnosed with
distant spread of ovarian cancer don't survive five years.

   Youth offers some protection but no guarantee.

   The risk for ovarian cancer is far greater for postmenopausal women such as
Palans. But Amanda Ballew was diagnosed with Stage III-C at 18, soon after
graduating from Judson High School in 1995.

   "It was a big shock," she recalls. "You don't think of something like that
happening to you when you're young."

   Still, even with the very real fear, interviews with survivors and local and
national cancer specialists and researchers reveal at least three reasons to
feel more hopeful about this "silent killer":

   - The growing activism of ovarian cancer organizations and survivors

   - Improved treatments affecting quality of life and longer survival for those
with late-stage cancers

   - Research into earlier detection methods and other advances

   The power of well-organized and highly vocal breast cancer advocates to
command legislative attention and gain research dollars hasn't been lost on
women with ovarian cancer.

   The Ovarian Cancer National Alliance, based in Washington, was formed last
fall, creating an umbrella organization aimed at increasing visibility and
clout.

   The alliance is working to shape public policy, arranging the first- ever
congressional briefing on ovarian cancer. It claims to have increased research
funding for the disease by $2.5 million. Members have testified at the National
Institutes of Health and the President's Cancer Panel.

   Another organization, the grass- roots National Ovarian Cancer Coalition,
formed in 1995 and headquartered in Florida, is uniting regional groups and
disseminating information. NOCC is setting up chapters in every state.

   Borrowing a page from breast cancer groups, advocates are promoting the first
designated Ovarian Cancer Awareness Month with public-information announcements
and educational materials.

   Ovarian cancer survivors from San Antonio will join other cancer experts and
survivors in the March on Washington, "Coming Together to Conquer Cancer," on
Saturday.

   With growing activism, some long-silent resentment has surfaced.

   "We get what falls on the laboratory floor from breast cancer research,"
Palans reports a survivor- friend saying.

   But the activist downplays any competition for National Cancer Institute
research dollars.

   "We're not asking for a bigger piece of the pie. We want a bigger pie for
everybody," Palans says.

   "Ovarian Cancer: It whispers. So listen," is this month's theme. Women such
as Palans and Cindy Melancon - a Stage III-C survivor whose newsletter,
Conversations, has widened its audience from 10 women in 1992 to 2,200
subscribers in seven countries today - are speaking out for greater awareness of
those early symptoms that women may not heed.

   Certainly, the signals were vague for Palans. Six years ago, she had some
rapid, unexplained weight gain around her waist. There were some bowel changes,
and there may have been frequent urination. Aches?

   "I don't remember," replies the mother of two sons and grandmother of three.
"I was one of those persons who just didn't do a morning rundown of aches. You
just go on about your business."

   For middle-age women, a few extra aches, pains and pounds aren't likely to
sound loud alarm bells.

   In 1987, Palans had undergone a prophylactic double mastectomy after
precancerous tissue was found in her breast. But she felt fine by 1992, and just
months before her ovarian cancer was found, her regular semi-annual pelvic
examination revealed no problems.

   As she remembers, "I went from detecting nothing to Stage IV in 51/2 months."



   In Stage IV, the most advanced stage, the cancer has metastasized or spread
beyond the ovaries to the liver, lungs or other organs outside the peritoneal
cavity.

   "When they (surgeons) got in there, they had to remove eight inches of colon,
a piece of the bladder, the ovaries, the (fallopian) tubes, some pelvic lymph
nodes and the (abdominal) fluid," says Palans, who had undergone a partial
hysterectomy a few years before the ovarian surgery.

   In Ballew's case, the then-high school senior felt something was wrong, but
she was stressed and preoccupied.

   "My mother had triple bypass (heart) surgery, and I was spending all my spare
time at the hospital with her. I would have these sharp pains around where my
ovaries were, and I had major weight gain (50 pounds). But I thought I was
having sympathy pains for my mother."

   Not imaginary

   Finally, a pelvic exam (her first), ultrasonography and a test for levels of
CA-125 - a substance in the blood used as a tumor marker for ovarian cancer -
revealed the pains were far from imaginary.

   In August 1995, surgeons removed a 15-pound tumor and her left ovary. They
were able to save her right ovary and uterus but the cancer had invaded her
lymph nodes.

   Melancon, a registered nurse in Amarillo who helped found both the alliance
and coalition, says recognizing even vague symptoms not listed in the medical
literature could spell the difference between early-stage cancer and life or
late- stage cancer and death.

   "It is not normal - even if some idiots in the profession tell you - for a
woman to be exhausted for four weeks unless there is good reason," she says. "It
is not normal to have low back pain for eight months unless you've done
something to your back."

   Now six years out from her own cancer, Melancon, whose disease had spread to
her bowel and bladder, is surveying survivors on early symptoms and distributing
thousands of cards listing potential warning signs.

   Diagnosis is usually followed by surgery, then a course of chemotherapy and
followup scans and CA-125 tests, best directed by gynecological oncologists,
experts say.

   Dr. Maurie Markman, a cancer researcher at the Cleveland Clinic, explains
that new, less-toxic chemotherapy drugs and more effective drugs to counter side
effects like nausea and vomiting are changing treatment.

   "Women feel a lot better. Their quality of life is better. But, more
importantly, there's a significant improvement in survival," Markman says.

   A combination of Taxol and platinum has become a recommended treatment for
ovarian cancer. And Dr. Ted Trimble, head of the surgery section of the National
Cancer Institute's cancer-therapy evaluation program, cites new treatment
approaches involving drugs such as topotecan, gemcitabine and Navelbine, plus
clinical trials with Herceptin, gene therapy that moves beyond so-called "slash
and burn" chemotherapy and causes some breast cancers to disappear.

   With an expanding array of drugs, "There's a lot we can do. It is a treatable
disease, and some of these women can be cured even in the advanced disease,"
says Dr. Geoffrey Weiss, medical oncologist at the Cancer Therapy & Research
Center and deputy director of the San Antonio Cancer Institute.

   Palans completed standard chemotherapy, directed by medical oncologist Dr.
Steven Kalter at the CTRC. Because she was Stage IV, she went the extra,
then-unusual step of undergoing a bone marrow transplant with Dr. C.F.
LeMaistre, today the director of the South Texas Cancer Institute.

   She felt fine at the five-year survival milestone. Then, last year, Palans
faced the thing survivors dread most - recurrence. In April, she completed yet
another course of chemotherapy.

   Dreaded recurrence

   Recurrence is often viewed as fatal. But in this instance, a suspicious tumor
marker blood test led to early detection.

   "Things don't always follow the textbooks," Kalter observes. "The CA-125 test
and Judy's vigilance helped us, and we found this one (cancerous) lymph node
that was removed surgically."

   Rejecting despair, Palans, who feels empowered by an informed "partnership"
with her doctor, says, "You can either go straight forward and capture every
day, or you can pull the covers up over your head. Either way, you're going to
get the same number of heartbeats."

   Work is underway on a vaccine that may prevent recurrence by helping the
immune system spot cancer cells now going undetected. "But a vaccine is still in
its infancy," Kalter notes.

   Earlier detection is key, but an elevated CA-125 alone is not reliable for
routine screening of undiagnosed women. Several weeks ago, researchers at the
Cleveland Clinic announced a possible breakthrough, reporting that plasma LPA
(lysophosphatidic acid) levels may be a biomarker for ovarian and gynecological
cancers. Markman, who worked on the study, cautions that further research is
needed.

   Trimble says there are studies under way involving thousands of women to see
if a combination of vaginal ultrasound, currently not used in routine screening,
and CA- 125 tests might provide effective early detection.

   Meanwhile, regular pelvic exams by a gynecologist offer the best chance for
early detection.

   For women with a family history of breast cancer and ovarian cancer, there is
a genetic screening clinic and registry at the CTRC. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene
mutations linked to breast cancer also are associated with ovarian cancer.

   Clearly, this silent killer doesn't have the large, high-profile block of
funding advocates that breast cancer has. But increasingly un-silent ovarian
cancer survivors are raising awareness and pushing for research.

   Six years ago, Melancon recalls, "There was nothing out there. No local
groups. No national groups. There was a void. It was like women with ovarian
cancer didn't exist, which meant I didn't exist, which meant I was going to
die."

   Melancon didn't die. She and others organized.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: LELAND A. OUTZ / Special PHOTO: DELCIA LOPEZ / Staff
Express-News Graphic - Ovarian cancer - the silent killer

   Judy Palans is an ovarian cancer survivor. To illustrate how the 'silent
killer' strikes, she recalls that a pelvic exam revealed no problems in 1992.
Months later, she was diagnosed as having Stage IV ovarian cancer, leading to
radical surgery. ; Amanda Ballew relaxes poolside with her dog, Sophie. When
Ballew was 18, she was diagnosed as having Stage III-C ovarian cancer, which is
described as a later-stage disease.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1998


                             1829 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 20, 1998 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1931 words

HEADLINE: MONEY MISSING AT ALLEGHENY

BYLINE: Karl Stark, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Just days before Allegheny's bankrupt hospitals are scheduled to be sold,
researchers and physicians are still discovering that more funds were taken from
restricted endowments and other accounts during the health system's harrowing
descent into bankruptcy this year.

   Allegheny's internal accountants have found that more than $17 million in
interest income alone was taken from restricted endowments at its Philadelphia
hospitals and professional schools, according to physicians, researchers and
other officials close to the situation.

   It's still unclear how many millions are missing, where the money went, who
authorized the taking, and whether it can be recovered after the sale is
completed.

   Some of Allegheny's most prominent faculty, worried that their opportunity to
find and recover missing money may be lost when the hospitals are sold in nine
days, have grown frustrated. Some have even hired lawyers to track down the
cash. The chancellor emeritus of Allegheny University of the Health Sciences, D.
Walter Cohen, and Louis F. Rose, a well-known dentist and physician at Allegheny
University Hospitals/MCP, seek the return of more than $500,000 raised for a new
dental hospital in Rose's honor at MCP.

   In another development, some private research money also has been tapped,
according to Darwin J. Prockop, director of Allegheny's Center for Gene Therapy
in Philadelphia.

   Prockop is an internationally known molecular biologist whose hiring in 1996
was considered a coup for Allegheny. In an interview, Prockop said he recently
learned that a $360,000 private foundation grant he had received has been
emptied of all but about $50,000.

   "It strikes at the heart of private donations for research," Prockop said.
"It thoroughly disrupts our plans. We can't plan. We can't organize. We can't do
the work for which the money was given."

   Allegheny spokesman Thomas G. Chakurda said he did not know whether
nonfederal research grants were taken under the previous administration, which
ended with the firing of chief executive Sherif S. Abdelhak on June 5. Officials
are reviewing endowment and research records to find out what has happened to
the money, Chakurda said.

   Chakurda has not disputed published reports that endowments were taken. He
also has stressed that no endowment funds are being tapped under current chief
executive Anthony Sanzo.

   The Inquirer reported last month that Allegheny administrators had taken
millions of dollars from restricted endowments and other funds as its financial
troubles were mounting last spring. Administrators took $8.5 million from a Bell
Atlantic grant earmarked for a genetics program at Allegheny's flagship
pediatric facility, St. Christopher's Hospital For Children. They also took $8
million from Allegheny University Hospitals/Graduate, ranging from restricted
surgery funds to the women's auxiliary and personal funds of the Graduate
medical staff.

   In recent weeks, Allegheny employees have realized more money was taken.
Doctors who invited a visiting professor from Missouri to St. Christopher's two
weeks ago learned suddenly that the money to host him were missing. Physicians
did not know how they would pay for the speaker until a Seattle-based
pharmaceutical firm, Pathogenesis Corp., came up with about $3,000 to pay for
his trip, a Pathogenesis spokesman confirmed.

   Thousands of dollars for continuing medical education have been taken, said
faculty members close to the situation.

   In another example, researchers Akhil Vaidya and Carol Long learned recently
that more than $52,000 had been drained from the Dan H. Moore Breast Cancer
Research Fellowship in the department of microbiology and immunology. "Nobody
ever consulted us," Vaidya said.

   "They have changed the terms of the fund overnight with no notification,"
Long said. "I'm sure there are multiple funds in this category."

   Allegheny employees have speculated that the money was spent in April to
repay an $87 million loan to a consortium of four banks led by Mellon Bank. Or
that it went to cover payroll in the months before bankruptcy. But no one has
proven where the restricted money went.

   Allegheny has set up an investigating committee of two trustees and two
Allegheny faculty members to determine what was done to endowments and other
funds. The members - trustees Ralph W. Brenner and Claire W. Gargalli, and
Allegheny University faculty members Richard Rest and Arthur Nezu - have agreed
among themselves not to speak publicly about their work at least until it is
completed.

   The state Attorney General's Office, which oversees charitable funds in
Pennsylvania, has demanded that Allegheny provide an accounting of its
restricted funds by Monday. Chakurda said Allegheny would comply.

   But several Allegheny officials said last week it was unlikely that Allegheny
would release any report before the sale of its eight bankrupt hospitals on
Sept. 29 in Pittsburgh. Officials said privately that auditing the system's
1,300 endowment funds - worth about $200 million - was a huge undertaking that
could take months. One plan is to audit the largest funds and scrutinize a
representative sample of the smaller endowments, according to a key Allegheny
official.

   There are several signs that Allegheny's accounting is in disarray. Top
executives announced this month that the system's financial statements are
inaccurate and that losses will be increased dramatically. The U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission is conducting an informal inquiry into whether Allegheny
deceived investors by releasing incorrect financial statements. Many Allegheny
finance employees simply have left for other jobs since the health system's
Philadelphia operations entered bankruptcy in July.

   New questions are being raised about what Allegheny has done to its
nonfederal research grants. Allegheny's Philadelphia researchers received about
$21.5 million in such grants from foundations, drug companies and other sources
in fiscal year 1997.

   Allegheny typically pools those funds to earn higher interest, but they are
accounted for separately.

   More than a dozen researchers who were interviewed said their bills were
still being paid and that most funds appeared intact - at least on paper. But
virtually all also said they noticed a lag in the system. When they try to buy
equipment, they said, purchases are quickly deducted from their monthly
financial reports, but the checks are not written and actual payments don't
reach the vendors for months.

   Researchers said they wanted to know whether Allegheny was paying only a
small portion of bills because the money to pay all vendors is gone. The
possibility of lost grants has been creating anxiety.

   Stan Fiel, chief of pulmonary and critical care at Allegheny University
Hospitals/Hahnemann and MCP, said he has been unable to get a definitive answer
on whether the non federal accounts have been touched. "Are they secure?" he
asked. "Where are they? Is this money that has already been spent and we're in a
creditors' line now?"

   "I would like a statement from somebody that that money's secure."

   Some researchers also wonder whether administrators selectively took money
from grants that were unused for a time and could be arguably the property of
the institution.

   That appears to be what happened to Prockop's $360,000 diabetes grant.
Prockop was given the money to try to prove a theory using genes to control
diabetes. When his idea did not pan out as he hoped, Prockop said the private
foundation let him keep the money and encouraged him to try again when a
solution presented itself.

   The money sat earning interest for nearly two years.

   A month ago, Prockop learned that Allegheny administration had unilaterally
taken $310,000 from the grant. Prockop said the action was taken with no
warning.

   Prockop, who brought the money with him from Thomas Jefferson University when
he joined Allegheny two years ago, said he wrote to the system's administrators
three weeks ago asking what happened to the money and had received no response.

   Prockop is now working to get the money back. He declined to name his
benefactor. "If you were heading a foundation, how would you feel?" he asked.
"These are people who have given their life's savings to forward research in a
particular disease."

   Cases like Prockop's are fueling uncertainty among researchers who report
receiving assurances from Allegheny's administrators, but no hard facts.

   Benefactors also have been calling Allegheny's researchers and inquiring
about the safety of their money.

   "There's been some anxiety," said Howard Ozer, director of the Cancer Center
at Allegheny, who oversees more than 30 grants. "When we've explained to them
that we're still functioning, they seem to be understanding. I don't say it's
easy. They're unlikely to give us new grants until this is settled."

   Allegheny's in-house researchers are not the only ones complaining about the
system's accounting practices. Consider the case of neuroscientist Jay S.
Schneider, who, when he left Allegheny a year ago for another research
institution, was entitled to take his research money with him. Now, a year
later, Allegheny still has not sent him about $750,000 from five pharmaceutical
and private grants given for his own research.

   It hasn't been for lack of trying. Schneider said he and Allegheny officials
agreed on how much was in the three pharmaceutical funds, one foundation grant
and one fund from private donors before he left.

   "Some of that money was people taking $10 and $20 and stuffing it in an
envelope and saying 'Here's something to help your research,' " he said. "That's
especially galling."

   Schneider called and wrote repeatedly when the money didn't come. The only
response he got was a one-sentence letter indicating that the matter was being
looked into.

   Allegheny spokesman Chakurda said he had no information on specific accounts.

   Schneider said Allegheny's hold on his money had delayed his work on
Parkinson's disease and prevented him from expanding his research. "I'm angry
and frustrated," he said. "It's just not a decent thing to do."

   Schneider has since hired a lawyer who has written Allegheny and the state
attorney general. "I would hope that it doesn't get held up in the bankruptcy,"
he said. "It sure would be nice to get my money."

   Some prominent Allegheny faculty, including MCP's Cohen and Rose, also have
hired lawyers to scrutinize restricted accounts.

   More than $1 million was pledged and more than $500,000 was collected in the
last year to build a 6,000-square-foot dental hospital in Rose's honor.

   But nothing ever happened.

   Rose said he heard only in the last month that the money had been taken by
Allegheny's administrators. "I am devastated and personally embarrassed," he
said.

   Rose said he had assurances from the two firms bidding for all of Allegheny's
hospitals - Vanguard Health Systems and Tenet HealthCare Corp. - that the center
will be built. But no one knows how the bidding will go.

   Cohen said his father set up a fund years ago to help Russian immigrant
children get dental care. The endowment, which grew to $240,000, recently was
transferred to Rose's fund for the new dental center and is among the missing
money.

   Cohen said he and Rose hired lawyer Louis W. Fryman to find out where the
money went and to try to get it back. "The whole thing is very discouraging,"
Cohen said. "You build something, and this happens. It's very hard to take."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Darwin J. Prockop, director of the Center for Gene Therapy, learned a $360,000
grant he received had been whittled down to $50,000. (The Philadelphia Inquirer,
WILLIAM F. STEINMETZ)
Sherif S. Abdelhak was fired as Allegheny's CEO on June 5. (Philadelphia Daily
News, DAVID MAIALETTI)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1830 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  September 16, 1998, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. B11

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Inc. to Lay Off Dozens

BYLINE: Justin Gillis, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   As many as 80 employees of Gaithersburg-based Genetic Therapy Inc., including
its chief executive, will lose their jobs under a reorganization plan announced
this week by the biotechnology company's corporate parent.

   Novartis AG, a large Swiss pharmaceutical concern, said it would merge
several functions of Genetic Therapy with similar activities of another
subsidiary in California. The merger will allow Novartis to eliminate overlap
while keeping full research programs in both locations, the company said in a
statement.

   The merger between Genetic Therapy and SyStemix Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif.,
will take effect over the next few months. Most of Genetic Therapy's 210
employees will keep their jobs, while a handful will be offered new positions at
the California company. About 60 to 80 will be dismissed.

   Layoffs on the scale of those planned at Genetic Therapy are unusual in the
local biotechnology industry. Though few of Maryland's biotech companies are
profitable yet, many have been hiring rapidly as they gear up to put products on
the market. The firms often have trouble finding enough qualified employees.

   Genetic Therapy, founded 11 years ago, has focused on ways to cure disease by
inserting genes into cells in the body. It has researched treatments for cancer,
heart disease and other ailments but has no products on the market. A Novartis
predecessor bought the company, once publicly traded, in 1995 in a friendly
takeover.

   SyStemix, which is unrelated to a Columbia software firm with a similar name,
concentrates on areas of research similar to Genetic Therapy's. Under the
reorganization, SyStemix will take the lead in managing the combined research
portfolio.

   Rachel King, chief executive of Genetic Therapy, said her position would be
among those eliminated, along with the jobs of three or four of the company's
vice presidents. The job losses in Gaithersburg also will include scientists,
technicians, finance employees and others, she said.

   "We came together and realized that we have areas of overlap," King said. "To
be most efficient, we had to find a way to functionally consolidate the two
companies. Unfortunately, these things have personal consequences."

   King said Genetic Therapy employees would be told by the end of October
whether they are being laid off. She said dismissed employees would be offered
60 days' pay after they stop working. They'll also be offered a lump-sum
severance payment of three weeks' pay for every year of service, with a 12-week
minimum, she said.


LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1998


                             1831 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 15, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 641 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy to cut 60 jobs; Parent firm Novartis merging
subsidiaries; Biotechnology

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   More than 60 Maryland scientists and technicians will lose their jobs under a
plan by Novartis AG, the world's largest drug company, to merge its two gene
therapy subsidiaries, Gaithersburg-based Genetic Therapy Inc. and Palo Alto,
Calif.-based Systemix Inc.

   Under the Swiss company's consolidation plan, Systemix will become the
headquarters for development of gene therapy treatments, while GTI will take a
back seat, focusing on core research and overseeing studies to assess the safety
of experimental gene therapies.

   The consolidation is expected to result in the loss of an estimated 60 to 80
of the 210 jobs at Genetic Therapy, said Rachel K. King, GTI's president and
chief executive officer.

   She and four GTI vice presidents are among those losing their jobs. Michael
Perry, Systemix president and chief executive officer, will head up the combined
operation, beginning Dec. 31.

   Another 10 to 12 GTI scientists are expected to be offered jobs at Systemix's
Palo Alto facility, King said.

   "This is a streamlining of activities into a single coordinated entity," King
said. "There were overlapping programs and interests in the two companies."

   Dr. Jorg Reinhardt, head of preclinical development and project management at
Novartis Pharma, said the consolidation would eliminate overlap and free up
resources needed to tackle scientific hurdles in developing effective gene
therapy treatments.

   "At the same time, we will retain access to the scientific communities and
expertise on both coasts," he said.

   GTI was among the first, if not the first biotechnology company in the nation
that started to focus on developing gene therapies. It was founded by Montgomery
County entrepreneur M. James Barrett and former National Institutes of Health
gene researcher French Anderson.

   The company has focused on developing treatments for diseases based on
correcting or altering genetic defects by inserting therapeutic genes into the
body.

   Its leading experimental treatment is GTI-328, a gene treatment for an
aggressive and often fatal form of brain cancer. GTI recently completed a
large-scale clinical trial of the treatment, which involved more than 200
patients in 12 countries. Data on its results are expected to be released next
year.

   Systemix is focused on developing treatments for diseases by attempting to
genetically manipulate specific types of cells outside the body and reinserting
them so they provide a therapeutic effect.

   It has experimental treatments in human studies for HIV and for
graft-versus-host disease, a complication of transplant surgery.

   King said cost savings would be seen in the consolidation, but declined to
give estimates. Sheldon Jones, a Novartis spokesman, said cost-saving estimates
were not being disclosed.

   Jones said Novartis, which had 1997 sales of $ 21.5 billion, did not have
plans to cancel any of its gene therapy programs as a result of the
consolidation.

   King said Genetic Therapy still plans to occupy a $ 20 million state-of-the
art research facility being built in Gaithersburg.

   The building, which is being built with the help of state and county money,
is expected to be completed late next year.

   At the time the project was announced in April, King said the
70,000-square-foot, two-story project was a sign of the company's commitment to
remaining headquartered in Maryland and of Novartis' commitment to developing
and bringing to market gene therapies.

   GTI found itself under the giant Novartis umbrella in 1996 when it was
announced that its Swiss parent, Sandoz Ltd., would merge with another Swiss
pharmaceutical giant, Ciba-Geigy Ltd. The merger resulted in the formation of
Novartis.

   Sandoz acquired GTI and Systemix in 1991 while on a buying spree for U.S.
biotechnology companies and their pioneering research.

   Pub Date: 9/15/98

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1998


                             1832 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 230 words

HEADLINE: Splice Einstein and Sammy Glick. Add a Little Magellan.

BODY:

   It is a wonderful vicarious pleasure to see Craig Venter succeed with his
research, despite funding refusals from overly conservative National Institutes
of Health review panels. Nevertheless, a few items should be brought into
perspective.

   Heredity is not so simple. It is highly unlikely that complex traits can be
reduced to "a gene that influences intelligence.. . . Or talent.Or beauty."
Nearly all traits are influenced by many genes, plus environment, time and
chance. Even when a trait is controlled predominantly by a single gene, it is
very difficult to translate that knowledge into anything useful.

    The classic example is sickle cell anemia, which is a significant health
problem in populations of West African descent. In 1949, Linus Pauling and his
co-workers found the cause: a genetic mutation in human hemoglobin, which Vernon
Ingram quickly pinpointed to a specific alteration in one place in the
hemoglobin-chain.

   So, in the ensuing decades, has this genetic understanding led to a cure?
Well, we have prenatal diagnosis, elective abortion and the persistent promises
of gene therapy, but none of these can currently be considered a cure. To
"replace the disease-prone genes of humans . . .like new spark plugs in an
automobile" remains an unrealistic simile, as our track record unfortunately
shows.

Kevin Jon Williams, M.D.
Wynnewood, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2004


                             1833 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                  September 10, 1998, Thursday, S-TIER EDITION

SECTION: COMIC, Pg. 9B

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: TREATMENTS FOR SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

BYLINE: Dr. ALLEN DOUMA; Special to The News

BODY:


   This is the second part of a two-part discussion of sickle cell disease. The
first part discussed the basics of sickle cell anemia. This second installment
will deal with treatment of the disease.

   Individuals with severe chest or back pain that accompanies sickle cell
anemia and prevents them from breathing deeply may be able to avoid the serious
lung complications associated with acute chest syndrome by using a breathing
device called a spirometer.

   Most complications of sickle cell anemia are treated as they occur. For
example, laser coagulation may be used to prevent vision loss in people with eye
problems. Surgery is also used to remove gallstones or replace a hip joint. Leg
ulcers are treated with cleansing solutions and zinc oxide or with skin grafts.

   Today, many people with sickle cell anemia are in reasonably good health much
of the time and live productive lives. Due to medical advances in the past 30
years, the life expectancy of people with sickle cell anemia has increased. Many
individuals with sickle cell anemia now live into their mid-40s and beyond.

   The ultimate cure for sickle cell anemia may be gene therapy. Two approaches
to gene therapy are being explored. Some scientists are looking into correcting
the gene and inserting it into the bone marrow. Other researchers are looking at
turning off the gene that produces the sickling hemoglobin while simultaneously
reactivating another gene to produce a hemoglobin that is now only present
around birth.

   To find more about sickle cell disease, check out the Better Health Web site
at www.betterhealth.com or contact the Sickle Cell Disease Association of
America at 200 Corporate Pointe, Suite 495, Culver City, Calif. 90230, (800)
421-8453.

   Update on inhaled steroids: Steroids play an important and powerfully
beneficial role in the treatment of many inflammatory diseases. But steroids can
have major side effects.

   One way to decrease side effects is to deliver the steroids directly to the
inflamed area. This has led to a rapid increase in the use of steroid inhalers
for people with allergies, asthma and other lung diseases.

   But two recent studies raise cautionary flags. One indicates that children
using steroid inhalers for asthma grow more slowly. But the research doesn't yet
say if their final height will be less.

   Also, inhaled steroids are linked to a dramatic increase in the percent of
people who get cataracts. The second study was recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association. It showed that a person over age 70 had
triple the risk of cataracts if he or she used inhaled steroids for more than
three years or used high doses for more than two years.

   Dr. Allen Douma welcomes questions from readers. Although he cannot respond
to each one individually, he will answer those of general interest in his
column. Write to Dr. Douma in care of Tribune Media Services, 435 N. Michigan
Ave., Suite 1400, Chicago, Ill. 60611. His e-mail address is DRFamily@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1998


                             1834 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    September 8, 1998, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: AREA CONTRIBUTIONS TOP $ 544,000 FOR TELETHON

BODY:


   Buffalo-area residents contributed more than $ 544,000 Monday to the Jerry
Lewis Muscular Dystrophy Association Labor Day Telethon, helping to bring the
pledges and contributions for the fight against neuromuscular diseases to a
record $ 51.6 million.

   "Today, when we're on the verge of testing gene therapy in people with
muscular dystrophy, viewers worldwide heard our message and understood that we
need their help more than ever," Lewis said. "The American people are the most
generous and caring in the world. Their leadership sparked contributions from
around the globe, and I can never thank them enough for their outpouring of
faith and support in our programs."

   The telethon aired locally on WGRZ-TV, Channel 2.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1998


                             1835 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   September 08, 1998, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 281 words

HEADLINE: Record raised by Jerry Lewis' telethon

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - Jerry Lewis' annual muscular dystrophy telethon raised a record
$ 51.57 million during a 21 1/2-hour event featuring musicians, magicians and
comedians.

   "Thank you! Thank you! Thank you!" Lewis said Monday as the 33rd Jerry Lewis
Muscular Dystrophy Association Labor Day Telethon drew to a close. "What more
can I say?"

   The exact amount raised was $ 51,577,023, telethon spokesman Jim Brown said.
Last year, $ 50.5 million was raised.

   In Houston, KPRC-TV Channel 2 raised a record $ 1,442,692 for the study of
neuromuscular diseases.

   Lewis said that without the public's help there wouldn't be money for new
treatment for the diseases.

   "Today, when we're on the verge of testing gene therapy in people with
muscular dystrophy, viewers worldwide heard our message and understood that we
need their help more than ever," Lewis said.

   Among those who performed were Ray Charles, Chuck Mangione, Bill Maher, Bob
Zany and Carrot Top.

   Taped segments from New York, Chicago, Las Vegas and Nashville included
appearances by Celine Dion, Leann Rimes, Enrique Iglesias, Jose Feliciano, Pam
Tillis and comedians Louie Anderson and Tom Dreesen.

   During the 33rd annual event, Lewis held special tributes for comedian Henny
Youngman, country music singer Eddie Rabbitt and Frank Sinatra - entertainers
who regularly appeared at the fund-raiser before their deaths.

   The show was broadcast live from Hollywood on Sunday and Monday and seen by
an estimated 75 million people on 200 television stations in the United States
and Canada, Brown said.

   The telethon was also viewed on the Internet in 60 countries, including
Honduras, Iceland, Kuwait and the Czech Republic.


GRAPHIC: Jerry Lewis announces a fund-raising record for his telethon to benefit
neuromuscular research; Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1998


                             1836 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   September 08, 1998, Tuesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Around Houston

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Art demonstration


   The teaching staff of the Houston Civic Arts Association Gallery will give a
free demonstration of their art techniques at 10 a.m. Friday at the CNB
Activities Center, 5217 Cedar St., Bellaire.

   For information, call 713-668-0785.





   Antarctica program


   Zoologist and naturalist Doug Cheeseman will discuss the marine mammals,
seabirds, invertebrates and ecology of Antarctica at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday at the
Brown Education Center of the Houston Zoological Gardens.

   Presented by the Houston Audubon Society and the Houston Parks and Recreation
Department, the program is free. For information, call 713-932-1639.





   Dance class


   An 11-session class on country-and-western dancing will begin Friday at the
Eddie Gray Wetlands Center in Baytown. Dances will include the Texas two-step,
cotton-eyed Joe, the polka and the schottische.

   Cost is $ 49. For information, call Lee College Continuing Education at
281-425-6311 or 800-621-8722.





   AIDS lecture


   Sara Selber, executive director of AIDS Foundation Houston, will speak at the
Downtown Houston Association's Women in the Workplace program at noon Friday in
Latham Auditorium at Christ Church Cathedral, 1117 Texas Ave. The free
presentation is titled "Why Care?"

   A brown-bag lunch is available for $ 6. For information, call 713-658-8938.





   SAT workshop


   The SAT workshop for high school students will be 1-3 p.m. Saturday at Main
Street Books, 4201 Main.

   Registration is required and space is limited for the workshop, presented by
instructors from the Princeton Review. For information, call 713-524-2524.





   Book sale


   Friends of the Bellaire Library will hold a used book sale 9 a.m.-4 p.m.
Saturday. Hardbacks will go for $ 1, and paperbacks for 50 cents.

   For information, call 713-662-8160.





   Support group


   TEX US TOO, a citywide prostate cancer support group, will meet at 7 p.m.
Monday at St. Luke's United Methodist Church, 3471 Westheimer.

   Dr. Dov Cadmon of Baylor College of Medicine will speak on "Gene Therapy for
Prostate Cancer."

   For information, call 713-840-6363.



NOTES: Send information for this column to Dai Huynh, Features Department,
Houston Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1998


                             1837 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 SEPTEMBER 8, 1998 Tuesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFS

BYLINE: Daily News wire services

BODY:

   CHICAGO

   Cops reopen case

   of slain girl, 11

   Chicago police were assembling a new team of detectives to reopen the
investigation into the the slaying of an 11-year-old girl after prosecutors
dropped murder charges Friday against two boys, aged 7 and 8, the Chicago
Tribune said yesterday.

   Investigators will review police reports compiled during the initial
investigation, which began July 28 with the discovery of Ryan Harris' body in
Chicago.

   The new investigation will focus in part on a man who lawyers for the
7-year-old suspect said was giving their client toys almost immediately after
Ryan's body had been discovered.

   Charges against the two boys, among the youngest murder suspects ever in the
United States, were dropped because semen stains found on the girl's underwear
likely could not have come from the pre-adolescent boys.

   SANTA CLARA

   Freak roller coaster

   accident kills man

   A 25-year-old man died yesterday after being struck in the head by a woman
whizzing by in a roller coaster at Paramount's Great America Theme Park.

   The man jumped over a fence into a restricted area to retrieve a hat he had
lost while riding "Top Gun," park officials said.

   A woman accidentally kicked the man when her car passed him. Roller coaster
cars hang from the track above them and passengers are seated with their legs
dangling. The woman was treated for leg injuries.

   LAS VEGAS

   Accused casino killer

   goes on trial today

   A California teen-ager accused of killing a 7-year-old girl in a Nevada
casino restroom was scheduled to go on trial for his life today.

   Prosecutors have said they will seek the death penalty if Jeremy Strohmeyer,
19, of Long Beach, is convicted of sexually molesting and strangling Sherrice
Iverson.

   He allegedly confessed to Long Beach police that he killed the girl on May
25, 1997, at the Primm Valley casino "to experience death."

   UNION GROVE, Wis.

   Photographer killed

   by careening race car

   A dragster racing at Great Lakes Dragway veered out of control and flew over
a guard rail, killing a track-side photographer.

   Videotape taken by spectators in the stands Sunday showed the car rolling and
crashing, then disintegrating into flaming wreckage.

   The car's driver, protected by a roll-bar, could be seen walking away from
the charred wreckage after it rolled to a stop.

   The victim was identified as Jason Benton, 23, of Grand Rapids, Mich.

   LOS ANGELES

   Jerry Lewis telethon

   raises $51.5 million

   Jerry Lewis' annual muscular dystrophy telethon raised a record $51.57
million during a 21 1/2-hour event featuring musicians, magicians and comedians.

   "Thank you! Thank you! Thank you!" Lewis said Monday as the 33rd Jerry Lewis
Muscular Dystrophy Association Labor Day Telethon drew to a close. "What more
can I say?"

   The exact amount raised was $51,577,023, telethon spokesman Jim Brown said.
Last year, $50.5 million was raised.

   "Today, when we're on the verge of testing gene therapy in people with
muscular dystrophy, viewers worldwide heard our message and understood that we
need their help more than ever," Lewis said.

   Among those who performed were Ray Charles, Chuck Mangione, Bill Maher, Bob
Zany and Carrot Top.

NOTES: Nation

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             1838 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 08, 1998, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A14; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: The Genomics Revolution

BODY:


   The editorial "The Gene Race Quickens" [Aug. 22] hailed the anticipated
medical windfall that the public will receive from genomic research, but it did
not explain the protections and benefits that exist for academic researchers
when genomics research is patented and the vital role that patents play in
speeding basic scientific research into products for the benefit of patients.

   When patents are issued, the editorial asserts that the patents "greatly
increase the power of [the patent holders] to influence or impede work on a gene
. . . by a research scientist." This fundamentally misinterprets the law. The
courts have held that academic researchers are exempt from patent infringement
actions as long as their work is academic, not commercial.

   The patent system only protects the patent holder from actions of a
commercial competitor and has no impact on academic researchers who are free to
pursue their academic research without any fear of action by a patent holder.
Just as important, in order to secure a patent the inventor must agree that the
nature of the invention be published for all to see. The publication requirement
makes the invention available to academic researchers for continued study.

   Universities, in fact, are eager to patent their own inventions because the
licenses of these inventions provide a substantial revenue stream to fund
further academic research. The most recent statistics find that universities
were paid $ 365 million under 4,958 licenses in 1996, 80 percent of which are
"life sciences" patents licensed to biotechnology companies for development into
products.

   Specifically with reference to genomics research and patents, large amounts
of capital are needed to sequence genes, determine their function in the body
and develop products -- i.e., diagnostics, drugs and biologics and gene therapy.
Because patents enable a company potentially to profit from its genomics
research, we now have 25 companies dedicated to this work that have greatly
accelerated the discovery process. A wide-ranging competition to discover genes
is now underway, which is in the best interests of patients suffering from an
estimated 6,000 genetic diseases.

   The biotechnology industry has cautioned against granting overly broad patent
protection to partial sequences of genes -- expressed sequence tags -- and we
understand that this position reflects the policy of the Patent and Trademark
Office. That office should proceed with this policy, which is sure to be
reviewed in time by the courts. Any intervention in this process to circumscribe
the patents that will be issued is unnecessary to protect academic researchers
and is harmful to biomedical research and to the patients who await the benefits
of the genomics revolution.

   CARL B. FELDBAUM

   President

   Biotechnology Industry Organization

   Washington

LOAD-DATE: September 08, 1998


                             1839 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           September 7, 1998, Monday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 8C

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE COMES OUT OF CLOSET;
MOST WHO HAVE ILLNESS DON'T KNOW THEY HAVE IT

BYLINE: Steve Stephens , Dispatch Staff Reporter

BODY:


   The disease that threatens Shelly Longo's life has no telethon, no celebrity
spokesmen.

   But an estimated 12 1/2 million people have polycystic kidney disease - PKD -
more than the combined number of those with muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis,
hemophilia, sickle cell anemia and Down syndrome.

   Longo, 28, of Dublin said she has no symptoms yet but was tested for PKD
because her grandmother and mother both have the inherited disease.

   ''It strikes at different ages with really no warning,'' Longo said.

   PKD causes fluid-filled cysts to form on both kidneys, ballooning them to
several times their normal size.

   More than half of those with PKD develop kidney failure and must undergo
dialysis or a kidney transplant.

   Longo's grandmother was unaware of the disease until she was 78. But Longo's
mother began to suffer kidney failure at 35 and eventually needed a transplant.

   Longo said she decided to be tested when deciding whether to have a child.
Her test was positive, which means her children would have a 50 percent chance
of inheriting the disease.

   Of the estimated 600,000 Americans with the disease, only 100,000 know they
have it, said Dan Larson, president of the Polycystic Kidney Research
Foundation.

   Larson was in Columbus last week for a meeting with foundation supporters and
members of the local PKD support group.

   Symptoms of PKD include persistent urinary tract and kidney infections, high
blood pressure and backache.

   Larson said part of his job is to encourage those with symptoms or a family
history of kidney disease to be tested for PKD.

   The fight against PKD is important even though diseases like muscular
dystrophy and cystic fibrosis get more public attention, Larson said.

   ''Most everyone has heard of one or more of those diseases, but few have
heard of PKD,'' he said. ''Even the medical community often doesn't know much
about the disease.

   ''There are very few celebrities who have PKD.  The most well-known was
(writer) Erma Bombeck'' who died of the disease.

   Larson said he once worked for the national Multiple Sclerosis Society, with
a staff of 400 to 500.

   His staff at the Polycystic Kidney Research Foundation, the only PKD
organization in the world, is 13.

   The nonprofit group is based in Kansas City, Mo.

   Despite limited resources, research has been promising, Larson said. ''We are
getting close to a treatment and a cure,'' he said.

   Promising drugs to arrest the disease are being developed.  And development
of a gene therapy to eliminate PKD, although probably more than a decade from
becoming reality, is under way, he said.

   When she found out she has PKD, Longo also learned to avoid food and
medication that can tax kidney functions, she said.

   She decided to become pregnant even though she has the disease.

   ''It made the decision a very thoughtful one, but I really believe they are
going to come up with a cure in the next five to 10 years,'' she said.

   Longo and her husband now have a healthy 3-month-old son.

   The PKD Foundation can be reached toll-free at 1-800-PKD-CURE
(1-800-753-2873) or on the Internet at www.kumc.edu/pkrf/

GRAPHIC: Photo, Larson

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1998


                             1840 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   September 07, 1998, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: D; Pg. 6 Discovery

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: Research could help target prostate cancer therapy;
Manipulating protein could make cells more vulnerable to loss of testosterone

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Baylor College of Medicine researchers have found a protein that may explain
why prostate cancer continues to grow even after patients with advanced disease
receive the most common form of treatment - surgical or chemical castration,
according to a recent report.

   Prostate cancers usually depend on the hormone testosterone for survival,
said Dr. Timothy C. Thompson, a Baylor professor of urology, radiology and cell
biology. Once the tumor has spread beyond the prostate gland (a process called
metastasis), chemical or surgical castration is used to stop testosterone
production.

   While the patients respond to the loss of testosterone at first, their cancer
cells eventually recover to grow and spread, Thompson said in a report in a
recent issue of the scientific journal Nature Medicine.

   Previously, Thompson and his Baylor team had found that a protein called
caveolin is turned on in metastatic cancer cells. Now, he said, his team has
discovered that when the amount of caveolin in such cells is reduced, the cells
once again become sensitive to the lack of testosterone and die.

   Unlike many proteins known to enhance tumor cell growth, caveolin is not a
growth factor, Thompson said. Instead, it alters the signals within cells.

   "The repercussions of this finding are many," Thompson said. "We can identify
a real target for therapy now."

   Interfering with the production of caveolin or its action within the cell
might make prostate cells more vulnerable to the loss of testosterone, he said.

   "There are also some possibilities for gene therapy," he said. Or, he said,
scientists could find ways to alter the interactions between caveolin and other
proteins in prostate cancer cells.

   "The key is to make the cells sensitive to the loss of testosterone once
again," Thompson said.

   Caveolin, in other body systems, is regulated by cholesterol, Thompson said.
"This could involve cholesterol at some level and may link dietary cholesterol
with prostate cancer," he said.

   However, Thompson said the cholesterol link is merely a hypothesis. He said
his group is working hard to determine if there is such a link.

   Caveolin also is found in pretty high concentrations in breast cancer,
Thompson said. He speculated that the mechanism of spread in which caveolin is
involved may be specific to cancers that are in some way regulated by hormones.

   His research was funded by the National Cancer Institute, including A
Specific Program of Research Excellence (SPORE) grant to Baylor's Department of
Urology, and by CapCure, a foundation devoted to prostate cancer research.

   Other Baylor researchers who are co-authors of the Nature Medicine article
include Sang Hee Park, Marlene DeLeon, Chengzhen Ren, and Drs. Yasutomo Nasu,
Terry L. Timme, Guang Yang, Chris H. Bangma, Likun Li, and Jianxiang Wang.


LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1998


                             1841 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    September 7, 1998, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: Local family appears with Jerry Lewis;

BYLINE: Walt Belcher;

BODY:


   Christopher Rhoades' mother got him a copy of the original "Nutty Professor"
so he could learn  more about Jerry Lewis.

   The 9-year-old Clearwater boy has seen Lewis for years on the annual Jerry
Lewis Labor Day  Telethon for Muscular Dystrophy.

   But he got a history lesson on Lewis this year because during today's
telethon telecast,  Christopher and his parents, Tracie and Phil Wiechmann, are
scheduled to meet the legendary  entertainer.

   The family, including Christopher's three older sisters, left Clearwater for
Hollywood on  Friday.

   The telethon, which began at 9 p.m. Sunday on WFTS, Channel 28, is broadcast
live from studios  at CBS Television City.

   "We are so excited about the trip and the chance to meet Jerry Lewis in
person," Tracie Wiechmann  said Thursday before leaving.

   As of Friday, the family was scheduled to be interviewed at 10 p.m. Sunday
and again at 5:30  p.m. today. The telethon continues until 6:30 tonight.  A
three-minute taped profile of Christopher is scheduled to be shown during the
interview today.

   "I hope we can all get through it because Jerry does get emotional about
these things," Tracie  said.

   Christopher has Duchenne muscular dystrophy, an incurable disease caused by a
defective gene.  Duchenne progressively destroys voluntary muscle control. It
eventually affects the heart and lung  muscles, usually leading to death in the
20s.

   "Chris is doing very well so far," his mother says. "He's still ambulatory
and doesn't need a  wheelchair yet. He's a very happy child who likes to get a
laugh by playing pranks and practical  jokes on us."  Christopher, a student at
Safety Harbor Montessori Academy, has been featured during past telethons  on
the local segments produced by WFTS, Channel 28.

   While there is no cure yet, the Wiechmanns are excited that MDA is scheduled
to soon begin human  gene therapy experiments for Duchenne.

   "This is our first tangible hope and if they can come up with a corrective
gene that replaces the  faulty one, it would be wonderful," Tracie said.

   She added that this year's telethon will focus on gene therapy treatment.

   In a prepared statement from the national MDA, Lewis said, "The experiences
of Christopher and  his family are poignant examples of the challenges muscular
dystrophy presents. I'm honored that  they agreed to share their story with our
television audience of some 75 million, and I know  viewers across the country
will be moved by their courage and hope."

   Tampa Bay area MDA representative Ann Taylor, who produces the local portion
of the telethon on  Channel 28, said the profile of Christopher is one of the
most moving stories she has ever seen.

   "Christopher's parents are just the nicest people, and we're glad the rest of
the country will  get to meet them," she said.

   Last year, the 32nd telethon brought in a record $ 50.5 million and raised $
701,028 locally.

   Local hosts for the telethon include Channel 28 anchors Martie Tucker,
Brendan McLaughlin, Bob  Kendrick, Linda Hurtado, Angie Moreschi and Dave Mikes;
sports anchor Jay Crawford; forecasters  Wayne Shattuck and Denis Phillips.

   Other personalities involved include Scott Robbins of Coast 107.3; John
Ritter of Q105; Jeff  Thomas of 93.3 WFLZ; Enrico Ciccone of the Tampa Bay
Lightning; and Orestes Destrade, director of  community relations for the Tampa
Bay Devil Rays.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; SIGNATURE,
 Christopher Rhoades

NOTES: WALT BELCHER

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1998


                             1842 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                September 6, 1998, Sunday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: TISSUE BANK AIDS RESEARCH INTO CHILD DISORDERS;
 MEDICINE: THE CHOC FACILITY IS ONE OF ONLY THREE IN THE U.S. THAT COLLECT
SAMPLES FROM YOUNG SUFFERERS OF BRAIN AND SPINAL CORD AILMENTS.

BYLINE: LORENZA MUNOZ, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   It is a delicate dance, a struggle to find the right words to console
grieving parents while also asking for permission to harvest their dead child's
organs.

   The physicians and scientists at Children's Hospital of Orange County do
their best to gently explain that the only way to find a cure or prevent
childhood disorders ranging from autism to cerebral palsy is to dissect and
research brain and organ tissue from young sufferers.

   "We are not only trying to help diagnose but to use tissue to better
understand the disorders," said Dr. Stuart Stein, founder and director of
neurology at the hospital's nonprofit Brain and Tissue Bank for Developmental
Disorders.

   The center collects and disseminates brain and organ tissue from young
patients to researchers and universities throughout the world. One of only three
such organ banks in the nation and the only one of its kind on the West Coast,
the 2-year-old clinic based in Orange focuses on disorders that attack the brain
and spinal cords of youngsters, officials said.

   The clinic recently petitioned the National Institutes of Health to renew its
funding. It shares a $ 1-million federal grant with the nation's two other brain
and tissue banks in Maryland and Miami.

   Its work is recognized as helping to lead the way to curing fatal childhood
diseases, said Dr. Edward McCabe, physician in chief at UCLA Children's
Hospital. He said the Orange County brain bank has been an invaluable resource
as research focuses on genes and irregularities in DNA makeup that are believed
to cause mental retardation.

   Through the brain bank, the UCLA researchers are collaborating with doctors
and scientists in South Carolina and Miami. They hope to isolate the affected
genes to improve diagnoses and eventually create a drug or gene therapy to
prevent or reduce the chances of mental retardation at birth.

   "The Orange County brain bank has been a real facilitator, letting us go the
next step," McCabe said. "They are a national resource."

   The work of the brain banks in Miami, at the University of Maryland and in
Orange County also is credited with advancing research into still mysterious
diseases such as adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD, a genetic disorder that attacks
the brain and spinal cord and was the focus of the 1992 movie "Lorenzo's Oil."

   About 3% of children born in the United States have mental disorders at birth
or eventually develop an abnormality, said Dr. Felix de la Cruz, founder of the
Miami and Maryland brain banks and chief of the mental retardation and
development disabilities branch of the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, a branch of the NIH.

   Many of the disorders systematically destroy the brain over time. Sometimes,
such as in instances of ALD, babies are born without any apparent problems. Then
they begin disintegrating, losing the ability to talk and walk. Many eventually
die.

   "At this point, we have no real treatment," Stein said. "You can't make the
brain regrow."

   It wasn't long ago that scientists shied away from researching mental
retardation, saying the brain is too complex to decipher, McCabe said. It also
was difficult to find patients to examine and study.

   Mental retardation and other disorders were considered embarrassing secrets
that most families wanted to hide, doctors said.

   "The children were dumped in institutions with very little care or
opportunity for improvement," de la Cruz said. Added McCabe: "Families kept it a
secret, so it was difficult to even do family studies."

   Society's acceptance of mental disorders has allowed doctors and researchers
in recent years to probe deeper into the causes of these conditions.

   "Now, it's open and addressed," de la Cruz said.

   For years, officials at the National Institutes of Health wanted to open a
brain bank on the West Coast. But they were unable to find an appropriate
research facility, de la Cruz said.

   "In many of the research site visits I made, scientists bemoaned the lack of
central repositories for brain and other tissues they could use," he said.

   Then officials at Children's Hospital recruited Stein, whose specialties are
fetal brain development and metabolic disorders, with the goal of establishing
the facility as one of the key children's neurological research and clinical
centers in the nation.

   That is when the West Coast brain bank became a reality, and a resource for
the entire region, de la Cruz said.

   "You have lots of hospitals that take care of children in California, but
there are only six children's hospitals in the state," said Dr. Maria Minon,
vice president of medical affairs for CHOC. "The Brain and Tissue Bank not only
increases our quality, it gives us the ability to be at the forefront."

   The local tissue bank has harvested hundreds of organs, a majority coming
from biopsies of live patients and the rest from cadavers.

   "The response from the scientific communities has been very positive," de la
Cruz said. "They have told us that without the Brain and Tissue Banks, a lot of
research could not be carried out."

   The work can be difficult, as organs often are gathered amid tragic
circumstances.

   "They are slow, painful and awful deaths to watch," clinic coordinator Philip
Schwartz said.

   But researchers, scientists and even the parents of the victims find
something life affirming in it all.

   "Most of the parents we approach are grateful for the opportunity to give
some meaning to the pain their child has suffered," Schwartz said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Images of brains are reflected in glasses worn by Dr. Stuart
Stein, founder of CHOC's Brain and Tissue Bank.  PHOTOGRAPHER: KEVIN P. CASEY /
Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1998


                             1843 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                           September 6, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: SEMINOLE TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: SEMINOLE TIMES; LARGO TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS
TIMES; CITY & STATE

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: At telethon, boy helps others, self

BYLINE: KRISTINE MILLEN

DATELINE: CLEARWATER

BODY:


   Most 9 year olds have never heard of Jerry Lewis.

   But to Christopher Rhoades, a fourth-grader at Safety Harbor Montessori
Academy, Lewis is a hero.

   Not only does Christopher think Lewis is funny and cool as the Nutty
Professor, Lewis has also raised millions of dollars to fund research into
muscular dystrophy, a disease that has put a crimp in Christopher's style.

   This weekend, Christopher will get the chance to work alongside Lewis to
garner support for the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

   Christopher, his parents Tracie and Phil Wiechmann and sisters Gina, Leah
and Sara left Friday for Los Angeles, where they are scheduled to appear on  the
Jerry Lewis Labor Day Telethon for MDA.

   The Wiechmanns are one of nine families to be highlighted during the
national segment of the 21 1/2 hour program that begins at 9 tonight.

   MDA and its corporate sponsors are paying for the Wiechmanns' five-day  trip.

   "As a child, I always looked forward to the telethon," Christopher's  mother
said before leaving for California. "I loved the entertainment and  watching
Jerry Lewis. But seeing those children - it was hard to watch them,  yet I knew
I wanted to help. My mom would make me wait until Labor Day  afternoon to call
in our pledge. Never did I realize then the role MDA would  play in my life."

   The  Wiechmanns will appear in a three-minute video that focuses on the
family's reaction to gene therapy experiments for Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
which  Christopher has.

   Boys with Duchenne, the most common type of muscular dystrophy, lack the
gene that tells the body to produce dystrophin, a protein that is critical to
maintaining muscle strength. Eventually, the heart and lung muscles are
weakened. Life expectancy is in the 20s.

   Christopher, who was diagnosed with Duchenne when he was 3, is still able  to
walk short distances without his braces, which he wears only at night. He  uses
a wheelchair for long distances. The Wiechmanns recently presented  Christopher
with a motorized scooter so he too could speed around the block  with his
bike-riding buddies.

   "We know gene therapy is not expected to be the cure," said Mrs.  Wiechmann.
"It's a preliminary step to a cure for MD. But for us, the big  rush is that we
want that cure to come within the next two years before  Christopher will be
forced into a wheelchair."

   MDA is expected to begin human testing within the next several months,
pending  Food and Drug Administration approval, said Jim Brown, MDA director  of
public affairs.

   "You always have hope, you have to, but gene therapy is the first tangible
hope that we have had," Mrs. Wiechmann said.

   The Wiechmanns have long helped MDA. Mrs. Wiechmann stays at home to care
for Christopher and Phil Wiechmann is the vice president of New Latitudes, a
continence management company. They brought together four children from
previous marriages when they married seven years ago.

   For the past six years, they have participated in local segments of Lewis'
telethon, and have appeared at golf tournaments and other MDA fund-raisers.

   But being in the spotlight is not Christopher's forte, said his mom.  Neither
is talking. He does, however, get a thrill from meeting the  celebrities who
rally for the MDA cause, like Miami Dolphins quarterback Dan  Marino, and actors
Will Smith and George Clooney.

   While Christopher is excited about having met Lewis, Mrs. Wiechmann is
reliving childhood memories. When she watched the telethon as a little girl,
her favorite part was waiting for the final dollar count and listening to  Lewis
sing You'll Never Walk Alone.

   "That's the part I'm still excited about it," she said. "I want to hear  him
say, "We beat last year's amount.' That's the symbol of how many people  care."
  Where to watch

Jerry Lewis Labor Day Telethon for MDA begins at 9 p.m. today and ends about
5:30 Monday on WFTS-Ch. 28. Along with three live segments with Lewis, the
Wiechmanns will be featured in a three-minute video taped in the Tampa Bay  area
in June. They can be seen between 10 and 10:45 tonight and between  midnight and
1 a.m. and at 5:30 p.m. Monday.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, DOUGLAS R. CLIFFORD; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, DOUGLAS R.
CLIFFORD; Nine-year-old Christopher Rhoades of Clearwater plays with friends
Erik Werlin, 9, and Michael Warren, 8, at Safety Harbor Montesorri Academy. (ran
SE, LA, CT); Nine-year-old Christopher Rhoades of Clearwater plays with friends
Erik Werlin, 9, and Michael Warren, 8, at Safety Harbor Montesorri Academy. (ran

 NT)

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1998


                             1844 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 6, 1998, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B3, COMMENTARY COLUMN

LENGTH: 2249 words

HEADLINE: THE MORAL BOUNDARIES OF GENETIC TECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: Daniel Callahan; The Hastings Center

BODY:


   * The American Entrprise Institute recently held a seminar on Genetic
Research and Society moderated by Clarisa Long, a fellow at the institute. The
following is from the institute's summary of the presentations.

Why genetic research?

Daniel Callahan

The Hastings Center

   I see three different ways to set standards to deal with limits on genetic
research and its application. One is use of religious traditions, combined with
a particular view of nature. This would push one in a direction of seeing
fundamental limits to the benefits of trying to manipulate nature.

   Second is an attempt to balance risks and benefits. We can determine by
scientific evidence what the risks and benefits might be and then try to
determine what the political and social consensus is concerning our response to
those risks and benefits.

   Third is a belief that scientific progress is good, that it is worth taking a
risk for that progress, and that the main point of scientific and technological
progress is the expansion of choice and the relief of individual suffering. The
presumption here would be that the technologies ought to go forward unless we
can find very decisive reasons to stop them.

   My own convictions run in the direction of some combination of the first and
second approaches. That is a view of human nature that would lead us to develop
standards for setting limits with some way of assessing risks and benefits while
also taking the religious perspective into account.

There are several obstacles to setting standards.

   First is the difficulty of proving harm with technologies that are only under
development.

   Second is what I call the pluralistic proposition. It argues that when people
have fundamental differences about ultimate human goods and values people should
be free to make their own choices.

   A third powerful factor is simply the profit motive. I do not believe we
would be having a debate on much of the genetic technology were it not likely
that a lot of money is to be made with it if it works.

   The last obstacle is the relief of suffering. Some people believe that the
relief of suffering is the principal aim of the good society. No matter how much
our health increases, it is never good enough. An enormous bias exists in favor
of progress and innovation as the only real and serious means of relieving the
human condition.

   Future shock wears off Eric T. Juengst Case Western Reserve University

   One of the features of the early debates on in vitro fertilization was an
expression of moral unease. If we go back to 1972 and look at the moral
boundaries of reproductive genetics, we see they are clinical risks and moral
revulsion. The discussion has shifted because we have so many more things to
talk about. We now worry about enhancement, pre-implantation diagnoses,
fetal-cell sampling, prenatal diagnostic techniques, germ-line gene therapy and
cloning.

   The risk boundary and the public revulsion boundary are expandable as our
future shock wears off and we become socialized to the next new intervention.
For the purposes of making public policy, no one of those arguments persuades.
Even collectively those arguments are not enough to persuade. The wheels have
been spinning the past 20 years because one can rebut all those arguments in a
free society.

   We are still heirs of the Enlightenment. That is, we are still committed to a
particular vision of individuals as moral equals and free agents. We are
committed to our constitutional respect for moral equality and autonomy. One
classic way in which we can violate that commitment is to treat others as if all
we needed to know about them was their genes. Our reaction against the ways in
which lineage and genetic prejudice had oppressed people led us to our current
notion of individuals as free and equal moral agents.

   Any intervention simply based on knowledge of people ,s genes violates the
boundary of genetic prejudice. On the other hand, maybe for interventions that
act to increase genetic diversity, we have enough trust in each other to accept
the gift of real novelty. That might permit the use of technologies to change
individuals to allow them to break free from their genetic heritage through
various enhancement technologies.

'Playing God'

Leon R. Kass University of Chicago

   Occupying the moral ground of compassionate healing, biomedical technology
usually receives a royal welcome in our society, even when it raises challenges
to other traditional moral norms. To a large extent, the same will be true of
much of what genetic technology has to offer in the future, especially insofar
as it actually leads to improved diagnosis and treatment of disease. Who would
not welcome genetic surgery that corrected the genetic defects that lead to
sickle cell anemia, Huntington ,s disease and breast cancer, or that protected
against the immune deficiency caused by the AIDS virus?

   But genetic technology strikes most people as different from other biomedical
technologies. Many people are concerned, anxious, afraid of tampering with human
genes. Even knowledgeable people duly impressed by the truly astonishing genetic
achievements of the past decade and eager for the benefits are nonetheless
ambivalent. They sense - I think rightly - that genetic technology, while in
some respects continuous with the traditional medical project, is also in
decisive respects radically new and, therefore, disquieting. Often hard-pressed
to articulate the precise basis of their disquiet, they talk rather in general
terms about the dangers of eugenics or the fear of "man playing God."

   Genetic engineering, when fully developed, will wield two powers not shared
by medical practice. Medicine treats existing individuals, and it seeks to
correct deviations from a more or less stable norm of health. Genetic
engineering, in contrast, will be able deliberately to make changes that are
transmissible into succeeding generations (especially with direct germ-line or
embryo modifications); and it may be able to create new capacities (through
so-called genetic enhancement) and, hence, new norms of health and fitness. For
the present, genetic technology is being hailed primarily for its ability to
better diagnose and treat disease in existing individuals. To the extent that
genetic engineering would and could be confined to such practices, it would
raise few questions beyond safety and efficacy.

   Even people who might welcome the growth of genetic knowledge and technology
are worried about the power of geneticists, genetic engineers and any other
governmental or other authority armed with genetic technology. Precisely because
we have been taught by these very scientists that genes hold the secret of life
and that our genotype is our essence if not quite our destiny, we are made
nervous by those whose expert knowledge and technique touch our very being.

   The new biologists and their technological minions do not know all they think
they know, and they never will. For all their ingenuity, they do not even seek
the wisdom that just might yield the kind of knowledge that keeps human life
human. And if the rest of us become clearly aware of the dangers - not just to
privacy or insurability, but to our very humanity - we might be better equipped
to defend those increasingly beleaguered pockets and principles of human
dignity, even as we continue to reap the considerable benefits genetic
technology will inevitably provide.

Screening guidelines Robert F. Murray Howard University

   We need to set limits for the applications of genetic technology. In genetic
testing and screening we have the problems of the danger of genetic determinism.
We are deficient in the knowledge of gene structure and function relative to the
ability to cure disease successfully.

   Twice in 20 years we have reviewed the reasons for genetic screening and have
suggested that if we can treat or manage disease, if we can provide information
for making reproductive decisions, and if we can prevent the onset or
manifestation of disease, screening is justified. In many ways, genetic
screening is not any different from screening for other conditions, except that
my having a disease or carrying a certain gene has implications for anybody who
is genetically related to me.

   The best-known and described disease in medical literature is sickle cell
anemia. If there is any disease where testing and screening applications should
work, that ought to be the one. By 1988, many states instituted newborn
screening for sickle cell anemia. But we still grapple with problems of the
sickle cell trait.

   A presidential commission reviewed the practices for conducting genetic
screening programs and came up with five recommended guidelines. First, the
community should have prior education and be involved in setting up the program.
Second, informed consent is critical to the proper conduct of genetic screening.
Third, accurate diagnosis should be used and the results should be unambiguous.
Fourth, results should be kept confidential. Fifth, voluntary programs are
preferred, and mandatory programs should be justified.

   Even with a simple genetic trait that is easily tested for, readily
identified and unambiguous, problems will arise. Add the complexity of DNA
testing and the multiplicity of the gene mutations we are dealing with, and one
can see the kinds of problems that might possibly arise.

   Enhancement will clearly raise the specter of discrimination of
classification of human beings, perhaps even more rigidly than we are currently
being classified. I think we already have evidence that technological
applications driven by the profit motive will cause harm. In the long run, if we
do not guide or set limits for the applications of technology, we shall surely
do more harm than good.

   Genetic enhancement Nelson A. Wivel University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine

   I think that we can agree that genetic technology and genetic engineering are
essentially generic terms and apply to a range of enabling techniques. In terms
of human genetics, there are such elements as molecular testing for genetic
disease, the use of molecular genetics in human embryo research, and the cloning
of humans and animals. One of the principal problems for the scientifically
unsophisticated is to lump all those disparate elements into one common burial
ground while missing the fact that significant differences exist among the
various applications of recombinant DNA technology.

   I have chosen to focus on human gene transfer or human gene therapy. Gene
transfer itself does not pose any new ethical problems. Most of the ethical
problems concerning gene therapy were first addressed when gene transplantation
arrived on the scene 25 years ago. Because of the long public oversight of gene
therapy, the majority of the public approves of gene therapy as long as it is
used to study and treat human disease.

   So what is the ethical conundrum surrounding that particular type of applied
biotechnology? A substantive problem awaits us, and that is the use of human
gene transfer techniques for conditions other than disease. That type of gene
transfer has been dubbed enhancement.

   Two gene therapy trials are currently under way: one in Boston under Dr.
Jeffrey Eisner at Tufts University, the other in New York at Cornell University
with Dr. Ronald Kristal as the principal investigator. Both trials have been
able to isolate the gene that encodes for vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEG-F). VEG-F works well in model systems to produce a growth network of small
systems. Dr. Eisner is attempting to treat patients by using a balloon catheter
to transfer genes to a major artery in the patient ,s leg. Dr. Kristal ,s
proposal is to inject VEG-F into the myocardium. In both cases, the hope is to
increase the amount of collateral circulation.

   We can all agree that those are noble gestures. But suppose that we could
move over slightly and see what could be done in the way of enhancement. What is
to keep the use of that technology away from athletes who would like to have an
extra supply of blood vessels to their muscles to oxygenate them better and
perhaps increase muscular strength? How does one decide which enhancements are
ethical and which are not? How does one reach any common standard by which to
make that judgment?

   Banning genetic enhancements is impossible under our current regulatory
paradigms: It is possible to move from the use of gene transfer for the
treatment of disease to the use of gene transfer for enhancement in practically
a seamless fashion. The FDA generally approves a drug for an initial type of
disease, but nothing in the law prevents physicians from using that drug for
another disease. That is called off-label use, and the FDA currently treats a
gene as it does a drug.

   Another dimension to that problem is even more compelling - the international
one. Standards in the United States are not universally applied. If some other
nation should decide to engage in those technologies for the purpose of
enhancement, one can be sure that those with sufficient financial resources
would not hesitate to go to those countries where those technologies are
available.

   As those technologies develop, public venues for discussion will be
indispensable. The public deserves a forum, and public discussion should help to
ameliorate some of the potentially negative developments in this area.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1998


                             1845 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    September 6, 1998, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 902 words

HEADLINE: Proposed genetic therapy on infants prompts loud scientific, religious
debate; Calif. researcher seeks to treat genetic defects

SOURCE: NEWSDAY

BODY:


   A pioneer in genetic therapy is proposing experiments that might be the first
to change an individual human's germ line, the cells reserved to make sperm and
eggs.

   The idea, experts say, is expected to prompt hot debate on a number of
fronts: scientific -- involving possible unexpected downstream effects on other
genes; humanitarian -- if the research fails, a mistake might persist through
later generations; and even religious -- some argue the germ line is God's
blueprint for humanity, don't mess with it.

   "I want to force that debate," said Dr. W. French Anderson, a researcher at
the University of Southern California School of Medicine in Los Angeles, whose
team is submitting the proposals.

   The experiments, recently submitted for consideration by a federal review
committee, call for inserting genes into fetuses as a way to fix severe genetic
defects before the babies are born.

   By working with fetuses, Anderson hopes the curative gene will have greater
cell coverage with tiny patients' compared with attempts at therapy later in
life. He hopes to cure two genetic diseases -- ADA deficiency, a rare immune
deficiency syndrome, and alpha thalassemia, a severe inherited form of anemia
common in Asia.

   Although Anderson and his colleagues aren't ready to experiment yet with
human fetuses (their first work will be in lab dishes, then in animals), they've
submitted preliminary documents to the National Institutes of Health committee
that oversees such work, anticipating a national debate on the issue.

   In an interview, Anderson said his goal is to spur exploration of the ethical
and societal pitfalls early, while tissue culture and animal experiments are
being done. He said he hopes to begin human experiments in about two years.

   Already Anderson and his colleagues have engineered the special viruses
needed to carry the genes into fetuses. "We have built the vectors [viruses] and
are starting the tissue culture phase [of experiments]," he said. The next
experiments will be in animals such as mice, sheep and monkeys.

   The big difference in human experiments, Anderson said, is that for the first
time "the likelihood is high that at least some of the germ line cells will be
affected."

   "We don't know what will happen," he added. "But if the gene goes in and
causes a problem, now there is a problem not only in this fetus. If it survives
there, the gene persists in the germ line of all the descendants."

   Dr. Robertson Parkman, a longtime member of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, said Anderson's desire to get the debate going "is perfectly valid.
It's necessary that we begin to discuss how we're going to evaluate the
introduction of genetic material into the human germ line."

   When human gene therapy trials started at the beginning of this decade, the
experiments were aimed at so-called "somatic cells," targeting cells such as
bone marrow that would not pass genes on to the next generation.

   When the possibility arose for doing experiments with germ-line cells, it
"was just shelved," said bio-ethicist Thomas Murray. "We were going to just put
that aside and focus on somatic cell therapy. But some people felt it should not
just be shelved, but banned forever."

   Murray, director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at Case Western Reserve
University in Cleveland, said other ethicists and observers "wanted to retain an
open mind, not embracing it, but saying let's revisit once we know more about
somatic cell therapy. I'm one of those people."

   Another was ethicist LeRoy Walters, director of the Kennedy Center for Ethics
at Georgetown University in Washington.

   About five years ago, Walters began arguing that debate on germ-line therapy
should start soon. He could not be reached for comment.

   Murray noted, however, that "we're now at the point where we ought to be
assessing these arguments."

   There are also other issues to be considered beyond potential damage to the
germ line, the researchers said. For instance, if something goes wrong while
putting new genes into a fetus, both the fetus and the mother may be in peril.
Additionally, if the result of gene therapy is only a partial cure in an infant
who would normally die, the treatment may produce an individual who suffers
through life needing expensive and difficult care.

   Anderson is no stranger to such controversy. He and Drs. R. Michael Blaese
and Kenneth Culver, all three then at the National Institutes of Health, ran the
first approved human gene therapy experiments.

   They tried to cure two young Ohio girls of ADA, the severe combined immune
deficiency syndrome. Children born with this disorder have no natural immunity,
and unless cured must live inside germ-free chambers, huge plastic bubbles.

   The first two experiments were partially successful; the girls did establish
immune function, but it must be maintained with periodic shots of an expensive
drug called Peg-ADA. Still, both girls can live relatively normal lives.

   Anderson said the problem in those first two attempts was that not enough of
the girls' white blood cells picked up the normal gene -- which makes an enzyme
called adenosine deaminase. The reason for trying experiments in-utero, he
explained, is because cell division is occurring rapidly in a developing fetus,
and there's a far better chance the engineered virus will infect many more
cells.

   Pub Date: 9/06/98

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1998


                             1846 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



              September 4, 1998, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: CITY & STATE; FLASH; ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. 2B

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 512 words

HEADLINE: Jerry Lewis' telethon to highlight local family

SOURCE: Compiled from Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:


   There's a curious mixture of exhilaration and fear filling the Clearwater
home of Phil and Tracie Wiechmann these days, as they prepare for an  appearance
next week with their 9-year-old son Christopher Rhoades on The  Jerry Lewis MDA
Labor Day Telethon. The family was scheduled to fly from the  Tampa Bay area to
Los Angeles this morning, allowing a few days to prepare for  three scheduled
appearances on Lewis' 33rd annual telethon benefiting the  Muscular Dystrophy
Association. The telethon also will feature stars such as  Bill Cosby, Ed
McMahon, Celine Dion and Hanson. The show airs for 21 1/2 hours  beginning at 9
p.m. Sunday on WFTS-Ch. 28. During the show, Lewis will  broadcast a previously
recorded feature on the Wiechmanns and have a live  interview with the family.
"You hold it together for months, then you crash,  crying in your room one night
by yourself," said Tracie Wiechmann, describing  the stories she told a film
crew from the telethon, which taped footage of the  family in July. "It's hard
seeing him fall down or not be able to ride a  bike. But you have to hope." The
biggest hope currently boosting the  Wiechmann family is the announcement of a
possible clinical trial of gene  therapy treatments for Duchenne muscular
dystrophy - a therapy the Wiechmanns  hope will lead to a cure.

Movie on Selma march

features leader's daughter

 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s daughter has joined the cast of a television
movie about the 1960s civil rights struggle. Yolanda King has signed on to
appear in the Wonderful World of Disney movie Selma, Lord, Selma. The ABC  movie
is based on two girls' experiences during the 1965 Selma, Ala., voting  rights
march led by King. Filming is set to begin in Georgia and Alabama this  month.
The movie is scheduled for broadcast in January.



AUDITIONS: The youth ballet and music seasons are gearing up with a round of
auditions. West Florida Ballet, which performs The Nutcracker Nov. 27-29 at
Tampa Bay Performing Arts Center, is in need of boys and girls age 2 to 7  years
old to play bonbons, candies, mice and soldiers. Those who are  interested can
come by the studio at 3705-3 Tampa Road in Oldsmar 11:30 a.m.  to 1:30 p.m.
Saturday or call (727) 854-4578. Ballet Theatre International,  which performs
its Nutcracker with the Florida Orchestra Dec. 11-13 at  Mahaffey Theater, has
auditions for children age 8 to 15 years old Sept. 20.  Call (813) 814-3246. The
Pinellas Youth Symphony, open to students age 5  through 21, has auditions Sept.
12 at Osceola Middle School. Call (727)  438-3149.



CANCELLATIONS: The Wizard of Oz has canceled its Orlando engagement in  October.
The tour will go on hiatus after performances at the Tampa Bay  Performing Arts
Center Sept. 11-27. Bernadette Peters' show Oct. 31 at Van  Wezel Hall has been
canceled because she has been cast in the starring role of  the Broadway revival
of Annie Get Your Gun.

- Compiled from Times staff and wire reports

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files; (1994) Yolanda King

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1998


                             1847 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       September 4, 1998 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: ALGIERS FATHER HOPES NEW GENE THERAPY WILL HELP AILING GIRL

BYLINE: By John Pope Staff writer

BODY:

   After an experimental compound was injected into her brain to stop the
genetic disease ravaging her nervous system, Lisette Guths fever shot up to 102
degrees, and she started vomiting.

   But her fever broke Wednesday, and the 16-month-old Algiers girl might be
well enough to be discharged today from the Philadelphia hospital where she has
been a patient for nearly two weeks, a nurse practitioner specializing in
neurosurgical cases said.

   Lisette suffers from Canavan disease, which short-circuits the brain by
breaking down myelin, a protective coating around nerve fibers. Without such
insulation, there is no communication in the nervous system, and normal
development is impossible.

   Even though Lisette is more than a year old, she cant walk or speak. Even
following an object with her eyes is beyond her ability.

   To try to keep this destructive process in check, scientists have developed
an artificial gene that is injected into a reservoir surgically inserted just
under the scalp. From there, it goes into a thin catheter running to the brain.

   Lisette is the eighth child to receive this compound in the United States. It
is being tested for safety as part of the process to determine whether it can be
sold.

   The reservoir was inserted Aug. 27 at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in
Philadelphia, and Lisette received 10 cubic centimeters of the artificial gene,
about a syringe full, Tuesday at the hospital, said Doug Guth, her father.

   Shes doing great, said Chris Abel, a nurse practitioner. She has tolerated
the injection very well. Shes had some fever and vomiting, which are expected.
Shes sleepier than she normally is, but, still, thats within the guidelines of
what we would expect.

   Lisettes temperature rose as high as 102 degrees, Doug Guth said, but it has
dropped.

   If it stays down, she might be discharged today or during the weekend, Abel
said.

   But Lisette cant go home because she has to return Sept. 17 for a follow-up
check.

   Doug Guth said he doesnt expect to see any changes until next week. A child
who underwent the treatment at Thomas Jefferson in March seems to be able to pay
more attention, Abel said. He seems to focus a little bit better and is,
basically, more alert.

   There is no accurate case count. Descendants of eastern European Jews are at
greatest risk; the carrier rate among this population is about 1 in 40.

   The root of Canavan disease is a defective gene that shuts down production of
an enzyme needed to break down a certain type of acid in the brain. If the body
cannot perform this reaction, the brain becomes overloaded with the acid, which
destroys myelin.

   Moreover, the acid buildup makes the brains of boys and girls with Canavan
disease swell.

   Most children with the disease die before their 10th birthdays.

   The gene therapy cannot reverse the damage that has been done.

   An increase in functional level would be the best that we can hope for, Abel
said. Were giving them back the gene theyre missing, so, hopefully, that will
happen.

   Were hopeful, Doug Guth said. Everything has gone the way they told us it
would, no surprises or complications.

GRAPHIC: Doug and Desiree Guth with daughter Lisette before she went to
Philadelphia for treatment of Canavan disease, which short-circuits the nervous
system. [COLOR] STAFF FILE PHOTO BY ELIOT KAMENITZ

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1998


                             1848 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 3, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer treatments advance; FDA urged to approve 2 new gene
therapies

SOURCE: FROM WIRE AND STAFF REPORTS

BODY:


   The first in a wave of gene-based attacks on cancer took a major step forward
yesterday as government scientists recommended that the drug Herceptin be sold
to fight advanced breast cancer.

   Herceptin does not cure breast cancer. But for about 30 percent of patients
whose tumors are fueled by a bad gene, it offers a chance at living a little
longer after the cancer has spread through a woman's body, scientific advisers
to the Food and Drug Administration concluded in Bethesda.

   In a second potentially critical advance against breast cancer yesterday, the
FDA's advisers said another drug, tamoxifen, may reduce the chances that certain
healthy women will get the disease. But the panelists stressed that the FDA
should approve tamoxifen only for women considered at high risk of breast
cancer, because it also can cause life-threatening side effects.

   The FDA is scheduled to make final decisions on both drugs by November. It is
not bound by advisory panel recommendations, but typically follows them.

   The question of whether women should take Herceptin was an easier decision --
because it is for women whose advanced breast cancer has spread to other parts
of their bodies, giving them a slim chance of surviving for long.

   "It's very exciting," said Dr. Dennis Slamon of the University of California
at Los Angeles, whose genetic research led to Herceptin.

   Thirty percent of breast cancer patients have a defective gene called
HER2/neu. In a healthy cell, the gene produces a protein that helps signal cells
to grow normally and multiply. In women who have too much HER2, the breast cells
reproduce out of control and spread through the body.

   Herceptin's manufacturer, Genentech Inc., genetically engineered an antibody
that blocks excess HER2 to inhibit tumor growth and possibly kill cancer.

   It's not a magic bullet -- it helped only half of the women who tested it.
But adding Herceptin to chemotherapy or Taxol, another therapy, doubled chances
that tumors would shrink. In women who had failed standard therapy, Herceptin
alone reduced tumors by half in 15 percent of women. A handful of women went
into remission. Most later relapsed, but one is alive six years later and
another three years later.

   For most patients, Herceptin provided about three more months before the
cancer progressed. Still, experts say a three-month respite in patients that
sick is an important advance.

   A year later, 78 percent of women who took Herceptin together with
chemotherapy were alive, compared with 67 percent who took chemotherapy alone.

   Thus, the FDA advisers voted unanimously that Herceptin offered benefit to
patients who had failed other chemotherapies, and that it could be used as
first-line therapy together with Taxol.

   But they said patients should not use Herceptin with other chemotherapy drugs
known as anthracyclines. While Herceptin causes far fewer side effects than most
chemotherapy, it surprised doctors by causing one serious problem: heart damage,
sometimes severe.

   The problem seemed worse in patients who were taking anthracyclines: One in
four of them suffered some heart damage. By a 9-2 vote, the panel decided the
risk of heart damage outweighed the benefit of a few more months for this group
of patients.

   The FDA advisers' other move yesterday, on tamoxifen, is aimed at healthy
women who are at high risk of breast cancer. The advisers decided that the drug
may reduce those women's risk of cancer. But the panel's backing of tamoxifen
was a reluctant one, because its benefit was small and the drug also causes
serious side effects even in these healthy women. It doubles their risk of
uterine cancer, triples the risk of a potentially deadly blood clot and
increases the chances of cataracts.

   Headlines touted the drug last spring when the National Cancer Institute
announced that a study found that the drug could prevent 45 percent of breast
cancer cases in high-risk women. But when those numbers were translated to real
life, the FDA advisers noted that 6,600 women took tamoxifen for 3 1/2 years,
but it prevented only 69 cases of cancer.

   Doctors couldn't tell which women were most likely to get that benefit -- or
if tamoxifen simply delayed cancer's inevitable appearance, meaning women took
big risks for a short-term benefit.

   "We don't know who to treat," said panel Chairman Dr. Janice Dutcher of
Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

   Dr. Gary Cohen, director of the cancer center at the Greater Baltimore
Medical Center, said women with the strongest family histories of breast cancer
have the most to gain.

   "If somebody says, 'My mother and sister had it,' that's someone who might
benefit," Cohen said. "If someone says her cousin and grandmother's sister had
it, she might not be someone who would benefit as greatly."

   Additionally, Cohen said he would recommend it only for post-menopausal women
because the drug benefited them more significantly than it did younger women.
"I'd use it for the full five years assuming they did not have significant
changes in menopausal symptoms, but as soon as toxicities occurred, I'd
discontinue it.

   "The benefit, although real, is marginal. It has to be an individual
decision."

   Pub Date: 9/03/98

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ASSOCIATED PRESS, Pioneer: Dr. Dennis Slamon of UCLA, whose
research led to the development of Herceptin, discusses his work in Bethesda.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1998


                             1849 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 2, 1998, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: Protein points to potent cancer

BYLINE: Rita Rubin

BODY:

   Prostate tumors that contain relatively low levels of a certain
protein tend to be more aggressive, says a study out today.

   Researchers from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New
York measured levels of the protein, called p27, in 130 tumors
from men whose prostates had been removed. They found that patients
whose cancer recurred more quickly after surgery tended to have
little or no p27 in tumors, according to the research report in
the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.


   The p27 protein is produced by the p27 gene, which seems to act
as a brake on cell growth. Low levels of the protein suggest that
the gene has been altered and is unable to do its job.

   P27 could represent the first genetic crystal ball for prostate
cancer, says lead author Carlos Cordon-Cardo. "If we knew which
tumors might be more aggressive, we could treat them more aggressively."

   While a few such prognostic indicators have been identified for
cancers of the breast, bladder and other organs, predicting the
future in prostate cancer always has been tricky.

   In many men, prostate tumors are so slow-growing that the disease
is not as bad as the potential side effects of cancer treatment.
Unfortunately, it's nearly impossible to identify those patients.

   Cordon-Cardo was co-author of a related study reported June 17
in the cancer institute journal. That research found that the
lower the p27 levels were in patients' tumors, the less likely
the patients were to be alive and cancer-free nine years after
having their prostates removed.

   Because both p27 studies focused on men who had prostate cancer
surgery, the findings cannot be used to help newly diagnosed patients
make treatment decisions, says Richard Cote, lead author of the
June study.

   Many more years of research will be needed to determine p27's
usefulness in such men, says Cote, of the University of Southern
California School of Medicine in Los Angeles. Eventually, he says,
studies of p27 could lead to gene therapy for prostate cancer.

LOAD-DATE: September 02, 1998


                             1850 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 1, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: MD gene discovery may bring new therapies

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   A week before the annual Jerry Lewis Labor Day telethon, two teams
of competing scientists announced the discovery of a gene that
appears to be involved in at least two forms of muscular dystrophy.

   The gene, reported in the September issue of Nature Genetics,
out today, appears responsible for a rare adult type of muscular
dystrophy (MD) called Miyoshi myopathy and a more common form
of limb girdle muscular dystrophy.

   MD is a mixed bag of muscle disorders that strike at different
ages, in different muscles and with varying degrees of severity.
All forms lead to muscle deterioration. Duchenne MD is the most
severe early childhood form and first weakens the legs. Limb girdle
MD appears later in childhood and affects the shoulders and pelvis.

   Robert Brown, who led one of the studies at Massachusetts General
Hospital, says the new gene may be responsible for 5% to 10% of
all MD cases. The gene has been named dysferlin by Brown's group
and the second team at the University of Newcastle in England.

   Dysferlin is a protein that may be important in keeping the membranes
of certain muscle cells strong. Its discovery means scientists
can develop a diagnostic tool for the gene and begin to understand
its role in all various forms of MD.

   Although six other genes are associated with the limb girdle form,
the dysferlin gene and protein reveal an entirely new way that
the disease occurs, says Kevin Campbell of the University of Iowa,
who was involved in the discovery of four of the other genes.
"This might give us a clue and help put together the whole picture
of the cause of muscular dystrophy."

   Leon Charash of the Muscular Dystrophy Association's medical advisory
committee says he will announce during the telethon Sunday and
Monday that human gene therapy studies for the Duchenne, limb
girdle and Becker forms of MD will commence this fall. The studies
are intended to show whether gene therapy reverses muscle deterioration.

LOAD-DATE: September 01, 1998


                             1851 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     August 31, 1998, Monday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: HOT DEBATE SEEN ON RESEARCH TO ALTER GERM LINE

BYLINE: ROBERT COOKE; Newsday

BODY:


   A pioneer in genetic therapy is proposing experiments that might be the first
to change an individual human's germ line, the cells reserved to make sperm and
eggs.

   The idea, experts say, is expected to prompt hot debate on a number of
fronts: scientific -- involving possible unexpected downstream effects on other
genes; humanitarian -- if the research fails, a mistake might persist through
later generations; and even religious -- some argue that the germ line is God's
blueprint for humanity, so don't mess with it.

   "I want to force that debate," said Dr. W. French Anderson, a researcher at
the University of Southern California School of Medicine in Los Angeles, whose
team is submitting the proposals.

   The experiments, recently submitted for consideration by a federal review
committee, call for inserting genes into fetuses as a way to fix severe genetic
defects before the babies are born.

   By working with fetuses, Anderson hopes that the curative gene will have
greater cell coverage with tiny patients, compared with attempts at therapy
tried later in life. He hopes to cure two genetic diseases -- ADA deficiency, a
rare immune deficiency syndrome, and alpha thalassemia, a severe inherited form
of anemia common in Asia.

   Although Anderson and his colleagues are not ready to experiment yet with
human fetuses (their first work will be in lab dishes, then in animals), they
have submitted preliminary documents to the National Institutes of Health
committee that oversees such work, anticipating a national debate on the issue.

   Dr. Robertson Parkman, a longtime member of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, said Anderson's desire to get the debate going "is perfectly valid.
It's necessary that we begin to discuss how we're going to evaluate the
introduction of genetic material into the human germ line."

   When human gene therapy trials started at the beginning of this decade, the
experiments were aimed at so-called somatic cells, targeting cells such as bone
marrow that would not pass genes on to the next generation.

   When the possibility arose for doing experiments with germ-line cells, it
"was just shelved," said bioethicist Thomas Murray. "We were going to just put
that aside and focus on somatic cell therapy. But some people felt it should not
just be shelved, but banned forever."

   Murray, director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at Case Western Reserve
University in Cleveland, said other ethicists and observers "wanted to retain an
open mind, not embracing it, but saying let's revisit once we know more about
somatic cell therapy. I'm one of those people."

   Another was ethicist LeRoy Walters, director of the Kennedy Center for Ethics
at Georgetown University in Washington. About five years ago, Walters began
arguing that debate on germ-line therapy should start soon. Murray noted that
"we're now at the point where we ought to be assessing these arguments."

   There also are other issues to be considered beyond potential damage to the
germ line, the researchers said. For instance, if something goes wrong while
putting new genes into a fetus, both the fetus and the mother may be in peril.
If the result of gene therapy is only a partial cure in an infant who normally
would die, the treatment may produce an individual who suffers through life
needing expensive and difficult care.

   Anderson is no stranger to such controversy. He and Drs. R. Michael Blaese
and Kenneth Culver, all three then at the National Institutes of Health, ran the
first approved human gene therapy experiments. They tried to cure two young Ohio
girls of ADA, the severe combined immune deficiency syndrome. Children born with
this disorder have no natural immunity. Unless cured, they must live inside
germ-free chambers, huge plastic bubbles.

   The first two experiments were partly successful; the girls did establish
immune function, but it must be maintained with periodic shots of an expensive
drug called Peg-ADA. Fortunately, both girls can live relatively normal lives.

   Anderson said the problem in those first two attempts was that not enough of
the girls' white blood cells picked up the normal gene, which makes an enzyme
called adenosine deaminase. The reason for trying experiments in-utero, he
explained, is because cell division is occurring rapidly in a developing fetus,
and there's a far better chance that the engineered virus will infect many more
cells.

   The gene used in fetuses with thalassemia will be designed to correct an
inborn defect that makes abnormal hemoglobin in the blood.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1998


                             1852 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      August 31, 1998 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: PROPOSED GENE THERAPY COULD CHANGE SEX CELLS

BYLINE: NEWSDAY

BODY:

   A pioneer in genetic therapy is proposing experiments that might be the first
to change an individual human's germ line, the cells reserved to make sperm and
eggs.

   The idea, experts say, is expected to prompt hot debate on a number of
fronts: scientific - involving possible unexpected downstream effects on other
genes; humanitarian - if the research fails, a mistake might persist through
later generations; and even religious - some argue the germ line is God's
blueprint for humanity, don't mess with it.

   "I want to force that debate," said Dr. W. French Anderson, a researcher at
the University of Southern California School of Medicine in Los Angeles, whose
team is submitting the proposals.

   The experiments, recently submitted for consideration by a federal review
committee, call for inserting genes into fetuses as a way to fix severe genetic
defects before the babies are born.

   By working with fetuses, Anderson hopes the curative gene will have greater
cell coverage with tiny patients' cells compared with attempts at therapy tried
later in life. He hopes to cure two genetic diseases - ADA deficiency, a rare
immune deficiency syndrome, and alpha thalassemia, a severe inherited form of
anemia common in Asia.

   Although Anderson and his colleagues aren't ready to experiment yet with
human fetuses (their first work will be in lab dishes, then in animals), they've
submitted preliminary documents to the National Institutes of Health committee
that oversees such work, anticipating a national debate on the issue.

   Anderson and his colleagues have engineered the viruses needed to carry the
genes into fetuses and have begun the tissue culture experiments. "The next
experiments will be in animals such as mice, sheep and monkeys," he said.

   In an interview, Anderson said his goal was to spur exploration of the
ethical and societal pitfalls early, while tissue culture and animal experiments
are being done. He said he hopes to begin human experiments in about two years.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             1853 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      August 31, 1998 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 2074 words

HEADLINE: BLOWING WHISTLE ON FRAGILE X;
SOLON COUPLE ALERTING PUBLIC TO GENETIC RETARDATION FACTOR

BYLINE: By ELAINE T. CICORA

BODY:

   Ara and Leslie Bagdasarian didn't expect child rearing would be easy, but
Julie, 6, and Alex, 4, have presented challenges the couple never bargained for.
The children are affected by the most common inherited cause of mental
retardation, fragile X syndrome.

   The condition affects the learning and developmental potential of one in
2,000 boys and one in 4,000 girls, according to the FRAXA Research Foundation,
which funds fragile X research. (The incidence rate has been revised since 1996
when the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development published the
rate at one in 1,000 males and one in 2,500 females.)

   In addition to the developmental delays, the Bagdasarian children are
hyperactive and have difficulty expressing emotions through speech. They are
being helped with speech and occupational therapy.

   FRAXA projects 90,000 Americans are affected by the genetic condition. And
yet, nine out of 10 of those who are impaired remain undiagnosed.

   The Bagdasarians of Solon are hoping to change that picture, working at the
grass-roots level to increase awareness and understanding of the condition.

   In 1997 the couple founded the Fragile X Alliance of Northeast Ohio. Starting
with a handful of families, the group now provides emotional support and
advocacy for 35 families throughout the region.

   "When our kids were diagnosed, there was absolutely nothing out there for
us," said Leslie Bagdasarian. "We didn't want anyone else to have to go through
that. We've tried to give support to other families, create awareness and
promote the research that can make a difference in our children's lives."

   Possibility of cure

   Dr. Michael Tranfaglia, co-founder with his wife, Katherine N. Clapp, of the
FRAXA Research Foundation, believes a cure is possible in three or four years.
Gene therapy, the definitive treatment, has succeeded in a petri dish and is
being tried on a laboratory mouse, he said. Protein replacement therapy, an
early hope, has been ruled out.

   "There are a lot of characteristics of fragile X that make it look quite
likely that you can do something about it," he said. "It's not degenerative, and
a lot of developmental disorders are. ... So far all the evidence suggests that
it is the only disorder we know of in which the people have an actual lack of
development in brain cells."

   "The cells in the brain are just fine," he said, "but they can't develop in a
normal way. The neurons can't mature in a normal way."

   The intensity of fragile X's physical and behavioral symptoms can vary widely
and makes diagnosis difficult.

   "Julie was just a little over 2 when we noticed she wasn't progressing in her
speech," Leslie said. "She seemed a little on the hyperactive side, too, we
thought."

   The Bagdasarians took her to a speech therapist, who referred her to a
neurologist.

   "It took us months to get in to see the neurologist," she recalled. "He
noticed Julie was flapping her hands a lot and made poor eye contact, and he
diagnosed her as having autism." (Fragile X and autism share many features, said
Tranfaglia.)

   About three months later, the parents noticed their second child, 9-month-old
Alex, still wasn't sitting up.

   "We went to the same practice, but saw a different doctor," said Leslie. "He
told us to just wait a few months and come back."

   By 15 months, Alex was just starting to sit up. The neurologist decided to
run blood tests to try to make a diagnosis.

   "About one month later, he called us and asked us to come back in," Leslie
said. "He didn't want to tell me what was wrong over the phone, but I insisted.
That was how we learned Alex has fragile X."

   After that, Julie and Leslie had genetic testing. Doctors found Julie had the
syndrome, and Leslie was a carrier. They also found Leslie's mother, brother and
sister carry the premutation for the syndrome.

   A blood test has limited usefulness, said Tranfaglia. It can detect a male
with fully developed fragile X syndrome, but it is not 100 percent sensitive.
However, a DNA test is 100 percent sensitive and will pick up carriers and
victims alike.

   "If you are about to [conceive] a child and already have a developmentally
disabled child, it's a good test to do," said Tranfaglia, whose son with Clapp
has fragile X. Their daughter does not.

   Fragile X, unlike Down syndrome, is not random, said Tranfaglia. After having
the first child with the condition, "the chances of having another is 50-50. We
have members with two or three [affected] kids. If we had prenatal screening,
we'd be able to decrease the number of familes hit with fragile X."

   Early diagnosis of a firstborn can give a couple the opportunity to decide
whether they want to conceive additional children.

   A pilot screening program is in the planning stages at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.

   Leslie said she initially felt responsible for her children's disorder.

   "But how could I have known I was a carrier?" she said. "'Until this time
there was no family history, and we just didn't know. We came in the back door
as it was. If it hadn't have been for Alex, we may not ever have been properly
diagnosed.'

   Girls overlooked

   Because girls have two X chro- mosomes, and only one is affected by fragile
X, their symptoms are often less severe. Intelligence may be unimpaired,
although learning disabilities are common. Likewise, girls may have motor,
speech and language problems, but they tend not to be extreme.

   As a result, Leslie says, girls with fragile X are often overlooked.

   "People may just think they are shy, or quiet," she says. "In some ways, they
just fit the stereotype of good little girls."

   However, since boys have only one X chromosome, if that one carries the
fragile X mutation, their impairment can be considerable. The typical affected
male has an IQ of 50, said Tranfaglia.

   Mike Sydenstricker of Solon is the father of two sons with fragile X.
Stephen, 19, and Brent, 15, were diagnosed in the early 1980s.

   Mike says he and his wife, Jeanne, knew something was wrong when Stephen
wasn't talking by age 4.

   "He was clearly a slow learner, but nobody knew why," Mike said.

   While the family lived in California, the boys had chromosome testing at UCLA
and were found to have fragile X syndrome.

   Both boys attend special education classes in public school, and Stephen is
in a vocational program.

   "We think Stephen has the best chance of someday making it in an
assisted-living program," Mike said. "Brent isn't functioning quite as well."

   Despite their considerable disabilities, Mike says neither boy displays
obvious physical signs of the disorder. "Brent was a really good-looking baby.
His picture could have been on a baby food jar."

   And Mike says son Stephen is muscular and athletic.

   "Unlike some causes of mental retardation, I challenge anyone to identify
fragile X kids just by their appearance," says Mike.

   "When we evaluate a kid with mental retardation, we always screen for fragile
X," says Dr. Nathaniel Robin, assistant professor of genetics and pediatrics at
Case Western Reserve University. "But we will also screen that child for other
chromosomal ab- normalities, to be sure we make an accurate diagnosis."

   Early diagnosis critical

   CWRU cell biologist and researcher Dr. Allan Tartakoff agrees early diagnosis
"is absolutely critical."

   "We are dealing with a problem that appears to affect the development of the
nervous system," he says. "Therapies, to be effective, should be initiated as
soon as possible."

   Mary Ann Haase of Pepper Pike was six months pregnant with her second child
when her firstborn, Walker, was diagnosed with the disorder.

   "Walker was around 2 when we recognized he had missed some of the
developmental milestones, but our pediatrician told us not to worry about it,"
her husband, Richard Haase, recalls. "By the time we got Walker's diagnosis we
were pregnant again and had lost the opportunity to decide whether or not we
wanted to have a second child."

   As it turned out, their daughter, Caroline, does not have fragile X.

   "But it's a huge issue," Haase says. "It is only through early diagnosis that
parents can have some measure of control over those decisions."

   On the other hand, Mike Sydenstricker says he and his wife have opted not to
have their sons genetically tested.

   "I don't know what more genetic testing could tell us," he says. "And
frankly, we've heard too many horror stories about the growing databanks of
genetic information and the problems that information may cause with insurance
companies down the road. We've elected not to become part of it."

   As it is, available treatments focus on the observable symptoms of the
disorder, not the underlying genetics.

   Some families find drugs like Ritalin, used to control hyperactivity, are
helpful. Others, like the Sydenstrickers, have found antidepressants, like
Prozac or Zoloft, are beneficial.

   Because of speech and motor problems, speech and occupational therapies are
usually necessary.

   Helpful treatments

   Leslie Bagdasarian says she has found that her children have become less
distractible and more educable through sensory integration therapy, in which the
occupational therapist repeatedly exposes the child to sensory stimulation until
the child no longer reacts to the stimulation.

   And Dr. Randi Hagerman, a Denver Children's Hospital expert on the syndrome,
urges early intervention, preschool education and lots of individualized
attention for those with the disorder, as well as genetic counseling for
carriers.

   The biggest stumbling block to an effective treatment is lack of funding,
said Tartakoff.

   FRAXA has placed a high priority on raising awareness of the disorder among
members of Congress and hopes to persuade the National Institutes of Health to
target fragile X for major research funding.

   This spring, FRAXA President Clapp testified before the Senate and House
Appropriations Committee seeking increased research funding. Clapp pointed out
that in 1997, NIH's National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
spent just $2 million on fragile X research, or only four times the $500,000
FRAXA had raised privately.

   The group welcomed suspense author Mary Higgins Clark as a celebrity
spokeswoman for the disorder. Clark has a 9-year-old grandson with fragile X and
has pledged both time and money to the cause.

   But until a cure is found, Sydenstricker says he and many other families will
just "play with the hand we've been dealt."

   "We were out there alone when our kids were diagnosed in the '80s," he says.
"Now, we are just relieved to know what is going on."

   He says the Bagdasarians and the local support group came long too late to
help him and his wife cope with the stress of the disorder, although he has been
delighted with their successful efforts to raise local research funding and
awareness.

   Now, he sees his role as being a mentor to other, younger families.

   "We've gone down the path," he says. "Now our role is to give back to others.

   "We expect that one day, there will be a cure. Maybe not for our kids, but
for other kids, further down the road."

   Partial defect in gene not rare

   The defective gene responsible for fragile X syndrome is carried on one leg
of the X chromosome, the chromosome that helps determine the sex of a child.

   A partial defect in the gene, known as a premutation, is not uncommon. Male
carriers can only pass the premutation on to their daughters, while female
carriers can pass it on to either daughters or sons. Researchers estimate that
one in 259 to 400 women and one in 800 men carry the premutation with no
noticeable symptoms.

   However, as the gene passes through successive generations, the chances
increase that a full mutation will develop.

   In a full mutation, the affected gene shuts down and no longer instructs the
cell to make a protein assumed to be essential for normal brain functioning.

   At this point, the symptoms of fragile X syndrome emerge, including mental
retardation, developmental delays, behavioral problems and mild physical abnor-
malities.

   A simple DNA blood test, available since 1992, can accurately identify the
disorder in both carriers and in people with the full mutation.

   Screening is available at University Hospital's Center for Human Genetics,
the Cleveland Clinic Foundation's Risk Assessment Clinic and MetroHealth Medical
Center's genetics department. The test costs around $300 and is usually covered
by insurance.

GRAPHIC: BOX: The Fragile X Alliance of Northeast Ohio, (440) 519-1517, will
meet in October. Call for details or visit the Web site:
http://www.fragilexohio.orgOther sources of information include:; The FRAXA
Research Foundation. Call (978) 462-1866 or visit the Web site:
http://www.fraxa.orgThe National Fragile X Foundation, call 1-800-688-8765 or
visit the Web site: http://www.nfxf.org; BOX: PLAIN DEALER; PHYSICAL SIGNS OF
FRAGILE X SYNDROME; PHOTOS BY: AL FUCHS; PHOTO 1; Leslie and Ara Bagdasarian
founded the Fragile X Alliance of Northeast Ohio after their children, Julie, 6,
left, and Alex, 4, were diagnosed with the condition.; PHOTO 2; Alex was 16
months old and his sister, Julie, was 2, before their parents, Leslie and Ara
Bagdasarian, learned fragile X syndrome was responsible for their delayed
development.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1998


                             1854 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 30, 1998, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 935 words

HEADLINE: A killer in the shadows;
Mind and Body

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    There are no marches or rallies for lung cancer, no ribbons to commemorate
the victims. Yet lung cancer is the biggest cancer killer of all, outstripping
breast cancer in women and prostate in men, making up, in fact, more than
one-fourth of all cancer deaths.

   Lung cancer lags behind high-visibility diseases like breast cancer and AIDS
in research funding, getting only $ 800 in research dollars per death, compared
to $ 7,500 for breast cancer and $ 30,000 for HIV and AIDS.  "We've been aware
that lung cancer gets a small amount of attention," says Diane Blum, executive
director of the support organization Cancer Care Inc.  "And we have heard from
lung cancer patients that they feel isolated, in part because of a stigma that
has disappeared from other types of cancer." After all, if they hadn't smoked,
they wouldn't have gotten the disease, right?

   It is true that 80 to 90 percent of lung cancers are smoking-related, but
many of these cancers occur in people who beat their addiction decades earlier.
And it's equally true that many cases of AIDS, heart disease, and other
afflictions can be traced to individual behavior and choice - unprotected sex or
intravenous drug use, for example. Activism has gone a long way toward
neutralizing the criticism of people with AIDS but not of those with lung
cancer.

   Because of this blame-the-victim mentality and a general aura of
discouragement about treating the disease, Blum and cancer specialists say, many
patients lack social support and may not be offered the full range of treatment
options - some of which can extend life, if not save it, and ease the pain
during the final months.

   In a poll released last month by Cancer Care, Americans showed themselves
poorly informed about the impact of lung cancer. Only 11 percent knew that lung
cancer is the biggest cancer killer of women, causing 65,000 deaths a year, far
ahead of breast cancer (44,500 deaths) and ovarian cancer (14,500 deaths).  And
70 percent of respondents said they were only somewhat or not at all
knowledgeable about the causes, death rates, and possible treatments for the
disease.

   Blum said so much public awareness is focused on prevention, especially on
efforts to keep young people from starting to smoke, that there's little
attention to the problems of those for whom prevention is too late. "We're going
to be faced with people dying with this disease for decades, even if everyone
stopped smoking right now," she says.

   Indeed, the proportion of lung cancer patients who are ex-smokers is rising
as more people quit: Their risk goes down after stopping, but it never reaches
zero. "A few years ago, 51 percent of newly diagnosed cases were former smokers,
and 35 percent were current smokers," says Dr. Paul Bunn, of the University of
Colorado Cancer Center, in Denver. "Now, it's 59 percent former smokers and 30
percent current smokers." About 10 percent have never smoked.

   Unlike breast and prostate cancer, there's no way to screen for early
detection of lung cancer.  The symptoms aren't specific or obvious in the
disease's early stages. At diagnosis, only 23 percent of patients have lung
cancer in its early stages (stage I or II), when the five-year survival rate is
40 to 45 percent - not very encouraging, but a lot better than it will be in
later stages.

   Forty-four percent of those with lung cancer are diagnosed with stage III
disease and 32 percent with stage IV, says Bunn.  "This disease spreads very
early, and it's difficult to cure spread disease," he says, estimating overall
cure rates - defined as five-year survival - at 14 percent.  Still, this is a
marked improvement over the 8 percent cure rate 30 years ago.  "One point is
that people ought to demand and get the best care possible," Bunn says. "The
best care is better than it used to be." Adds Peggy McCarthy, who heads the
Alliance for Lung Cancer Advocacy, Support, and Education, "Contrary to what
many believe, lung cancer is not an automatic death sentence."

   Moreover, there's hope in some of the cutting-edge therapies being tested in
early clinical trials. They include gene therapy - injecting tumors with normal
versions of the p53 gene, which is damaged in a large proportion of lung cancers
- and new strategies using "anti-angiogenesis" drugs that cut off the blood
supply to tumors and metastases rather than attacking them directly. Also in
testing are monoclonal antibodies - proteins that home in on and destroy cancer
cells; cancer drugs injected into the lungs and activated by light; and vaccines
that prod the immune system into fighting cancer. But these are years away from
widespread use, even if they work in tests.

   Chest X-rays are still the best way of detecting lung cancer early, though
mass X-ray screening of the population hasn't proved worthwhile.  Yet, as with
breast cancer, improved imaging methods are in research and may eventually pay
off.

   Meanwhile, early diagnosis depends in large part on careful attention to
symptoms - many of which, unfortunately, can be mistaken for signs of other
illnesses. Lung cancer symptoms include persistent coughing or wheezing,
difficulty breathing, chest and back pain, a change in the color of sputum,
fatigue, and unexplained weight loss.

   The overall picture is, admittedly, a sober one; that's why so much stress is
placed on prevention. However, prevention is not likely to solve the problem any
time soon. The inescapable conclusion is that if lung cancer is to be beaten
back, both prevention and treatment efforts will have to be geared up to a more
effective level.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             1855 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 30, 1998 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: Money runs health care; stop abuses to save lives

BYLINE: NEIL MORGAN

BODY:

   On my desk are bulky new dream works from Scripps and UCSD. They are studies
about how waste must be curbed in their health care systems, how patients must
come first again, and then doctors.

   Sharp is dreaming, too. Meetings all the time. "But nothing's happening,"
says Monroe Trout, who comes as close as any to being an elder statesman of this
wrenching health care revolution. Still serving on six major U.S. corporate
boards, Trout is feared and admired as a voice of conscience.

   Leaving Sterling Drug as senior vice president, he moved to San Diego in 1987
as CEO of American Healthcare Systems, through which 900 church-owned hospitals
sought buying power and countered merger advances from companies such as
Columbia/HCA. "If we could only get past a bunch of big egos in this town, we
could do what needs to be done," he said here in 1995.

   "There's duplication everywhere.

   It doesn't bring the usual benefit of competition.

   It raises costs and lowers the quality of care." The towering Trout has spent
retirement months counseling with the father figures of San Diego health care
about better patient care through eliminating overlaps, and reducing the
scandalous slice of health care money going to middlemen. But now he is losing
patience. What follows is a condensed verbatim of his remarks over lunch Friday.

   They seem to me to be apt, courageous and urgent: "When the profit motive was
introduced to health care, it became a game of managing costs instead of
managing care, and the patient be damned.

   Every decision made today in patient care has an economic aspect. "In San
Diego, some hospitals should be closed.

   Children's and UCSD Pediatrics should cooperate.

   Burn groups and bone marrow transplant teams should merge; so should the
three cancer research centers on Torrey Pines. Trauma centers can be
consolidated. "Any hospital, HMO or PPO that pays any officer more than $400,000
per year in salary, bonuses or deferred pay should not be eligible to receive
Medicaid or Medicare payments or should be otherwise penalized. "Corporations
that pay their officers over $1 million per year are taxed heavily on the
excess.

   Yet the 10 highest-paid executives of investor-owned managed-care companies
in 1996 made from $11.9 to $111.9 million each.

   This is pure greed and comes off the backs of patients.

   This is obscene behavior in medicine. "Patients and the Health Care Financing
Administration should demand that hospitals stop spending $3.7 billion in
advertising and marketing as they did in 1997. Such statistics for HMOs and PPOs
are unknown but probably comparable. "The U.S. government should get serious
about recovering the estimated $90 billion lost in health care fraud each year.
"The malpractice problem must be resolved.

   It makes no sense for attorneys to collect fees in the billions for lawsuits
against the tobacco companies for medical expenditures made by state and federal
health care.

   Most of that money should be used for treatment and not to enrich any lawyer.
Patient care is being bilked of billions of dollars. "Patients who by their own
actions add billions to the national health care bill through smoking, drinking
and violence should suffer through higher insurance premiums or other penalty.
"We must preserve UCSD's role as a public research institution and a community
safety net.

   But the five UC medical schools must begin collaborating -- in gene therapy,
for instance -- and combining their managed-care systems to be competitive. "If
we have the political and individual will to effect these changes, we will
improve the quality of care for all, including those 600,000 San Diegans who are
not covered by health insurance."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1856 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         August 30, 1998 Sunday, THIRD

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1391 words

HEADLINE: THE SUNSHINE GIRL;
WITH HER STRENGTH AND SPIRIT, MOLLY BEGNAUD HAS DAZZLED;
EVERYONE AT TULANE HOSPITAL FOR CHILDREN, HER SECOND;
HOME SINCE BEING DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER

BYLINE: By BARRI BRONSTON Staff writer

BODY:

   Molly Begnaud has a bevy of hobbies for a 6-year-old. She boasts a love for
painting, fishing, skating, boating and tubing on the river near her home in
Natchitoches.

   She can't imagine life without Raggedy Ann, but she is even fonder of Noah
Conlay, a schoolmate with whom she goes for walks, plays with water guns and
digs for worms.

   More than anything, Molly loves a tea party. And when Molly throws a tea
party, you can bet that anyone who is anyone will be in attendance.

   Just ask the doctors and nurses at Tulane Hospital for Children, where Molly
- who is suffering from a rare and terminal form of childhood cancer - throws
tea parties to lift her spirits during visits for chemotherapy.

   "The tea parties started out as a way of distracting her, but they have
grown, and the last one was the blow-out of all tea parties," said
hemotologist/oncologist Dr. Marta Rozans, known as Dr. Cookie to her young
patients and their parents.

   "Molly makes the invitations, helps with the decorations and pours the tea.
She even helps make the cucumber sandwiches. She has hugs and kisses for
everyone. I've never seen anything quite like it."

   Oncology nurse Judy McNeil said Molly is one of those rare children people
can't help but admire.

   "I'm sure Molly gets sad at times, but she doesn't dwell on the bad things.
She has a lot of spirit, and that's a great part of the battle."

   Whether Molly ultimately wins the battle remains to be seen, but her chances,
according to doctors, are slim. Molly suffers from neuroblastoma, a rare
childhood cancer that attacks the nervous system and affects one out of every
100,000 children in the United States.

   For the past two years, she has undergone an array of treatments and
surgeries at Tulane, including a life-saving bone marrow transplant in the
spring of 1997.

   Molly was in remission for seven months; then she began feeling sick again.
The cancer had made its way into her abdomen and chest, but doctors deemed a
second bone marrow transplant too risky.

   Instead Molly and her parents, Susan and Mark Begnaud, will travel to St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis later this year for an experimental
cancer vaccine being used on neuroblastoma patients.

   The vaccine is typically prepared from bone marrow that contains cells from
the patient's cancer. It uses gene therapy to make it easier for the immune
system to recognize and destroy the cancer cells.

   Doctors have told the Begnauds that the treatment is not a cure - that it
could prolong Molly's life but probably not save it.

   Despite the prognosis, the Begnauds, who also have a 4-year-old-son, are not
about to give up the notion that miracles do occur.

   "I've yet to meet a family with a child who has survived what Molly has,"
Susan said. "But I know that Molly is going to be the child who beats it.

   "She's going to be cured, and she's going to go around the world and talk to
other kids with cancer and tell them not to give up."

   The Begnauds were hit with the news of Molly's illness in the fall of 1995.
At first, they thought that the fever she'd been running was a symptom of the
flu. But a subsequent weight loss coupled with a noticeable protrusion of her
stomach told doctors otherwise.

   "The doctor looked at her stomach and he could tell," Susan said. "He said,
'Your child has cancer,' and I said, 'Oh my God.'

   "You feel totally devastated, totally out of control. This is something that
happens to other families, not to yours. Molly hadn't been sick a day in her
life and now this."

   Doctors told the Begnauds that most children die from what Molly has and that
her odds for survival past two years was only 10 percent.

   Molly asked her parents if she was going to die, but the Begnauds told her
no. Instead, they explained to her - as best they could to a 4-year-old - why
she had been feeling so sick and what doctors wanted to do to help her feel
better.

   "Children don't know to feel sorry for themselves. Her big concern was making
sure Mark and I weren't hurting. She's constantly trying to comfort us. I
generate a lot of my strength from her because she is so strong."

   With her strength, spirit and upbeat attitude, Molly has dazzled everyone
from custodians to surgeons at Tulane Hospital for Children, her second home
since being diagnosed with cancer.

   Her tea parties have made her the hospital's unofficial sweetheart, and when
invitations are posted, few can pass by her room without joining in the fun.

   "It started as a fluke," said Susan, amid the joyful noise of Molly's latest
tea party. "We wanted to get her mind off the real reason we were at the
hospital and focus on some fun."

   The first party had such a positive impact on Molly that she wanted to have
another and another and another. The Begnauds obliged, helping Molly make each
of the 10 parties she has hosted better than the last.

   "I just love tea parties," said Molly, showing off a teapot-adorned
fingernail at her latest party Aug. 20.

   For this party, she decorated the walls of her room with wax-like material in
the form of balloons, butterflies, sailboats and hearts. She traded her hospital
gown for a yellow and white striped party dress. And she sang and danced with
Cajun musician Papillion, whom she knows through relatives in Lafayette.

   While Molly danced, about 20 or so guests sipped on green tea and munched on
scones, cucumber sandwiches, cheese straws and sugared pecans.

   Many brought gifts, including a stuffed angel bear and a porcelain wishing
box. Molly's father, who was unable to attend the party, sent a teapot-shaped
cookie bouquet.

   "Only Molly could bring out this many people," said Ann Mahorner, executive
director of the Make-A-Wish Foundation of Louisiana. "She's really a special
little girl."

   It is Mahorner's organization that grants wishes to children who have been
diagnosed with life-threatening illnesses. Last year, the non-profit group
fulfilled Molly's wish of meeting ice skating star Kristi Yamaguchi during a
"Stars on Ice" appearance in Memphis. The two skated together, and Yamaguchi
later sent her a Molly-sized replica of one of her pink skating costumes.

   In a thank-you note to Yamaguchi, Mark Begnaud wrote: "Molly smiled more on
the day that she met you than she had in the previous six months . . . . Without
you, her journey would have been a far different one."

   Indeed, Molly has had her share of down days and last year entered a period
of depression that required medication, Susan said.

   Besides the physical pain she has suffered, one of the most disheartening
aspects of her illness has been the reaction of strangers to her bald head.
Children have asked her if she is a boy, and a group of men once gasped when
they saw her remove her wig to scratch her head.

   "She has a real hard time with the hair loss," Susan said. "But her friend
Noah is so sweet. When she's wearing a hat over her head, he'll ask her to take
it off because she looks so pretty without it."

   Besides Noah, the Begnauds are thankful for the other people who have touched
their lives over the course of Molly's treatment - their own family as well as
the staff at Tulane Hospital.

   Rozans and McNeil said Molly and her family have captured their hearts as
well.

   "They've become like family here," McNeil said. "Everyone from the front door
to the back door knows Molly. She really knows how to turn on the charm. She has
a lot of spirit, and that's one reason she's come as far as she has."

   =============================================================

   #ART:

   For children who are ill ...

   The Hair Club for Kids provides custom-designed wigs and

   hairpieces for children who experience hair loss because of

   a serious illness. The program is conducted through the

   Hair Club for Men in Metairie. For more details, call John

   Ringenberg Jr. at 828-4236 or 1-800-888-4236.

   The Make-A-Wish Foundation of Louisiana grants wishes to

   Louisiana children who have been diagnosed with

   life-threatening illnesses.

   Since granting its first wish in April 1996, the nonprofit

   group has completed more than 120 wishes with more than 20

   wishes pending.

   The group has sent children to Disney World, arranged

   meetings with celebrities and given out laptop computers.

   For information on volunteering or making donations, call

   Make-A-Wish at 522-9474 or 1-888-677-9474.

   GRAPHIC

GRAPHIC: Molly Begnaud, 6, dances with Cajun musician Papillion and medical
student Marnie Baker at a tea party she gave in her hospital room. [COLOR] Molly
is fitted wit a donated wig at the Hair Club for Men. [COLOR] Molly poses with
ice skating star Kristi Yamaguchi, whom she met last year through the efforts of
the Make-A-Wish Foundation of Louisianaa 5 STAFF PHOTOS BY KATHY ANDERSON

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1998


                             1857 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   August 26, 1998, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 261 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs;
Houston & Texas

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Construction begins on auto dealerships

   Construction has begun on two large auto dealerships in Houston's suburbs.
Northside Lexus, a companion to the established Westside Lexus on Interstate 10
and Kirkwood, is being built on Interstate 45 North and Stagerunn Drive, north
of FM 1960.

   The 45,000-square-foot Lexus facility will serve the Woodlands, Kingwood,
Humble and Champions communities, said dealership president Jack Kendall.
Amenities will include a customer business center with fax machines,
workstations, and electronic hookups for laptop computers.

   Allen Samuels, a Waco-based dealer, is building a 55,000-square-foot Chrysler
Plymouth Jeep Eagle dealership in Webster at 16200 Texas 3. The dealership will
have a collision repair center and 44 service bays.

    GeneMedicine wins rights to two patents

   GeneMedicine said Tuesday it had received the exclusive license to two
patents issued to the Baylor College of Medicine that cover the way gene therapy
is delivered to fluid spaces, such as the eyes or joints, and a method of
delivering gene therapy to the intestines.

   Gene therapy to joints can help treat arthritis, and gene therapy to the
intestines can help prevent and possibly treat infectious organisms and certain
cancers, said Richard Waldron, vice president and chief financial officer.

   GeneMedicine, based in The Woodlands, discovers and develops pharmaceutical
products that use genes to treat or prevent serious diseases. Its first product
will be a cancer product expected to be on the market in late 2002, Waldron
said.


LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             1858 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 26, 1998 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 1483 words

HEADLINE: Coming together for support, research;
Parents, scientists meet for workshop on genetic defect

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: DEL MAR

BODY:

   DEL MAR -- Doctors couldn't tell Cathy McCullough of Richmond, Va., what was
wrong with her daughter, Morgan, until she was a year old.

   "They only said she'd never walk or talk and there was nothing we could do,"
McCullough said. Jette Ziegler of Copenhagen learned that her daughter, Julie,
was the only one with this strange disorder in all of Denmark. And George
Kollasch, a Navy recruiter in San Diego, was told by physicians that his
daughter, Sara, "wouldn't live past age 2 and that we shouldn't waste our time."
So from around the world they came to Del Mar the weekend before last, to a
special UCSD support and research workshop focused just on them. They shared
their tears and triumphs as a team of scientists, also from around the world,
tried to learn more about this mysterious, extremely rare genetic defect. It is
called simply 11q, or in some cases, Jacobsen syndrome, a constellation of birth
abnormalities ranging from facial deformities and delayed development to lethal
conditions of the heart. Many of the children also have a greater-than-normal
propensity to be trusting of others, a happy mood, a unique sense of humor and
outgoing personalities.

   Some have pixielike faces, similar to Williams syndrome, an unrelated genetic
disease. Although physicians believe thousands of children have 11q, only about
100 around the world have been diagnosed with it. "This defect is so unusual, so
rare, most pediatricians have never heard of it," said Dr. Paul Grossfeld, a
pediatric cardiologist at UCSD who has made 11q defects a full-time research
project. To scientists, 11q is especially interesting.

   While each child has a different array of symptoms, the cause is the same.

   All the children are missing a very long sequence of genetic material --
between 9 percent and 27 percent of the DNA -- that normally sits on an arm of
chromosome 11. "The deletions associated with 11q may be the longest of any
birth defects studied that are still compatible with life," Grossfeld said. At
the workshop, researchers from London, Paris, Sicily and Colorado as well as
UCSD helped the parents realize that their children are not necessarily doomed,
and certainly are not alone. "We didn't know what was wrong with our son; nobody
knew it was Jacobsen," said Sallie Griffin of Bloomington, Ill., whose son,
Cody, is now 8.

   "Just seeing all these kids, and the similarities, makes me feel so much
better." Indeed, looking across a patio at a dozen children with 11q, parents
sat together comparing their children's behavior and appearance with the others,
asking questions about the phenomenon of "toe-walking" for example, the
horizontal crease on many of the children's palms and their apparent sensitivity
to certain sounds. How do parents prepare their children for school when they
are academically ready but unable to hold a pencil, one parent asked. About half
the children have major heart defects, including hypoplastic left heart syndrome
in which the left side of the heart fails to develop properly.

   Left untreated, the heart condition is uniformly lethal. Genetic mapping By
studying which genes are missing, and chronicling each child's symptoms, the
researchers hope to precisely map the points where these deletions occur, and
better define the function of every missing gene, especially those that affect
the heart, said Dr. Kenneth Chien, director of UCSD's Cardiac Molecular Biology
Program. Chien also directs a federally funded program with the Salk Institute
that is looking at the molecular basis of heart disease.

   The program helped fund the recent workshop. "It makes for a real gold mine,
a way for us to study the fundamental mechanism of many disease processes,"
Grossfeld said. The syndrome is all the more interesting because there are four
types of 11q abnormalities.

   Some of the children are missing a long sequence of genetic material, some a
shorter one and some have genetic material duplicated.

   Still others have a shorter deletion in the middle of the chromosome arm. The
more genetic material missing, the less well off many of the children appear to
be, Grossfeld said. In the future, said Chien and Grossfeld, there may be
possibilities for therapeutic intervention. "Once we find the genes, that's just
the beginning for us," Grossfeld said. "Then we learn their function, and how
that function goes wrong to cause heart disease, and then we can think about
therapeutic interventions." For example, a fetus lacking a certain gene
responsible for a growth hormone necessary for proper heart development may be
given growth factor in utero. Chien hopes to further refine diagnostic tools.

   After identifying the responsible genes, he hopes to duplicate the syndrome
in animals by knocking out a counterpart gene in a mouse, paving the way for
some forms of gene therapy. The first step But that is probably some time off.

   The first step is to identify the symptoms as well as the genes. An expert in
rare genetic disease, UCSD's Dr. William Nyhan, applauded Chien and Grossfeld's
project and attended a portion of the workshop.

   "The importance of these deletion syndromes is that they point us in the
direction of genes that are important to the study of human genetics," he said.
During the four-day workshop at the Del Mar Inn, researchers performed a battery
of tests to analyze each child. A Paris hematologist drew blood to study
platelet defects -- common in many of these children.

   Grossfeld and Christopher Jones, a geneticist from London's Institute for
Child Health, took blood to perform DNA analyses to learn why certain chromosome
locations are so fragile that they break at certain points. Grossfeld and
cardiac sonographer William Elias conducted echocardiograms on the patients to
look for heart diseases that might be treated now with catheterization, surgery
or drugs. A San Diego ophthalmologist performed eye examinations; a team
directed by Salk researcher Ursula Bellugi focused on cognitive abilities; a
Colorado researcher examined language development; and a physician from Sicily
examined each child for facial and other physical abnormalities.

   Two other UCSD physicians examined the children's bone development and growth
hormone levels. More in Sicily? There is no known cause of this genetic defect,
and experts say finding one is going to be extremely difficult.

   Most families have only one child with the disorder. But there may be areas
of the world that have more cases. Dr. Teresa Mattina of Sicily flew halfway
around the world because she has seen nine patients with the disorder there in
the last few years. "I came because I don't know what to tell these families,"
she said.

   "I could inform them better if we can collect more information."
Milwaukee-area resident Ellyn Heicher is an exception to the one-child rule.

   Her first child, Kaitlyn, now 5, was born with heart and speech defects and a
bleeding disorder.

   For years, doctors were puzzled by the cause. She and her husband then had
Andrew, now 3. It took two years after he was born with similar symptoms for
physicians to find the cause, a deletion in chromosome 11. She and her husband
got involved to find out more, hooking up with a growing number of Internet
sites dedicated to rare genetic disorders, and one in particular focusing just
on 11q. And for nearly all the parents, the Internet has been their only
communication with other 11q families until this workshop.

   A first workshop was held in Dallas two years ago and another was held this
year in Europe. Excessive bruising Such gatherings have been invaluable for some
in knowing what to expect, several parents said.

   In a few cases, children with a common platelet disorder associated with 11q
have been suspected victims of child abuse because their deficiency creates
excessive bruising. For Jay Henneberry and Roberta Manshel of Manhattan Beach,
parents of Jamie, a 6-year-old with 11q, an important benefit of the conference
was seeing a few children like Jamie who are older, to know their children do
have a future. "I wanted to meet parents who have my life," said Susan Brannen
of Brea, whose 2-year-old son, Tristan, was diagnosed with 11q.

   "And to get this kind of expert medical advice, you'd have to pay an arm and
a leg." "I was nervous about coming," said Milwaukee's Heicher, who helped
organize the recent workshop.

   "I had heard it could be quite emotional.

   But it was so encouraging to see that there are many older children, and see
how they are enjoying life, and the things that they can do.

   That 11q is not holding them back." While children with 11q will never be
normal, they are in most cases much better off than predicted by their
physicians years ago. Morgan McCullough can walk and is learning a variety of
words. Sara Kollasch is 2 1/2 and walking, and she uses sign language to
communicate her desire to watch television and Walt Disney movies.

   And Julie Ziegler, now 8, can draw and swim.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Heart sounds: Dr. Paul Grossfeld listened to the heart
of Cody Griffin, 8, in a room at the Del Mar Inn as Cody's mother, Sallie,
watched. The Griffins came from Bloomington, Ill., to attend the UCSD workshop
on the rare genetic defect 11q.; PHOTOBY: CHARLIE NEUMAN / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1859 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 25, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: Tumor-starving drugs to augment other treatments, researcher says;
Folkman enthusiastic about study that backs therapy's effectiveness

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   A researcher who runs one of the nation's most closely watched cancer labs
said yesterday that two new drugs that shrink tumors by starving them of their
blood supply will likely be used to augment older therapies before they will be
used alone.

   Dr. Judah Folkman, whose experiments touched off a media frenzy and a surge
of interest on Wall Street earlier this year, said he was encouraged by studies
at the University of Chicago that showed one of the drugs dramatically improved
the effectiveness of radiation on cancerous mice.

   "No matter which therapies you use -- chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
immunotherapy, gene therapy -- the drugs will improve them," Folkman said after
giving a presentation to the annual meeting of the Institute of Human Virology
in Baltimore.

   The seven-day conference, which concludes Saturday, has drawn an
international audience of about 1,000 scientists -- most of them engaged in AIDS
and cancer research. The meeting was been organized by Dr. Robert Gallo, who
directs the 2-year-old virology institute on the campus of the University of
Maryland, Baltimore.

   Folkman has spent almost three decades showing, in various ways, that tumors
survive and spread by stimulating the growth of blood vessels that supply them
with the nourishment they need. Last November, his laboratory reported that two
new drugs destroy tumors in mice by depriving them of an adequate blood supply.

   In mid-May, a news report suggested that the drugs -- endostatin and
angiostatin -- were emerging as possible cures, causing a brief surge of media
excitement followed by more cautionary reports emphasizing that experimental
results in mice are often hard to reproduce in humans.

   Folkman says it could be at least a year before EntreMed, a Rockville
biotechnology firm which has the license to produce the drugs, has manufactured
enough to supply "a small number of patients" in the first clinical trials. Once
trials begin, it could be several years before the drugs wind their way through
various levels of experimentation and -- in the best scenario -- prove
themselves as drugs suitable for widespread use.

   None of this has diminished Folkman's enthusiasm.

   Declaring it a "landmark" study, Folkman said he was encouraged by the
University of Chicago experiments that showed that angiostatin combined with
radiation shrank tumors in mice far more effectively than radiation alone.

   Folkman said the one-two punch, if applied to humans, could bring about
faster remissions while sparing patients the harsh side effects of radiation.

   Even if the drugs are eventually approved for human use, it could be several
years more before doctors use them alone rather than in combination with older
therapies.

   "Historically in medical practice, when you introduce something new, you
don't dare give up on what you've got," he said.

   More than 20 angiogenesis inhibitors are already in small clinical trials,
but Folkman characterized them as older drugs that either slow or arrest the
growth of tumors.

   Pub Date: 8/25/98

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1998


                             1860 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 25, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1477 words

HEADLINE: Coming together for support, research;
UCSD hosts parents, scientists in workshop on genetic defect

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: DEL MAR

BODY:

   DEL MAR -- Doctors couldn't tell Cathy McCullough of Richmond, Va., what was
wrong with her daughter, Morgan, until she was a year old.

   "They only said she'd never walk or talk and there was nothing we could do,"
McCullough said. Jette Ziegler of Copenhagen learned that her daughter, Julie,
was the only one with this strange disorder in all of Denmark. And George
Kollasch, a Navy recruiter in San Diego, was told by physicians that his
daughter, Sara, "wouldn't live past age 2 and that we shouldn't waste our time."
So from around the world they came to Del Mar the weekend before last, to a
special UCSD support and research workshop focused just on them. They shared
their tears and triumphs as a team of scientists, also from around the world,
tried to learn more about this mysterious, extremely rare genetic defect. It is
called simply 11q, or in some cases, Jacobsen syndrome, a constellation of birth
abnormalities ranging from facial deformities and delayed development to lethal
conditions of the heart. Many of the children also have a greater-than-normal
propensity to be trusting of others, a happy mood, a unique sense of humor and
outgoing personalities.

   Some have pixielike faces, similar to Williams syndrome, an unrelated genetic
disease. Although physicians believe thousands of children have 11q, only about
100 around the world have been diagnosed with it. "This defect is so unusual, so
rare, most pediatricians have never heard of it," said Dr. Paul Grossfeld, a
pediatric cardiologist at UCSD who has made 11q defects a full-time research
project. To scientists, 11q is especially interesting.

   While each child has a different array of symptoms, the cause is the same.

   All the children are missing a very long sequence of genetic material --
between 9 percent and 27 percent of the DNA -- that normally sits on an arm of
chromosome 11. "The deletions associated with 11q may be the longest of any
birth defects studied that are still compatible with life," Grossfeld said. At
the workshop, researchers from London, Paris, Sicily and Colorado as well as
UCSD helped the parents realize that their children are not necessarily doomed,
and certainly are not alone. "We didn't know what was wrong with our son; nobody
knew it was Jacobsen," said Sallie Griffin of Bloomington, Ill., whose son,
Cody, is now 8.

   "Just seeing all these kids, and the similarities, makes me feel so much
better." Indeed, looking across a patio at a dozen children with 11q, parents
sat together comparing their children's behavior and appearance with the others,
asking questions about the phenomenon of "toe-walking" for example, the
horizontal crease on many of the children's palms and their apparent sensitivity
to certain sounds. How do parents prepare their children for school when they
are academically ready but unable to hold a pencil, one parent asked. About half
the children have major heart defects, including hypoplastic left heart syndrome
in which the left side of the heart fails to develop properly.

   Left untreated, the heart condition is uniformly lethal. Genetic mapping By
studying which genes are missing, and chronicling each child's symptoms, the
researchers hope to precisely map the points where these deletions occur, and
better define the function of every missing gene, especially those that affect
the heart, said Dr. Kenneth Chien, director of UCSD's Cardiac Molecular Biology
Program. Chien also directs a federally funded program with the Salk Institute
that is looking at the molecular basis of heart disease.

   The program helped fund the recent workshop. "It makes for a real gold mine,
a way for us to study the fundamental mechanism of many disease processes,"
Grossfeld said. The syndrome is all the more interesting because there are four
types of 11q abnormalities.

   Some of the children are missing a long sequence of genetic material, some a
shorter one and some have genetic material duplicated.

   Still others have a shorter deletion in the middle of the chromosome arm. The
more genetic material missing, the less well off many of the children appear to
be, Grossfeld said. In the future, said Chien and Grossfeld, there may be
possibilities for therapeutic intervention. "Once we find the genes, that's just
the beginning for us," Grossfeld said. "Then we learn their function, and how
that function goes wrong to cause heart disease, and then we can think about
therapeutic interventions." For example, a fetus lacking a certain gene
responsible for a growth hormone necessary for proper heart development may be
given growth factor in utero. Chien hopes to further refine diagnostic tools.

   After identifying the responsible genes, he hopes to duplicate the syndrome
in animals by knocking out a counterpart gene in a mouse, paving the way for
some forms of gene therapy. The first step But that is probably some time off.

   The first step is to identify the symptoms as well as the genes. An expert in
rare genetic disease, UCSD's Dr. William Nyhan, applauded Chien and Grossfeld's
project and attended a portion of the workshop.

   "The importance of these deletion syndromes is that they point us in the
direction of genes that are important to the study of human genetics," he said.
During the four-day workshop at the Del Mar Inn, researchers performed a battery
of tests to analyze each child. A Paris hematologist drew blood to study
platelet defects -- common in many of these children.

   Grossfeld and Christopher Jones, a geneticist from London's Institute for
Child Health, took blood to perform DNA analyses to learn why certain chromosome
locations are so fragile that they break at certain points. Grossfeld and
cardiac sonographer William Elias conducted echocardiograms on the patients to
look for heart diseases that might be treated now with catheterization, surgery
or drugs. A San Diego ophthalmologist performed eye examinations; a team
directed by Salk researcher Ursula Bellugi focused on cognitive abilities; a
Colorado researcher examined language development; and a physician from Sicily
examined each child for facial and other physical abnormalities.

   Two other UCSD physicians examined the children's bone development and growth
hormone levels. There is no known cause of this genetic defect, and experts say
finding one is going to be extremely difficult.

   Most families have only one child with the disorder. But there may be areas
of the world that have more cases. Dr. Teresa Mattina of Sicily flew halfway
around the world because she has seen nine patients with the disorder there in
the last few years. "I came because I don't know what to tell these families,"
she said.

   "I could inform them better if we can collect more information."
Milwaukee-area resident Ellyn Heicher is an exception to the one-child rule.

   Her first child, Kaitlyn, now 5, was born with heart and speech defects and a
bleeding disorder.

   For years, doctors were puzzled by the cause. She and her husband then had
Andrew, now 3. It took two years after he was born with similar symptoms for
physicians to find the cause, a deletion in chromosome 11. She and her husband
got involved to find out more, hooking up with a growing number of Internet
sites dedicated to rare genetic disorders, and one in particular focusing just
on 11q. And for nearly all the parents, the Internet has been their only
communication with other 11q families until this workshop.

   A first workshop was held in Dallas two years ago and another was held this
year in Europe. Such gatherings have been invaluable for some in knowing what to
expect, several parents said.

   In a few cases, children with a common platelet disorder associated with 11q
have been suspected victims of child abuse because their deficiency creates
excessive bruising. For Jay Henneberry and Roberta Manshel of Manhattan Beach,
parents of Jamie, a 6-year-old with 11q, an important benefit of the conference
was seeing a few children like Jamie who are older, to know their children do
have a future. "I wanted to meet parents who have my life," said Susan Brannen
of Brea, whose 2-year-old son, Tristan, was diagnosed with 11q.

   "And to get this kind of expert medical advice, you'd have to pay an arm and
a leg." "I was nervous about coming," said Milwaukee's Heicher, who helped
organize the recent workshop.

   "I had heard it could be quite emotional.

   But it was so encouraging to see that there are many older children, and see
how they are enjoying life, and the things that they can do.

   That 11q is not holding them back." While children with 11q will never be
normal, they are in most cases much better off than predicted by their
physicians years ago. Morgan McCullough can walk and is learning a variety of
words. Sara Kollasch is 2 1/2 and walking, and she uses sign language to
communicate her desire to watch television and Walt Disney movies.

   And Julie Ziegler, now 8, can draw and swim.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Heart sounds: Dr. Paul Grossfeld listened to the
heart of Cody Griffin, 8, in a room at the Del Mar Inn as Cody's mother, Sallie,
watched. The Griffins came from Bloomington, Ill., to attend the UCSD workshop
on the rare genetic defect 11q. 2. Listening: Cardiac sonographer William Elias
recorded Cody Griffin's heart in a room at the Del Mar Inn as Cody's mother,
Sallie, comforted him. (B-2) 3. Father and son: Jay Nenneberry of Manhattan
Beach played in the pool at the Del Mar Inn with his son James, 6, who has the
rare 11q genetic defect. (B-2) 3. A child's perspective: Morgan McCullough, 2
1/2 , of Richmond, Va., who has the rare 11q genetic defect, sat among standing
parents and health professionals during the UCSD workshop at the Del Mar Inn.
(B-4); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4. CHARLIE NEUMAN/Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1861 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                            August 24, 1998, Monday

SECTION: Health & Fitness; Pg.  29

LENGTH: 1989 words

HEADLINE: THE MIRACLE WORKERS
NEW YORK'S STAR RESEARCHERS TOIL TIRELESSLY IN THEIR SEARCH FOR THE NEXT MEDICAL
MARVEL

BYLINE: By SUSAN FERRARO

BODY:


   Medical miracles, gene manipulation, new ways to cure. New York City probably
has the world's greatest concentration of men and women behind the drive to
pioneer new medicine at research facilities like Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, Mount Sinai Medical School, New York University, Columbia Medical School
and Albert Einstein School of Medicine.

   Many of today's medical geniuses work with molecular biology and genes the
vast new field of inquiry that holds, quite literally, the keys to the kingdom
of human ills: from cancer to diabetes, maybe even heart disease and more.

   The men and women who are New York's leading researchers start with
questions, wisps of ideas, hunches. They pursue possibilities that set the
scientific stage for a lucky break or a stunning insight.

   Tenacious and brilliant detectives of disease, they sometimes labor through
years of unceasing lab work. They must be tough enough to brave rigorous
academic scrutiny and even, occasionally, derision.

   If all goes well if the funding holds out, if newly invented techniques
surmount difficulty and experiments succeed they identify pieces of the puzzle
and publish. Then, others can push their ideas even further.

   Even in the early stages, the finest researchers look toward real-life
applications and cures. In the first of a Daily News series, here are two of the
city's medical miracle makers.

   DR. PIER PAULO PANDOLFI, M.D., Ph.D.

   Department of Human Genetics and Molecular

   Biology Program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center

   Interest: Reprograming leukemia cells

   What if doctors could simply tell cancer cells to stop stop dividing, stop
growing uncontrollably, stop killing?Dr. Pier Paulo Pandolfi, 35, is trying to
do just that working on a way to make early leukemia cells mature, or
"differentiate," into healthy adult blood cells. His method works well in lab
mice and may be the reason a 13-year-old girl the single participant in an
experimental, preliminary trial this year is still alive.

   "Now we are starting formal, Phase 1 trials," says Pandolfi, who is reluctant
to talk about human applications of his therapy. "We are not certain we have
cured her," he says of the girl who, for now, is in complete remission. "But we
have given her new opportunities." The time she has gained in remission may
allow her to have a bone-marrow transplant a common treatment for leukemia,
which she had earlier been too sick to undergo.

   Surgery and chemotherapy or radiation are the traditional treatments for
cancer. All are hard on the patient. "A third possibility, which is most
exciting if it would work, but requires a very thorough [understanding] of the
genetics of the disease, is to make the cell behave as if it were normal," says
Pandolfi, who came to New York from London, and before that Rome, three years
ago.

   His focus is acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), which strikes as many as
3,000 Americans annually. In APL, immature cells grow uncontrollably instead of
maturing into healthy adult cells. "It has a very abrupt onset," says Pandolfi.
"You feel reasonably bad for a week and then, boom! It shows up as a bleeding
disorder."

   Five years ago, Sloan-Kettering researchers led by Dr. Raymond Warrell found
APL could be treated but not cured with a nontoxic Vitamin A derivative,
retinoic acid (RA). But some patients do not respond to RA treatment, and those
who do eventually relapse and become resistant to further treatment.

   Pandolfi and his 15-person team analyzed the patients' genes and their
"transcription factors," which are proteins the genes make to signal cells to
mature. He identified two genetic mutations one in those who responded to RA,
another in those who did not that turned off the normal signal and kept the
transcription factors from doing their job.

   To study the two mutations, Pandolfi bred two sets of lab mice prone to
leukemia. Significantly, some were responsive to RA, some weren't, just like
humans. Analyzing the molecular mechanisms, he wondered if a drug that inhibited
the mutations might, if given with RA, strengthen its effect.

   "And, yes, it worked," Pandolfi says.

   The treatment lets the transcription factors signal cells to mature in a
healthy way in both mice colonies. The approach may also work with non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, a cancer that strikes more than 50,000 Americans a year and killed
Jacqueline Onassis in 1994. The treatment has no adverse side effects, Pandolfi
says.

   The lab work runs a big tab "the mouse work is extremely expensive" says
Pandolfi. He is funded by Sloan-Kettering, the National Cancer Institute, and
the Leukemia Society of America, which awarded him a $ 350,000 grant over five
years.

   "Pandolfi is a rising star in the in field," says Dr. Irwin Bernstein, head
of pediatric oncology at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

   "What's exciting is that he's working on a form of leukemia where we have
developed [a treatment] that is selective and nontoxic, and he's learning more
about the genes that are involved."

   Pandolfi also has the rare gift of being able to combine complex biological
science with real-life applications, says Dr. Richard Rifkind, chairman of the
Sloan-Kettering Institute (who cautions that one human success story does not
represent a breakthrough). He is a terrific model, Rifkind says: "There's his
level of enthusiasm, the high quality of science and the high value-added of
looking toward clinical applications."

   For his part, Pandolfi often works in his lab until 8 p.m., frequently
playing with the mice, which he calls his "pets," to assess their physical
condition. He seems moved that, working with Warrell, his therapy may have
helped one patient. "She was dying," he says. "It seemed to work."

   DR. NANCY CARRASCO, M.D.

   Professor, Department of Molecular Pharmacology

   Albert Einstein College of Medicine

   Interest: Identification of iodine transporter in the thyroid gland

   Another scientist once said the molecular entities Carrasco sought to
identify were "working conceptual hallucinations," but Carrasco, a Mexican-born
molecular biologist, wouldn't quit. Two years ago she identified a "missing
link" protein that transports iodine, essential to the thyroid function, into
the gland.

   The thyroid, a butterfly-shaped gland at the base of the throat, makes
hormones that travel to every cell in the body as they control metabolism and
energy levels. The hormones affect growth in the nervous system, the muscles and
other tissue.

   The implications of Carrasco's research are far-reaching, in part because the
thyroid is especially vulnerable to attack from various diseases, including
cancer, says Dr. Terry Davies, director of endocrinology at Mount Sinai Medical
School. Carrasco's discovery may someday lead to new treatments.

   Scientists wondered why the thyroid gland was so vulnerable. They suspected
the answer might be found in the way iodine enters the gland.

   "These [data] are of fundamental importance. They explain a lot of clinical
observations and open up a whole new area of diagnosis and treatment," says
Davies.

   The transporter protein may if Carrasco's structural model is correct work as
what researchers call a vector, a substance or strand of material that can carry
other things, such as medicines, into cells to cure them.

   What fascinated Carrasco was how iodine a natural element the body does not
make but which the thyroid uses and needs gets into the thyroid gland. For
decades, scientists had used iodine in diagnosing and treating thyroid disease,
but they didn't know the chemical pathway it used to get past the cell membrane
or how they might further deploy that mechanism.

   To find the pathway, Carrasco and her six-person team isolated the molecular
elements of a rat thyroid cell and injected them into the eggs of a South
African frog whose responses to iodine could be tracked. Then the team ran tests
to sort out the molecular response.

   The protein looks like a squiggling, looping thread that zips in and out of
the cell membrane 13 times. It is almost incomprehensibly small: Every cell has
46 chromosomes, every chromosome has "millions" of kilobases (a measurement) of
DNA, and the DNA coding for the protein is 3 kilobases in size, Carrasco says.

   The find is basic, vital information about the protein. "Unlike other kinds
of gene therapy, here we have a system that we already know works in treatment
of thyroid cancer," says Carrasco, "and now we have an opportunity to extend the
treatment to other cancers."

   For now, she is trying to see if the genes manufacture this protein in other
sites in the body. So far, she has found it in the breast; she's now
investigating whether it is in the ovary.

   Carrasco, 40, lives in Manhattan with her husband, Samuel Zyman, a composer
at the Juilliard School, and their son, Erik. She is very much aware of her
position as one of the few women in her field at a recent conference, she was
stunned to see that of 30 presenters, only two herself included were women.

   Carrasco decided to pursue research as a student in Mexico, and finds the
academic environment stimulating even though she spends "a lot of time" applying
for grant money. Most of her funding comes from the National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

   Treatments remain years away. Even with the discovery of the elusive
transporter protein behind her, Carrasco is doing basic work. "Because I am an
M.D., I wanted to work on something that could have physiological and potential
medical relevance," Carrasco says.

   Now, because of her research on the thyroid, "We can start answering
questions because we have the tools," she says. "I think it is a system that
will have important new medical applications in the long run helping cure cancer
from a different angle."

   SIDEBAR/ LEUKEMIA

   1998 estimates

   28,700 will be diagnosed 26,500 adults, 2,200 children.

   Deaths: 12,000 men, 9,600 women

   Survival rates: 63% after one year, 42% after five years.

   Established treatment: Chemotherapy. Bone marrow transplants.

   Symptoms: Fatigue, paleness, weight loss, frequent infections, easy bruising.

   Causes: Usually unknown.

   Risk factors include having Down syndrome, possible exposure to chemicals
like benzene (a toxic substance used commercially and in lead-free gasoline),
and in some forms, a retrovirus, HTLV-I.

   Source: American Cancer Society

   NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA

   1998 estimates

   55,400 new cases

   24,900 deaths

   Source: American Cancer Society

   THYROID DISEASE

   Women are about five times more likely to have thyroid problems than men.

   13 million Americans have overactive or underactive thyroid.

   6,000 Americans develop thyroid cancer each year.

   1 in 4,000 babies in America are born with thypthyroidism, most identified by
standard tests. Treatment with thyroid hormone and life-long followup avoids
retardation or abnormal growth.

   10% of women have increased TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone, by age 50.

   16.9% of women and 8.7% of men have increased TSH by age 60.

   5% of women become either hypo or hyperthyroid after giving birth, and it may
be a cause of postpartum depression.

   1 billion people in the world live in areas where iodine deficiency can lead
to goiter, lower achievement of children in school or lower community
productivity. This deficiency is vitually unknown in the U.S., in large part
because of iodized salt.

   Source: Thyroid Foundation of America.

   The bucks must start here

   Research costs: No matter what their field, doctors who spend lifetimes in
labs must specialize in patching together funding from their medical schools,
the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute and assorted
foundations that can deliver the cash it takes to set up, staff and run highly
complex labs. Often, they have to raise money for their own salaries.


GRAPHIC: PAT CARROLL DAILY NEWS THE HARD CELL: Cancer fighter Dr. Pier Paulo
Pandolfi at work in his lab at Sloan-Kettering.  PAT CARROLL DAILY NEWS TEST
SUBJECT: Pandolfi holds onto a mouse at his Sloan-Kettering lab. JONATHAN BARTH
TRACKING A PROTEIN: Dr. Nancy Carras-co, left, and surrounded by her staff,
right, at Albert Ein-stein College of Medicine.  JONATHAN BARTH

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1998


                             1862 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     August 23, 1998, Sunday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: READER; Pg. 04C

LENGTH: 983 words

SERIES: Metro Final

HEADLINE: ScienceWatch;
On the front lines against Cystic Fibrosis;
Georgia patients are among the first in the nation to test a new drug that
targets the defective gene causing the disease.

BYLINE: Ellen Lee

BODY:


   Chris Kidd would rather have been out by a pond, fishing. Instead, in the
hospital room of a white three-story building, a doctor drew out a sealed,
unlabeled bottle. Inside was a single white pill that resembled a small round
Tylenol. He handed the pill, along with a glass of water, to Kidd.

   As the first patient in a test of the experimental drug in Georgia, Kidd said
he had the typical jitters.

   "I'd rather have been spending my weekend fishing or doing something with my
family than, say, being in the hospital," Kidd said. "But I think it's worth it,
to give up a weekend."

   The little white pill that Kidd swallowed is part of a study on CPX, one of
several experimental drugs that researchers say may break new ground in how
doctors treat cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited disease among
Caucasians and one of the leading fatal illnesses among young people.

   The new drugs are the first to target the cause of cystic fibrosis --- that
is, the mutated gene that wreaks havoc on proteins in the body and eventually
leads to debilitating lung and digestive problems --- and not just treat the
symptoms.

   CPX is one of three gene-assist therapies under study nationwide, so-called
for the way they alter what the defective gene does, without altering the gene
itself. Researchers are also testing gene therapy, which works to alter the
defective gene, as another possible treatment. So far, only 37 cystic fibrosis
patients in the United States have tried CPX, or a look-alike inactive pill, in
clinical trials that began a year ago.

   Eight of those patients, including Kidd, a 22-year-old from Dalton, took part
in the experiment at Emory University's Egleston Cystic Fibrosis Center. The
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, a national nonprofit group that promotes research,
chose the Atlanta center, which treats nearly 500 patients, as one of five
institutions to participate in the study.

   Mark Weatherly, assistant professor of pediatrics and the associate director
of the Egleston center, and Nael McCarty, assistant professor in the departments
of physiology and pediatrics, assured Kidd that the drug so far had been safe
--- on animals, that is.

   "This is a brand-new drug. This is the first time it's ever been used on
patients. We gave the first pill to a patient and said, 'No human has ever had
this,' " said Weatherly. "We don't know what it's going to do."

   Researchers added, however, that because CPX is made from a compound similar
to caffeine, they did not expect any health or safety problems.

   What researchers say they hope CPX will do is halt some of the symptoms of
cystic fibrosis and allow patients to lead normal lives. CF, which affects
nearly 30,000 Americans, causes glands in the body's tissues to malfunction.
Mucus builds up in the lungs, and the digestive system lacks enzymes to properly
absorb nutrients. Most patients eventually die of recurring lung infections.

   Thirty years ago, the life expectancy of a person with cystic fibrosis
hovered around 11 years. Today, Kidd and other CF patients can expect to live
beyond their early 30s. Some have lived past 60.

   Researchers point to the 1989 discovery of the defective gene that causes
cystic fibrosis as the major turning point in combating the illness. The
discovery, aided by years of basic research in how cells function, launched a
better understanding of what causes cystic fibrosis. Before, patients took drugs
that dealt with the symptoms of the illness.

   "For the first time, we can treat the basic defect. Anytime you can do that,
the likelihood that we can have effective therapies is higher," said Robert J.
Beall, president and CEO of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "That's why we have
so much excitement (with these new treatments). We can have a more profound
impact on the disease."

   Aside from improvements on old drugs such as enzymes to aid the digestive
system and a treatment introduced during the early 1990s that breaks down the
mucus in the lungs, researchers have not developed new drugs for nearly 30
years, Beall added.

   Discovered by researchers at the National Institutes of Health, CPX is being
developed by SciClone Pharmaceuticals Inc. in conjunction with the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation. Researchers are also separately conducting the first
nationwide clinical trials for two similar drugs, phenylbutyrate and Duramycin.

   Kidd became a prime candidate for the CPX study because he has the specific
gene mutation the drug targets. Of the 650 different gene mutations that cause
cystic fibrosis, it accounts for nearly 70 percent of cases.

   The Phase 1 trial of CPX monitored the safety of the drug. The results will
be compiled, analyzed and presented at a national meeting sponsored by the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in October. This fall, Weatherly and McCarty plan to
start Phase 2 of the study, which will begin to measure whether the drug is
effective. If it passes that test, it goes to Phase 3 trials, the final study
before it can be submitted for Food and Drug Administration approval.

   Researchers still do not know whether Kidd received CPX or the look-alike
pill, but they have been assured that the drug trial can proceed to the next
level. "The Phase 1 trial showed the drug to be safe and we are optimistic that
the Phase 2 trial will show that repeated doses of CPX may provide some clinical
benefit," said McCarty.

   Kidd, who after the test picked up his girlfriend and went fishing in a pond
in his parents' back yard, said he felt no different after taking the pill. Even
if he did receive CPX, the drug would have been in such a low dose that it would
have had little effect.

   "You shouldn't brush off the opportunity," he said about testing CPX and
other drugs in the future. "Without someone trying it, they're never going to
know. I hope it works the way they want it to. If it does, it will be a
breakthrough."

GRAPHIC: Photo :
 Chris Kidd

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1998


                             1863 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 23, 1998 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. K-14

LENGTH: 1176 words

HEADLINE: Mark Russell heading west for Mi Casa

BYLINE: By Joanne Davidson

BODY:
 Current events in Washington are certainly no laughing matter, but political
satirist Mark Russell is sure to hit on some topical humor when he comes to
Denver Sept. 10 to headline a benefit for the literacy and learning programs
offered through Mi Casa and Community Resources Inc.

   Sponsored by The Alliance Foundation, the philanthropic arm of The Alliance
of Professional Women, "An Evening With Mark Russell" begins with a cocktail
reception at 5:30 p.m. at the Adam's Mark Hotel. During dinner, the 1998 Athena
Award will be presented to University of Colorado Regent Susan Kirk. The award
symbolizes her professional excellence and clout, and her willingness to use
those traits to further the advancement of women in a profession.

   In addition to her responsibilities as a regent, Kirk is in charge of
international business development for the Holme Roberts & Owen law firm. She
has a bachelor's degree in sociology and economics from Vassar College and was a
gubernatorial appointee to the Colorado Women's Economic Development Council.

   TV Guide has called Russell "the funniest man on television," and his "Mark
Russell Comedy Special" is in its 19th season on PBS. Tickets for "An Evening
With Mark Russell" start at $ 80. Proceeds will receive a percentage match from
The Denver Post Charities Fund, which is part of the Robert R. McCormick Tribune
Foundation.

   Mi Casa Resource Center for Women seeks to break the cycle of poverty in
Denver's Latina community by offering career, business and youth programs for
women and girls. Community Resources Inc. has served the Denver Public Schools
for 20 years, offering mentors, classroom speakers, parent workshops, reading
skills and vocabulary development.

   Twenty-six volunteers serve on the benefit committee, including Ellie
Bennish, Judith Bortz, Kim Monson, Judith Cahan, Gregg Batt, Denise Maes, Elaine
Torres, Anne Vitek and Emilie Ailts. For tickets, call 303-368-4747. Coming up
Today: A reception to celebrate the opening of the 1998 Rocky Mountain National
Watermedia Exhibition begins at 2 p.m. at Foothills Art Center, 809 15th St.,
Golden. The exhibition itself runs through Oct. 18. Sponsors include the JFM
Foundation and the Scientific & Cultural Facilities District. Call 303-279-3922.

   Monday: The second annual University of Colorado Pulmonary and Critical Care
Golf Classic will be played at Green Gables Country Club, 6800 W. Jewell Ave.,
Lakewood. Afterward, prizes will be presented by Rick Reilly, senior writer at
Sports Illustrated. Tournament proceeds go to the Lung Research Endowment Fund.
Call 303-766-8347.

   Tuesday: The Channel 9 studios, 500 Speer Blvd., are the setting for a
cocktail reception where plans for the 1999 Saturday Night Alive will be
announced. Charlene Dunn chairs this March 6 dinner and entertainment
extravaganza for the Denver Center for the Performing Arts; Channel 9's general
manager, Roger Ogden, and his wife, Ann Penny, head the corporate committee.
Tonight's festivities begin at 6:30 p.m. For details, call Mary Mosher,
303-572-4594.    Tuesday: Comedians Lori Callahan and Kevin Fitzgerald headline
"Comedy Cures," which benefits the National Cancer Prevention Fund's annual Day
of Caring. Doors open at 6:45 p.m. at the Comedy Works, 1226 15th St. The show
begins at 8. Channel 4's Tom Martino will emcee. Day of Caring, featuring
educational workshops and a fashion show where the models are all breast-cancer
survivors, was started 18 years ago by Sue Miller as a way to increase awareness
about breast cancer and to help survivors feel good about themselves. Tickets
for Tuesday night's event are $ 12 and can be purchased from Miller,
303-239-3417.

   Wednesday: The University of Denver Women's Library Association hosts "A
Gathering in the Garden" to welcome prospective members and thank those who've
chosen to continue for another year. Festivities begin at 10 a.m. at Phipps
Tennis House Garden, 3400 Belcaro Drive. Tickets are $ 5 and reservations are
required. Call 303-722-9369.

   Wednesday: The American Diabetes Association is looking to increase its
volunteer corps, and toward that end is hosting an iced-tea party at the Women's
Arts Center, 282 Delaware St. Reservations for the 1:30 p.m. event can be phoned
to Alison, 303-778-7556, ext. 301.    Wednesday: Dr. Mark Malyak discusses gene
therapy when LEA chapter of Hadassah holds a poolside meeting at Elaine and
Arnie Tinter's home in Cherry Hills Village. The 6:30 p.m. gathering is a
prelude to the chapter's Oct. 17 Big Gifts Dinner and for the ongoing effort to
raise money for the Hadassah Gene Therapy Research Institute. Tonight's activity
is under the direction of Laura Schiff (303-773-8429) and Arlene Stein
(303-694-1978).

   Thursday: The Diana Price Fish Foundation is having a dinner at the
Metropolitan Club to thank J.D. Edwards co-founder Jack Thompson and his wife,
Viki, for the generous donation they have made to the foundation's endowment
fund. The gift was so significant that the fund has been named in the Thompson's
honor.

   Thursday: Entertainment by Lannie Garrett (in her Patsy DeCline persona),
informal modeling of western wear, cocktails and a buffet supper are part of the
fun when Volunteers of America hosts its annual Western Fantasy kickoff party.
Activities begin at 6 p.m. at Neiman Marcus. Western Fantasy itself takes place
Nov. 7. Arlene and Barry Hirschfeld are the chairmen, and the headliner is
country music sensation Wynonna Judd. Vicky Myhren and Lisa Williams are in
charge of tonight's party. Call 303-297-0408.

   Friday: Due to construction at the Denver Zoo, the Rocky Mountain Multiple
Sclerosis Guild is moving its 10th anniversary "Where the Deer and the Antelope
Play" to a new location, the Kevin McNicholas estate in Cherry Hills Village.
"Follow the Deer and the Antelope" begins at 7 p.m. and includes a barbecue
supper, silent auction and dancing to the Mountaineers. McNicholas and his wife,
Mary, are chairing the $ 75-a-ticket event; Dr. Gary Willstein and his wife,
Lynne, are the physician chairmen, and Sears and Colleen Barrett head the
corporate committee. For reservations, call 303-781-3791.

   Saturday: Musical instruments signed by Melissa Etheridge, Chris Isaak,
Sheryl Crow and Matchbox 20 are among the items up for sale at the Peak
Foundation's Rock and Roll Yard Sale. It runs from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the
Sam's Club parking lot, 505 S. Broadway, Denver. Also for sale will be a
harmonica signed by John Popper of Blues Traveler, a map of Colorado autographed
by Big Head Todd, framed lithographs designed and signed by Sarah McLachlan and
a selection of South Park Beanie Babies. For additional information, call Pat
Loewi or Loren Faye, 303-832-5665.

   Saturday: A Not-So-Late Night Party and Luau, to benefit the Diana Price Fish
Foundation, begins at 8 p.m. at Chopper's Sports Grill in Cherry Creek. A $ 15
donation, payable at the door, includes one free drink and complimentary
appetizers. Deejay music will be supplied by Sounds Entertainment Co. Call
303-639-9110.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1998


                             1864 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 23, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: J. Craig Venter

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7273 words

HEADLINE: Splice Einstein and Sammy Glick. Add a Little Magellan.

BYLINE: By Lisa Belkin;  Lisa Belkin is a contributing writer for this magazine.
Her most recent article, "Chasing Bad Genes to the Ends of the Earth," appeared
in April.

BODY:

   There are just a few hours left before the start of the Newport-to-Bermuda
yacht race, and the Sorcerer, J. Craig Venter's 82-foot-long,
million-dollar-deep dazzler of a boat, is not even close to being ready. A
frenzy of activity fills the teak and cherry cabin as the galley chef stocks the
custom-built refrigerator-freezer with provisions for the 635-mile trip: spinach
lasagna, Catalina chicken, broiled lamb chops with pesto sauce. Assorted crew
members bound up and down the stairs between the two front staterooms with word
of the latest glitches:

   "The inverter is out," meaning there will be no on-board power for things
like computers and electronic charts.

    "The cockpit radio's totally dead."

   "I can't get the turbos to kick in."

   A more usual man might be concerned by all of this. Craig Venter, on the
other hand, sits calmly in the cockpit, surrounded by dozens of dials and
gauges, wearing the crew uniform -- a polo shirt bearing the logo of the
Sorcerer -- and looking downright pleased. Bald and fit, with wizardly eyebrows
that are in keeping with the mystical name of his boat, the 51-year-old Venter
is a man who speaks in metaphors and who sees his life as a series of ongoing
aphorisms. His favorite: They said it couldn't be done, but I did it.

   He particularly likes that theme lately, now that he has entered the biggest
race of his career, one that has nothing to do with the Sorcerer. The yacht,
after all, is just a distraction, something he's indulged in since he's become
extremely rich. When not at sea, he is a scientist -- arguably the most
prodigious and best-financed molecular biologist in the world. His success comes
from codifying shortcuts, doing things in less time and for less money. "Quick,"
he says, "does not mean dirty," although his critics would argue otherwise.

   Recently, he has elbowed his way to the center of what may turn out to be the
most significant race in the history of modern medicine. The finish line (which,
in many ways, is really a starting point) is a map of the entire human genome,
the 80,000 genes that are thought to exist within our dna. Altogether, this
means finding more than three billion microscopic pieces of information --
nucleotides, or bases, that are the molecular equivalent of letters -- then
putting them all in the right order and learning how to read them. If the poet
Alexander Pope was right and "the proper study of mankind is man," there is no
more elemental way to look at humanity than this.

   After the genome is sequenced, a new era in human health could,
theoretically, begin. Drugs could be made to neutralize the genetic codes of
infectious agents -- h.i.v., tuberculosis, hepatitis -- like a new program in a
computer. Others could replace the disease-prone genes of humans -- cancer,
diabetes, heart disease -- like new spark plugs in an automobile. Genomic
scientists (the field is so new that the term was coined only a few years ago)
liken knowledge of the genome to that of electricity. When the first wires were
strung, no one could envision the computers they would eventually power. In
genomics, too, they say, the possibilities are so vast they are beyond
imagination. If the dream proceeds as planned, it will make today's treatments
look as clumsy and archaic as blood-letting and cupping.

   "Most historians will look back on this project as the most important thing
we did in science at the turn of the century," says Dr. Francis S. Collins,
director of the National Human Genome Research Institute at the National
Institutes of Health, which oversees the Human Genome Project. It is a huge
undertaking, administered by the Department of Energy and the n.i.h., costing $3
billion in the United States alone and involving hundreds of scientists in
universities and private laboratories around the world.

   "This is more important than putting a man on the moon or splitting the
atom," Collins says. "Biomedical research will be divided into what we did
before we had the human genome and what we did after."

   But "after" depends on completing the genome, and that is where Venter comes
in. In the spring, he announced that this Holy Grail could be got privately and
that he, in partnership with one of the nation's largest manufacturers of
laboratory research equipment, was planning to get it. It would cost not $3
billion, he said, but a mere $300 million. He would be doing it not for the sake
of public knowledge alone but also on behalf of big business. And he would be
finished by 2001, four years ahead of the Government's target date.

   It was as if private industry had announced it would land a man on the moon
before nasacould get there. As if an upstart company intended to build the first
atom bomb.

   The response among scientists, ethicists, businessmen and legal experts was
as dramatic as the announcement itself. "Overnight, he changed everything," says
James Weber, a senior research scientist at the Marshfield Medical Research
Foundation. "Government labs are scrambling to keep from being eclipsed. Even if
he never intended to do it himself and just wanted to stir things up, he did it
brilliantly." There were attacks on Venter's methods, charges that his shortcut
would result in a genome filled with errors and gaps, a slipshod substitute for
the real thing. "A rough draft," says Collins dismissively. "Is this the Book of
Life we signed up for and that will stand the test of the decades? No."

   There were also attacks on Venter's motives. Was it only money he was after,
his critics and competitors wondered, or was it something more chilling: that he
might somehow come to own the operating system for the human body.

   "The question scientists are asking," says Lori Andrews, a professor of law
at the Chicago-Kent College of Law, "is does he want to be the Bill Gates of the
human genome?"

   As with most things in the realm of the double helix, however, the
controversy goes beyond what can easily be seen. Venter's announcement threw a
powerful lens on this world -- a discipline that is still in its infancy yet
already reinventing itself. It is a place where the lines between the goals of
science and those of industry are increasingly blurred, where countless genes
have been quietly claimed by patents, and where, long before Venter's
announcement, companies were already well on their way to owning the Book of
Life. Here, personalities can matter almost as much as results. And differences
in methods -- arcane and incomprehensible to those of us who are outsiders --
can make all the difference in our future.

   As for the man at the center of the shouting, he is as complex as his
science: a multimillionaire who insists he is not interested in the money, a
late-bloomer who craves the approval of the academic world yet delights in
attacking the establishment from the rear.

   "They don't like me," he says, fiddling with a temperamental computer screen
on the Sorcerer, trying to adjust the color of the water on the navigational
map, which is a stubbornly murky purple. "I keep changing the rules," he adds.
'People hate you when you do that." He smiles the same kid-in-trouble smile he
wore when he learned that the inverter had broken, the radio had ceased to work
and the turbos wouldn't fire.

   The fastest boat in the 40 previous runnings of this race took 57 hours to
finish, leaving on a Friday afternoon and reaching Bermuda near midnight on
Sunday. Venter stares at the seas on his computer screen, which, after all his
adjustments, have turned a brilliant blue.

   "We'll be in," he says, "by Sunday night."

   No one has ever accused Craig Venter of being too modest. He tries
self-deprecation once in a while, offering up an anecdote, say, of how he was a
mediocre student back home in the San Francisco Bay area. But by the time he
gets to the end of the story, it has turned into something else entirely.

   "When I close my eyes," he begins, "I see nothing. I can't picture my wife's
face; I can't picture my boat."

   His inability to remember visual images, he says, was why he nearly flunked
out of high school, barely passing each grade before finally receiving his
diploma in 1964. "All my thinking is totally conceptual," he continues,
beginning his segue from short-lived humility back to cheerful boasting. "I can
see things that other people can't see. And I'm usually very good at predicting
the future. It makes me very frustrated waiting for everyone else to catch up
with me."

   At age 17, Venter drifted south to Newport Beach, working at night so he
could spend his days surfing. Drafted during the Vietnam War, he found himself
at a hospital near the front lines. Trained as a medical corpsman, he was given
the job of triaging severely wounded soldiers based on his best guess of who
would live and who would die. By the time his tour was completed, his goals had
expanded beyond his surfboard. "Everybody has some sort of life-altering
experience," he says. "I couldn't be a frivolous surfer after what I went
through."

   Beginning with junior college, he earned both his bachelor's degree and his
Ph.D. in physiology and pharmacology from the University of California at San
Diego within six years. In 1976, he moved to the State University of New York at
Buffalo, where he met his wife, Claire Fraser, then a graduate student in
microbiology, who has been his professional colleague and confidante ever since.
Once he got started, he would always be in a hurry, as if making up for a late
start, doggedly determined to prove that he belonged in this most intellectual
of worlds. The world he entered, however, was not in a hurry. In the late 70's,
the way to find a gene was to read the genetic alphabet one letter at a time.
Researchers sat squinting at narrow columns of magnified dna, scanning across
and down, trying to parse out which sections represented genes and which
represented the filler, known as "junk dna," between them. Working at this pace,
it took Venter 10 frustrating years, until 1986, to find his first gene -- one
that produces a protein that serves as an adrenaline receptor in brain cells.

   There was already talk of a Human Genome Project when Venter made his
breakthrough, but it was little more than talk because the technology of the day
would have meant a project of 30 or 40 years. That changed overnight, however,
with the invention of an "automated sequencer," which replaced much of the
squinting with lasers and computers. In 1987, Congress approved the first budget
for the Human Genome Project. It would be administered by the n.i.h. office of
human genome research under the direction of James D. Watson, the Nobel laureate
who along with Francis Crick described the double-helix shape of dna in the
first place. That same year, Venter, who was running his own laboratory at the
n.i.h., arranged to have the lab designated as a test site for the machine.

   Within two years, he had found eight new genes. It was, at the time, a
dizzying rate of discovery, but it was still not fast enough for Venter. By
1991, the year after the Human Genome Project officially started, he had devised
a shortcut -- one loved by industry but questioned by scientists, a theme that
would come to define the rest of his career. Rather than looking for genes in
the full string of dna, Venter trawled through something called cdna
(complementary dna), which is manipulated chemically to contain the genes but
not the filler. His approach rarely resulted in an entire gene sequence, but
provided enough to indicate that the gene is there. He called these bits and
pieces "expressed sequence tags," or e.s.t.'s.

   Critics point out that he was not the first to realize the potential of cdna
for this purpose. (Actually, critics point out that nearly everything Venter has
done over the years has been thought of first by someone else.) But he was the
first to do something about it on a large and dramatic scale.

   Venter applied for a $10 million grant from the n.i.h. for e.s.t. research.
His goal, he said, was to find every human gene. He was turned down, probably
because the amount of money he requested was a substantial percentage of the
yearly Genome Project budget. Venter believes it was more personal than that.

   "Watson turned on me," he says. Venter's theory is that Watson feared that
the shortcut might cause Congress to question the $3 billion it was paying for
the slower, more precise sequencing method chosen by the Genome Project, a
method that includes pinpointing not only the genes but also the filler between.
Watson said at the time that he'd had nothing to do with the e.s.t. grant
request, which had been rejected "at a level I couldn't reverse."

   Whatever the reasons, this was the start of the bad blood between Venter and
Watson, a chill that continues to this day. When asked to discuss Venter's
newest controversial plan, Watson says, gallantly but firmly, "I think it's best
if we say nothing of each other."

   Venter experimented with his e.s.t. gene fragments anyway, using money from
his general lab budget. This, too, would become a pattern in his life --
circumventing the lengthy peer-review grant process and improvising other ways
to finance his research. Within months he had found pieces of a remarkable
number of genes. By June 1991, he had located 347. A year later, 2,375 more. Six
months after that, an additional 4,448. By 1991, all the scientists in the world
had found fewer than 2,000. Craig Venter was locating 25 genes each day, and
raising questions of ethics and commerce at about the same rate.

   How, exactly, does one measure the value of a gene? Is its worth determined
by its function within the body? Is a gene that influences intelligence more or
less valuable than one that influences health? Or talent? Or beauty? Or perhaps
the value should be measured by the profits to be seen from sales of gene-based
pharmaceuticals? And to whom, then, does the discovered gene belong? To the
scientist who conducted the research? To the entity that financed it? To the
whole of mankind, which shares that gene in common?

   Is it blasphemous to patent the building blocks of our very existence? Is it
shortsighted not to patent them? If all genes are in the public domain, would
any company invest the tens of millions necessary to transform that nonexclusive
knowledge into practical therapy? If they are not in the public domain, do those
who own them privately also own a blueprint for humanity?

   Over the past two decades, law and practice have evolved to treat genes as
they would any other commercial product -- meaning they are subject to patents.
It happened quietly, and there are many who now question whether it should have
happened, but, being students of technology, they understand there will be no
going back.

   What Venter was discovering expanded the debate beyond the patenting of
genes. That is because he was not discovering full genes but pieces thereof,
raising an entirely new set of questions. Can you patent a gene before you know
what it does and how it can be used?

   The n.i.h. technology transfer office decided to try, applying for patents on
thousands of Venter's e.s.t.'s. Those who had kept silent while gene patents
became the norm now raged at double volume over the patenting of genetic pieces.
This was governmental hubris, academic scientists protested, and would lead to a
biological gold rush, a mad scramble to stake claims in uncharted territory.

   Although the patents weren't Venter's idea (he had at first been opposed to
the proposal), most of the backlash was directed toward him. Watson publicly
criticized those within his own agency who made the patent-application decision,
calling the plan "sheer lunacy." A colleague of Watson's then attacked Venter's
e.s.t. approach as something "any monkey" could do. Days later, a scientist in
Venter's lab came to work dressed in a monkey suit and his colleagues took a
photo of him reading a book written by Watson.

   Eventually, the patent applications were withdrawn, but not before Watson
resigned from the Human Genome Project in protest. (He is now at the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory on Long Island.) Craig Venter, in turn, packed up his entire
30-person staff and also left the n.i.h., lured by $70 million from Wallace
Steinberg, a venture capitalist who thought all this talk of making money on
genetics was not ethically troubling at all.

   Under a glass case in Craig Venter's expansive office is a model of the
Sorcerer -- its hull sapphire blue, its sails full to the wind. The mahogany of
the antique desk and conference table is highly polished. The rugs are dark and
thick. The walls are filled with nautical sketches, save for a single photograph
-- an aerial shot of the Sorcerer and its crew taken from a helicopter.

   The office is part of the Institute for Genomic Research, Venter's own
personal research institute, where he has worked since his departure from n.i.h.
in 1992. Wallace Steinberg, chairman of the Healthcare Investment Corporation
until his death in 1995, pledged his $70 million to establish the institute (
known as tigr and pronounced like the wild animal). At the same time, he spent
$3 million to set up a sister company, Human Genome Sciences, or h.g.s. There
were no restrictions on Venter's research, but -- this was a business venture,
after all -- he was required to give h.g.s. a six-month exclusive look at tigr's
results. If h.g.s. was interested in pursuing a patent on a particular gene,
then tigr could not publish that information for another 12 months, giving
h.g.s. time to apply for the patent.

   Venter, who says he had $2,000 in savings at the time, accepted the offer
from Steinberg, receiving 10 percent of h.g.s. stock when the company first went
public in December 1993. (He sold that stock in the spring of 1994 for more than
$9 million; he says he did not want to be personally beholden to h.g.s. "It
shows you I'm not in this for the money," he says. The price as of Aug. 12 was
37, three times what it had been when Venter divested.)

   By 1994, tigr and h.g.s. had found e.s.t.'s for 35,000 genes, almost half the
genes in the human genome. At about that time, Venter ran into Hamilton O.
Smith, who had won a Nobel in 1978 for work he had done using the Hemophilus
influenzae bacterium, which causes ear infections and meningitis.

   Smith knew of Venter, whose unorthodox reputation was growing within
genomics. Intrigued by this rebellious bad sheep, Smith accepted Venter's
invitation to dinner one night. The conversation turned to new software being
developed at the institute that could reassemble and analyze ever-larger chunks
of a genome. Smith suggested that Venter try out the assembler on the nearly
two-million-base-pair H. influenzae.

   At that time, the only full genomes that had been sequenced were viruses, and
as genomes go, they are tiny: from 10,000 (h.i.v.) to about 200,000 (smallpox)
base pairs. Several labs were trying to sequence bacteria, but they were doing
it the old-fashioned way -- one section at a time. The standard technique was to
first create a "map" of chemically known signposts along the dna, then sequence
the spaces between the signposts. Because the map always gives you an idea of
where along the genome you are, the pieces are easier to put back together. What
Venter and Smith agreed to do was skip the mapping stage. Instead, they relied
on the tigr software program to fit together the pieces.

   The largest number of bases anyone had reported subdividing and reassembling
at that point was 48,000. Now Venter and Smith were trying to take on 1.8
million. The two applied for an n.i.h. grant to finance the project, but because
they were creating the software as they went along, Smith says, "we realized we
probably wouldn't get the money."

   So, in the meanwhile, the team began the work on their own, using tigr funds.
In time, n.i.h. did turn down the request. While the agency's confidential
report was careful to say that the idea was "worth pursuing," it also expressed
doubt that it could be done as proposed. "To date," the report concluded, "there
is no successful example of assembling 2 Mb of finished sequence. And there is
no indication that this can be achieved by the tigr group."

   But by the time the grant was rejected, Venter and Smith had completed 90
percent of the sequencing and another chapter had been added to the evolving
Venter myth. With a flourish, the partners announced the completion of the H.
influenzae genome to a microbiology conference 10 months later and followed that
with a pullout centerfold in Science, the most prestigious of journals: four
pages of 1,749 separate genes, laid out in rows, a first glimpse at a Recipe for
Life.

   Even James Watson had good things to say: "I think it's a great moment in
science."

   Although the science was going well at tigr, other things were not. Venter's
relationship with h.g.s. meant that he could not publish many of his discoveries
until months after they were made, and to an academic scientist, publication is
confirmation of one's existence. h.g.s. policy allowed other scientists to see
the findings, but only after they signed an agreement saying they would not use
the data for commercial purposes.

   Free access to information is tantamount to religion among scientists, and
they once again directed their anger at Craig Venter. One pharmaceutical
company, Merck & Company, went so far as to announce a new partnership with the
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, pledging that all e.s.t.
discoveries would be put immediately into the public domain. You can do well
while doing good, the announcement seemed to say. Venter saw the announcement as
a direct slap, and he felt the sting.

   Despite his pride at tweaking the establishment, Venter also craves its
approval, and the ties between Venter and Human Genome Sciences became
increasingly strained. Last summer, the partnership was officially dissolved.
Venter gave up the $38 million that was owed to tigr by h.g.s. over the next
five years -- money he says he will not miss. The sum of his public and
commercial grants was about $30 million last year, he says, one of the highest
levels of per capita grant funding in the country.

   On the day that the dissolution of the tigr-h.g.s. partnership was made
public, Venter made his own separate announcement: that tigr would post a
treasure trove of new information into genetic data banks, including the full
genomes for Helicobacter pylori, the bacterium that causes ulcers. That done,
Craig Venter began looking around for something new and controversial to do.

   Francis Collins, who replaced James Watson as the head of the Human Genome
Project, does not have any yacht dioramas in his laboratory office. There is no
fireplace, no plush carpet, no antique artwork. The view out his window is of a
construction site.

   The differences in decor say a lot about the varying budgets of public and
private science. They say something, too, about the core differences between
these formidable men. Venter is ever restless and impatient; Collins is
methodical and precise (although, it should be said, he rides a red Honda
Nighthawk motorcycle to work every morning). Not surprisingly, these two give
every impression that they do not like each other.

   "We don't go drinking together," says Collins of Venter. "I wouldn't describe
us as friends."

   "Francis is not a competitor," says Venter of Collins. "He's a Government
bureaucrat whose job is to hand out money to help get the genome done."

   Craig Venter called Francis Collins on a Thursday afternoon in May and asked
if the two might meet the following day. The meeting took place in a lounge at
Dulles airport, and Venter brought along Michael W. Hunkapiller, senior vice
president of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation and president of its biosystems
division, which sold almost $1 billion in life-science research equipment last
year. Hunkapiller was Venter's new business partner.

   Perkin-Elmer was about to unveil a new sequencing machine, Collins was told,
one that is not only far more powerful than the current version but that also
changes the entire sequencing process. It is so fast and so automated that the
new Venter-Perkin-Elmer labs will far exceed the total sequencing capacity of
all the existing genomics labs in the world.

   The new company that would run those labs would be named Celera Genomics --
from the root word "celerity," meaning "swiftness of action." The company's
goal: nothing less than to sequence the entire human genome, faster and cheaper
than Collins and the n.i.h. were planning to do -- faster and cheaper than
anyone had thought possible.

   Three days later, a still-stunned Collins agreed to appear at a joint news
conference with Venter and several Perkin-Elmer officials. Everyone smiled. Some
looked more sincere about it than others. Collins now says that he was, in fact,
deeply troubled by what he was hearing from Venter, but thought it would make no
sense to start off this relationship with public rancor.

   "This was a real opportunity not to get off on the wrong foot," he says. But
Venter's assumption that the entire Human Genome Project would come to a halt
more than rankled. "There was the expectation that we would be sufficiently
convinced that their strategy was going to work quickly, that we could turn our
attention to other things now and wait and see how they did," he says with a
tone that lies somewhere between astonishment and anger. "It never occurred to
me to seriously consider that we would back away from the effort on the human
genome."

   When early news reports painted the new partnership as the end of the Human
Genome Project and when Congress subsequently announced it would hold hearings
on the continuing need for such a project, Collins grew more alarmed. So did
many in the scientific community.

   To portray Venter's pursuit of the genome as a clash between a bloated
Government bureaucracy that costs billions and a feisty, efficient start-up
venture that will spend mere hundreds of millions is "just nonsense," says
Maynard V. Olson, director of the University of Washington Genome Center and a
participant in the Government's research. "The numbers that are being compared
are not comparable," he says. "It's worse than comparing apples and oranges.
It's like comparing all of city planning in Paris with the building of the
Eiffel Tower."

   To start, project defenders say, it is not true that the Government's
approach will take 15 years, compared with Venter's 3. The years invested in the
Human Genome Project thus far have been spent on technical preparation.
Full-scale sequencing began last month, meaning the Government will take 7 years
to sequence the human genome, not 15.

   In addition, they say, it is inaccurate to compare the $3 billion being spent
on one project with the $300 million being set aside for the other. The public
budget is paying for far more than human genome sequencing. It is also paying
for all the advance work done to date, as well as the parallel sequencing of
other organisms and a cluster of related projects. The money that will be spent
on the actual sequencing: $500 million.

   The more accurate comparison, therefore, is that Venter will do in three
years what will take the Government seven years. And he will do for $300 million
what the Government says will cost $500 million. Why is his plan still cheaper
and faster? The answer is one of the few things about which Venter and his
critics agree: Venter does not do as much work.

   The n.i.h. approach involves three steps. The first is mapping, which means
plotting reference points along the dna. It has the additional result of
dividing the genome into workable sections. Instead of tackling a full
encyclopedia, you can approach it entry by entry.

   The second step is the actual sequencing: taking the individual entries,
ripping them into small pieces and then putting them all back together. The
analogy favored by nearly every scientist interviewed for this article was the
shredding -- only figuratively, mind you -- not of an encyclopedia but of this
particular newspaper. "You take 10 copies of the Sunday New York Times," says
Eric Lander, director of genome research for the Whitehead Institute at M.I.T.
"Then you divide each one into random 500- word segments and scramble them up."

   Imagine that those segments are on pieces of transparent plastic. If you wave
them over one another, or do the computational equivalent, eventually you will
find clauses, even sentences, that match. By sticking the overlapping sections
on top of one another, you can, eventually, reconstruct the original whole.

   The final step is "finishing," which means filling in the gaps and correcting
all errors and ambiguities in the text. "Sequencing is large-scale factory
work," Lander says. "Finishing is the master craftsmanship at the end."

   Venter plans to leave out the first step, the mapping, and much of the last
step, the finishing, an approach that would greatly reduce costs. To do only the
middle step, which Lander estimates at a cost of 12 cents a base pair for three
billion pairs, would result in a total expenditure of $360 million at current
prices, which are steadily coming down.

   What then is the Government buying for its extra effort? Is it worth the
additional time and money?

   Critics of Venter's approach say his work will result in a genome sequence,
but it will be a mess. By skipping the mapping process, they say, Venter runs
the risk of sticking the wrong parts of the chromosome together. Without
mapping, the potential for inadvertently splicing together sentences referring
to the Nixon White House and the Clinton White House increases exponentially.

   Venter counters that mapping does not provide nearly the information that its
proponents say it does. As for finishing: "It gives people something to complain
about. They have to complain about something because otherwise what is their
justification for continuing to spend all this money?"

   His best evidence that his approach will work, he says, is that he used it on
H. influenzae. Collins responds that bacteria genomes and the human genome are
different. Not only is the human genome 2,000 times as big, but bacteria do not
have repeat sequences of dna -- strings of letters that appear in the same order
in many places in the genome. In bacteria, less than 1 percent of all dna is
repetitive. By contrast, 70 percent of human genes are repetitive.

   Venter's results, Collins says, will be useful, but his shortcut will mean
they will not be accurate enough. "You want the whole thing," he says. "You want
it done right. You want no mistakes if you can help it, and you don't want gaps
in the assembly. That is the potential risk -- that victory will be declared and
we will be left with a rough draft rather than the real thing."

   While some scientists are worrying about the quality of the results, others
are worrying about access to those results. In the years since the fight over
the patenting of Venter's e.s.t. gene fragments, the world of genomics has
become increasingly privatized: in genetic research, private financing now
outpaces public financing; the United States Patent and Trademark Office has
issued more than 1,800 patents on full gene sequences, according to John Doll,
director of biotechnical examination at the Patent Office. Most, he says, have
been for plant genes, although the past two years have seen "a tremendous
increase" in applications for human-gene patents. Licenses on many of those
human-gene patents have been granted to pharmaceutical companies. Amgen, for
instance, paid Rockefeller University $20 million to license a gene thought to
regulate metabolism, with an agreement to pay many times that amount if the gene
proves useful in treating obesity.

   "You no longer have a clearly bounded territory of open noncommercial
science," says Rebecca Eisenberg, a professor at the University of Michigan Law
School and a specialist in biotechnology patents. "It's hard to tell public from
private. It's like a lottery of sorts, and no one wants to discover they've just
parted with a winning lottery ticket." The result, she says, is that the world
of genomics is becoming a place where "people are much more reluctant to share."

   That get-out-of-my-sandbox approach to science would be fine, some theorists
say, if private control over genes spurred companies to develop genetic
therapies. But in recent months, Eisenberg and others have published arguments
in leading science journals arguing that the privatization of this research
could inhibit that process instead. In the May 1998 issue of Science, Eisenberg
and a co-author, Michael A. Heller, write that the existence of multiple and
overlapping "owners" of genetic material makes it difficult for anyone to get
all the necessary permissions to use the material.

   It is a situation, she says, that will worsen when the Patent Office does
what it has balked at doing for nearly a decade but now seems poised to do in
the future -- allow patents on gene fragments, or e.s.t.'s. "More intellectual
property rights," Eisenberg predicts, "may lead paradoxically to fewer useful
products for improving human health."

   Celera, she fears, is one more major step in that direction. Tony White,
Perkin-Elmer's chief executive officer and the chairman of Celera, promises that
Celera will place the actual genome sequence, the three-billion-letter string,
in the public domain. Every three months, he says, the latest results will be
entered into GenBank, the Internet directory that tracks the accumulating
information. (The n.i.h., in contrast, updates that database every 24 hours.)

   But that does not mean that everything the company discovers will be made
public. "We didn't say we would put everything in the public domain,"
Hunkapiller says. "We said we'd put in the basic sequence."

   What the company will not give away is its interpretation of the data,
particularly the valuable polymorphisms -- the genetic differences among human
beings that are the core of all gene therapy. That will be available to
pharmaceutical companies -- for a price.

   In addition, Celera will retain the intellectual property rights to "some
number" of genes, White says, ones that show particular commercial promise.
Using the three-month lead time, Celera can identify those genes that are of
greatest interest to pharmaceutical companies. If past trends are a prediction
of the future, the most marketable genes will be not only for those that cause
cancer but also for those that cause such problems as obesity and baldness.

   "We don't intend to just go ahead and patent everything that comes out of our
machines, willy-nilly," White says, "but this is a commercial venture. We intend
to get a very good return to our shareholders on this."

   There are some who go so far as to suggest that all of this is not really
about sequencing the genome. Business, not science, they say, is at the root of
this announcement. And the business in question has nothing to with gene
patents. Instead, they say, it is a creative way for Perkin-Elmer to sell more
of its sequencing machines.

   "When all is said and done it will have been a great marketing coup for
Perkin-Elmer," says Randy Scott, president of Incyte Pharmaceuticals, a biotech
company that earned a $10 million profit against $90 million in revenue last
year marketing a similar database to pharmaceutical companies. "That's what this
comes down to, great publicity."

   Says Tony White: "I sell tools and I want that data out there so people will
start using our equipment to mine that data. We think it's going to create
increased demand for our primary division."

   But if there is reason to believe that Perkin-Elmer is less interested in
science than in commerce, there is also evidence that Venter, who will own 5
percent of the new company, is motivated by something that does not have to do
with money at all.

   He gave a speech in Stockholm recently, a guest of the Nobel Symposium. He
spoke in the very hall where the most prestigious prizes in science are
presented. The Nobel is not something one is supposed to campaign for. It is not
even something one is supposed to lust for aloud. But in this area, too, Craig
Venter likes to break the rules.

   "Do I wish?" he said shortly after that speech. "Every scientist does. If the
scenario works as we envision it.. . ." He trailed off, midthought. Even he is
too superstitious to complete the sentence.

   The cabin of the five-passenger Lear jet is cramped and noisy, but it
provides status, efficiency and privacy. Venter, as one of his corporate perks,
leases private planes often lately, when commercial airline schedules can not
get him to all the places he needs to be in one day. On a recent morning, the
trip is particularly bumpy, the cloud cover is dense and Venter is full of
metaphors.

   "Look out the window," he says. "You can't see anything, but you can still
get where you're going. That's something only the human mind is capable of:
envisioning what it can't see." Pointing toward the two pilots in the cockpit,
he says: "They have their instruments and their maps. My brain is my map."

   Suddenly, the plane dips below the clouds, and the ground appears as if from
nowhere. "This is genomics," Venter says, sweeping his hand theatrically toward
the horizon. "The big view." Let others worry about each little gene, he says,
his plan is to "look at the whole world."

   He has been traveling relentlessly since plans for Celera were unveiled,
leaving the day-to-day operations of tigr in the hands of his wife, Claire
Fraser, who is expected to be named president soon by the board of directors. He
is vilified at some stops, hailed at others. Through it all, he looks dazed but
buoyant, like one of those inflatable clowns that pop up smiling, no matter how
often they are hit.

   Soon after the plans for Celera were first announced, for instance, he was
the hastily scheduled guest speaker at a long-planned meeting of genome
scientists at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, James Watson's lab. It was not
one of Venter's more welcoming audiences.

   During his presentation, Venter explained that his predictions of success
were based on a particular mathematical formula, the Lander-Waterman equation.
That was when Eric Lander, co-author of that equation, raised his hand and said
that Venter had misapplied the formula because, among other things, the equation
assumes a perfect situation, including a genome with no repeats.

   Later at that meeting, Venter announced that Celera would not start on the
human genome immediately, but would first sequence Drosophila -- the fruit fly
-- as a test run. During this first phase, he said, he would have the
cooperation of Gerald M. Rubin, a professor of genetics at the University of
California at Berkeley, who has spent years (and expects to spend years more)
sequencing Drosophila. The ensuing discussion after Venter had left was loud and
nasty. A number of people at the meeting say Watson invoked the specter of
Hitler and Munich in describing Venter's ambition. (Rubin was Poland.) Watson
says he never mentioned Hitler. Then what did he accuse Rubin of? "Of
collaborating with Venter," Watson says, effectively taking the word that
scientists regularly use to mean "cooperation" or "sharing" and using it to mean
"helping the enemy."

   Things went a little better for Venter a few weeks later, when he testified
before a Congressional subcommittee. By that time, there had been a meeting of
the group responsible for the next five-year-plan for the Human Genome Project,
and the Government-financed scientists discussed giving some ground to Venter by
altering their own schedule to include an "intermediate sequence product,"
similar in quality to the one Venter proposes, then fine-tuning it later.

   Appearing before Congress, therefore, Collins was most solicitous of Venter.
"Let me assure you," Collins vowed, "we will work together." He nodded toward
Venter, who, to the discomfort of both men, was dressed in almost the same
jacket, shirt and trousers as he was. "If you doubt that, notice Dr. Venter and
I seem to have worn the same clothes today without intending to. We are
intending to be partners in every possible way, so let this be a symbol
thereof."

   By far the most enthusiastic receptions, not surprisingly, have come from the
pharmaceutical companies that are Celera's prospective clients. If Celera is to
be successful, Venter has to sell his anticipated database, but these are the
audiences that make him most uncomfortable, most aware of the border he is
crossing between science and industry.

   One June afternoon, the Lear jet has stops scheduled in Westchester County,
just north of New York City (for a meeting with SmithKline Beecham); then
Groton, Conn. (Pfizer Pharmaceuticals); then Teterboro, N.J. A stretch limo
meets Venter at Teterboro and drives him to the New York Hilton in Manhattan,
where he is to be the keynote speaker at Bio '98, a meeting of 5,000
representatives of the biotechnology industry.

   The lights in the Grand Ballroom dim. Three sequined dancers take the stage,
performing a Broadway medley that includes "This Is the Moment," the
show-stopper from the musical "Jekyll and Hyde," sung right before the maverick
scientist, Jekyll, drinks the drug that transforms him into the monstrous Hyde.
Soon after, the floodlights swoop, the music blares and Venter stands at the
sparkling podium.

   At the end of his presentation, the dancers return and they hand Venter a top
hat and cane, expecting him to join in as they soft-shoe off the stage. Venter
stares at the props, but refuses to take them.

   "I'm willing to do a lot of crazy things," says the man who wardrobes his
yacht crew in identical outfits, who dressed a lab member in a monkey outfit,
who blithely headed for Bermuda not knowing whether his engine was working. "But
somewhere you have to draw the line."

   The 1998 race from Newport to Bermuda turns out to be the slowest in 20
years. The wind is so weak that at times the Sorcerer sails backward, carried
along by the Gulf Stream. On the first leg of the race, the only option is to
drop the sails and bob helplessly in the Atlantic for 18 hours. Venter, certain
he can never win, talks of "motoring back to Hyannisport and saying to hell with
it."

   But he does win. At least for a moment. He sails into Hamilton at 10 P.M. on
Wednesday. That is days later than he had planned to arrive, but sooner than any
other boat in his division. Shortly before the awards dinner, however, he learns
that several competing boats have reported a rule infraction to the race
committee.

   There had been confusion back in Newport about the class in which the
Sorcerer was entered and about whether or not the crew could use the spinnaker.
Venter thought he could -- he was particularly proud of that sail, which carries
a 20-foot- high sketch of himself wearing a peaked wizard's hat. Now he is being
told that the spinnaker was in fact banned in his class. Exhausted and
disappointed, he withdraws his boat from the race and skips the dinner
altogether.

   And what is the metaphor here? That breaking the rules sometimes has
consequences? That figuring it out as you go along might not be the best idea?
That shortcuts are not always the right approach? That unforeseen circumstances
can slow you down?

   No, Venter says, none of those.

   The lesson he has learned?

   "Maybe sailing isn't really a metaphor for life."

GRAPHIC: Photos: (Photographs by Greta Pratt); Family business: While Venter
concentrates on Celera Genomics, his wife, Claire Fraser, runs the Institute for
Genomic Research.; "I wouldn't describe us as friends," says Dr. Francis S.
Collins, who bikes to the National Human Genome Research Institute he heads.
(Photographs by Greta Pratt for The New York Times.)

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1998


                             1865 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 23, 1998 Sunday
                                 UNION EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1917 words

HEADLINE: Cancer activists put their rivalry on hold

BYLINE: Kitta MacPherson, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   An emerging activist group harbors the bravest of hopes: that the world will
be watching as hundreds of thousands of cancer patients march on Washington one
weekend next month.

    Coupled to their hope is an absolutely immodest wish: that this act will
persuade Congress and the public to double, at least, the spending on cancer
research.

    The March, as advocates of cancer patients are calling their Sept. 26 rally,
is designed to heighten awareness of the fight against the disease, which kills
one of four Americans.

    ``I don't think it's hyperbole to say we are on the cusp of great
discoveries," said Ellen Stovall, president of The March, herself a long-term
cancer survivor. "Yet we believe that the disease is woefully underfunded. This
march is about presenting a unified voice, with all its anger, passion and fear,
to articulate such big-picture issues."

   To anyone who has seen the pink-ribbon pins worn by those who call attention
to breast cancer, cancer advocacy is nothing new. What's different is the
attempt by The March organizers to marshal the country's 8 million cancer
survivors into one supergroup. According to the organizers' careful definition,
a survivor is anyone in whom cancer has been diagnosed and who is still alive.
The disease need not be in remission.

    Getting factions to work together, though, hasn't been easy. "It's like
nailing Jell- O to the wall," Stovall said. "It's like taming a wild beast."

    Cancer groups are accustomed to tussling over funding and recognition. Their
names and symbols show it. A prostate cancer group is called "Us Too," an
obvious dig at breast cancer patients' more aggressive tactics. Statistics show
the number of prostate cancer cases and breast cancer cases are roughly
equivalent.

    A looped ribbon pin, originally distributed in red by AIDS activists, is
also being distributed by lung cancer groups. Their pin, however, is colorless,
made of clear plastic. "Lung cancer is the invisible disease," explained Susan
McCarthy of the Alliance for Lung Cancer Advocacy, Support and Education. "It's
the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in America today. Yet no one knows
that."

    The event - conceived during a Larry King show on CNN - is being organized
by a group that, charitably speaking, is loosely knit. The amalgam of cancer
survivors and research scientists operates without the behind-the-scenes
expertise of any well-known nonprofit group. Yet with the aid of a few corporate
sponsors, such as Pharmacia & Upjohn, and some celebrity endorsements -one-time
junk bond king Michael Milken and retired Army Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf have had
prostate cancer - the organizers have reached out to cancer groups in all 50
states. In New Jersey, groups organized through The Cancer Institute of New
Jersey plan to rally Sept. 17 in Trenton to publicize The March.

    Pete Doherty of Morristown, an activist and prostate cancer survivor, said
he does not feel well enough to go to Washington but will attend the noon rally
at the Statehouse. Calling attention to the disease and talking about the
possibilities for research is an approach he has embraced. He was instrumental
in persuading the state Division of Motor Vehicles in January to issue a
"Conquer Cancer" license plate, replete with woolly violets.

    Betty Gallo, widow of Rep. Dean Gallo, who died in 1994 of prostate cancer,
said she will be attending. She sees it as a great opportunity to talk about the
possibilities of research. "I've seen what cancer does, and I don't want this to
happen to anyone else," said Gallo. Fight over `scraps' Americans fear cancer
perhaps more than any other disease. This year, it will be diagnosed in nearly
1.4 million people in the United States, and about 560,000 Americans are
expected to die of it - about 1,500 a day.

    Cancer is a group of about 100 similarly acting diseases that occur when
cells become abnormal, dividing and forming more cells without control or order.
It has taken decades to figure that much out, but scientists now know that, for
cancer to occur, a series of changes in genes that control cell growth and
behavior must take place.

    A critical question in cancer research that rests before today's generation
of scientists is how and why these genetic errors occur, and just as important,
why the errors are not corrected by the cell's normally efficient mechanisms.

    People get cancer in all kinds of ways. Some have inherited certain genes
that predispose them; others fall victim at random. Ultimately, its origins lie
in the interplay between the vulnerability of DNA and the environmental stresses
- such as smoking and poor diet - that are placed on the cells in which DNA is
housed.

    Advocates of cancer patients like to talk about the "scraps" of dollars
fought over by rival groups to fund research programs. Since the "War on Cancer"
was announced by President Nixon in 1971, however, the federal government has
spent about $26 trillion on cancer-research efforts funneled through the
National Cancer Institute.

    Donald Coffey, the president of the American Association of Cancer Research
and the lead scientist supporting The March, said that the benefits of cancer
research, providing basic insights, tools and techniques, are inestimable.

    The venerable cancer biologist from the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine in Baltimore said he was transformed from quiet scientist to loudmouth
advocate when he was named president of the research association and began to
study budget figures. "I couldn't believe how little we were spending on cancer
in relation to the rest of the federal budget," Coffey said. "Then, through my
position, I started having to apologize to scientists whose grants were being
turned down."

    Interesting science begets more, it seems. By creating new fields of
endeavor in basic research, the federally funded program has provoked a
flowering of scientific inquiry - more scientists with more questions. Out of
every 100 research grants now approved by the NCI - proposals that have met the
rigorous standards of scientific "peer review" - about 23 are funded, Coffey
said.

    ``That's bad, because we don't have all the answers yet," he said. "We don't
know where the next breakthrough is coming, and we are discouraging a whole new
generation of scientists from ever trying for one."

    When he speaks with members of Congress, Coffey said, he likes to describe
the benefits of cancer research. For instance, because of the more widespread
use of early detection methods - whose efficacy was proven through research -
many of the most common cancers, such as breast and colon tumors, are being
diagnosed at earlier stages, when chances for successful treatment are greater.
A more enlightened use of chemotherapy, discovered through experience and
research, combined with improved surgical and radiation treatments for several
cancers, is also improving the outcome. Young beneficiaries Perhaps more than
any other group, America's children have benefited the most from cancer
research. Scientists have been instrumental in developing better treatments for
childhood cancer. Just a couple of decades ago, survival of many childhood
cancers was measured in weeks or months. The vast majority of children with
cancer now can be cured and grow up to be healthy adults. Today, one of every
1,000 people reaching adulthood is a cured survivor of childhood cancer,
according to NCI statistics.

    ``When I started here in 1960, children with leukemia had a 90-day survival
outlook from the time of diagnosis," Coffey said. "Then, through research, we
got up to 50 percent of them cured. Now it's 80 percent who are cured.

    ``I don't think it's a bad investment. Research works. It got us to the
moon."

   Dramatic improvements also have come for adult cancers as a result of
long-term cancer research. Mortality for testicular cancer, for example, has
declined 66 percent since 1973. Hodgkin's disease, which can strike young
adults, was once the most feared of cancers. Today the majority of Hodgkin's
disease patients can be successfully treated, and most are cured. Mortality
rates are falling for cancers of the colon and rectum, breast, and prostate and
gynecologic cancers in women, and for lung cancer in men.

    As Coffey is compelled to point out, however, work remains. Death rates for
some cancers, notably lung cancer in women and lymphatic cancers in both men and
women, continue to rise. And the burden of cancer is not shared equally in
society: African- Americans have a 30 percent higher death rate than other
Americans.

    Research has identified some of the genes that enable cancer's growth and
other genes that prevent its growth. This crucial information offers scientists
unparalleled opportunities to find new ways to prevent, diagnose, and treat
cancer. `Envy of the world' This year's budget for the National Cancer Institute
is $2.5 billion. For next year, institute officials are seeking 9 percent more.

    Increasingly, scientists such as Coffey are finding friends in high places.
Rep. John Porter (R-Illinois), regarded on Capitol Hill as a fiscal
conservative, is bullish about spending on biomedical research. Not only does he
support an increase for the NCI, he has gone on record repeatedly for doubling
the $13 billion budget of the National Institutes of Health, the parent
organization of biomedical research. As a senior member of the House
Appropriations Committee, which passes on all of the country's federal spending,
Porter's opinion matters.

    Porter has voted to eliminate funding for the B-2 bomber, for the Seawolf
submarine and for other military technologies. He also has voted to end federal
tobacco subsidies. But he would never think to cut back on biomedical spending,
cancer research included, because, he believes, the paybacks have been so
enormous.

    ``We are the envy of the world in our commitment to basic biomedical
research, but we are also the global leader in the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries, huge enterprises spawned by and dependent upon
research funded through the NIH," Porter said. "It's a lead we cannot
relinquish. It provides our country with increased economic growth, a positive
balance of trade, and the kind of high-technology, high-pay jobs we want for our
children and grandchildren."

    Porter, however, is opposed to any efforts to earmark funds, whether it is
for breast cancer or Alzheimer's disease, or to allocate money based purely on
"disease burden"- the number of people afflicted with a given disease. He would
far prefer good science to dictate what projects get funded.

    Furthermore, he said, science is so serendipitous that researchers may be
looking at one thing when something else comes forth. So it was with the
revolutionary AIDS drugs known as protease inhibitors. They came out of research
into cholesterol-lowering drugs, he noted.

    Is the heightening level of activity by cancer patients worrying other such
groups? Derek Link, director of federal affairs for the Gay Men's Health Crisis
in New York, a trailblazing advocacy group that successfully lobbied for
increased funding into AIDS, believes that increasing involvement in the public
sphere by cancer patients will be good for everyone.

    ``I think the cancer march is fabulous," Link said. "Every family in America
has been touched by cancer. Whenever anybody is advocating for the NIH that is
good for us all." Organizers of the Sept. 26 rally have set up a toll-free
number, (800) THE MARCH, and Web page (www.themarch.org) for information.

GRAPHIC: CANCER TIMELINE:

What the `War on Cancer' has brought

1971

 National Cancer Act  is signed by President Nixon, Dec. 23

 Prevalence of adult cigarette smoking starts to drop

 1970s and 1980s

 Studies in human populations link cancer risk to infectious agents, such as
human papillomavirus (cervical cancer) and hepatitis B (liver cancer)

 Statistical methods are developed to quantify cancer risks

 Studies link cancer risks to hormonal drugs, such as diethylstilbestrol (DES)
taken during pregnancy and hormonal replacement therapy

 Studies associate risk of certain cancers with dietary and nutritional factors,
such as low intake of fruits and vegetables and obesity, as well as to sedentary
lifestyles

 Studies clarify the patterns of cancer risk following exposure to ionizing
radiation

 Mid-1970s

 Recombinant DNA techniques  are developed for cloning genes

 Positron emission tomography (PET), imaging technology, is developed for
diagnosis and detection

 1973

 National Cancer Institute establishes first eight comprehensive cancer centers

 Death rates for colorectal cancer begin to drop

 Death rates for testicular cancer begin to drop

 Hodgkin's disease death rates start to drop sharply

 Death rates for cancer in children start precipitous decline, esp. leukemia,
the most common childhood cancer

 Computed tomography (CT) is introduced in the U.S.

 Certification in medical oncology is first offered

 1974

 FDA approves anti-cancer therapy, doxorubicin

 CANCERLINE, a national database of published  research is established

 1975

 Methods are developed to sequence DNA fragments

 Oncology Nursing Society is founded

 1976

 First of some 50 now-known human proto-oncogenes are discovered

 Interleukin-2 is discovered

 Cancer Information Service (1-800-4-CANCER), nationwide telephone service for
cancer patients, opens

 1977

 First national cancer patient education program (I Can Cope) is founded

 1978

 A biological therapy (alpha interferon) is first tested on humans

 FDA approves anti-cancer agent, cisplatin

 FDA approves anti-cancer agent, Tamoxifen

 1979

 Most frequently mutated gene in human cancer, p53, is discovered

 Late 1970s

 Limb-sparing surgeries are developed for sarcomas of the extremities

 Early 1980s

 First effective anti-nausea drugs are developed to reduce the side effects of
chemotherapy

 Continuous pain-medication infusion pumps are developed

 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is introduced for detection and diagnosis

 1981

 First human cancer vaccine (hepatitis B virus vaccine for liver cancer) is
introduced

 1982

 First major DNA sequence databases are established in the U.S. (GenBank) and
Germany

 mid-1980s

 Flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy are developed to help detect and remove
pre-cancerous growths

 1984

 Dietary guidelines are developed to reduce cancer

 HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is discovered

 1985

 Lumpectomy plus radiation is found equivalent to mastectomy for breast cancer

 1986

 First of some 20 now-known tumor suppressor genes are cloned

 Modified prostatectomy, designed to preserve potency and urinary incontinence,
is introduced

 1988

 The Bethesda System Conference develops a method for standardized reporting of
Pap smear results

 1989

 Human Gene Mapping database is established

 1990s

 Transition is made from film-based radiology to digital computer-assisted
medical imaging

 1990

 FDA approves anti-cancer agent, Levamisole

 First chemoprevention trial to show efficacy is a vitamin A analogue against
mouth and throat tumors

 1991

 Overall cancer death rates start to fall

 Lung cancer death rates for men start to fall

 Another drop is seen in death rates for colorectal cancer

 Death rate for breast cancer starts to drop

 Death rate for prostate cancer begins to drop

 First human gene therapy for cancer (melanoma) is introduced

 American Stop Smoking Intervention Study for Cancer Prevention (ASSIST),
largest tobacco prevention and control project is  launched

 National Cancer Institute-sponsored  studies in China show importance of
nutrition in preventing cancer

 1992

 FDA approves anti-cancer agent, Paclitaxel

 Mammography Quality Standards Act passed

 1994-95

 Inherited breast cancer genes are cloned (BRCA1 and BRCA2)

 1996

 FDA approves anti-cancer agent, Topotecan

 1998

 Major pharmaceutical firms and biotechnology companies report launching dozens
of clinical trials of many novel, promising anti-cancer agents, including
Herceptin, a monoclonal antibody that targets a specific gene defect in some
breast cancer patients. Hundreds of other anti-cancer agents are reported in the
pipeline

 FDA approves anti-cancer agent, Xeloda

 Tamoxifen is shown to reduce the incidence of breast cancer

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             1866 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   August 22, 1998, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: BOY'S SURVIVAL TIED TO TENUOUS CORD;
PROCEDURE USES UMBILICAL BLOOD TO FIGHT DISEASE

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Six-year-old Derek Kuhs slept in his Power Rangers pajamas, a rag doll in one
arm, as Dr. Mitchell Cairo hooked a small bag to the IV tube in his chest.
Slowly, blood dripped into Derek's body.

   It wasn't ordinary blood but a bag of special cells taken from the umbilical
cord of a newborn in Barcelona, Spain, that - with a little luck might cure the
incredibly rare immune disease that threatens to soon kill Derek.

   It wasn't a dramatic operation, but it was so unusual that doctors and nurses
crowded the glass wall of Derek's sterile room at Georgetown University Hospital
to watch.

   ''It's taken five years of constant effort to keep him alive, and to think
this blood could cure it all,'' said his mother, Gloria Kuhs. It will be early
September, however, before doctors know if the Laguna Hills, Calif., boy's
transplant worked.

   Derek's is a story of the hope of umbilical cord transplants, how his doctors
and parents took a chance on a highly experimental treatment when there was no
record of anyone with his disease ever having tried cord blood. Derek has a
genetic disorder called chronic granulomatous disease, which strikes just one in
1 million people. His white blood cells lack the protein they need to produce
chemicals that kill bacteria.

   The 3 ounces of blood inside umbilical cords - collected at a baby's birth
and quickly deep-frozen - contain stem cells, the building blocks of blood. The
hope is that these transplanted stem cells will survive in Derek's bone marrow
and produce healthy white blood cells, thus curing his CGD.

   Cord blood transplants have been used as a last resort to treat leukemia and
certain other killers more than 500 times worldwide, said Dr. Paul McCurdy, who
oversees the technology for the National Institutes of Health.

   The NIH has begun a five-year study at Georgetown and other hospitals to
determine which diseases are best treated with cord blood, the odds of success
and to increase the cord blood available for transplants.

   Bone marrow transplants have cured a handful of CGD patients, but bone marrow
appears better at treating cancer than immune diseases and might be riskier than
cord blood, Cairo says. His parents concluded cord blood was Derek's best
chance.

   Derek seemed healthy at birth but soon began having unexplained fevers. His
first life-threatening infection struck at 18 months. Fighting it off took six
months. The 11 specialists the Kuhs consulted were baffled.

   A year later, infection almost killed Derek again. That time, Cairo, a
hematologist then at Children's Hospital in Orange County, Calif., found the
symptoms unmistakable. Cairo had trained with the world's leading CGD expert.

   CGD once killed all its victims. But five years ago, scientists discovered
that the drug gamma-interferon helped prevent the worst infections, apparently
helping white blood cells produce bacteria-killing chemicals.

   Gamma-interferon plus powerful antibiotics allowed Derek to leave the
hospital.

   The drugs, however, slowly lost their effect. Cairo put Derek's chances of
surviving another two years at just 5 percent.

   After the transfusion, Derek must stay inside a sterile, specially ventilated
room until his immune system, which doctors have suppressed even more so he
won't reject the blood, can recover.  Umbilical cord blood contains few stem
cells, so most transplants have been restricted to small children. Cairo, who
used cord blood in an unsuccessful attempt to save baseball great Rod Carew's
daughter from leukemia, is about to try multiplying the cells to get enough for
teen-agers and adults.

   Cord blood shows significant promise: Besides helping rare diseases, it might
cause fewer complications than bone marrow transplants, and it might aid gene
therapy. So Cairo's first mission is to get more women to donate their newborns'
cord blood into blood banks.

   It will be three weeks before Cairo knows if Derek's new stem cells are going
to survive and grow. He estimates there's a 50 percent to 75 percent chance they
will. Until then, Derek is at huge risk from the simplest germ.

   ''Derek knows these cells could cure him,'' his father says. ''I can't
describe the feeling watching that blood move down that tube.''

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1998


                             1867 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 21, 1998, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 1994 words

HEADLINE: Wellesley biotech firm names CEO, executive director;
WHO'S WHAT WHERE;
RECENT APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS

BODY:

    Wellesley-based CpG ImmunoPharmaceuticals Inc., a recently formed
biotechnology company, said this week that it has appointed Robert L. Bratzler
president and chief executive. CpG also appointed Deanna Petersen as executive
director of business development.

   Bratzler brings to CpG more than a decade of executive experience in the
biotech and pharmaceutical industries. Most recently he was chairman and
cofounder of Encore Pharmaceuticals, and chairman and chief executive of ChiRex
Inc.

   Bratzler spent 14 years as a cofounder and principal executive at several
Sepracor group companies, including Sepracor Inc., SepraChem Inc., Versicor, and
ChiRex Inc. He currently serves on the board of Encore Pharmaceuticals, Synthon
Corp., and Integrated BioSystems.

   Petersen is a former director of research marketing and corporate relations
at the University of Iowa, where she was responsible for building industrial
research relationships and directing technology transfer initiatives.
Previously, she conducted research in molecular genetics and human gene therapy
at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Iowa City.  CpG is a privately held
biotechnology company focused on the development and commercialization of
innovative therapeutic and prophylactic products based on CpG DNA technology.

PRI Automation elevates Tyson

    Mitch Tyson, 44, has been promoted to chief executive at PRI Automation in
Billerica, the firm said this week. Tyson, who joined the company in 1987 as
vice president of operations, had been chief operating officer since 1990 and
president since 1995.

   Mord Wiesler, a founder and PRI's chief executive, will remain board
chairman.

   Before joining PRI in 1990, Tyson had been director of product management at
GCA Corp.

Marcam cofounder Margolis to retire

    Marcam Solutions Inc. of Newton said yesterday that company cofounder and
board member Paul Margolis has retired from the board of directors to pursue
other business interests.

   Margolis cofounded Marcam in 1980, successfully brought the company public in
1990, and grew Marcam to be recognized in process manufacturing software
solutions.

    "I have greatly enjoyed my tenure on the board and now look forward to
devoting more time to my other business interests," said Margolis. He has formed
a new venture capital company, Longworth Management.

   Marcam operates 16 offices throughout North America, Europe, the Middle East,
Asia Pacific, and Latin America.

Services

    John M. Karoff, senior vice president, Berkeley Management, Boston; William
W. Batchelor, sales and marketing director, All Seasons Services Inc.,
Braintree; William John O'Leary, associate, Ross Sinclair Cann, senior project
architect, Bergmeyer Associates Inc., Boston; Michael W. Broderick, chief
financial officer, Oxford & Associates Inc., Peabody; Dave deBronkart, product
manager, Indigo, Woburn; Cynthia Gavlick, manager, Mullen & Co., Burlington;
Lawrence A. Heimlich, vice president, HR Logic, Newton; Steven P. King,
admissions director, Bridgewater State College, Bridgewater.

   Bernard L. Walsh, vice president, Kevin McGrath, senior vice president, Mark
J. Noonan, managing director, Laura F. Lockwood, vice president, Nicholas F.
Sciotto, assistant vice president, J & H Marsh & McLennan, Boston; David F.
Crawford, Jim Ferrin, assistant vice presidents, Carlin Insurance, Natick; Betsy
Earls, division director, Frank McDougald, business development director,
Sedgwick of New England Inc., Boston; Scott Becque, sales and marketing
director, Swissotel, Boston; Michael Giardina, senior associate, Cannon, Boston;
Amanda Xu, chief product designer, KnowledgeCite, Boston.

Communications Advertising & Public Relations

    Frank Mainero, president, chief executive, McKay Fried Advertising, Boston;
David Register, copywriter, Pagano, Schenck & Kay, Boston; Chris DeCarlo, senior
copywriter, Jeff McAllistar, senior Mac artist, Sarah Lepkowski, executive
assistant, Clarke Goward, Boston.

   Lisa Badeau, partner, CC and D Communications, Boston; Christopher Donnelly,
president, Jackie McCabe, strategic planning/consultant, Mill House McCabe,
Salem; Eivind Ueland, associate creative director, Gearon Hoffman, Boston; Amy
Donovan, Keith Gainsboro, assistant vice presidents, Donna M. Morrissey, media
director, Regan Communications, Boston; Michael J. Greeley, vice president,
Collaborative Communications, Cambridge; Michael Brodsky, Web director, Trinity
Communications, Boston.

    Christine Klaehn, partner, Christopher Martin, interactive programmer, Sarah
Smith, Christina Hagopian, designers, Corey McPherson Nash, Watertown; Stephanie
Doherty, Mark A. Feldman, vice presidents, Cone Communications, Boston.

High technology

    Jeffrey Tabor, engineering director, Wilson J. Prokosch, southwest region
manager, LANart Corp., Needham; John Rainford, vice president, PassGo
Technologies, Boxborough; Jo Ann Woodyard, executive director, corporate
employee services, Cognex Corp., Natick; Paul Drzaic, director, display
technology, Ian Morrison, director, ink technology, E Ink Corp., Cambridge.

Legal

    Nancy S. Shilepsky, director, labor and employment, Goulston & Storrs,
Boston; Leo V. Boyle, partner, Meehan, Boyle & Cohan, elected secretary,
Association of Trial Lawyers of America; Margaret B. Easton, associate, Shapiro
Israel & Weiner, Boston; Michael Falkoff, Michael C. Fondo, counsels, Nutter
McClennen & Fish, Boston; Stephen G. Howard, special counsel, Day Berry &
Howard, Boston.

   Kimberly Kramer Stoll, J. Channing Bennett, associates, Berlutti &
McLaughlin, Boston; James D. Friedman, John B. Harkavy, partners, Bernkopf
Goodman & Baseman, Boston; James E. Purcell, managing partner, Partridge Snow &
Hahn, Providence.

Finance

    Francis E. Grimard, vice president of operations, Susan Clark, regional vice
president of sales, BankVest Capital Corp., Boston; Christopher P. Scontras,
managing executive and business development director, Sedgwick Risk Services,
Portland, Maine; Mary Lou Boutwell, senior vice president, Charlesbank Capital
Partners, Boston.

   Michael Gilles, senior vice president, chief financial officer, Jill
MacDougall, corporate secretary, Philip McNulty, senior vice president, David
Tait, vice president, Ann Marie Barese, Robert Crupi, assistant treasurers,
Patrick Fortuna, assistant vice president and systems manager, Brenda
Harrington, assistant vice president, Robert Moran, vice president and
controller, Noelle Nickerson, vice president, William Treddin, origination
manager and assistant vice president, Bay State Federal Savings Bank, Brookline.

    Jonathan Friend, support services center manager, Digital Employees Federal
Credit Union, Maynard; James S. Murphy, Raynham branch manager, First Citizens'
Federal Credit Union, New Bedford; Elizabeth L. von Pier, treasurer, Kevin R.
Joyce, senior vice president, senior loan officer, South Shore Co-operative
Bank, Weymouth; Kimberly Legere, merchant sales representative, Family Bank and
Bank of New Hampshire, Haverhill; Larry Beinema, vice president, Rita M.
Janeiro, sales and service manager, Community National Bank, Hudson.

Health

    Dr. Robert D. Compton, faculty, Harvard School of Dental Medicine; Dr. Gail
Ellis, affiliated, Family Medicine Associates, Beverly; Dr. Elliott Cohen,
medical staff president, Dr. Stephanie K. Stevens, medical director, integrative
medicine, Northeast Health Systems, Beverly; Peter Neville, marketing director,
Allerton House at Hancock Park, Quincy; Dr. Manuel A. Peregrino, associate
director of neonatology, Beverly Hospital; Candace A. Race, sales and
communications director, Richard P. Burke, public affairs and business planning
director, Fallon Community Health Plan, Worcester. Dr. Thomas M. Horiagon Jr.,
WORKWell, Peabody.

Industry

    Thomas Freitas, superintendent, Ron Thomas, field engineer, O'Connor
Constructors, Canton; Roberta F. Ellis, corporate director, environmental health
and safety, Ionics Inc., Watertown; Jerry Knights, outside sales representative,
McKittrick Industrial Supply, Lowell; Andrew F. O'Brien, vice president, project
delivery services, William A. Berry & Son Inc., Boston.

   David A. Smith, manager, food product development laboratory, Shuster
Laboratories Inc., Boston; Philip Roberts, director, Western operations, David
Lear, director, customer services, Dawn Rogers, director, marketing
communications, Moldflow Corp., Lexington; April Kelly, Arthur Duffy, assistant
project managers, Larry Augustus, mechanical coordinator, Richard M. Babyak,
field engineer, George B.H. Macomber Co., Boston.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Bratzler 2. Petersen 3. Badeau 4. Compton

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1998


                             1868 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                            August 17, 1998, Monday

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1, Part D

LENGTH: 1060 words

HEADLINE: Cancer lives on S.A. town hall meetings to assess advances, 'explosion
of new knowledge' against stubborn disease

BYLINE: Marina Pisano; Express-News Staff Writer

BODY: Twenty-seven years after President Nixon declared a nationwide War on
Cancer, calling for a cure by 1980, cancer continues to kill about 1,500
Americans a day.

   The cure for which stricken families long for remains elusive.

   "Yes, we have seen some reduction in mortality from cancer," allows National
Cancer Advisory Board member Ellen Stovall, referring to recent reports showing
cancer deaths have declined.

   And, yes, cancer specialists today say there are actual cures of testicular
cancer in men and certain lymphomas, small examples of the kind of magic cure
dreamed of in the National Cancer Act of 1971.

   "Those are just a fraction of cancers. We are far from knowing how to prevent
cancer, from knowing what really causes cancer," Stovall says.

   Still, many in the scientific community are buoyed by remarkable progress in
the laboratory, especially over the past decade.

   "We're in an era of an explosion of new knowledge, and that's going to start
turning into better ways to treat cancer cells - to translate a lotof the
knowledge that we've gained in basic science into clinical benefit," observes
cancer researcher Dr. Jolene Windle. "The only drawback to that progress would
be inadequate funding. If the funding doesn't keep pace, we'll stall."

   Assuring that the engine of progress doesn't stall is the whole idea behind
the upcoming Town Hall Meeting, titled "The Key to Curing Cancer Is Cancer
Research Now," to be held in City Council Chambers on Aug. 25 from 6 to 8 p.m.

   San Antonio is one of nine American cities holding such grass- roots meetings
to gather comments and concerns from cancer specialists, researchers, survivors
and the public - all in preparation for the March on Washington on Sept. 26,
called Coming Together to Conquer Cancer.

   Some 25 medical, social-service and corporate entities are sponsoring the
Town Hall Meeting, including OnCare Inc., the Cancer Center Council, the Cancer
Therapy & Research Center and the Alamo Breast Cancer Coalition & Foundation.

   U.S. Rep. Henry Bonilla is keynote speaker for the event.

   Planners say the goal of the town hall meetings and the March on Washington
is clear, though far from simple to achieve: to make the cure and prevention of
cancer the nation's top research priority.

   This time around, Stovall, who is president of the March on Washington, is
ditching the well-worn war analogy.

   "I've often bristled at the analogy," she says. "If this were truly a war,
the country would never have put up with this many losses or this protracted
time of fighting."

   To put those losses in context, the American Cancer Society estimates that
more than 564,000 Americans will die of cancer in 1998 alone. About 58,000
American men and women were killed in the Vietnam War during this country's
10-year involvement.

   "It's not a war. We are in for the long haul - here to do whatever it takes
to create a better system of health care and a predictable climate for cancer
research funding that's not subject to political whims," says Stovall, a
two-time survivor of Hodgkin's disease.

   Funding for the National Cancer Institute, currently budgeted at $2.3
billion, comes out of the National Institutes of Health budget, now at $14
billion.

   Stovall wants to see NIH funding doubled. And, she explains, the NCI has
bypass authority to go directly to Congress for more funding.

   "Interestingly enough, this is not just about money," she adds. "It's a
systemic issue. The march is really about no more cancer. It means understanding
what causes cancer, how to care for people with cancer and, ultimately, how to
cure cancer."Windle, director of the Division of Cancer Biology at the Cancer
Therapy & Research Center's Institute for Drug Development, says the enormous
variables in cancer challenge researchers.

   "Doctors say there are 200 different types of cancer, but, in fact, every one
of them is different because they have different combinations of genetic
alterations in their tumors. It takes a minimum of six mutations to make a
normal cell a cancer cell, but a cancer may possess many more mutations by the
time it's diagnosed."

   Windle does basic research on how cancer cells function differently from
normal cells and how those differences can be exploited to attack cancer cells,
very specifically and selectively.

   But, pointing up the complexity of such work, Dr. Steven D. Weitman, a
pediatric oncologist and researcher, finds this specificity both amazing and
problematic.

   "In years past, we had this trickle-down phenomenon and children would still
benefit from adult research," Weitman says. "Now, as we have become smarter with
our gene therapy and very specific treatments, are the children going to be left
out? I worry about that in the future. Children are not small adults. They are
unique and have a whole different set of tumors."

   Both researchers agree new technology has transformed cancer research.

   As Windle says, "A lab used to sequence a couple of hundred base pairs of DNA
sequence data in a week. Now, a large lab can generate 100,000 base pairs of DNA
sequence data in a day. But the equipment to do that is enormously expensive."

   That expense is a major issue facing Town Hall Meeting panel presenters,
including researchers Dr. Suzanne A.W. Fuqua of the University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio and Dr. S. Gail Eckhardt of the Institute for Drug
Development. Also participating are Rose Ann Reeser of the Texas Department of
Insurance and Dr. Fernando Guerra, director of the San Antonio Metropolitan
Health District, discussing access to cancer care.

   Cindy Wedding, a cancer survivor whose colon cancer went undiagnosed until it
had spread through her body, is on the panel as well. Her story was featured in
the Express-News on May 31.

   Specialists such as Weitman are prepared to field questions from the
audience. Spanish translation is available on request.

   Weitman emphasizes the urgency in all this, especially for young patients.

   "Yeah, we've made great progress in cancer. But every day we lose children.
These families who have a child with cancer or are about to lose one to cancer -
they are desperate. They can't wait six or nine months. We need to develop, and
constantly be looking for, new treatments."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: IRENA PASTORELLO / SpecialExpress-News Graphic - Pushing for an
end to cancer

   Cancer researcher Dr. Jolene Windle examines a portion of a mammarytumor on a
monitor with UTHSC graduate student David Bearss. Windle fearsthat
cancer-research funding will stall, jeopardizing momentum.;Windle, who does
basic research on how cancer cells function differently thannormal cells, points
out differences among genes that regulate tumor cell growth.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             1869 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 16, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Page 6; Column 6; Society Desk

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: WEDDINGS;
Katherine Snyder, Justin Vagliano

BODY:

   Katherine Sterling Snyder, the daughter of Diana F. Snyder of Essex, Vt., and
Dennis C. Snyder of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to Justin
Christopher Vagliano, the son of Sally V. Pettus of Sharon, Conn., and Alexander
M. Vagliano of Norfolk, Conn. Arthur S. Rosenblatt, the First Selectman of
Norfolk, officiated there at Sunset Ridge Farm, the home of the bridegroom's
father.

   Mrs. Vagliano, 25, is a veterinary assistant at the Atlantic Veterinary
Hospital in Marblehead, Mass., and expects to begin studying for a doctorate in
veterinary medicine at Cornell University next year. She graduated summa cum
laude from the University of Vermont, where until recently she was a researcher
in animal biotechnology and gene therapy. Her father is the vice president of
pulp services at Rayonier, a forest products company in Stamford, Conn. Her
mother is an administrative assistant at Champlain College in Burlington, Vt.

    Mr. Vagliano, 23, is the general manager of Caillou Boats, a builder in
Marblehead. He also graduated from the University of Vermont. His mother is an
artist in Sharon and New York. His father, a former executive vice president of
the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company's international division in New York, now
raises Polypay sheep in Norfolk.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1998


                             1870 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         August 16, 1998 Sunday, THIRD

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1710 words

HEADLINE: IT'S IN THE GENES

BYLINE: By RONETTE KING Business writer

BODY:

   Sudhir Sinha's laboratory is plain in a typical laboratory white way: white
laminate countertops, white cabinets, white lab coats starched stiff on wire
hangers, opaque bottles filled with alcohol and rows of white freezers. The
monotony is broken by an occasional baby picture or postcard.

   This sterile environment in a low-slung strip of offices in Elmwood Business
Park is home to ReliaGene Technologies Inc. where discerning the body's
microscopic genetic code is turning into a growing business.

   It is a high tech enterprise that until recently few heard of and fewer still
trusted. But in recent years DNA testing has proven its worth in claims of
paternity and guilt.

   Now widely accepted as proof of a person's unique genetic fingerprint, such
evidence can be used as evidence in local crime cases and make national
headlines. It's the stuff that can finger a murderer or clear an innocent
person, can pinpoint the father of a child or could be used as evidence in an
effort to impeach a president.

   ReliaGene has been part of it all. The company operates three divisions: the
forensic laboratory which tests crime scene evidence for law enforcement
authorities; the medical diagnostic department which helps identify different
strains of the HIV virus in patients; and the paternity testing lab which
matches DNA samples of the mother, the child and the person identified as the
father to a certainty of 99.9 percent.

   Advances in technology that offer increased accuracy and the excitement
generated by highly publicized crimes that were solved - or not - because of DNA
testing have brought attention to the exacting work of matching genetic
fingerprints to identify culprits.

   ReliaGene Technologies has picked up work as law enforcement officials have
become increasingly aware of forensics testing and state governments have become
more aggressive in collecting child support payments from absent fathers. As a
result Sudhir Sinha has watched his privately-held company grow steadily. Last
year ReliaGene had sales of $2.3 million, outpacing 1996 sales of $1.6 million.
Sinha expects sales will continue to grow as state prison systems begin to
catalogue DNA information on convicted felons.

   That's a far cry from the $40,000 in sales the company tallied in 1990, the
year it was founded under the name GenTest Laboratories. The company employs 34
people. The technicians must have a bachelors degree in the relevant sciences
such as chemistry, biochemistry, biology or molecular biology. "These are good,
high tech, biology jobs," said Sinha. "It's not what people think of in New
Orleans but its logical with the medical communty here."

   The company's growth has come in part from improvements in technology. The
latest scientific equipment allows investigators to lift a DNA sample from a
drop of blood, the saliva left on the rim of a drinking glass, a single hair
strand or minute amounts of other bodily fluids found at a crime scene, said
Sinha, who is also an adjunt professor at Tulane University Medical School since
coming to New Orleans in 1984.

   "The O.J. (Simpson) trial has helped us. People are more aware, small police
departments in Columbus, Miss., and other small towns call us now," said Sinha.
ReliaGene is accredited by the National Forensic Science Technology Center which
examines crime labs around the country. The company has done its part in some
closely watched local cases. The company handled testing in the murder trial of
Jesse Hoffman of Algiers, convicted in June of abducting and killing advertising
executive Mary "Molly" Elliot in 1996, Montgomery said.

   As its use has increased, DNA testing has become well-established as a valid
measure of evidence in criminal cases. Court challenges over the validity of the
test or database used in a criminal case have gone down, Sinha said. Now defense
lawyers attack how evidence was gathered, which is a genuine issue because it is
a biological sample that can breakdown if handled improperly making it more
difficult to obtain a reliable sample, he said.

   Caroline Caskey, who owns Identigene Inc., a DNA testing company based in
Houston, agrees that the Simpson trial was a pivotal time for the DNA testing
industry despite its controversial outcome. "The Trial," as she refers to it,
was a forum where DNA was discussed at length. "It raised everybody's
awareness," she said.

   "Even though O.J. Simpson was exonerated, it was not because his lawyers said
the test wasn't accurate but they said it was because somebody planted the DNA
evidence at the crime scene," Caskey said. "But most people understand (DNA
testing) is the best test for profiling identification and relationships."

   In family law courts paternity tests are so routine they rarely need an
expert witness to testity to the validity of the tests, Caskey said.

   With so much fuss about bloody gloves that didn't fit (the Simpson case) or
what evidence a stained cocktail dresses might hold (Clinton-Lewinsky matter),
it's almost anti-climactic to set eyes on actual DNA matter. Physically, the
sample can be reduced to an opaque glob that would fit on the end of a pencil
eraser, the whole mass floating in alcohol in a plastic tube the size of a
ballpoint pen cap.

   DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is an essential component of all living matter
and is found in the nucleus of the cell. It contains the genetic code and
transmits hereditary pattern, it's what determines eye and hair color, physique,
whether you are predisposed to breast cancer because your mother had it or high
blood pressure like your father.

   The availability of DNA technology has brought a new level of sophistication
to determining parentage. Prior to DNA testing, paternity was decided by looking
at the child and parents' blood type. The scientific approach was nudged along
by a bit of eyeballing the bouncing new boy to spot some resemblance to the
would-be daddy.

   But blood testing was exclusionary, meaning researchers could say that the
person wasn't the father, but couldn't say with as much certainty that he was
indeed the father of the child, Sinha said.

   "Now we can say this person is not excluded and has a 99.9 percent chance of
being the father," he said. The only question that would remain is if the person
has an identical twin brother.

   ReliaGene does DNA testing using a blood sample taken from the mother, the
child and the person identified as the father.

   In the lab, researchers separate the nucleus found in white blood cells from
everything else including red blood cells, plasma and platlets that make up
blood. From there researchers separate the nucleus, much like breaking open an
egg and removing the yolk, said Anne Montgomery, director of operations at
ReliaGene. The cell is like a pellet that is cracked open to reveal its DNA.

   The samples then are compared to a set of 23 known genes arrayed in a
vertical row on an X-ray sheet. The mother's two genes show up as shadows at
certain points along the continuum. The father's two genes are lined up in
another row. The child's two genes appear in a third row on the sheet. Since
each parent contributes one gene to a child, the child's two genes should
intersect with one from each parent's.

   DNA testing still holds great potential in law enforcement and in medicine.

   Starting in 1999 Louisiana will join about 25 other states in collecting
blood samples from every person convicted of a sexual offense or certain other
crimes. The Department of Public Safety and Corrections will catalogue the DNA
identification of each prisoner along with their fingerprints and photos,
information that can be used to solve other crimes in the future. Under the
measure passed by the legislature last year, the system will be administered by
State Police.

   That data will become part of the FBI's nationwide DNA database to be shared
with law enforcement agencies across the country. ReliaGene Technologies has
picked up the job of cataloguing DNA information for Delaware and Oklahoma.

   One of the newest developments in tracing family links is mitocondrial DNA
testing which tracks that set of genes that are only inherited from the mother.
Researchers recently used that type of DNA testing to identify the Vietnam War
soldier buried in the Tomb of the Unkwowns, Montgomery said.

   A massive federal research effort is under way to map the estimated 50,000 to
100,000 genes in the human body by the year 2005.

   DNA is a genetic fingerprint because each person is unique. "A lot of people
can have 1 in 10 genes," Sinha said. "What are the chances of having 1 in 20 and
1 in 1,000 of other genes at the same time. I tell the jury (in a trial) it's
like saying you saw not just a red van, but one with a dented bumper, smoked
windows and this license plate number."

   The genetic information gathered in the Human Genome Project could lead
researchers to find the exact genes are responsible for inherited diseases such
as sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis or heart disease. In time that
information could allow medical researchers to identify a person's
predisposition to certain diseases and have counteract those inherited genes
before the disease manifests itself, Sinha said. Gene therapy would allow
doctors to introduce genes into existing cells to prevent or cure diseases such
as cancer.

   What also excites Sinha is the potential DNA testing holds for the treatment
of the HIV virus. By analyzing the DNA of the virus over time, doctors can
monitor changes in the virus and figure out how to manipulate the cocktail of
medications used in treatment of the disease, said Sinha, a native of India who
finished his post-doctoral work at the University of Miami before coming to the
city.

   For Sinha, like many small business owners, the biggest barrier he's faced in
growing ReliaGene has been lack of capital. The Whitney National Bank recently
extended the business a $600,000 line of credit which allowed Sinha to buy
equipment that will help automate the testing process.

   That equipment will help speed the pace of work and reduce human element in
interpretation of results, Montgomery said. It also helps them handle a larger
load of tests with the same staff.

   "It's an exciting time to be in DNA research," she said.

GRAPHIC: A blood sample yields a specimen from which scientists can separate the
nucleus from the white blood cell. From there, the cell is cracked open to
reveal the sample of DNA, shown here afloat in an alcohol-filled plastic tube
held by Sudhir Sinha, president and laboratory director of ReliaGene
Technologies Inc.  An X-ray film shows a group of known genes lined up on one
side to compare the genes found in a mother, child and father in a paternity
test being examined by Nan Jiang, an associated scientist at ReliaGene
Technologies.  Associated scientist Jeff Salsiccia takes computerized pictures
to confirm and catalog results of DNA tests in the medical diagnostic
department. Sinha and Anne Montgomery, director of operations, stand in
background.  SUDHIR SINHA, ReliaGene Technologies Inc.  ReliaGene forensic
scientist Gina Pineda examines a tray that holds DNA test results for samples
for a crime lab.  STAFF PHOTOS BY BRYAN BERTEAUX

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1998


                             1871 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    August 14, 1998, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: CURES IN COLD STORAGE?;
LOCAL FIRM FREEZES YOUR BLOOD FOR TREATMENT OF FUTURE CANCERS

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A Pittsburgh area company is banking on future scientific advances to draw
clients to a new kind of safety deposit box - one that saves frozen samples of
healthy blood cells that could be transfused to treat cancer years later.

   The company, called bioTrust, is offering for the first time to store blood
from healthy adults for future use. For several years now, various companies
have sprung up to freeze and store umbilical cord blood following a baby's
birth.

   But while bioTrust representatives say the blood samples could be used for
cancer treatment, boosting immunity in AIDS patients, or as a starting point for
gene therapy, medical experts note that such applications are experimental or
theoretical. No one can even be certain how long the cells can be frozen.

   Getting a blood sample stored away is straightforward, however.

   ''It's no different to the client than a normal blood draw from an insurance
company,'' said bioTrust's George Aubrey.  ''You get a number that you can give
to your doctor and file it, and if anything happens to you down the road, then
your oncologist contacts the cell storage staff and it'll be shipped anywhere in
the country.''

   The initial blood samples can be taken anywhere.. BioTrust agents arrange for
blood draws from New York to California; the collected sample is sent by courier
to Pittsburgh for processing and storage. The company would not say how many
people have banked their blood thus far.

   Butler Biomedical Laboratories and Western Pennsylvania Hospital process the
samples for the company.

   A 4 1/2 -hour lab procedure prepares each sample for storage.  The sample is
spun in a centrifuge to separate out a layer of white cells and stem cells,
which give rise to red and white cells as well as platelets.  The stem cells are
gradually cooled to minus 196 degrees Celsius in a liquid nitrogen tank and
stored at the University of Pittsburgh Applied Research Center.

   A single adult can expect to pay $ 197 for the initial service and $ 150
annually while the sample is stored.  Family and groups discounts are available.
Insurance plans do not cover the procedure, Aubrey said.  BioTrust does not do
any cell transfusions; that will be the job of the biotechnology firms that
develop applications.

   The technology focuses on harvesting stem cells, which one researcher
referred to as the ''Holy Grail of the bone marrow transplant community.'' All
other blood cells are formed from stem cells.

   Finding those precursor cells means being able to regenerate blood
components, said Dr. Robert Bayer, associate director of bone marrow transplant
at Loyola University Medical Center in Chicago.

   Chemotherapy kills not only diseased cells that may have spread through the
body, but also some healthy ones, damaging the bone marrow and its ability to
produce new cells to populate the bloodstream.  Bone marrow transplants are done
to provide the needed cells.

   Bayer and his colleagues are studying cancer patients, taking small amounts
of bone marrow and processing it in a ''bioreactor'' device called the Aastrom
Cell Production System, which can multiply the marrow cells a thousand-fold. The
lab-generated cells are given to the patient in a transfusion after
chemotherapy.

   But stem cells can be found in the peripheral bloodstream as well as the bone
marrow. Far fewer stem cells are in the bloodstream than the marrow, Bayer said,
but drawing a blood sample is far easier than extracting marrow.

   Many research teams, including Bayer's, are giving patients a drug that makes
stem cells relocate from the marrow to the blood.  Those stem cells recovered
from the blood are taken to the lab and put through the bioreactor, expanding in
number over the course of a week before returning them to the patient.

   Dr. Lawrence Goodnough, a stem cell researcher at Washington University in
St. Louis, said that storing cells from previously healthy people may be an
advantage in blood cell diseases like leukemia and multiple myeloma. The patient
cannot be his own donor in such conditions and must obtain a transplant from a
family member or other person whose own marrow is a reasonable match.

   Both Bayer and Goodnough described such stem cell therapies as in their
infancy.

   ''How long can we store these (stem cells)?'' Goodnough said.  A blood sample
stored when a person is 30 may not be needed for decades.  ''We don't have the
answer to that.''

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1998


                             1872 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 13, 1998, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: The medical system is failing cancer patients;
JOHN K. ERBAN;
John K. Erban, MD, is chief of New England Medical Center's division of
hematology/oncology.

BYLINE: By John K. Erban

BODY:

    In the past decade, there has been explosive growth in the number of
anticancer strategies, including gene therapy and the use of designer drugs. The
understanding of the cellular processes that control tumor growth is leading a
major shift in thinking about how anticancer therapies work.

   As the recent Boston Globe series on advances in cancer treatment pointed
out, novel approaches are being pioneered in virtually every hospital in Boston
and, indeed, in many institutions across the country.

   Against this promise, however, primary care physicians are increasingly
becoming part of larger health systems and are indirectly encouraged not to
refer patients outside that system, even if that is where the greatest hope may
lie.

   This is not right. Restricting patients from access to the full range of
cancer treatment options will only drive a wedge between them and these new
discoveries and stifle the progress now underway. Those who desperately seek the
best treatment should know where it exists and how to gain access to it.

   The ability to care for cancer patients must be truly national and not
institutional in scope. Cancer research and care will not be made better by the
creation of health systems that seek to contain referrals for complex care to
specialists within their own systems. No single hospital, cancer center, or
health system possesses the resources to provide all patients at each stage of
illness the full range of options for care and research.

    For example, since 1990 at least five new and useful treatments for breast
cancer have made their way from the laboratory to the clinic. These agents
became available to different cancer programs at different times due to the
interests of investigators and their respective hospitals in Massachusetts and
beyond. Research to bring these new options to patients quickly will surely not
succeed if patient restrictions continue to grow. Researchers treating rarer
types of cancer need access to the entire population of patients at risk for the
disease in order to complete their studies in a timely and comprehensive
fashion.

    Because therapies are constantly evolving, cancer specialists should promote
this right of patients to receive care in any institution. However,
accomplishing this in the context of managed care and structured networks and
systems presents a difficult, if not impossible, dilemma.

   We have even begun to witness conflict between the goals of modern health
systems and those of the National Cancer Institute. For example, the Cancer
Institute and some insurers were recently eager to complete a randomized trial
comparing bone marrow transplantation to standard chemotherapy for women with
metastatic breast cancer.

    Because not all centers were involved in this study, patients had limited
access to enrollment. Sadly, access was not guaranteed - and this was a study
that began in 1990. Now, after eight years, we await its important conclusions.

   For a primary care physician who chooses to participate in a health network
system, the burden falls on him or her to know what options exist within and
outside that system.  There must be advocacy for the patient to leave the system
when care and research options exist elsewhere. Giving patients and their
physicians the ability to chose fully will provide the medical community with
the momentum it needs to sustain the pace of advances we have witnessed in the
past five years and lead us to a time when our current methods of cancer
treatment will be obsolete.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1998


                             1873 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     August 10, 1998, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18 Education

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Honor ROLL

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   STUDENTS

    Fourteen recent graduates from Houston's Washington High have been awarded
scholarships totaling $ 1 million from the National Action Council for
Minorities in Engineering. The students are: Chris Sudjadi; Jeremy Barras; Erica
Barrett; James Taylor; Delea Cooper; Thomas Alvarez; Michael Jones; Diane Lau;
George Cartwright; Kirk Edwards; Dameon Green; Sophia Edukere; Beverly Karhson;
and Gerardo Esparza.

    Erin Cassidy, Amy Taylor, Tiffany Toellner and Ben Arbour - students at The
John Cooper School in The Woodlands - have earned superior ratings in the vocal
solo competition at the Texas Private Schools Music Educators Association Solo
and Ensemble Competition.

    Amy Chang, a graduate of Bellaire High in Houston, has been presented an
award from the Sigma Xi Honorary Science Fraternity for her Science Engineering
Fair of Houston project "Exploring Anti-Cancer Gene Therapies."

    Robin Dudley, a recent student at Spring Branch's Wilchester Elementary, has
won first place in the Duck Stamp Art Contest. Classmates Martha Sontheimer has
placed second and Roxanne Sadeghpour has placed third.  Nicole Lyons and Phillip
Calaway, recent students at Terrace Elementary in Spring Branch, have had their
artwork selected for publication in Rising Star, Young Texas Tales - a statewide
magazine that publishes works of students in grades second through sixth.

    Shervin Shirvani, a recent student at Spring Branch's Memorial High, has won
a $ 1,250 Discover Bronze Scholarship in the arts and humanities from the
American Association of School Administrators.

    Hector Hernandez, a recent eighth-grader at Spring Branch's Northbrook
Middle, has been awarded the grand prize in a water conservation T-shirt design
contest sponsored by Houston Water.

    Riddhi Bowry, a recent graduate of Spring Branch's Memorial High, has won
second place and $ 600 worth of U.S. savings bonds for her essay,
Entrepreneurship and the American Economy, in a three-state contest sponsored by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

    Mark Clancy, a recent graduate of Springwoods High in Spring Branch, and
Jacqueline Price, a recent graduate of Stratford High in Spring Branch, were
among 250 students nationwide to each receive a $ 20,000 Wal-Mart Competitive
Edge Scholarship to pursue the study of science or technology.

    Recent graduates from area schools have received $ 1,000 Community Service
Awards from Serve Houston, an affiliate of the AmeriCorps National Service
Network. The students are: Susan Barra and Lisa Gonzales, Saint Agnes Academy in
Houston; Alyson Bricker and Aliza Wender, Houston's Westbury High; Jenny
Ceballos, Houston's Austin High; Ashley Davis, Houston's High School of the
Performing and Visual Arts; Pamela Delaney, Houston's Scarborough High; Sophia
Edukere, Houston's Washington High; Naomi Flores, Houston's Davis High; Lilian
Garcia, Houston's Reagan High; Yuh-Shan Huang, Houston's Bellaire High; Tiffany
Johnson, Houston's Kashmere High; Valerie Karplus; Spring Branch's Memorial
High; Felicia Latson, Houston's Yates High; Sebabi Leballo, Spring Branch's
Northbrook High; and Jose Lopez, Houston's Furr High. More scholars will be
listed next week.


   . . .


   SCHOOLS

    Ridgecrest Elementary in Spring Branch has received the Leadership in Action
award for improving the environment through its new SPARK Park.

    Future Farmers of America members at Clear Creek High in Clear Creek have
received a National Chapter Rating award in recognition of outstanding
achievements in community service at the Texas State FFA Convention.


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1998


                             1874 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1998 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             August 9, 1998 Sunday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1969 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL MIRACLES MAY COST FAMILIES

BYLINE: PATRICK O'NEILL, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Sunday, August 9, 1998 MEDICAL MIRACLES MAY COST FAMILIES

   Some children with chronic illnesses might have to move from home to
hospital if insurance coverage changes

   Eric Thomas wasn't supposed to live.

   His parents' only child, Eric came into the world nine weeks early and
profoundly weak. The weakness in his muscles left him unable to breathe on his
own and dependent on a mechanical ventilator.

   After nine months in the intensive care unit of Emanuel Hospital and Health
Center, he was sent home to die.

   That was 13 years ago.

   Against the odds and with much support and love, Eric has grown into a
bright , young man who hates homework, particularly math, and lives for  sports:
Name the Portland team, he's a fan.

   Eric is among the ranks of children who have graduated from hospital to
home, accompanied by mechanical ventilators that breathe for them. They have a
variety of life-threatening illnesses. Some, like Eric included, have muscles
that are so weak they can't expand their lungs. Others have neurological
disorders that make them forget to breathe when they're asleep. Still others
have injuries that have cut the links between the brain and the muscles of the
diaphragm, which powers the lungs.

   Children on ventilators and others saved by modern medical intervention  pose
a predicament for health insurance companies, which want to avoid paying
lifelong costs for people with chronic conditions. The threat of losing such
coverage means that families like such as the Thomases share a nightmare: that
someday their insurance companies will stop paying for nurses to come into
their homes, forcing their children into hospitals or nursing homes.

   State Medicaid programs will take care of these children if their parents
are impoverished. However, Some states have programs that make such children
eligible for Medicaid help without forcing their parents into poverty, but .
Oregon has no such program.is not one of them.

   Most private insurers cover home care if it is aimed at an eventual cure  for
the patient, said Jane Galvin, director of managed care policy for the  Health
Insurance Association of America.

   What insurers don't cover is custodial care in which patients need skilled
nursing care for conditions that never will improve. Custodial care is the
province of public assistance programs like such as Medicaid, Galvin said.

   ``The difficulty is deciding who's going to pay for what,'' she said. ``It
is very hard for people to accept less than 100 percent coverage.

   ``Private insurance programs are not social institutions. Every health plan
has limits and exclusions.''

   The question of what to do about ventilator-dependent children, Galvin  said,
is ``going to need much closer scrutiny as time goes on.''

   Advances in medical technology have focused the attention of medical
ethicists on all kinds of new and emerging treatments, from bone marrow
transplantation to gene therapy. Ventilator dependence is just another field  in
which improvements in medicine bring out the question: Who pays?

   Dr. Norman Fost, director of the program in medical ethics in the  department
of pediatrics at the University of Wisconsin Hospital, expresses  the problem in
plain terms: ``We can't afford to do everything for  everybody.''

   ``Whether we're spending money in the right places is unknown at best, and
at worst it's determined by unpredictable and irrational factors,'' he said.

   Fost said a partial solution might lie in the development of a single-payer
system of health insurance. Such a system, like similar to Canada's, would
permit more focused study of the benefits of medical therapies. , he said.

   But even with greater understanding of medical treatment outcomes, debate
over about the use of medical resources won't stop.

   ``There will never be a time when there will not be a controversy about how
we're spending our health care dollars,'' he said.

   Complexities of care, coverage

   Because of the complexities of care and insurance issues, parents of
ventilator-dependent children say they learn from and depend on one
another.each other.

   Chris Thomas,  Eric's mother, has joined forces with Theresa Cody,  the
mother of another ventilator-dependent child. The two Portland-area women are
training for an assault on the 1999 Oregon Legislature, hoping for a law to
give better insurance coverage for families like theirs.in similar  situations.

   Four years ago, Theresa Cody and her husband, Mark, brought their son,
William, home from the hospital. Like Eric, William also has profound muscle
weakness that leaves him unable to breathe without a ventilator.

   William's room resembles a miniature pediatric intensive care unit. Three
large green tanks of oxygen stand against one wall. A pulse oxymeter measures
the level of oxygen in William's blood. Like Eric, he is fed a special formula
through a tube implanted in his stomach. A suction machine, an air cleaner and
an electric wheelchair stand nearby.

   No one knows just how many such children there are in the United States.  The
federal Health Care Financing Administration, which runs Medicaid and  Medicare
programs, doesn't keep records on them. The most recent nationwide  study, done
in 1987 by the federal Office of Technology Assessment, estimated  that 680 to
2,000 American children were tied to ventilators.

   Dr. Tina Kitchin, medical director of the state Office of Developmental
Disability Services and supervisor of the Medically Fragile Children's Unit,
said she knows of 26 ventilator-dependent childen in Oregon. The state  provides
some services to 24 of them. Nobody knows how many other children  there are who
rely on private insurance.

   Although the numbers appear to be few, the impact effect on their families
is huge. Cost of care can reach hundreds of thousands of dollars a year,  enough
to eat through a lifetime of health insurance benefits in just a few  years.

   ``One thing BlueCross has said to family members is that they won't pay for
any home care in two years,'' Chris Thomas said. ``If they put that into their
policies, there's nothing we can do.

   ``We can't fall back on the state because Eric is not Medicaid-eligible,''
she said. Eric would have to go into the hospital intensive care unit.

   ``It would destroy us. I think it's an outrage that families should be put
in the position of even thinking that they could be torn apart by medical
problems.''

   Annie French, the head of health care management for Regence BlueCross
BlueShield of Oregon, said it's up to employers to decide what benefits to
include in the health insurance programs they provide for their workers. She
said employers could include home nursing care in their contracts if they're
willing to pay the cost.

   French said she is not aware of any effort to cut back on the number of
nursing hours available to a ventilator-dependent child.

   Dr. Tom Janisse, assistant regional medical director for Kaiser Permanente,
said: ``We don't have a specific ventilator-dependent policy because it's so
rare. Because we're an integrated health care system, we apply whatever
resources are required.''

   The purpose of health insurance, Janisse he said, is to give people medical
care when they need it. Or, as he Janisse puts it, to move patients ``from
medical instability to medical stability.''

   When patients have stabilized, their needs involve less medical care and
more custodial care. ``At that point, society has provided for people through
public assistance programs,'' he said.

   Under current Medicaid regulations require that a family of three, like  such
as the Thomases, would have to earn $1,138 per a month or less to qualify for
assistance. But because Ric Thomas has a job as a systems administrator,  and ;
, the Thomas family earns much more than that. As a result, they're  pretty much
on their own.

   Kitchin said the state of Oregon is asking the federal government for a
waiver that would allow medically fragile children, including some who are on
ventilators, to get help from Medicaid, even if their families aren't poor.

   Kitchin said, however, that there would be funding money for only five such
children.

   Care for a ventilator-dependent child, Kitchin said, can cost $22,000 to
$23,000 a month, -- most of it in nursing care.

   Often, families with insurance are shocked to discover that they're not
fully covered for catastrophic care.

   Insurance companies have dealt with such cases on an individual basis.  While
Although policies don't specifically cover full-time in-home nursing  care,
insurance companies sometimes agree to shift benefits from one area of  coverage
-- nursing-home care, for instance -- to pay for in-home nursing.

   But that may might be changing.

   ``Lately, the insurance companies have been saying that if a child has any
other resources available, including Medicaid, they aren't required to pay the
(nursing) care,'' Kitchin said.

   Although the burden falls heavily on the families of ventilator-dependent
children, Kitchin doesn't put all of the blame on insurance companies.

   ``I think this is society's problem. Medical science has advanced so far,
and we have not addressed the question of how all of this could be funded,''
she said.

   Kathryn Weit, a policy analyst with the Oregon Developmental Disabilities
Council, says the unexpected survivals have thrown insurance companies a  curve.

   ``These were kids no one ever expected to live,'' she said. ``In many
instances, insurance companies don't have written policies to handle them. But
they've bent over backward to help.''

   A life ruled by details

   Lying on his hospital-style bed in the TV room, Eric luxuriates in the
freedom of vacation.

   Does he miss school?

   Eric laughs.

   ``I'd rather focus on summer and goof off,'' he said.

   Eric speaks in automatic cadence, talking when the ventilator allows him to
breathe out. He depends on the machine as much as a deep-sea diver relies on
his air hose. Without it, he'd die in minutes.

   The ventilator is a permanent fixture of family life. And so are the  nurses.

   Nurse Mike Jaqua -- who has been with Eric for eight years and is
practically a member of the family -- arrives at 8:30 a.m. on weekdays and
leaves at 4:30 p.m. Eric's parents then watch over him until 10 p.m., when a
night nurse arrives. All night long, the nurse attends to Eric while he  sleeps,
turning him occasionally, giving him medications and monitoring the  machine
that breathes for him.

   Eric and others who depend on respirators are vulnerable to infection.
Ordinarily, when people breathe, the air goes through the nose and throat,
where bacteria and viruses are filtered out and where the air is humidified.
But Eric's tracheostomy provides a straight pathway to his lungs for any
infectious agent.

   When Eric has a cold or congestion, he doesn't have the strength to cough  up
mucus.mucous.

   The Thomas family's life is ruled by details. Check the ventilator, make
sure all the tubes are properly plugged in. See that the alarms are hooked up
correctly. Be sure there's enough oxygen in the tanks. Is Eric getting enough
air? Is the tracheostomy tube blocked? Does mucous mucus need to be suctioned
out of his lungs?

   The Thomas family lives in constant fear that their insurance carrier will
refuse to pay for the 16 hours per a day of nursing care that make it possible
for Eric to live at home.

   ``We could never do it without the nurses,'' Chris Thomas said. She's
prepared to fight for long-term insurance coverage for families like such as
hers.

   ``We're a family, and we brought this child into the world, and we're going
to provide the best quality of life for as long as we have him,'' she said.  ``I
used to be the biggest wimp in the world. I hated confrontations,
disagreements. I realized I had to toughen up.''

   ILLUSTRATION: 2 Photo by Bob Ellis - of The Oregonian staff

   MEMO: Mechanical ventilators

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1875 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 6, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: Human Genome's profit falls; 5 cents a share in second quarter, down
from 13 cents; Genomics

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Human Genome Sciences Inc. reported yesterday net income of $ 1.2 million, or
5 cents per share, for its second quarter.

   Earnings in the period, which ended June 30, were sharply lower than the $
2.9 million, or 13 cents per share, in the second quarter of 1997.

   The Rockville-based genomics company, which is developing two experimental
drugs, said second-quarter revenue fell to $ 13.9 million from $ 14.8 million in
revenue in the 1997 quarter.

   In the first six months of the year, Human Genome said, it had a net loss of
$ 8.5 million, or 38 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $ 9.2 million,
or 44 cents a share the year before.

   The company attributed part of this year's loss to a $ 400,000 loss related
to Human Genome's equity stake in recently formed Vascular Genetics Inc., a
private venture which hopes to develop gene therapies for heart disease.

   Human Genome said it had revenue of $ 15.9 million in the first six months,
down from $ 16.1 million in the corresponding period of 1997.

   The company's revenue comes largely from licensing deals and research
agreements with a number of pharmaceutical companies.

   Pub Date: 8/06/98

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1998


                             1876 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   AUGUST 4, 1998 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 9F

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: ONE DOCTOR TRIES TO CHANGE THE ESTABLISHMENT FROM THE INSIDE

BYLINE: BRIGID SCHULTE Free Press Washington Bureau

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   To help people understand the life of a black scientist at the National
Institutes of Health, the nation's premier research organization and a
cloistered good old boys club, Dr. Roland Owens tells white friends to imagine
going to a black church.

   How would you feel? A little uncomfortable? Definitely an oddity? "You
wonder, am I going to fit in? This is where I want to be, but I don't want to
tick off anybody," he says. "Sometimes I can do a real number on my own head."

   Because he knows he's playing against entrenched stereotypes, Owens is never
late for meetings, works 12-hour days and always practices his lectures. "To say
I have something to prove is a true statement. Nobody ever told me I have to
prove it," Owens says. "But one of my gifts is being able to extract the actual
survival parameters rather than the stated ones."

   In his cramped lab, cluttered with microscopes, computers, papers, Petri
dishes and freezers full of viruses, Owens, 38, is one of fewer than 20 elite
tenured and tenure-track scientists at NIH who are black -- out of about 1,400,
most of them white.

   He and all the other black, Hispanic, Pacific Island and American Indian
scientists make up only 6 percent of the country's science and engineering
workforce.

   And there aren't that many more coming up behind them: In 1995, only 6.4
percent of all PhDs in biomedical science went to minorities.

   "As a black male from my neighborhood, I had a higher chance of being dead by
age 25 than getting a PhD," he says.

   That's something Owens, a molecular biologist, is driven to change. From the
inside. In 1992, an NIH internal report determined that a special recruiting
office was needed. None was ever created. "We decided we had to do it
ourselves," Owens says. And the 33-member NIH Black Scientists' Association was
born.

   The group's aim is to get more qualified black scientists to work at NIH by
giving them the skinny on how it really works: It's all who you know.
"Mentoring" and "networking" are two words Owens uses like mantras.

   After serving on NIH committees that decide who gets hired and who gets
promoted, he says he was "enlightened": A letter from a friend, a good word from
an old colleague were sometimes more important than having studies published in
journals or other formal selection criteria.

   "It's easier to be upwardly mobile once you understand how the game is
played," Owens says. "That's what our organization's for."

   Owens was lucky. He is the son of a maintenance worker and a teacher and grew
up in not the best but not the worst neighborhood in Baltimore, where he was
often beaten up as he carried his books home. But he has never lacked for
mentors.

   His Aunt Katherine, a school principal, took him on walks through the woods
that sparked his interest in biology. Professors at Johns Hopkins took him under
their wings. His boss at NIH, impressed with Owens' discovery about a virus to
be used for gene therapy, called a friend and helped his work get published in
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, the pinnacle of prestige.

   Owens' motivation is simple: He wants to move blacks forward. And he wants to
make a difference in people's lives. His research could lead to treatments for
cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell anemia, even the cancer that claimed his aunt's
life.

   "My life expectancy is 68 years," he says. "Believe me, I want to do anything
I can to increase that."

NOTES: UNEQUAL CARE; SERIES

GRAPHIC: Photo CHUCK KENNEDY, KRT;
Roland Owens, PhD, is one of nine tenured black scientists at the NIH.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             1877 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 4, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 1; Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1919 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy's Focus Shifts From Rare Illnesses

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   WHEN the gene responsible for Hunter's syndrome was discovered about 10 years
ago, Joan Cohen was told by a doctor that it would take only five years to
develop a gene therapy for the rare hereditary disease that afflicts her son.

   Mrs. Cohen, who lives in Island Park, L.I., is still waiting. Even in its
mild form, the disease often kills people by the time they reach 35. "It's like
a time bomb," Mrs. Cohen said. Her 17-year-old son, Adam, is just 4 feet 11
inches tall and suffers from leaky and enlarged heart valves, respiratory
problems and deteriorated hearing. "I'm sitting here with a kid that I know is
going to die and there's nothing I can do that will stop it."

    When it first made headlines about a decade ago, gene therapy seemed the
answer to the prayers of thousands of people affected by hereditary diseases.
The idea is simple and eloquent. Many inherited diseases are caused by a faulty
gene, which makes the body unable to produce some essential protein or enzyme.
Gene therapy would deliver the needed gene to a person's cells, which would then
begin producing the essential substance.

   But gene therapy so far has not worked, mainly because it has been difficult
to get the genes to the desired cells efficiently and have them produce enough
of the needed protein. Scientific evidence of consistent improvement in patients
is lacking so far, although some patients have reported gains.

   Even as significant technology hurdles are being overcome, other issues --
business ones -- may keep gene therapy from helping people like Adam Cohen.

   The focus of gene therapy has shifted from inherited diseases toward more
common ailments like cancer, AIDS and heart disease -- all areas that could
prove more profitable. Many genetic disorders, and there are thousands of them,
affect anywhere from a handful to a few thousand people worldwide, hardly a
commercially promising prospect for pharmaceutical companies.

   "The whole concept of gene therapy for genetic diseases doesn't fit the
business model," said Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the institute for human
gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania and president of the American
Society for Gene Therapy.

   The situation raises the prospect that the Human Genome Project will discover
an abundance of genes responsible for illnesses, but that no one will actually
use those genes to help patients.

   "It's only genes for things like obesity and baldness that are spurring
further investigation," said Abbey S. Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders.

   Of the 244 gene therapy trials registered since 1989 with the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee at the National Institutes of Health, about 150 are for
cancer and another 23 are for H.I.V. Only 33 are for diseases caused by a defect
in a single gene, and 16 of those are for cystic fibrosis, the most common
inherited disease among Caucasians. Seventeen tests cover 12 other genetic
diseases. Among trials registered since the beginning of 1997 the balance is
even more lopsided -- 53 for cancer and 8 for hereditary diseases.

   Although cancer has a genetic basis, it is a complex disease and many experts
think gene therapy, at best, will become part of an arsenal of weapons achieving
partial results. By contrast, diseases caused by a single defective gene could,
at least in theory, be cured by gene therapy.

   "It's the rare genetic diseases that give you neat model systems that are
most likely to show success," said Dr. W. French Anderson, director of the gene
therapy laboratories at the University of Southern California. "So it's really
ironic that we can't get the funding to do it."

   When he worked at N.I.H., Dr. Anderson participated in the first human gene
therapy experiments, performed on two girls with a rare inherited immune
deficiency. But now, he said, his gene therapy work is directed at cancer,
cardiovascular disease and arthritis because that is where the funding is.

   Because the technology so far has not worked on a large scale, the paucity of
clinical trials aimed at inherited diseases has not been a major issue.

   "Without the breakthroughs in technology, all the clinical trials wouldn't
mean much in the end because they are not going to be successful," said Dr.
Savio Woo, director of the institute for gene therapy and molecular medicine at
Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.

   Some experts, as well as families with rare genetic diseases, are confident
that once the technology works, money will become available. The Orphan Drug
Act, which gives drug companies financial incentives to develop treatments for
rare disorders, probably would cover gene therapy.

   Still, some scientists say that recent improvements in technology promise to
bring the business issue to the fore in a few years, and efforts to address it
are starting.

   The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health have
begun exploring whether clinical trials of gene therapy for rare genetic
diseases could be compressed to make them less expensive and require fewer
patients. One proposal would combine the first phase of trials, used to test for
safety, and later stages that test for efficacy, said Dr. Stephen C. Groft, who
heads the institutes' rare disease office.

   Meanwhile, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Southern
California and the National Organization for Rare Disorders are discussing a
joint effort to raise millions of dollars for gene therapy clinical trials on
rare diseases.

   Many patient groups are raising money to finance research, including gene
therapy trials. The Fanconi Anemia Research Foundation, for example, has
distributed $2.7 million since 1990 for research on that disease, in which the
bone marrow fails to work. But many patient organizations are small and have
been unable to raise such large sums.

   Some say the Government will have to finance clinical trials for rare
diseases. But the N.I.H., following a 1995 review of gene therapy, believes that
money should first be spent to improve the basic science and technology rather
than embarking on trials that probably will not be very useful.

   Dr. David Williams, a professor at Indiana University who is working on gene
therapy for several rare diseases, said the N.I.H. seems more willing to finance
some clinical trials. But Dr. Williams's first clinical trial will be for
cancer, because the National Cancer Institute has been more amenable to such
trials than other institutes.

   Some scientists say that even if the technology does not work yet, clinical
trials could speed development. "If I had a million dollars I couldn't suddenly
treat 100 patients," said Dr. Chester B. Whitley of the University of Minnesota,
who wants to do gene therapy for Hunter's syndrome. "But I could treat one
patient and learn from that and then treat three patients."

   Even if Government funding were available, it would probably go only through
the initial safety testing, at a cost of about $200,000 to $600,000, researchers
said. It would probably be up to companies to do the more expensive later-stage
trials.

   Most companies, particularly the new ones that are doing most of the gene
therapy work, say they cannot afford to spend money on treatments for rare
diseases because of the limited potential for payback.

   "The commercial value of a product in that area is going to be less," said
Dr. Stephen A. Sherwin, chief executive of Cell Genesys of Foster City, Calif.
"In a business setting, you have to consider that." His company is conducting
seven gene therapy trials -- five for cancer and two for AIDS.

   Cancer is also being emphasized because risky treatments traditionally are
tested on terminal illnesses, Dr. Sherwin said. In addition, the technical
problems that have stymied the use of gene therapy in inherited diseases may
pose less of an obstacle in cancer or cardiovascular disease, other scientists
said.

   The problem with gene therapy so far is that researchers have not been able
to deliver the genes in large enough quantities to the proper cells, or to have
the genes "expressed," or activated to produce the required protein for a
sufficient length of time.

   But for cancer, the genes usually would not need to be activated forever. One
approach, for example, calls for injecting genes that cause the tumor cells to
produce a protein that stimulates the body's own immune system, which then would
attack the tumor. In clinical trials sponsored by Vical, a San Diego company,
such an approach reduced the tumors by at least half in 17 percent of melanoma
patients who had failed other therapies.

   "For certain cancers and cardiovascular diseases, you don't need expression
forever," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, professor of medicine at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. Dr. Crystal is continuing work on hereditary
diseases at his laboratory. But a company he co-founded, Genvec, is
concentrating on gene therapy for cardiovascular disease, using genes for a
protein to help grow new blood vessels in tissues with inadequate blood flow.

   Some experts say that the search for cancer treatments has increased spending
on gene therapy technology, which will eventually help people with genetic
diseases.

   "Maybe the quickest route to solving cystic fibrosis is to take a detour,"
said Dr. Alan E. Smith, chief scientific officer at Genzyme Corporation, a
biotechnology company that conducted eight unsuccessful gene therapy trials for
cystic fibrosis. Now the company is concentrating on cancer and cardiovascular
disease as well as Gaucher's disease, a rare inherited disorder.

   Mrs. Cohen is also hopeful that techniques developed for cancer gene therapy
will be applied to her son's disease.

   Other treatments for genetic disorders are being tried. Genzyme is treating
Gaucher's using genetic engineering. The necessary gene is implanted in vats of
cells, producing an enzyme that is sold to patients for about $150,000 a year.

   In the ideal case, gene therapy would require a single injection of genes
that would then allow the patient to make his or her own enzyme. But for a drug
company, a one-time cure for a rare disease might offer less chance of profit.

   The biggest problem with gene therapy has been developing the vectors --
usually partially disabled viruses -- that can deliver the genes to the cells.
But scientists say progress has been made, and other techniques have been
developed to do away with viruses altogether.

   "It's going to work in the next couple of years for many more genetic
diseases," said Dr. R. Michael Blaese, a gene therapy pioneer at N.I.H. who
recently became chief scientific officer at Kimeragen, a new company. Rather
than inject entire genes, the company's technology will just "correct the typos"
in the patient's own genes. Dr. Blaese said the company's first clinical trial
will probably be for a rare inherited liver disorder called Crigler-Najjar
disease.

   Avigen, a gene therapy company in Alameda, Calif., has improved the condition
of dogs with hemophilia B for 20 weeks with a single injection of the gene for
Factor IX, the missing blood clotting agent. The company, which hopes to begin
human trials this year, uses a vector made from an adeno-associated virus, a
type of virus that has received little attention.

   Avigen's president, John Monahan, said the company would focus on more common
inherited diseases rather than cancer. "For cancer," he said, "there's not even
an agreement on what the gene should be."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Adam Cohen, 17, who suffers from Hunter's syndrome, is still
waiting for a gene therapy treatment he was told would be available 5 years ago.
(Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)(pg. F1); Adam Cohen undergoes physical therapy
with Anthony DeCicco twice a week. Hunter's syndrome often kills people before
the age of 35. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)(pg. F6)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1998


                             1878 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 4, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 7; Column 6; Science Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
News for the Colorblind

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   Researchers at Tuebingen University in southern Germany say that they have
isolated the gene that causes complete colorblindness.

   The discovery, which was published in last month's Nature Genetics journal,
means that parents-to-be will be able to find out whether they carry the
recessive trait that causes the rare inherited disorder, called rod
monochromacy, which affects about one in 50,000 people. The findings could lead
to gene therapy to treat the colorblindness, the researchers said.

    People with rod monochromacy cannot sense any colors from birth, seeing only
various shades of gray. Oliver Sacks chronicled the disorder in his 1997 book
"The Island of the Colorblind," about the Micronesian island of Pingelap, where
10 percent of the inhabitants are completely colorblind.

   Joel Pokorny, a colorblindness expert at the University of Chicago, called
the findings interesting.

   "If you have an understanding of what the genetics are," he said, "maybe at
some point you can find a treatment."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1998


                             1879 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       AUGUST 4, 1998 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2268 words

HEADLINE: FADED ALLEGHENY DREAMS DOCTORS, NURSES, STUDENTS WONDER: WHAT'S TO
COME?

BYLINE: Marian Uhlman and Stacey Burling, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Just 20 months ago, Sherif Abdelhak was a rich man in a hurry.

   The architect of the Allegheny health system was launching ambitious plans
for adorning his sprawling Philadelphia empire.

   Abdelhak soon pledged $10 million to remake his City Avenue hospital into a
premier women's hospital. He promised nearly $100 million for a major building
project in Center City. He hoped to control five or six hospitals in South
Jersey.

   He was recruiting nationally for a dean for his new school of public health.
He was courting three of the region's best-known orthopedists to anchor a
revamped Graduate Hospital. And he was trying to buy more doctors' practices.

   While many found his top-down management style cold and heavy-handed, others
were captivated by Abdelhak's vision and chutzpah. The possibilities seemed
boundless. Perhaps more amazing was that the chief executive of the
Pittsburgh-based Allegheny Health, Education and Research Foundation could make
those promises while health-care dollars were getting tighter.

   Using laboratory space, larger staffs and handsome salaries as enticements,
Abdelhak snagged talent from Thomas Jefferson University, the University of
Pittsburgh and beyond.

   Dr. Howard Ozer left a job directing Emory University's cancer program in
Atlanta for a chance at building a first-class center here.

   "Here was an opportunity that sounded out of the ordinary and probably too
good to be true," he said. "But, on the other hand, they clearly had been able
to do it for a number of years. . . . It seemed like they had figured it out."

   Money seemed to flow freely for programs big and small.

   "It felt like Camelot," said Dr. Marla Gold, head of the HIV/AIDS program for
Allegheny University of the Health Sciences.

   Now, those who were inspired by Abdelhak's vision find themselves and their
dreams in limbo.

   The architect is gone, ousted just weeks before nearly the entire health
system he amassed in Philadelphia went bankrupt.

   Bidding on the spoils has begun. Two for-profit companies, Vanguard Health
Systems and Tenet Healthcare Corp., say they want to buy eight of Allegheny's
nine area hospitals.

   And Allegheny University of the Health Sciences - a big part of what drew
Abdelhak here from Pittsburgh in the first place - could wind up on its own.

   About 17,000 people who work or study at Allegheny in the Philadelphia area
are hoping for the best but bracing for the worst. Among them are a pediatrician
and an obstetrical nurse, a cancer researcher and a molecular biologist, a
medical student and an AIDS doctor.

   SELLING THE PRACTICE Four years ago, the stage was set for hundreds of
doctors like William Zavod to give up their independence and sell to Allegheny.

   Insurance companies were "squeezing and squeezing and squeezing" their
payments to doctors, and there was little a small practice could do to fight
back, Zavod said. His income hadn't dropped yet, but he could see it coming.

   All around him, doctors were beginning to join groups or sell out to health
systems, hoping that greater numbers would give them clout with HMOs. The
systems hoped that by buying practices, they would secure a steady stream of
patients.

   Zavod and his partner, pediatricians with offices near Center City and
Ardmore, had been trying to hire a third doctor for four years. They were tired
from all the grueling nights and weekends on call. They felt isolated and
vulnerable.

   Along came Allegheny. If Zavod's group joined the system, the physicians
would get a third doctor of their choice to reduce their workload. They would
maintain their income for at least five years.

   Allegheny offered a good price for their practice. Zavod wouldn't say what it
was, but systems were paying $200,000 to $300,000 per doctor. Allegheny would do
billing and payroll, freeing the doctors to concentrate on medicine.

   Zavod, a big man with a white beard, knew he was being seduced, but he went
willingly with Allegheny in August 1995. He would be about 60 when the contract
expired. His children would almost be done with graduate school. It seemed a
risk worth taking.

   For the most part, he got what he bargained for. Zavod was freed from many a
business hassle. He got the third doctor. Allegheny has left medical decisions
to the doctors.

   But he has hardly gotten the five years of stability he sought. What he has
instead is "so strange and awkward," he said.

   Zavod tries to keep his mind on his work, which he does in a refreshingly
old-fashioned way. He looks in ears and tickles bellies. He doesn't believe in
handing nurses the dirty work, so he gives his own shots.

   Occasionally, parents call, wondering if he is still open. That much he
knows. What he doesn't know is whether he and his staff will get paid, who will
own the practice, or even what his legal rights are.

   Zavod's contract doesn't allow Allegheny to sell the practice to anyone
without his consent, but, he said, dryly, "If they're bankrupt and they're going
to sell us to someone who's not, we'd probably consent."

   His big question is unanswerable:

   "Does anybody want us?"

   A HOSPITAL FOR WOMEN At first, Kathleen Gurbada was insulted when Allegheny
laid off its maternity nurses last year and required them to apply for positions
at its new women's hospital on City Avenue.

   Gurbada, a maternity nurse, had worked at Hahnemann Hospital for 13 years.
Allegheny planned to shut maternity services there and at MCP and combine them
at City Avenue. The 228-bed hospital was to be transformed into a Philadelphia
first: a hospital devoted to women's health.

   The idea was to have "one-stop" medical services for women - care for
everything from pregnancy to osteoporosis to heart disease.

   After thinking a while, Gurbada warmed to the idea.

   "I felt at the time: 'We are going to be cutting edge,' " she said. "I wanted
to be part of the new idea."

   By last summer, Allegheny had completed the first phase of a $10 million
renovation plan. Twelve labor-delivery-recovery rooms, some with Jacuzzis, were
built. The nurseries were remodeled into open, airy spaces. Patient rooms on the
fifth floor got an overhaul.

   Little things mattered, too. Five plum parking spaces at the hospital's
entrance were marked with storks and reserved for women in labor. Doctors
insisted that midnight-snack trays be available for nursing mothers.

   "We wanted a hospital committed to excellence," said Dr. Owen Montgomery,
medical director of obstetrics and gynecology for Allegheny's Philadelphia
practices.

   Montgomery, who moved with his partners from Jefferson in 1996, believed the
new hospital would raise the profile of women's health, which often plays second
fiddle to such glamorous services as orthopedics.

   Even as signs of the system's problems mounted, the hospital was attracting
patients from as far away as Cape May and Vineland. It delivered 3,000 babies
the first year.

   "I don't want to jump ship," Gurbada said. "I am glad I came here . . . as
crazy as things are."

   CREATING A CANCER CENTER When an Allegheny recruiter approached Howard Ozer
at his Emory office about heading a greatly expanded cancer program in
Philadelphia, Ozer was taken aback.

   "My first reaction was I'd never heard of them," he said.

   But he was intrigued enough to visit Philadelphia, and he was impressed. The
system had some good programs in place and had incredible expansion plans.
Abdelhak wanted to hire 100 cancer researchers and doctors over the next two
years. The system was going to build a 12-story outpatient complex at the corner
of Broad and Race Streets, and much of the space would go to the new Allegheny
Cancer Center.

   Ozer was told that his Philadelphia cancer center would have $25 million over
five years. When he began work in March 1997, Allegheny had the deep pockets it
had promised. Ozer hired about eight people. There were blueprints for the
outpatient building.

   But last summer, Allegheny told Ozer that there was not enough money for the
big building. That did not alarm him. It is not unusual for organizations to
pull back on building plans.

   It was not until January, when officials started reorganizing programs and
budgets, that he knew there was big trouble. His budget fell from $5 million to
$1.5 million, still a respectable amount, but nowhere near what he had
anticipated.

   Now, he is left with what he believes is the foundation for a great cancer
center. He is waiting to see whether Allegheny's new owners - whoever they are -
agree. If they do, he would be happy to stay, he said. If not, there will be a
"large academic exodus."

   Ozer feels betrayed but thinks he made the best decision he could at the
time.

   "I'm no more foolish than any of the other very smart people who did this,"
he said.

   A NEW CAREER DIRECTION Two years ago, at an age when many people coast toward
retirement, Darwin Prockop got a chance to take his career in a whole new
direction.

   An internationally renowned molecular biologist and biochemist at Jefferson,
he was recruited to establish a gene therapy center at Allegheny.

   "I was happy at Jefferson . . . but I needed to break into a new field,"
Prockop, now 68, said. "Jefferson could not make that additional investment at
that time."

   He took with him a 25-person research team. They set up shop in 10,000 square
feet of newly renovated laboratory space on 15th Street, with all the latest
machinery, and went to work on Prockop's hunch that certain bone-marrow cells
could play a vital role in treating a variety of diseases, including
osteoporosis.

   "For the first two years, the support was superb," Prockop said of
Allegheny's commitment to his program.

   Even so, hints that something might be amiss started to arise soon after his
arrival: Renovations took longer than expected; equipment was leased rather than
purchased.

   Still, Prockop said, he had no reason to suspect the magnitude of trouble
ahead.

   "I believed in the ambition of the institution," he said. "Allegheny expanded
so rapidly, we needed time to catch up."

   Abdelhak also was masterful at allaying concerns. Prockop remembered the
former chief executive mounting a slide show on how he had negotiated - in one
week - the acquisition of the Graduate Health System.

   "It was like giving a lecture on molecular biology to a layperson," Prockop
said. "It sounds impressive. He had a command of a huge number of facts."

   Just last March, Prockop's group published promising results in animal
studies suggesting that bone-marrow cells might be useful in treating diseases
of the central nervous system, such as Parkinson's.

   Now Allegheny's financial turmoil has left him wondering when and where he
and his team will further test their ideas. He is anxious to try them out on
people.

   "Just think," Prockop said, "if we had a treatment for Parkinson's."

   'THIS PLACE IS AWESOME' The MCP-Hahnemann School of Medicine didn't start out
as Sandeep Deshmukh's first choice. But an interview at the school after his
acceptance changed his mind.

   "When I left," he recalled, "I was thinking, 'This place is awesome. I can't
believe I didn't know about it.' "

   The size of the Allegheny system would give him a chance to study in many
different types of hospitals and doctors' practices. Its research stars were
also a drawing card.

   But what the Tucson, Ariz., native really liked was the atmosphere. People
were friendly, helpful and enthusiastic. It felt like a family. What better
place, he thought, to study something as demanding as medicine?

   That atmosphere turned to panic when the bankruptcy was announced, said
Deshmukh, a third-year medical student who is president of the university's
medical-student association. Since then, university leaders have said they would
try to keep the school open. Other national medical leaders, meanwhile, have
vowed to help students finish school elsewhere should MCP-Hahnemann close.

   Deshmukh, a 23-year-old with short black hair and oval glasses, said the
crisis had brought the faculty and students together.

   "The students really came to learn, and they're still interested in that," he
said. "The faculty's here to teach, and they're still interested in that. I
don't think everyone's ready to give that up."

   AN EXPANDED AIDS CLINIC David Rheinheimer did not sleep well when he heard
about Allegheny's misfortunes.

   He was afraid the bankruptcy would threaten the AIDS clinic he goes to every
three weeks. He worried his trusted doctor would be forced to leave.

   "I was scared I would lose him," said Rheinheimer, 46, of Center City.

   For now, at least, no one is leaving. And, ironically, the AIDS clinic is in
its best shape ever.

   Only days before the declared bankruptcy, the clinic moved from cramped,
dungeon-like offices on Broad Street into a spacious home at 1427 Vine St., a
place with new carpeting, large windows and a bright, welcoming waiting room.

   The program expanded with government grants and Allegheny's money. That
support was not to be taken lightly, because many hospitals flinch at committing
resources for AIDS patients, said Dr. Marla Gold, who has shepherded the
clinic's growth.

   "Every request, they backed," she said of Allegheny's Philadelphia
leadership.

   In five years, the clinic grew from about 400 patients to roughly 1,000. The
staffing about tripled, to 25. The services expanded to include a nutritionist,
a pharmacist, an education-outreach worker, and physicians who are on call
around the clock.

   "We accomplished our dream," Gold said. "The trick is to see how to maintain
the dream."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Sherif Abdelhak's ambitious plans attracted some top talents to his Philadelphia
empire.
Dr. William Zavod examines Melanie Solano, 7, in his Ardmore office. Zavod and
his partner sold their practice to Allegheny in 1995, but the sale did not bring
the stability they sought. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, REBECCA BARGER)
At Allegheny's new women's hospital on City Avenue, Beth Smith attends to a
prematurely born baby in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. The hospital's aim is
to offer "one-stop" medical services for women. (The Philadelphia Inquirer,
REBECCA BARGER)
With the support of Allegheny's Philadelphia leadership, Dr. Marla Gold has
shepherded the growth of the Vine Street AIDS clinic.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1880 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                August 4, 1998, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. C12

LENGTH: 621 words

HEADLINE: SOME 'ROACH MOTEL' STOCKS REWARD PATIENCE

BYLINE: New York Times

BODY:


   * So named because they're easier to get into than out of, roach motels
occasionally offer value.

   Many value investors say their goal is to buy "unloved" stocks. Now an
analyst with the challenge of covering an often unloved sector - biotechnology -
suggests going a step further, seeking bargains among stocks that are not merely
unloved, but downright loathed.

   Elizabeth Silverman of Banc-America Robertson Stephens follows genomics
companies, a group within the biotechnology sector that has had more than its
share of unsuccessful initial public offerings of late.

   "When investors feel there's too much product - too many initial public
offerings - the market window closes and the market for these stocks just dries
up," Silverman said.

   "Biotech is a very capital-intensive industry, so you always have companies
that need capital," she said. "It just becomes a supply-and-demand function that
investors can only invest in so many of these companies in any space of time.
And when that number gets to be too big, the capital tap, if you will, is shut
off."

   As a result, the stocks can fall from their initial offering price and become
so thinly traded that the Street calls them "roach motels" - investors can get
in, but they can't get out. The stocks are sucked down, and big investors don't
want the shares because they are likely to be difficult to sell.

   A stock is considered a roach motel when average daily trading volume slips
below 40,000 shares, not counting the quarter just after the IPO.

   So, Silverman mused, what happens if the surrounding neighborhood gentrifies?
Can a roach motel become, say, the Waldorf-Astoria?

   Going back five years, Silverman says she has found stocks that accomplished
just that - leaving roach motel status by climbing 50 percent or more above
their offering price. She detailed her findings in a recent report: "Why We Love
So-Called 'Roach Motel' Stocks."

   "This is a reminder for all of us to look at history and remind ourselves
that there are stocks that didn't look like they would be very good stocks that
ended up being excellent stocks," she said.

   Not explicitly spelled out in the report, however, is that to find 11
successful escapes from roach motel status, she had to canvass more than 100
stocks.

   In the report, Silverman singled out Gene Logic, which was taken public at $
8 a share in November 1997. It has gone as high as $ 10.12 1/2 but now drifts
around $ 6. Volume surged to 1.6 million shares the day it hit its high, but
only 25,000 shares generally change hands daily.

   Silverman likes Gene Logic for the usual reasons: good management, good
product pipeline, good contracts in place. "We think this 'roach' of today is
destined to be a star of tomorrow," she wrote.

   Silverman notes at the end of the report, however, that her employer was in
the syndicate that brought Gene Logic public.

   Next, Silverman says, is to identify 1998 IPOs that may become roach motels.
Although it is still early, she advises keeping an eye on Combichem, which uses
computers to discover new drugs, and Transgene, a French gene therapy company.
(Robertson Stephens helped underwrite Transgene, too, according to the report.)

   Still, like emptying a roach motel, this type of investing is best suited to
those with strong stomachs.

   Silverman says the average residency of her success stories in roach motel
status is seven quarters, and one took as long as 16 quarters to check out and
subsequently prosper.

   She writes, "We don't think this is too bad," given the nature of
biotechnology investing, but it may lead investors to ask whether they really
want to park their money in a class of stocks that often turn out to be, well,
sticky.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC Color Graphic / Illustration - CARTOON BY MARK WILLIAMS /
POST-DISPATCH - (of roaches unpacking vacation luggage from a car)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1998


                             1881 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      August 3, 1998, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2314 words

HEADLINE: Doctors attack disease using a wide variety of strategies, weapons;
CANCER / TURNING THE CORNER;
Second of five parts

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:

   INSIDE JIM Hassmann's bones, out-of-control white blood cells had taken over.
Dividing unchecked, they were squeezing out the marrow that produces
life-sustaining red blood cells.

   Conventional drugs failed to slow his rampaging chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
or CLL. "The hematologist said there was nothing else to help me, that I was at
end-stage," recalls Hassmann, 54, who was breathless, tired, and sick. "And I
was making end-stage plans."

   As a last resort, the Houston man was referred earlier this year to the vast
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center here, where besides standard treatment, patients can
volunteer for a wide range of experimental therapies, from cancer vaccines to
gene therapy.

   The first two drugs he tried failed. But in April, Hassmann was switched to a
drug called Campath-1H, made by a Cambridge, Mass., biotech company, LeukoSite.
The drug worked like a "smart bomb" to knock out the cancer cells while sparing
the marrow that makes new normal white cells. And unlike most standard
chemotherapies, it didn't cause dangerous, toxic side effects.

   "I was feeling better within a week," says Hassmann, astonished and grateful
after a course of 12 weekly treatments. "I came there with no hope. Now this
could be good for many years."

   How long Hassman's new lease on life will continue is unknown. Like dozens of
other novel anticancer agents that have prompted a surge of optimism in the
field, Campath-1H is still in early testing.

   What is clear, however, is that in 1998, there is marked optimism about this
new generation of "targeted" therapies aimed at controlling cancer with vastly
more precise and less toxic drugs than those now available.

   "We've pushed conventional chemotherapy about as far as it can go," says Dr.
John Mendelsohn, a molecular biologist and president of M.D. Anderson. "It's
possible we'll be able to discover new chemotherapy agents, but we think the
targeting of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes" that malfunction in cancer
cells "is another major attack we can make" on the disease.

   The cancer center, one of the nation's two largest (the other is Memorial
Sloan-Kettering in New York), houses 800 faculty scientists and treats 65,000
patients a year. There are 494 clinical trials in progress here, including a
broad sampling of the novel cancer therapies that have moved into the spotlight
in the last year.

   Patients come to Houston from all over, many of them staying in high-rise
hotels that loom over the enormous Texas Medical Center in which M.D. Anderson
is located. In various clinics, they sit waiting for treatments, undergoing
infusions of drugs through intravenous lines, or nervously anticipating lab
results.

   Some, like Hassmann, are receiving drugs based on monoclonal antibodies -
engineered proteins that recognize and latch onto specific cancer cells. Other
drugs are designed to block cancerous growth signals from reaching the receivers
on the surface of cells or inside them - like filling a keyhole with gum so the
key won't fit, as one researcher put it.

   Others have volunteered for tests of angiogenesis inhibitors. These drugs
disrupt the network of tiny blood vessels a tumor needs to grow, thus halting or
shrinking the tumor. In early human testing these inhibitors have produced mixed
results, but the most powerful ones are not yet ready for patient trials.

   Still other patients, including some with lung, head, and neck cancers, are
undergoing gene therapy. Dr. Jack Roth, chairman of thoracic surgery at M.D.
Anderson, is leading trials in which a gene that is often defective in cancer
cells, called P53, is being ferried into tumor cells by means of a virus, in
hopes of halting malignant growth.

   It is P53's job to detect cells with damaged DNA, and either keep them from
dividing until they are repaired, or nudge them along a path to programmed
self-destruction before they can do harm. Mutant P53 genes, by contrast, allow
damaged cells to keep on reproducing, which can lead to cancer as the cells
accumulate genetic damage.

   "If you restore P53 function" with gene therapy, "it could trigger this cell
death" and turn off cancerous growth, Roth says. The therapy appears safe and
has shown some activity against tumors in early tests, he adds.

Strategy takes aim at broken cells

    Another strategy aims not to repair cells with broken P53s, but to wipe them
out. A bioengineered virus called ONYX-015 specifically attacks and kills cells
with mutant P53 genes. Scientists reported this spring that in combination with
two standard chemotherapy drugs, the virus has shrunk tumors of the head and
neck in 9 out of 10 patients in early trials.

   Cancer vaccines - the name for a strategy of revving up the immune system to
attack cancer cells - are also being tested here and at a number of academic
centers and biotech companies. Efforts to harness the immune system to fight
cancer has had a long history and few real triumphs, but scientists now know
more about how the complex immune defenses work and are more optimistic that
selective and powerful vaccines can be made.

   One vaccine that mobilizes the immune system against deadly melanoma is
heading toward possible approval in Europe and Canada by the end of the year and
perhaps next year in the United States. Called Melacine, it has been tested in
patients with advanced melanoma who have dismal prognoses. It has proven to be
as effective in extending survival by a few months as is the standard four-drug
chemotherapy treatment. But Melacine is much less punishing in its side effects,
say officials of RIBI ImmunoChem Research, Inc., the vaccine's makers.

   In contrast to the broadly toxic chemotherapies in use today, the new agents
have been precisely designed to attack, or in some cases, correct, specific
genetic changes that turn normal cells into malignant ones.

   "Up to now, we have cured a series of cancers that affect young people," says
Dr. Donald Coffey, of the Johns Hopkins Cancer Center, referring to diseases
like leukemia and Hodgkin's disease in which the war on cancer has had its
greatest triumphs to date. "We did this with drugs that blocked DNA synthesis" -
meaning they killed tumor cells, but often hammered normal cells as well,
causing terrible side effects.

   But now, scientists are developing drugs aimed at blocking the effects of
mutant, cancer-causing oncogenes, restoring broken tumor-suppressor genes, and
overcoming malfunctioning DNA-repair genes. They hope these therapies will bring
outlaw cancer cells back into good behavior or prod irrevocably damaged cells
into apoptosis, or cell suicide.

   If conventional chemo is like bombing an entire city to kill off a guerrilla
force, the newer drugs aim to pick off the enemy and spare the civilians.

   "I've never seen so many ways to attack cancer," says Coffey. Indeed, a
survey this year by an industry group showed that of 350 biotech drugs under
development, 151 - more than one-third - target cancer. There were 30 for
melanoma alone, 20 for colo-rectal cancer, and 13 each for prostate and breast
cancers.

   And, as reports at this spring's meeting of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology reflected, the early tests of many of these agents are promising.

   "I've never seen so many positive results in my life," says Dr. Dan Von Hoff,
founder of ILEX Pharmaceuticals and an oncologist at the San Antonio Cancer
Institute. "The biology is beginning to pay off. Now you can sit down and look a
patient in the eye and say there's a good chance of this doing you good."

   Despite a flurry of media reports this spring proclaiming that a cancer
"cure" might be at hand, few scientists will touch that word. Sobered by decades
of experience with cancer's Houdini-like ability to escape and survive,
researchers say the new agents may realistically prove more successful at taming
cancer than destroying it.

   "We may have cures someday," says Samuel Waksal, president of ImClone Systems
Inc. in New York, which is developing targeted cancer therapies, "but the types
of approaches we're developing now may make cancer a chronic disease. We would
like to kill every cancer cell, but we're recognizing that if you can keep
people alive for 30 more years, using drugs with few side effects - that's
pretty dramatic.

   "And," he adds, "that's a goal that is achievable in the near term." Even in
the next two or three years, "the world of cancer treatment is going to change."

   For ethical reasons, the newest drugs are tried first in patients with
hopelessly advanced cancer. Despite the grim odds, one such drug is already
sparking a glimmer of hope for patients with aggressive, incurable brain tumors
called glioblastomas. The drug, called SU101, blocks an overactive cell
growth-signaling pathway in brain cells and has kept a few patients alive for
one or two years. Under normal circumstances, they would have died within three
months, says Dr. Eric Wong, a neuro-oncologist at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, where the drug is about to begin testing.

   Last month, Nelba MacMurdo, 66, of Canton, finished her first seven-week
course of SU101: Her children had read about the experimental drug in a
newsmagazine and sought out Wong. Whether it has affected the brain tumor whose
tentacles couldn't be surgically removed wasn't immediately clear. But her
daughter, Leslie, says she has experienced few side effects and has felt
"renewed zest just knowing there's something that could potentially help her."

   No one expects any of the new biological therapies, as effective as they may
prove, to do the job alone. Most researchers believe they will work best when
combined with other therapies and with standard chemotherapy drugs to attack the
elusive cancer cell on many fronts.

   "We don't have to hit a home run to cure people" with newer agents, says Dr.
Christopher Logothetis at M.D. Anderson. "We just have to get a base hit,
because we already have one with chemotherapy - this could give us a run batted
in. That's why many of us are really optimistic that we're going to be able to
change the course of this illness."

   For example, ImClone's cancer drug C225, based on an antibody discovery by
Mendelsohn, is being tested in combination with radiation for head and neck
cancers. The radiation damages the cell while the C225 antibody blocks a
chemical growth factor, the EGF receptor, that the cell needs in order to
divide. The one-two attack has proven successful in halting tumors in the early
tests, says Mendelsohn.

   If they are cautiously optimistic that the new era of rationally designed
drugs and targeted therapies may yield major inroads into the disease, the
researchers are also mindful of the potential pitfalls.

   Normal cells in body tissues are of one kind, but cancer cells - even in the
same tumor - are genetically diverse, points out Coffey at Johns Hopkins.
"Diversity allows cancer to survive" by becoming resistant to drugs that attack
just one type of cell, he says. "Cancer is an evolutionary process that spins
off variants you can't control."

   Angiogenesis inhibitors may get around this obstacle because they don't
attack the cancer cell itself, only its blood supply, and the blood vessel cells
that are the target don't develop resistance. In animal experiments, resistance
to the angiogenesis agents has been remarkably absent.

Hurdles remain before drugs reach market

    But there are other hurdles. Turning experimental proteins from the
laboratory into commercial-scale drugs is difficult. Many of the proteins are
large, cn cancer, mice experiments still often don't predict what a drug will do
in humans, and the search for still better animal models continues.

   Says Dr. Martin Abeloff, director of the Johns Hopkins Cancer Center: "We're
all excited about the potential of really being able to attack this disease in a
more scientifically-based approach. But we also have to be cautious, because
we're learning about the complexity of these processes."

   And, he says, it's not as if cancer treatment is moving into a "different
universe."

   "I don't feel like what we've done in the past" with conventional treatments
will be rendered obsolete, he says.  "We'll never abandon them, even when we
have the new biologically-based approaches . . . we'll use them together." Globe
Online

   This series is available on the Globe Online at http://www.boston.com. Use
the keyword: Cancer.

 Data on drug trials

    Cancer patients typically rely on their doctors to tell them about new and
experimental treatments, but physicians may not know about everything that's out
there. And many consumers want to find out for themselves what investigational
therapies are available.

   For patients like this, the National Cancer Institute recently launched an
Internet site providing access to a database of all clinical trials of cancer
treatments. With a computer and modem, anyone can read informative articles
about clinical trials and how to decide whether to volunteer for them. And users
can search the database to find a trial involving a particular type of cancer or
a certain drug.

   At present, only 1 to 3 percent of all cancer patients participate in
clinical trials. Mary McCabe of the NCI's office of clinical research promotion
says this is due in large part to a lack of publicity, and the institute hopes
the Internet site will help change this.

   "What we hope is that a consideration of being in a clinical trial will
become part of good cancer care," says McCabe. The NCI has also been talking
with various health care plans in hopes of persuading more of them to cover the
costs of investigational treatments, which many now exclude.

   The NCI site's Internet address is http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov

   For consumers without access to a computer, the information is available in
paper format. Call the NCI public hotline: 1-800-4CANCER.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/SUZANNE KREITER/LESLIE MACMURDO COMFORTS
her mother, Nelba MacMurdo, 66, of Canton, as she undergoes drug therapy for a
brain tumor.  2. GLOBE PHOTO/BRETT COOMER/JIM HASSMANN was "feeling better
within a week" after switching to the experimental Campath-1H to treat chronic
lymphocytic leukemia that had not responded to conventional drugs.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1998


                             1882 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     August 2, 1998, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1010 words

HEADLINE: SISTERS BEAT THE ODDS TO BE MODEL SURVIVORS

BYLINE: GENE WARNER; News Staff Reporter

BODY:


   When former Cincinnati quarterback Boomer Esiason hosted the major
fund-raising dinner for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in New York City last
winter, he didn't choose any beefy football star or slick broadcaster to deliver
the keynote speech.

   He picked K.C. Bryan of Buffalo, now entering her sophomore year at the
University of Richmond.

   Esiason couldn't have found a better role model for his young son, Gunnar,
who has cystic fibrosis.

   "When I was diagnosed with CF at age 31/2, my future was uncertain," Ms.
Bryan told about 500 people at the February dinner. "My parents had one goal for
me, and that was to graduate from high school. They knew that if I graduated, at
least they would know what kind of adult person I would become, and that was the
most important thing to them. Due to great medical advances and a little luck, I
have exceeded their goal."

   And now, she told the fund-raising crowd, she's having the time of her life.

   At Richmond, she works as a waitress eight hours a week, plays club soccer,
softball and intramural sports, manages the girls varsity soccer team and
coaches a girls' first- and second-grade basketball team. She also goes to class
in her spare time, she kidded.

   "Because of the research and your support, I can now look into my future and
see many wonderful things to come," Ms. Bryan told the group. "At times, I am
still scared by the mortality aspect of the disease, but the confidence I have
that researchers are making great strides gives me strength. I want to thank you
for taking a risk on CF research. With your money, you are buying a dream."

   The crowd gave her a standing ovation.

   After dinner, Esiason told Ms. Bryan he was mad at her.

   "Why?" she asked.

   "Because you stole the show," he replied.

   Every day in Western New York, people like Ms. Bryan overcome tremendous
obstacles -- physical, emotional, even cultural -- in making contributions to
our community and achieving their own individual dreams.

   Ms. Bryan and her sister Ginny have beaten the odds.

   When K.C. was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis -- an inherited disease usually
marked by chronic lung infections and digestive problems -- the average life
expectancy for such children was 19. Relying on improved medication that she
takes faithfully and refusing to let her disease defeat her, Ms. Bryan has
reached 19 without being hospitalized.

   But she's only half the story in the Bryan family. Ginny, who will be a
junior at Nichols School, also battles serious physical problems.

   At 21/2, Ginny couldn't walk or talk. She was diagnosed with cerebral palsy,
a label that stayed with her until she was 10. Doctors then determined she had
hereditary benign chorea, a neurological condition marked by involuntary shaking
on her right side.

   "I felt embarrassed," she said of her elementary-school years. "I didn't feel
like I was a normal person. When people focused attention on me, I'd shake. If I
felt nervous, I'd shake. If I was excited, I'd shake."

   Then, in fourth grade, after seeing a puppet show on cerebral palsy, Ginny
gave a speech to her class about her rare condition, which affects less than 100
families in America.

   Close friends, teachers and family have learned how to give her a little
extra help, whether it's carrying her lunch tray, pouring a glass of water for
her, encouraging her on the soccer field or realizing she has trouble writing
cursive.

   For the Bryan sisters, the key to their active, athletic lives may be their
parents, Judy and Rick Bryan. Starting with K.C.'s diagnosis, the Bryans set out
to raise as normal children as possible.

   They've always been there to support their daughters, when K.C. gets scared
about her mortality or Ginny has trouble with day-to-day tasks. But they've also
taught them to take control of their physical conditions; from the age of 31/2
K.C. has been responsible for taking her medication.

   "I think our tactic has been to not think of our girls as being limited by
disease, and thus rush to protect them or apologize for them or feel sorry for
them," said Bryan, Nichols headmaster. "Judy and I have been overwhelmed by
their courage, their willingness to try new things, to not feel sorry for
themselves and to think they can accomplish anything."

   The sisters feed off each other's strengths.

   "K.C. is my hero, because she's always been so open," Ginny said. "She's so
tough and so courageous, I know she's going to live for a long time. That helps
me with my own condition. I know if I try hard, I'll be able to achieve
everything I want to achieve."

   Ginny, 16, has a reputation for being doggedly determined in anything she
does. Her condition has made her work harder to succeed. That, in turn, gives
her a lot of pride.

   "Ginny's taught me a lot about persistence," her older sister said. "She
works hard to conquer everything she does."

   The Bryan family has become activists.

   The sisters' grandparents, Jim and Connie Brown of Piqua, Ohio, have raised
more than $ 1 million for cystic fibrosis research. K.C., working as an intern
for the Buffalo Bisons this summer, has organized a special Cystic Fibrosis
Night this Thursday when kids with the disease will get free tickets to the
game. She made speeches about the disease. And she and her friends have done
local fund-raising events.

   The sisters also serve as models for youths battling disability or disease.

   "Every day I wake up and I'm thankful I'm so healthy," Ms. Bryan said. "I'm
psyched that I can do what I want. I don't consider myself a role model, because
I'm just living my life."

   But she is a role model, a cystic fibrosis patient providing tangible proof
that afflicted kids can live active, happy lives well into adulthood. Research
advances in gene therapy bring hope for a possible cure and have Ms. Bryan
dreaming of living a long life.

   Her advice to others with cystic fibrosis: "Don't give up hope. There will be
a cure."

   As she told Esiason last year, "Boomer, everything's going to be OK. I live
the best life, and Gunnar can too."

GRAPHIC: ROBERT KIRKHAM/Buffalo News; Ginny, left, and K.C. Bryan have overcome
serious physical problems to reach their dreams and help their community.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1998


                             1883 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  August 2, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6; Column 3; Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: INVESTING IT;
Does a Roach Motel Have 5-Star Potential?

BYLINE: By ERIC HUBLER

BODY:

   MANY value investors say their goal is to buy "unloved" stocks. Now an
analyst with the challenge of covering an often unloved sector -- biotechnology
-- suggests going a step further, seeking bargains among stocks that are not
merely unloved, but downright loathed.

   Elizabeth Silverman of BancAmerica Robertson Stephens follows genomics
companies, a group within the biotechnology sector that has had more than its
share of unsuccessful initial public offerings of late.

    There's a reason for this. "When investors feel there's too much product --
too many I.P.O.'s -- the market window closes and the market for these stocks
just dries up," Ms. Silverman said.

   "Biotech is a very capital-intensive industry, so you always have companies
that need capital," she said. "It just becomes a supply-and-demand function that
investors can only invest in so many of these companies in any space of time.
And when that number gets to be too big, the capital tap, if you will, is shut
off."

   As a result, the stocks can fall from their initial offering price and become
so thinly traded that the Street calls them "roach motels" -- investors can get
in, but they can't get out. The stocks are sucked down, and big investors don't
want the shares because they are likely to be difficult to sell. A stock is
considered a roach motel when average daily trading volume slips below 40,000
shares, not counting the quarter just after the I.P.O.

   So, Ms. Silverman mused, what happens if the surrounding neighborhood
gentrifies? Can a roach motel become, say, the Waldorf-Astoria? Going back five
years, Ms. Silverman says she has found stocks that accomplished just that --
leaving roach motel status by climbing 50 percent or more above their offering
price. She detailed her findings in a recent report: "Why We Love So-Called
'Roach Motel' Stocks."

   "This is a reminder for all of us to look at history and remind ourselves
that there are stocks that didn't look like they would be very good stocks that
ended up being excellent stocks," she said.

   Not explicitly spelled out in the report, however, is that to find 11
successful escapes from roach motels, she had to canvas more than 100 stocks.
Hardly inspiring odds.

   In the report, Ms. Silverman singled out Gene Logic, which was taken public
at $8 a share in November 1997 and has gone as high as $10.125, but now drifts
around $6. Volume surged to 1.6 million shares the day it hit its high, but only
25,000 shares generally change hands daily.

   Ms. Silverman likes Gene Logic for the usual reasons: good management, good
product pipeline, good contracts in place. "We think this 'roach' of today is
destined to be a star of tomorrow," she wrote.

   (The information at the end of the report notes that Robertson Stephens was
in the syndicate that brought Gene Logic public.)

   Next, Ms. Silverman says, is to identify 1998 I.P.O.'s that may become roach
motels. Although it is still early, she advises keeping an eye on Combichem,
which uses computers to discover new drugs, and Transgene, a French gene therapy
company.

   (Robertson Stephens helped underwrite Transgene, too, according to the
report.)

   Still, like emptying a roach motel, this type of investing is best suited to
those with strong stomachs. Ms. Silverman says the average residency of her
success stories in roach motel status is seven quarters, and one took as long as
16 quarters to check out and subsequently prosper. She writes that "we don't
think this is too bad," given the nature of biotechnology investing, but it may
lead investors to ask whether they really want to park their money in a class of
stocks that often turn out to be, well, sticky.

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Tom Bloom)

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1998


                             1884 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      August 1, 1998 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: OHIO CONSUMERS PARING CREDIT-CARD DEBT

BYLINE: FROM STAFF REPORTS

BODY:

   A drop of 4.3 percent in the Ohio Consumer Debt Index for June suggests that
consumers are trying to reduce their debt after a period of higher credit-card
use, Ohio State University economists say. The index, compiled by Ohio State's
Survey Research Unit, fell to 84.1 in June from 88.4 in May. The June 1988 level
remained higher than the 82.9 measure from a year ago. The index was set at 100
in January 1997. Ohio State computes the index from data collected in a
statewide monthly household telephone survey. The most substantial decrease
occurred in the percentage of respondents who carried a credit-card balance,
down to 36.6 percent in June from 41 percent in May.

   INSURANCE CONVERSION APPROVED

   The Ohio Department of Insurance approved Ohio National Life Insurance Co.'s
application to become a mutual insurance holding company. House Bill 370,
enacted in 1997, allows for mutual insurance companies to reorganize into mutual
insurance holding company systems, allowing the company additional access to
capital through stock offerings. The state agency will maintain authority over
the holding company to be formed, Ohio National Mutual Holdings Inc., and the
subsidiary to be formed, Ohio National Financial Services Inc.

   LUBRIZOL PURCHASE COMPLETE

   Lubrizol Corp. in Wickliffe said it completed the purchase of BP Chemicals'
Adibis lubricant and fuel additives business, the company's largest acquisition
ever. Adibis is particularly strong in Europe. Lubrizol, which didn't disclose
the terms of the deal, said it would strengthen its fuel additives business and
lubricant additives technology portfolio.

   CLEVELAND WATER BONDS

   The nation's two major bond rating agencies, Moody's and Standard & Poor's,
upgraded their rating on bonds issued by Cleveland's Division of Water. The
bonds were assigned a rating of Aa3 by Moody's and AA- by Standard & Poor's, the
highest ratings in the Division of Water's 144-year history. Both agencies
upgraded their rating in connection with the upcoming issuance of about $295.6
million in Waterworks Improvement and Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series I, 1998.

   COPERNICUS NAMES CFO

   Copernicus Gene Systems Inc. in Beachwood, which is developing technology in
gene therapy, named Thomas F. Barnish its vice president-finance and chief
financial officer. The former director of corporate finance for Medeva
Pharmaceuticals in Great Britain, Barnish has had over 25 years of experience in
the health-care industry and will help "develop numerous external partnering
relationships" for the company, said Dr. Robert F. Butz, president and chief
economic officer of Copernicus.

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

   LOCAL TICKER

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1998


                             1885 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      August 1, 1998 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: CWRU AWARDED GENETICS GRANTS;
$13 MILLION WILL FUND STUDIES OF DISEASES

BYLINE: By BRIAN E. ALBRECHT; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Grants totaling more than $13 million have been awarded to the department of
genetics at Case Western Reserve University's School of Medicine. It is the
largest chunk of funding received since the department was expanded in 1992 to
conduct major research in human genetics.

   Huntington F. Willard, department chairman, said the recent awards brought
department grant-funding to $16 million annually, up from $2 million per year in
1992. "This is the biggest jump forward we've ever taken, but hopefully not the
last," he said.

   "It really puts us in an elite class, among the top two or three programs
nationally in genetics," he said, referring to other leading genetic research
efforts being conducted at Stanford University in California and at Washington
University in St. Louis.

   Researchers here and elsewhere are up to their belt buckles in genes - the
thousands of units of heredity located on 23 pairs of chromosomes in each human
cell, carrying the chemical instructions that determine an organism's traits.
These instructions are stored in DNA, the chief substance of each chromosome.

   Scientists are trying to identify the function and map the location of each
gene, so that hereditary diseases can be identified and treated.

   "Much of the work in all of these grants is to take information from the
Human Genome Project and ask how we might diagnose human genetic disease and
treat it," Willard said.

   He also noted that the largest of the recent grants - $6.4 million - will
enable CWRU to examine genetic variations within the human population - "how
your [DNA] sequence differs from mine, and whether that sequence has anything to
do with diseases we're likely to develop, such as heart disease, cancer or
diabetes."

   He said there are several million conceivable DNA sequence variations among
individuals, and the challenge lies in determining how many of those variations
represent important biological functions.

   The bulk of the grants (more than $10 million) were provided by the National
Institutes of Health. Willard said much of that money will cover salaries of
researchers; 20 new faculty members have been recruited since the department's
expansion in 1992.

   A $1.3 million grant from the W.M. Keck Foundation of Los Angeles will be
used for equipment, robotics and informatics (use of computers to analyze data)
in mapping and identifying gene functions.

   Other funds were targeted to specific projects, such as a $719,500 March of
Dimes grant for development of an efficient delivery system for gene therapy to
combat genetic diseases, NIH grants for the study of the genetics of testicular
cancer (the most common form of cancer in men age 15-35) and placental
development (placental failure is one of the most common causes of embryonic
death).

   Willard said an Ohio Board of Regents' $277,600 grant represented state
encouragement of the economic spin-offs that biomedical research can create.
"There is an economic impact [of this work]. We hire new people, and it attracts
small biotechnology firms to Northeast Ohio," he said.

   But more important is the potential impact on public health care, he added.
"I think the public will see - within the next five, 10 or 20 years - changes in
how we approach disease, even in a pre-symptomatic stage to identify people at
risk before they actually get ill," Willard said.

   He noted that such work, based on genetic research, was already being done in
genetic testing of individuals for colon and breast cancer. "We're beginning to
see the fruits of that combination between basic science and clinical care," he
said.

   "That's just the beginning of what we might be able to do with heart disease,
diabetes and a whole range of other disorders we know are genetic in nature and
mainly arise later in life."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: NO CREDIT; Willard

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1998


                             1886 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    August 01, 1998, Saturday, Final Edition
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3645 words

HEADLINE: Volunteers at Risk In Medical Studies; Complex Research Projects
Strain System of Safeguards

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   It seemed a stunning example of medical research run amok: Physicians in New
York offered to give Toys R Us gift certificates to 36 healthy black and
Hispanic elementary school pupils if the children agreed to enroll in a medical
study that required them to take a potentially life-threatening drug.

   The three-year study, recently revealed by a patient advocacy group, brought
back memories of the infamous Tuskegee experiments that came to light in the
1970s, in which doctors withheld syphilis treatments from black men so they
could observe the disease's progression. Congress quickly convened two hearings,
and federal officials launched an investigation.

   Now, as additional information has begun to emerge, officials are realizing
that the facts involved in the New York study are much more nuanced and
complicated than was initially thought. It's no longer clear whether the study
endangered the children or was racist.

   Indeed, more than anything, the controversy highlights the surprisingly thin
line that can separate a justifiable human experiment from a research abuse. And
it shows that important issues relating to the ethics of human research remain
unresolved, even as U.S. medical research is poised to expand at an
unprecedented rate.

   Medical research is changing dramatically. Modest studies aimed at answering
straightforward questions are giving way to large, complex research projects
freighted with social and ethical baggage, such as those relating to
reproductive technology or genetic predispositions.

   Public perceptions are shifting too. "Guinea pig" was once a pejorative term,
but many people with AIDS, cancer and other serious diseases are now demanding
access to experimental drugs as their best hope for survival.

   Those scientific and social changes have led to a sharp increase in the
number of people participating in experiments, and have strained the nation's
system of protections for research volunteers. With Congress now preparing to
double the budget of the National Institutes of Health in the next five years,
many legislators, ethicists and patient advocates believe it is time to upgrade
that fragile system.

   "It's a very special privilege to use human beings in research," said Vera
Hassner Sharav, the activist who first rang alarms about the New York study
three months ago. "It must not be handled cavalierly."

   Redefining the rules will not be easy, however, because human experimentation
raises profound moral questions, the answers to which have remained elusive even
to philosophers and ethicists who have pondered them for years:

   When, if ever, is it appropriate to conduct research on minors or the
mentally incompetent, who are by definition unable to give legal consent?

   If such research is inappropriate, then how can scientists develop drugs and
therapies for these needy and often underserved patient groups?

   Is there anything wrong with offering cash or other incentives to research
volunteers, since the volunteers themselves rarely benefit from the research?

   Or might incentives seduce poor or medically desperate people into taking
unwise risks, and perhaps foster the creation of an underclass of professional
human guinea pigs?

   "Research most often requires that some people get exposed to risk for the
sake of knowledge that will benefit others," said R. Alta Charo, a professor of
law at the University of Wisconsin at Madison. "But there are deeply troubling
questions about the distributive justice of how we decide who will bear that
risk and who will not."

   Evidence of Abuses

   No one knows how many people participate in human research in this country.
There is no central repository for such information, and no system for keeping
track of how many are harmed.

   But there is indirect evidence that abuses are taking place.

   In June, a Department of Health and Human Services report concluded that the
federal system for protecting human research subjects was breaking down. The
report found that institutional review boards (IRBs), which judge the scientific
and ethical merit of proposed human studies, are overburdened with work, staffed
by insufficiently trained people and subject to conflicts of interest.

   That report did not cite specific improprieties, but in 1995 the HHS Office
of the Inspector General reviewed human tests of four experimental medical
devices. In three out of four cases, physicians tested the devices in more
people than they were supposed to or continued the experiments longer than they
had permission to.

   Moreover, in half the cases, volunteers were not adequately informed of the
risks. In some cases, people were asked to sign consent forms only after the
experimental devices had been surgically implanted inside them.

   Additional evidence of trouble arose last year as several people testified
before the National Bioethics Advisory Commission about alleged abuses they or
their family members had endured in psychiatric research studies.

   Robert and Gloria Aller of Los Angeles described a University of California
study in which their schizophrenic son, Gregory, had enrolled. Gregory had been
doing well, earning a 3.8 grade point average in college and working 15 hours a
week. But the study, which started in 1989, required him to discontinue his
medication. Deprived of his medicine, he became confused and violent and lost
ability to concentrate. Years later, Robert Aller said, Gregory still has not
fully recovered.

   Only after a federal investigation was launched did the Allers learn that
more than 90 percent of previous subjects in that experiment had also relapsed,
a fact they believe would have dissuaded Gregory from enrolling, had he been
told about it. One participant, Tony LaMadrid, did not survive the experiment.
During a portion of the study that did not include regular doctor visits, he
jumped to his death from the roof of UCLA's engineering building.

   "They claim that care in a research setting is better than the deficient care
you'd get in the community," Aller said in an interview. "But [LaMadrid] was
merely seen as a source of data."

   A report by the federal Office for Protection From Research Risks (OPRR)
criticized that study's consent forms for failing to properly warn participants
that the research was likely to trigger a relapse. Now the Aller and LaMadrid
families are suing the university.

   "The current system was built for a research world that does not exist any
more," said George F. Grob, an HHS deputy inspector general. "It is brittle,
strained and I think even cracked. We certainly need a better one."

   Children as Subjects

   The New York case, which involved minority children age 6 to 10, highlights
many of the issues that ethicists and regulators will face as they consider how
to fix that system.

   The research, which ended in 1995, was designed to study the biology and
sociology of criminal behavior. Physicians at the New York State Psychiatric
Institute and three other hospitals recruited the younger brothers of
adolescents who had been arrested for various crimes. The goal was to identify
which younger brothers might be at increased risk for trouble themselves, and
intervene with counseling or other methods before it was too late.

   As part of the study, researchers gave each younger sibling a dose of a drug
called fenfluramine to help measure levels of a brain hormone implicated in
antisocial behavior. When the work was published last year, it caught the
attention of Sharav, director of Citizens for Responsible Care in Psychiatry and
Research.

   Sharav objected to several aspects of the study.

   First there was the issue of using minors in a study that was nontherapeutic;
that is, a study intended to answer general scientific questions and not to
benefit the children themselves. Since children cannot fully evaluate for
themselves the risks and benefits of participating in a study, some argue, they
should never be subjected to a research risk if they do not stand to personally
benefit. Others, however, argue that the only way to develop new treatments for
children is to study them directly.

   Federal regulations try to address those conflicting views by precluding, in
almost all instances, the use of minors in any nontherapeutic research that
poses a "more than minimal risk." That sounds reasonable, Sharav said, except
that "nobody has defined 'risk' or 'minimal' or 'more than minimal.' " And as
the New York case shows, it is not obvious how to distinguish between those
levels of risk.

   For example, fenfluramine was never approved for use in minors. And although
it was approved for use as a diet drug in adults, it was pulled off the market
by the Food and Drug Administration in September after it caused several deaths.
In addition, as part of the fenfluramine test, the children had to fast for 18
hours and had a catheter placed in a vein from which multiple blood samples were
drawn over several hours, a procedure that left some feeling nauseous and
headachy.

   Those details alone have convinced some people that such a test is
unconscionable in children. The fact that it was approved by an IRB, said Rep.
Christopher Shays (R-Conn.) at a hearing last month, is evidence that "the
current system of bioethical review has failed miserably."

   Not so, replied B. Timothy Walsh, co-chair of the Psychiatric Institute's
institutional review board. Scientists have for many years used fenfluramine as
a brain hormone stimulant in children with no apparent ill effects, Walsh told
Congress. The drug's connection to heart damage was unknown when the experiments
were conducted. And in any case, only a single small dose was used in the study,
as compared with the much higher doses and longer periods of use that, when
combined with another drug, have been shown to be dangerous.

   All told, the fenfluramine test posed a risk no greater than other "routine
physical tests," concluded Danny Pine, one of the researchers in the study, in a
1995 memo to the institute's IRB.

   As it turns out, the institute's IRB deemed the study as posing "more than
minimal risk" but approved it anyway, a decision that highlights another
ambiguity in the regulations on human research. According to federal rules,
"more than minimal" research risks are allowed in children only if the study
promises to yield useful information about the children's "disorder or
condition" (and even then the research must pose no more than a "minor" risk
above minimal risk).

   But what disorder or condition afflicted these children? The researchers
noted in their study proposal that the younger siblings of juvenile delinquents
have increased odds of eventually getting into trouble themselves. But it would
be a stretch, critics said, to consider these youngsters as having a "disorder."

   Then there is the issue of whether it is appropriate to limit a study to
certain racial groups.

   The New York researchers initially proposed conducting their study on black
and Hispanic children only. Their rationale remains unclear (and they have
refused to speak to reporters), but scientists often try to work with as
homogeneous a population as possible, lest racial or other variables confound
their results.

   The IRB rejected that aspect of the study design and demanded that whites be
eligible as well. Now investigators want to know why, in the end, only blacks
and Hispanics were included. Was it a reflection of the mostly minority
population of the neighborhood where the study was conducted, as Walsh has
suggested, or were whites systematically screened out of the study?

   The New York researchers also offered the youngsters' parents $ 100 for their
children's participation, and approached the children directly, offering them $
25 gift certificates for toys and telling them that their participation would
earn money for their families. That raises another issue that has dogged human
research for decades: recruitment techniques.

   Cash payments and other incentives are commonplace in medical research. But
they are offered as compensation for a person's time, not as a fee for accepting
risk, said Gary B. Ellis, head of the OPRR, and amounts are supposed to be
modest enough so as not to tempt people to waive their better judgment.

   The line between acceptable and exorbitant compensation is subjective, but
the issue goes beyond the question of "How much?" Subtle issues of power must
also be considered. When the youngsters were told that their families would be
given cash, for example, might some of them have worried that their parents,
mostly poor, would be angry if they refused to participate?

   Moreover, the parents were first contacted by researchers who had gotten
their names through the judicial system that had arraigned their older children.
Might some parents have worried that a decision not to participate in the study
might adversely affect their children's upcoming court cases?

   The June HHS report cites several examples of recruitment ads that are
decidedly lopsided in their descriptions of the risks and benefits of
participation in research. One newspaper ad read: "Speed or Cocaine? Need help
getting clean? Free Treatment & Medication! Repeat callers welcome!!! Get Paid
$$$." As usual for such ads, there is no mention of risk.

   "The kind of ads we've seen present a real problem," said Mark Yessian, a
regional HHS inspector general. "When you see an emphasis on cash payments and
benefits, and little or no mention of risks, that's a real concern."

   Of course, ads are just the first round of recruitment; if the system is
working well, then researchers will explain the risks in proper detail when a
volunteer arrives. But as Gregory Aller and others learned, full and fair
disclosure is not always provided.

   "This is research. It is not standard treatment," Yessian said. "It does
involve risk and one should fully recognize that from the start."

   Glenn's Principles

   The New York study is now under investigation by the OPRR, and a final
judgment is not expected until fall. But the lack of easy answers to the
questions raised by the case suggest it's going to be difficult to draft new,
ethically sensitive protections for human research subjects.

   The National Bioethics Advisory Commission has spent much of the past year
analyzing the various ethical implications of human research. It has called for
a more thorough informed consent process for all volunteers and tighter review
of research, both public and private, by scientific and ethical review boards.
Those are also the central principles of a human subjects protection bill
sponsored by Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) that has languished since its introduction
last year.

   The commission has also expressed concern about the lack of explicit
protections for the mentally ill, who frequently are subjected to "wash out"
studies, in which helpful medicines are withdrawn, and "provocation" studies, in
which symptoms are intentionally exacerbated for study. A commission report, due
this fall and presaged already in a public draft, calls for added protections
for this vulnerable population.

   Meanwhile, a bill introduced in June by Rep. Edolphus Towns (D-N.Y.) would
require that all biomedical or behavioral studies involving minors or people
with mental disabilities be made public on a regular basis, a move that would
facilitate community oversight of such research.

   But it remains to be seen whether such steps will pass muster with the
biomedical research lobby, or even with some patients. At a recent congressional
hearing, the Association of American Medical Colleges and the Pharmaceutical
Researchers and Manufacturers of America argued that the nation's system of
research protections is working well. They cautioned against adding new
restrictions that could slow the advancement of life-saving research.

   Many patients too are wary of government efforts to restrict access to
medical research.

   "We have a society that tends to view everything that's new as better, and
people are militating for access to these drugs, saying, 'Who are you to be
protecting me against my own choices?' " said professor Charo.

   Unfortunately, Charo and others said, while some trials are indeed testing
tomorrow's miracle drugs, others are testing useless or even harmful compounds,
or are so poorly designed that they won't yield any useful information at all.
Lawmakers and the public eventually will have to decide to what extent the
government should help people distinguish between those kinds of research, and
to what extent people will have to heed a new version of an old aphorism:
"Volunteer beware."

   LOOPHOLES WEAKEN THE 'COMMON RULE'

   At the core of the system that protects people participating in research is
the "common rule." Seventeen federal agencies subscribe to that rule, which,
among other things, requires that human studies conducted by those agencies be
reviewed in advance by an independent board, and all volunteers be fully
informed of any risks.

   Universities and other institutions funded by any of those agencies must also
adhere to those protections, as must private enterprises developing products for
which Food and Drug Administration approval will be sought.

   But that leaves a lot of human research unregulated, including all federal
research funded by agencies that are not a party to the common rule, including,
for example, the Labor Department and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. In
addition, all privately funded research not heading for the FDA is excluded,
including the vast majority of human studies conducted at fertility clinics,
weight-loss clinics, psychotherapists' offices, genetic testing companies and
plastic surgeons' offices.

   In 1994, President Clinton ordered all federal agencies to come into
compliance with the common rule or halt their human research. Four years later,
however, no additional agencies have signed on to the rule. And according to one
knowledgeable federal official, there is "no evidence that any department or
agency has suspended a single activity."

   Bureaucratic complications make it nearly impossible for the 17 agencies that
subscribe to the common rule to close the loopholes that remain in that rule.
Federal regulations require that even minor changes must be independently
considered and approved by all 17 agencies, a cumbersome process that can take
years under the best of circumstances.

   Critics of the system have called for two major changes. One is to move the
Office for Protection From Research Risks (OPRR), which oversees federally
funded research, out of its low-level position in the National Institutes of
Health to a higher-ranking position, perhaps in the office of the secretary of
health and human services, where it might gain the clout it needs to fulfill its
wide responsibility to protect U.S. human research subjects.

   A significant increase in staff also would make sense, according to several
experts outside the office. The OPRR currently has 70 complaints on its
investigative agenda but only one full-time investigator.

   The second major change advocated by some is to enact broad legislation that
would extend the federal protections of the common rule to all research
volunteers, including people in privately financed studies.

   ABOUT THIS SERIES

   Biomedical research is proceeding at breathtaking speed.

   Geneticists are gaining insights into how genes work. Biologists are
unmasking the mysteries of how a tiny clump of cells develops into a fully
formed human. Immunologists are deciphering the complexities of the body's
defense systems.

   The research is yielding many potential benefits. Doctors can identify people
at risk for genetic diseases and fashion strategies to save their lives.
Reproductive biologists can help infertile couples have children. Researchers
can engineer animals with organs that may be transplanted into humans.

   But as science speeds ahead, it often pushes the edges of society's readiness
to cope with its consequences. Increasingly, research creates possibilities
before the accompanying ethical, social and legal ramifications have been
resolved. In a series of occasional articles, The Washington Post is exploring
these issues. Today's installment, the last in the series, examines whether
people are adequately protected when they volunteer for medical research.

   The previous installments, which were published Oct. 12 and Nov. 24, 1997,
and Feb. 8-9, March 22 and June 7, 1998, examined the use of gene therapy for
"cosmetic purposes," the possibility of making genetic changes before
conception, aggressive measures for harvesting organs for transplantation,
fertility research and its social implications, and genetically engineering mice
for research.

   SUBJECTS OF SCRUTINY

   Federal regulations governing medical research involving human beings apply
only to studies funded by the 17 federal agencies that adhere to the so-called
common rule, and to private enterprises developing drugs or medical devices for
which Food and Drug Administration approval will be sought.

   Among those not covered by these protections are some human studies funded
by:

   * Colleges and universities not receiving federal research funds

   * In vitro fertilization clinics

   * Weight-loss or diet clinics

   * Physician, dentist and psychotherapist offices

   * Corporate and industrial health, safety and fitness programs

   * Developers of genetic tests

   * Department of Labor

   * Nuclear Regulatory Commission

   Some research organizations are being criticized for overstating the benefits
and understating the risks in their solicitations for human test subjects. Above
are two advertisements on a Philadelphia subway car that were cited in a recent
Department of Health and Human Services report.

   SOURCE: Health and Human Services Department


CORRECTION-DATE: August 25, 1998, Tuesday, Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An Aug. 1 story about human research stated that Tony LaMadrid, a schizophrenia
patient, committed suicide while enrolled in a University of California at Los
Angeles drug-withdrawal study that did not include regular doctor visits. In
fact, LaMadrid completed the drug-withdrawal study 33 months earlier and died
while he was a subject in a related UCLA study. Although doctors were available
to patients in that study, regular visits with LaMadrid did not occur.

GRAPHIC: Illustration, TWP; Photo, KIM KULISH/SABA FOR TWP, Robert Aller, left,
says his son Gregory still has not recovered rom a University of California
study.  Gregory Aller, left, enrolled in a University of California study that
required schizophrenics such as himself to discontinue their medication. His
father Robert, right, who says Gregory has not fully recovered, is suing the
university.

LOAD-DATE: August 01, 1998


                             1887 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 31, 1998, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: Finding may aid in gene therapy

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Maine

BODY:

   A scientist has stunned geneticists here by describing his success with a
powerful new technique for rewriting the DNA code in the cells of animals,
plants and humans. The technique, he says, could revolutionize human gene
therapy and agricultural biotechnology.

   The geneticists, although excited about the prospect of shortcuts in making
animal models of human diseases and in developing cures for inherited diseases,
remain cautious because many labs have been unable to get the method to work.

   Some of the researchers attending the annual Short Course in Human and
Mammalian Genetics at the Jackson Laboratory here said they were eager to get
back to their labs and try their hand at correcting DNA mutations.

   "If it's only one-tenth as efficient as was presented, this will
revolutionize what we do in our labs," said Lawrence Brody, a scientist at the
National Institute for Human Genome Research, saying it would vastly speed the
creation of animals with specific genetic characteristics that mimic human
diseases.

   The new technology was presented here by Dr. Clifford J. Steer, a liver
specialist at the University of Minnesota Medical School, who further developed
the method after it was invented in the mid 1990s by another scientist. Steer
called it "very, very powerful."

   "You can go in and alter a nucleotide," or a single unit of DNA code, "take
it out or reinsert it exactly where you want to," Steer said. With current
methods for altering genetic information, changing a single "letter" among
billions of nucleotides in a human cell is so cumbersome that it is not
attempted. Instead, researchers use viruses to carry in copies of entire normal
genes in an effort to replace defective genes. But that has not succeeded in
curing any human disease.

   By contrast, the new technique is conceptually like using the correcting key
on an electric typewriter: It can quickly correct or change up to three
"letters" of genetic code in a remarkably high percentage of cells containing
the DNA mistake. And the artificial molecule that rewrites the genetic script,
called a "chimeraplast," can be administered to the animal, plant or human
without using viruses, which raise many problems for gene therapy.

   Steer and his colleagues published a report last March in the journal Nature
Medicine on using the method to correct a mutant liver cell gene in rats. And,
he said, a company that owns the technology, Kimeragen Inc. of Newtown, Pa.,
hopes to test it in children with a rare and ultimately fatal liver disorder by
sometime next year.

   Steer, whose work is supported by the company, said that the method has
successfully treated a version in rats of the disorder, which is called
Crigler-Najjar disease. The disease affects only a few hundred children but
causes a severe jaundice that eventually affects the brain, causing retardation
and death.

   Despite the potential applications in a wide range of genetic diseases,
cancer, AIDS and in changing traits in agricultural crops and livestock, some
scientists remain skeptical until the technique is shown to be reliably
reproducible.

   Steer said yesterday that the labs that have failed did not use chimeraplasts
of the necessary high quality.  The ones he uses are made by Boston Biosystems
in Bedford, Mass. And he said that one laboratory, at the University of Arizona
Health Science Center in Tucson, has published an abstract saying that it got
the method to work.

   Dr. Michael Blaase, who heads the gene therapy branch of the National
Institutes of Health, said in a telephone interview that he believes the
technique will prove to be "the breakthrough that I have been waiting for in my
two decades of work."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1998


                             1888 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      July 31, 1998, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 33 MetFront

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: Explorer for artery research;
Alvin man, 72, is first local participant in study

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   After three coronary artery bypass surgeries, a balloon angioplasty and a
special wire artery reinforcer, Roy Charles Wilkerson had few options when his
coronary arteries started to clog again.

   That is why the 72-year-old Alvin resident decided to become the first local
patient in a study by the University of Texas Medical School at Houston to
determine if a protein can help grow a new system of blood vessels to bring
blood to his heart.

   Wilkerson does not even know if he received the protein called vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or a placebo, but he was willing to try because
there were few risks and potential benefit.

   Finding patients like Wilkerson has been difficult, said Dr. Emerson Perin,
one of the Texas Heart Institute physicians who heads the local study. Dr. James
T. Willerson, chairman of medicine at UT and medical director of the Texas Heart
Institute, is the other local VEGF trial director.

   Wilkerson was the first of three to undergo the treatment since mid-June.
Nearly half of the patients screened for the study wash out, Perin said.

   Patients in the study are divided into high dose, low dose and placebo
groups.

   They cannot have any cancer or evidence of eye disease caused by diabetes.
VEGF can cause blood vessels to grow and feed cancers. It also can cause
overgrowth of blood vessels in the eye, resulting in blindness.

   It is also important that patients have no other good treatment options,
Perin said. "You don't want to rob people of a chance that might be offered
through standard therapy."

   The first dose of VEGF is given directly into the coronary arteries of the
heart while the next three are given intravenously in the arm.

   "We don't know if we need to give it intracoronary or IV," Perin said. There
is evidence that the damaged heart muscle has more receptors for VEGF, which
would make intravenous dosage effective, he said.

   But doctors who designed the trial decided to go with the dose in the
coronary arteries because "we want to make sure it gets where we need it," Perin
said.

   Results are not immediate, Perin warned. It takes months for the new arteries
to grow and deliver quantities of blood to heart muscle.

   The use of VEGF is a concrete example of the expanding new field called
angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels. While cardiologists are hoping to
stimulate new blood vessel growth, cancer specialists want to stop angiogenesis
because new blood vessels feed malignant tumors.

   Dr. Judah Folkman of Harvard Medical School is the father of angiogenesis and
is working on ways to block it in order to kill tumors.

   Dr. Jeffrey Isner at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston pioneered use
of the VEGF gene in people to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels in legs
where blood flow was dramatically curtailed.

   Now that the work with VEGF has moved into the heart, more institutions want
to get involved. Perin said nearly 20 have become part of the study. His study
is funded by Genentech Inc., the company that makes the angiogenesis-promoting
protein.

   Dr. Edward Massin, another THI cardiologist, said he has cared for Wilkerson
for 20 years. This was the patient's best chance, he said.

   Wilkerson and his wife, Kathryn, know the VEGF treatment is a long shot.

   But Wilkerson knows heart disease is frequently a family matter. His
grandfather and father died young of heart attacks.

   Even if it doesn't help him, "it would be wonderful for him to be part of
something that might help our daughter," Kathryn Wilkerson said.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Roy Charles Wilkerson is the first local patient with heart
disease who has undergone a gene therapy procedure designed to grow a new system
of blood vessels to bring blood to his heart. Wilkerson was the first of three
to undergo the treatment since mid-June (p. 34); E. Joseph Deering / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1998


                             1889 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     July 28, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C, Business Digest

LENGTH: 1286 words

HEADLINE: Lockheed to pay U.S. up to $ 75 million if missile keeps failing

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   Lockheed Martin agreed yesterday to pay the Army up to $ 75 million if its
developing theater missile defense system to protect U.S. forces continues
failing to strike its target. Tests of the system have failed.

   The cost-sharing deal had been expected since a May 12 test flight failure,
the fifth in a row, when an Army missile exploded in midair over the New Mexico
desert.

   Under the agreement, Lockheed Martin Missiles & Space must achieve three
direct hits in the five tests remaining under the $ 15 billion contract to make
a system capable of blowing up incoming enemy missiles in the sky by 2006.

French inflatable-boat maker buys British rival Avon

   Zodiac S.A. of Paris, one of the largest manufacturers of inflatable boats
and aeronautical safety equipment, says it has acquired British competitor Avon
Marine.

   Zodiac, which has its North American headquarters in Stevensville, did not
disclose financial terms. JJ. Marie, Zodiac's president and chief executive
officer, said the companies hope the acquisition results in significant growth.

   Avon, which has its U.S. offices in Florida and California, will continue to
operate under its current name and maintain a separate sales force. Zodiac will
have estimated sales of about $ 800 million this year, said Marie. Avon will
have sales of about $ 18.5 million.

Md. speeds probe of HMOs with Medicaid business

   Maryland Insurance Commissioner Steven B. Larsen vowed yesterday to
accelerate financial examinations of HMOs doing Medicaid work, in response to a
request from House Speaker Casper R. Taylor Jr. and Senate President Thomas V.
Mike Miller.

   State Medicaid rules require HMOs to spend 80 cents of each premium dollar on
care in the fiscal year that just ended, and 85 cents in this and future years.
Taylor said careful review of the spending "is really our only benchmark to
protect against excess profits or insolvency."

   Larsen said the insurance agency can charge companies up to $ 50,000 for a
solvency exam.

Funds from operations rise 50% at First Washington

   First Washington Realty Trust Inc. said yesterday that its funds from
operations rose 50 percent to $ 8.1 million in the second quarter, which ended
June 30.

   The Bethesda real estate investment trust, which owns 52 shopping centers,
attributed the increase to 96 percent occupancy and increased rental rates
throughout its portfolio.

   First Washington's funds from operations in the second quarter increased 10
percent, to 55 cents per share, on revenue of $ 18.1 million, a 40.3 percent
increase. For the first six months of 1998, it generated funds from operations
of $ 15.7 million, a 46.7 percent increase over a year ago, as revenue rose 38.1
percent, to $ 34.8 million.

Rockville mortgage firm more than doubles income

   Criimi Mae Inc. reported yesterday earnings of $ 22.4 million in the second
quarter, more than doubling the income the Rockville mortgage company generated
in the same period of 1997.

   The company attributed the 47 cents per share results to the acquisition of
more than $ 450 million in commercial mortgage-backed securities, and to a May
refinancing of $ 1.8 billion in similar securities at lower interest rates.

   For the first half of this year, Criimi Mae generated earnings of $ 37.4
million, 81 cents per share, a 35 percent gain as compared to the same period in
1997.

GenVec again offering stock in bid to raise $ 27 million

   GenVec Inc., a Rockville biotechnology company, will try again this week to
conduct an initial public offering. The IPO has been delayed several times by a
lackluster IPO market.

   The company, which wants to sell 2.5 million shares priced between $ 11 and $
13 a share, hopes to raise $ 27 million. It plans to use some of the money to
move into clinical trials its BioBypass gene therapy treatment for inadequate
blood flow to the heart.

   According to the IPO prospectus, Warner Lambert Co. will buy $ 5 million of
GenVec's common stock at the time of the IPO. The drug giant already owns $ 2
million of GenVec stock.

Broker, 6 employees to pay $ 1.05 million over trade delays

   Troster Singer Corp., one of the largest wholesale broker-dealers in the
United States, and six employees agreed yesterday to pay $ 1.05 million to
settle regulators' charges they deliberately delayed dozens of trade reports to
the Nasdaq stock market.

   The fine is the biggest ever imposed by the National Association of
Securities Dealers for late-trade reporting, and the largest to emerge from a
1996 Securities and Exchange Commission report that found numerous trading
violations on Nasdaq.

   The SEC report supported the commission's censure of the NASD, which runs
Nasdaq, for ignoring price collaboration by member brokerages that made millions
in illegal profits.

CEO of Corel Corp. probed over Canada insider trading

   Michael Cowpland, chief executive of money-losing software-maker Corel Corp.,
is being investigated by Canada's leading securities regulator for selling $
20.5 million (Canadian) in stock a month before the company's share price
plunged.

   The Ontario Securities Commission is probing trades made last year by the
flamboyant Cowpland, whose company has been under pressure since going toe to
toe with Microsoft Corp. in the office "suite" software market.

   Corel, once known mainly for its CorelDraw software, has been posting large
losses by pitting its WordPerfect software bundle -- which includes a word
processing program, a spreadsheet and other products -- against Microsoft's
Office software suite.

Rockefeller, other investors get fraud case dropped

   Goldman, Sachs & Co. and David Rockefeller, part of an investment group that
bought Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. for $ 1.2 billion, won dismissal
yesterday of the final claim against them in a securities-fraud case filed by
former shareholders.

   U.S. District Judge Roderick McKelvie in Wilmington, Del., ruled that the
failure of the two investors and RCPI officials to tell shareholders about
Rockefeller Center's rights to develop 2 million square feet at its New York
City complex wasn't serious.

   McKelvie's ruling ends the 2-year-old lawsuit. Other claims were dismissed in
December.

Dean sells Birds Eye, other vegetable operations

   Dean Foods Co. says it has agreed to sell its vegetable operations, which
include the Birds Eye, Dean's Freshlike and VegAll brands, to Agrilink Foods
Inc. for $ 400 million and additional assets.

   The Franklin Park, Ill., company said the sale will allow it to focus on its
dairy, pickle and specialty foods businesses.

Funeral home operator hires Salomon for advice

   Loewen Group Inc., North America's second-largest funeral home operator, said
yesterday that it has hired investment banker Salomon Smith Barney to advise it
on whether putting itself up for sale is the best way to overcome recent
financial and share-price woes.

   Salomon will "initiate comprehensive discussions with potential business
partners regarding strategic partnerships, combinations and capital investments
in the company," said Loewen from its headquarters in Burnaby, British Columbia.

   The company said last week that it expected to announce next week that its
second-quarter earnings wold be substantially below analysts' expectations of 31
cents (Canadian) per share.

Mexican phone company invests in Prodigy

   Mexico's biggest phone company said yesterday that it will invest $ 49
million in Prodigy Inc., the struggling Internet service provider. Telefonos de
Mexico (Telmex) said Prodigy has 450,000 subscribers, making it the
fourth-largest Internet service provider in the United States.

   Pub Date: 7/28/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1998


                             1890 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     July 25, 1998, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: Earnings

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Earnings


    Baker Hughes said its second-quarter results were affected by lower spending
levels in the energy industry.


    Qtr. to June 30 - 1998 - 1997


    Revenues - 1,113,000,000 - 917,200,000

   Net income - 81,800,000 - 82,500,000

   Per share (basic) - 0.48 - 0.56

   Per share (diluted) - 0.48 - 0.56

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.)

   Baker Hughes is an oil-field services company.




    Service Corporation International reported second-quarter earnings 15
percent higher than the same period a year ago, due to strong sales of cemetary
plots and a portfolio of funeral homes in major metropolitan markets worldwide.


   Qtr. to June 30 - 1998 - 1997

   Revenues - 671,904,000 - 601,141,000

   Net income - 90,948,000 - 78,801,000

   Per share (basic) - 0.36 - 0.33

   Per share (diluted) - 0.35 - 0.31


    Service Corp. is the largest operator of funeral homes and cemeteries.




    Apache Corp.  said its second-quarter earnings were down because of lower
oil prices.


   Qtr. to June 30 - 1998 - 1997


    Revenues - 220,132,000 - 258,841,000

   Net income - 9,236,000 - 25,746,000

   Per share (basic) - 0.09 - 0.29

   Per share (diluted) - 0.09 - 0.28


    Apache is an independent oil and gas company.




    Tetra Technologies said its earnings were lower than previously expected
because of a downturn of the company's well abandonment business in the inland
waters of Louisiana caused by the slowdown in oil industry spending.


   Qtr. to June 30 - 1998 - 1997


    Revenues - 63,787,000 - 52,399,000

   Net income - 3,714,000 - 3,663,000

   Per share - 0.27 - 0.28


    Tetra is a specialty inorganic chemical company.




    Cariage Services reported a 32 percent increase in second-quarter revenues
because of acquisitions and higher sales.


   Qtr. to June 30 - 1998 - 1997


    Revenues - 25,214,000 - 19,061,000

   Net income - 1,803,000 - 1,489,000

   Per share (basic) - 0.13 - 0.13

   Per share (diluted) - 0.13 - 0.12


    Carriage operates 129 funeral homes and 21 cemeteries in 22 states.




    GeneMedicine reported a loss higher than the loss in the same period a year
ago, plus higher expenses, because of expanded research in genetic vaccines and
cancer.


    Qtr. to June 30 - 1998 - 1997


    Revenues - 1,458,446 - 1,584,463

   Net income - (3,806,492) - (3,108,696)

   Per share - (0.26) - (0.23)

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.)

   The Woodlands-based GeneMedicine develops nonviral gene therapy products for
the treatment or prevention of serious diseases.








LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1998


                             1891 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     July 23, 1998, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs;
Houston & Texas

SOURCE: Staff, Wire Reports

BODY:

   CompUSA to begin taking iMac orders

   DALLAS - CompUSA will begin taking orders Sunday for Apple Computer's new
iMac consumer computer, as the nation's largest computer retailer prepares for
the Aug. 15 introduction of the curvy, translucent blue machine.

   CompUSA, which is the only national retailer that sells Apple computers, said
it will start promoting the iMac with coupon books for customers who reserve one
of the $ 1,299 computers from Sunday to Aug. 14 with a deposit of $ 250.

   Analysts and investors have high hopes for Apple's iMac, which was unveiled
in May and has an all-in-one design, a 56K modem, networking capabilities and no
floppy drive. Some smaller retailers already have started taking advance orders,
and they've reported those orders are exceeding their expectations.


    Greyhound reaches labor agreement

   DALLAS - Bus company Greyhound Lines said Wednesday it reached a tentative
agreement with the union representing its drivers and mechanics.

   The latest agreement with the National Local 1700 of the Amalgamated Transit
Union was reached early Wednesday after 15 days of talks. The union's current
contract doesn't expire until Jan. 31, 1999.

   The new agreement must be ratified by union members, including 4,500
Greyhound bus drivers and 350 mechanics.

   Greyhound said it will not release the details of the agreement until it is
presented to union members next week.


   Union Pacific to post another quarterly loss

   DALLAS - Union Pacific Corp. will report its third straight quarter of losses
today as the nation's largest railroad continues to wrestle with a rail snarl
and the costs of delayed and lost shipments.

   Dallas-based Union Pacific is expected to report a loss of 17 cents a share
for the second quarter, based on the average estimate of analysts surveyed by
First Call. The company earned 98 cents a share in the year-ago quarter, when
the backup was just beginning to get serious.


    GeneMedicine receives 4 patents

   GeneMedicine, a biotechnology company in The Woodlands, said it has been
issued four U.S. patents related to gene therapy.

   Three of the four patents were developed at the Baylor College of Medicine
and licensed to Gene-Medicine.

   The company said none of the four patents would lead directly to a product on
the market because any gene therapy requires a series of patents. Its first
product, expected to be ready by 2000, is gene therapy that stimulates the
immune system to destroy cancer cells.


   Halliburton earnings increase 34 percent

   DALLAS - Halliburton Co., the second-largest oil-field services company, said
Wednesday that second-quarter profits rose 34 percent, helped by revenues from
customers' offshore oil projects.

   Net income rose to $ 136.5 million, or 51 cents a diluted share, from $ 101.9
million, or 40 cents, in the year-earlier period. Per-share earnings were in
line with consensus estimates of 50 cents from 12 analysts surveyed by First
Call Corp.

   Revenues rose 11 percent to $ 2.48 billion.

   Halliburton shares rose 9/16 to 40 7/8.


LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1998


                             1892 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      July 22, 1998 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 9B

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: 3 CELEBRITIES READ 'LITTLE ENGINE' TALE

BYLINE: SARAH CRUMP

BODY:

   It was dueling storybooks Monday at the America Reads' Raising Readers
Celebration. Three celebrity readers showed up with the same book for the event
at Cleveland Public Library's Langston Hughes branch. K. Michael Benz, president
of United Way Services of Greater Cleveland; Carol Henderson, of Rep. Louis
Stokes' office; and Ohio Secretary of State Bob Taft, Republican candidate for
governor, all picked "Little Engine That Could" to read to 75 young Salvation
Army campers gathered there.

   Benz took charge, dividing the "I think I can" book into thirds. He read
first, Henderson second, Taft last. Democratic gubenatorial candidate Lee Fisher
brought along his daughter Jessica, 7, to hear him read Dr. Seuss' "Oh, The
Places You'll Go."

   Benz, still on crutches from a May 16 auto accident, is back to work full
time now.

   HELP FOR LEE ... Like the rest of the world, Rocky River free-lance writer
Paul Finnin was shocked by the deaths of the Quinn boys - Richard, Mark and
Jason - who burned to death when their Ballymoney, Northern Ireland, home was
firebombed. However, Finnin was moved to do something for Chrissie Quinn's
surviving son, Lee, 13. He and his friend Cuyahoga County Commissioner Tim Hagan
have set up a fund for the boy at Third Federal Savings & Loan.

   Finnin, one of a family of 13 children from Limerick City, Ireland, received
his first donation from his daughter. Anne Finnin, 13, gave her dad $8. In
addition to the savings and loan's Quinn Family Charitable Fund, a donation box
will be placed at the information booth of the Cuyahoga County Fairgrounds.
Thousands will attend the annual Cleveland Irish Cultural Festival there this
weekend.

   NOT FUNNY ... It may look like a comic book, but it's really a graphic novel
with a Cleveland storyline. Check the racks in mid-August for the Image Comics
publication written and illustrated by Brian Michael Bendis of Lakewood, whose
work appears in The Plain Dealer Sunday Magazine, and artist Marc Andreyko, a
Cleveland native who now lives in Los Angeles.

   "Torso" is an historical account of the infamous 1930s Torso Murders that
baffled "Untouchable" Eliot Ness, Cleveland's safety director. Bendis was
intrigued by his research of the legendary Ness, who helped bust Al Capone in
Chicago before coming here to clean out City Hall. "He basically reinvented law
enforcement here, even the traffic laws," said Bendis. "This was a corrupt hell
town before he came." The authors think they know who committed the serial
murders of this long-debated whodonit. The solution they offer is the suspect
that Ness had pegged all along.

   WAHOO LAYS LOW ... The muscle-bound posterboard portrait of Chief Wahoo that
Jim Stamper of Cleveland totes to Indians games hasn't seen as much mileage
lately as in past seasons. That's because Stamper, who was manager of the Tam
O'Shanter Inn in Lakewood for 25 years, is opening a bar of his own. The
4-by-3-foot poster has been in Sports Illustrated three times and had world
exposure during last year's divisional playoffs, when the Indians beat the
Yankees. The strongman version of the chief was created by Karlis Petersons, a
Lakewood artist.

   "I've only been to 12 games this season, but I'm stepping up my pace," said
Stamper, whose new Stamper's Grill Pub will open in Fairview Park in September.
The season ticket-holder had already seen 30 games by this time last year. Fans
miss him. They like to have their pictures taken with Wahoo.

   BIG BUCKS ... The March of Dimes has given one of the largest basic research
grants in its history to the Cleveland co-inventor of the artificial human
chromosome. Huntington F. Willard, professor and chairman of the department of
genetics at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine and University
Hospitals of Cleveland, will receive $719,460 over three years for his work in
developing an effective vector, or gene-delivery system, in the body for use in
gene therapy. His research is directed at curing genetic diseases.

COLUMN: SARAH CRUMP

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1998


                             1893 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              July 20, 1998 Monday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: OHSU LOOKS WEST TO HILLSBORO FOR RESEARCH SITE

BYLINE: AARON FENTRESS of the Oregonian

BODY:

   Monday, July 20, 1998 OHSU LOOKS WEST TO HILLSBORO FOR RESEARCH SITE

   Summary: The university plans a campus to include the Oregon Regional Primate
Research Center and Oregon Graduate Institute

   Strapped by a lack of space on Marquam Hill, Oregon Health Sciences
University could start building its new research campus in Hillsboro by
September.

   The university has filed its 20-year master plan for building on land
adjacent to the Oregon Primate Research Center, with which it has merged.

   The move will mean the end to some of OHSU's research in Portland but the
beginning of what could become a mecca for science and technology research in
Oregon under the name of Star Park, or Science, Technology and Research Park.

   The creation of an OHSU west campus started with the university's 1995
affiliation with the primate center, now called the OHSU/Oregon Regional
Primate Research Center.

   ``We fit very well, with existing strengths with the primate center,'' said
Dr. Lesley Hallick, OHSU provost.

   OHSU, the primate center and the Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and
Technology are the principal catalysts and occupants of Star Park, which could
provide a magnet for attracting science and technology businesses to  Hillsboro,
officials of the graduate institute and university hope.

   The university is planning to construct more than a dozen buildings on the
263 acres it acquired in its merger with the primate center. The site is
immediately west of Southwest 185th Avenue and south of Walker Road. It will  be
the center of Star Park, which will include about 500 acres.

   Other entities at Star Park include the Center for Advanced Partnerships in
Technology and the Capital Center, which is a consortium of eight Oregon
colleges and universities.

   Construction of the buildings for the planned research facility will be
phased in during the next 20 years.

   About 10 buildings exist at the primate center site. Additions by 2020  would
include four academic buildings, 11 research buildings, four small
research-support buildings and three facilities for animal housing. Facilities
also could house medical office buildings and rehabilitation clinics.

   Hallick said other buildings might include research facilities for
pharmacology, physiology, neurosciences, other biomedical sciences or
additional primate research.

   The first major move for OHSU will come after completion of a
100,000-square-foot Neurological Science Institute building. It will include
laboratories, classrooms, office space and its Vaccine and Gene Therapy  Center.

   The institute, which studies neurosensory, neuromotor, systems biology and
animal models, now operates out of leased space at Legacy Good Samaritan
Hospital.

   OHSU and primate center staff are recruiting scientists for the Vaccine and
Gene Therapy Center, Hallick said. This institute will focus on immune
pathology, studying vaccine development for infectious agents that cause
disease and developing vaccines against those viruses.

   OHSU's plans for the neurological building are under review by the  Hillsboro
Planning Commission. If approved, construction could begin in  September.

   The only significant opposition to the proposal has come from Portland-area
animal rights groups.

   In Defense of Animals has fought expansion of the primate center during
public hearings before the Hillsboro Planning Commission.

   Portland veterinarian Sheri Speede, Northwest director for In Defense of
Animals, said the group is against further investment in a facility designed
for animal testing.

   ``It will ensure that animals will die needlessly and suffer for years to
come,'' Speede said.

   While the motivation for the group's opposition is to combat animal  cruelty,
the appeals are focused on land-use and environmental requirements of the
Hillsboro Planning Commission.

   For the primate center, the affiliation with OHSU holds the promise of
closer collaboration in the research areas for which the center is nationally
recognized, including reproductive, infectious disease and neuroscience
studies, according to James Parker, public information officer for the primate
center.

   ``It means not only working together but being able to secure funding,''
Parker said.

   Oregon Graduate Institute officials hope OHSU's expansion will result in a
marriage between its biomedical research and the institute's engineering
research to form bioengineering research as well as other educational
opportunities, said Norman Eder, vice president of public affairs for OGI and
its representative to the Star Park board.

   ``We like those kinds of neighbors,'' Eder said.

   According to Eder, bioengineering and bioelectronics are booming industries
just coming into their own. He said both OHSU and OGI can benefit from having
their operations so close together.

   The synergy between the two also could lead to increased educational
opportunities for students at the Capital Center as well as area high school
and grade school students, Eder said.

   Access to Star Park will be heightened when light-rail stations open in
September at Willow Creek at Northwest 185th Avenue and Baseline Road and
Quatama at Northwest 205th Avenue and Baseline Road.

   None of OHSU's moves is expected to affect patients at OHSU Hospital. The
Hillsboro campus will be for research only, although a clinic could be built
nearby at some time, Hallick said.

   ``Everything we do is patient-related eventually,'' Hallick said.

   Aaron Fentress covers Beaverton and Hillsboro community news for The
Oregonian's MetroWest news bureau. He can be reached by phone at 294-5954,
e-mail at aaron fentress@news.oregonian.com, by fax at 203-1813 or by mail at
10245 S.W. Parkway, Portland, Ore. 97225.

   ILLUSTRATION: Graphics Map by The Oregonian -- OHSU'S proposed west campus

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = AARON FENTRESS  of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1894 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              July 12, 1998 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Financial, tech shares lead rise in N.J. index

BODY:

   New Jersey stocks rose last week, led by Computer Horizons Corp. and Chubb
Corp., as some technology and many financial-service stocks continued to rally.

    The Bloomberg Star-Ledger Index rose 0.56 points, or 0.35 percent, to
160.85. The index is a price-weighted measure of 224 companies that are based in
New Jersey or are major employers in the state.

   Another measure of the state's economy - the Bloomberg New Jersey Index -
rose 1.84 points, or 0.88 percent, to 212.09. That index includes the top 25 New
Jersey employers ranked by market value.

   Broader markets also gained for the week ended Friday. The Standard & Poor's
Index rose 17.91 points, or 1.56 percent, to 1164.33, while the Dow Jones
industrial average rose 80.48 points, or 0.89 percent, to 9,105.74.

    Gainers in the Bloomberg Star-Ledger index include Mountain Lakes-based
Computer Horizons, which rose 7 to 433/4 as the computer-services company agreed
to buy Informatics Search Group, a Canadian information technology-services
company, for an undisclosed amount of cash and stock. Computer Horizons said the
acquisition may boost earnings immediately and could add about 4 cents a share
next year.

    Warren-based Chubb Corp. rose 41/4 to 86-11/16. Saddle Brook-based Sealed
Air Corp., the inventor of bubble wrap, rose 4 to 393/4.

    Franklin Lakes-based Becton Dickinson & Co. rose 4 to 851/2. Madison-based
Schering-Plough Corp. rose 3-15/16 to 98, after the pharmaceutical company
signed a research agreement with Immune Response Corp. to develop gene-therapy
products for the treatment of hepatitis B and C.

    Gainers in the Bloomberg New Jersey Index also include New York-based
Merrill Lynch & Co., which rose 71/4 to 106-3/16 on speculation that America's
largest brokerage may soon announce a stock split.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             1895 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 10, 1998 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Immune Response in research deal The Immune Response Corp. reached a research
collaboration and option agreement with Schering-Plough Corp. to develop gene
therapy products to treat hepatitis B and C, and other diseases.

   Schering-Plough said total payments to Carlsbad-based Immune Response could
be more than $75 million in licensing fees and milestone payments, excluding
about a $5 million initial payment. Harris new Document Sciences CEO Document
Sciences Corp. named Charles R. Harris president and chief executive, ending a
four-month search.

   The San Diego company said Alan Lynchosky, who had been acting president and
chief executive, will work with Harris through the end of the third quarter and
then leave the company to pursue other interests.

   Lynchosky has been acting president and chief executive since the retirement
of Tony N. Domit in March.

   Harris was president and chief executive of Simulation Sciences Inc., a maker
of commercial simulation software that was acquired last month by Siebe PLC.
Family Bargain reports sales up Family Bargain Corp. said June sales in stores
open at least a year increased 9.7 percent.

   Total sales for the five-week period ended July 4 increased 10.7 percent to
$29.8 million.

   The company operated 162 stores as of July 4. PriceSmart in Guatemala deal
PriceSmart Inc. and Grupo Solid SA of Guatemala will form a new Guatemalan
company, which will open PriceSmart membership shopping warehouses in Guatemala.

   The San Diego company, which will be the majority owner of the new
enterprise, said it expects the first shopping warehouse to open in spring of
1999 in Guatemala City. PriceSmart, a merchandising company, currently licenses
six international membership shopping warehouses, located in Guam, Saipan,
Beijing and Panama. 2 San Diego firms to be acquired Consolidated Graphics Inc.
signed a letter of intent to acquire Rush Press and Arts & Crafts Press
commercial printing companies, both of San Diego. Financial terms weren't
disclosed by the Houston-based company.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1896 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        July 9, 1998 Thursday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-09

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Jahnigen, 50, geriatrics expert, dies

BODY:
 Dr. Dennis Jahnigen, a geriatrics specialist at the University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center who was nationally and internationally known as an
advocate for improved care of the elderly, died Sunday of brain cancer. He was
50.

   "Dennis was one of the most outstanding faculty this school has ever seen,"
said Dr. Richard Krugman, dean of the CU School of Medicine. "In his illness and
death, Dr. Jahnigen was a role model for all of us. We will miss him greatly."

   Jahnigen, a professor of medicine, was director of CU's Center on Aging,
which he created in 1993. He also was president of the American Geriatrics
Society, which presented him in May with the 1998 Milo D. Leavitt Award for his
career in geriatrics education.

   In April, the CU Geriatrics Center of Excellence was named the
Hartford/Jahnigen Center of Ex cellence in Geriatrics.

   "Since his arrival here     he has created a remarkable center for
geriatrics, which has included teaching, discovery and a remarkable sensitivity
to the care of our older citizens," said Dennis Brimhall, president of
University Hospital. "We will greatly miss the way in which he directed the
center and the special care he provided to all patients. We extend our sympathy
to his wife and family."

   Born on July 26, 1947, Jahnigen received his undergraduate degree from the
University of Cincinnati and his medical degree from Ohio State University. He
completed his residency in internal medicine at the University of Washington in
Seattle.

   Jahnigen came to CU in 1979 as an assistant professor at the Veterans
Administration Hospital. He became chief of the geriatrics section and director
of the contract nursing home program.

   He developed and became director of the geriatric fellowship program and
founded the National American Geriatrics Society's student section chapter in
Colorado.

   In 1986, Jahnigen became geriatric medicine director at the Cleveland Clinic
Foundation in Ohio. In 1993, he returned to Colorado as head of CU's geriatric
medicine division.

   Jahnigen was nationally recognized for his research in geriatrics, and he was
a member of numerous professional organizations. He was the author, co-author or
editor of 68 books, book chapters and articles on geriatric topics.

   A May 12 article in The Denver Post profiled his lengthy battle with brain
cancer and how he participated in an experimental gene therapy treatment. Though
the treatment didn't work, Jahnigen supported the approach.

   Survivors include his wife, Juanita; two daughters, Beth and Kat, both of
Denver; his mother, Suzanne; and brothers Robert and A. Richard.

   A memorial service is planned for 4 p.m. Monday in Denison Auditorium at the
CU School of Medicine, 4200 E. Ninth Ave., Denver. A reception will follow in
the Foundation Courtyard.

   In lieu of flowers or gifts, the family has requested that contributions be
made to the Dennis Jahnigen Memorial Education Fund, c/o Center on Aging, 4200
E. Ninth Ave., Campus Box B-179, Denver 80262.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jahnigen

LOAD-DATE: July 09, 1998


                             1897 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                      July 6, 1998, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 1162 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENTAL POTENTIAL;
HUMAN NEURONS COULD BE GROWN IN LABS TO TREAT SPECIFIC DISEASES

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The transplantation of brain cells into a stroke survivor at the University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center two weeks ago marked the first attempt to repair
stroke damage.

   But as the researchers emphasized last week when they announced the
procedure, it also marked the first use in humans of laboratory-produced brain
cells, or neurons.

   The experimental neurons that made the procedure possible potentially could
be used to treat many brain diseases, such as Parkinson's disease. But there may
soon be other lab-made neurons vying for those roles, as scientists across the
country scramble to find the right cell, or mix of cells, and the best way to
produce them.

   Much remains to be learned about how neurons develop in fetal and adult
brains and how to make the cells in the lab; biotechnology companies are busy
conducting basic research and animal studies, hoping to manufacture the next
brain cell product approved for human clinical trials.

   ''It's fair to say that in the past 10 years there's been a lot of effort in
trying to create cell replacement therapy as well as a platform for gene
therapy,'' said Virgina M.-Y. Lee, a University of Pennsylvania researcher who
helped develop the LBS-neurons used in the transplant.

   The LBS-neurons - named for Layton BioScience Inc. of Atherton, Calif. were
generated from a 22-year-old man's cancer cells.

   Finding methods of manufacturing neurons is a hot prospect for biotechnology
companies because the conductors of the nervous system have been very hard to
replace.

   ''We are born with one set of nerve cells and we live all our lives with the
same set,'' explained biochemist Karl Johe, chief science officer of NeuralSTEM
Biopharmaceuticals Ltd. ''Neurons do not regenerate, period.''

   That biological fact has not stopped scientists from thinking up ways to
create new neurons, usually by trying to induce the cells to divide or to find
primordial cells that are not yet neurons and are still able to replicate.

   Lee and her colleagues found such primitive cells in the 22-year-old's
testicular tumor. They were lucky: they came across a cell that seemed destined
to become a neuron, but hadn't yet.

   The precursor cells were cultured to multiply many times, and then treated
with a body chemical called retinoic acid to become neurons. Some 2 million of
the engineered neurons will be injected into the stroke-afflicted areas in the
brains of each of 12 participants in Pitt's first trial of the therapy.

   More lab-made neurons may be on the way.

   Some scientists experiment with ''multipotential stem cells'' from fetal
brains to produce not only neurons, but also two other major brain cell types:
astrocytes, the support cells that help maintain neurons, and oligodendrocytes,
which speed up the conduction of nerve impulses.

   ''There are five companies or more trying to use the stem cells to turn them
into neurons,'' Lee said.  ''That's all very nice on paper. In practice, it's a
slightly different story.''

   The problem, as she sees it, is that most of the stem cells turn into the
support cells, not neurons. She added that it would be fantastic if the cells
could be coaxed into producing more nerve cells.

   Johe said his company, based in College Park, Md., held a patent on
technology developed to make those neurons out of stem cells from fetal brain
tissue.  However, some of the scientific proof of the advance has yet to be
published.

   NeuralSTEM's manufactured brain cells could be better transplants because
they contain not only neurons, but also the other cells that were killed off in
the stroke, Johe added.

   Company researchers are particularly interested in the treatment of
Parkinson's disease, caused by the progressive death of dopamine-producing cells
in the brain. Medical treatment involves giving dopamine in pills, but the cells
keep dying, making the illness worse..

   Some centers are transplanting portions of fetal brain tissue that is rich in
dopamine-producing neurons into people with the disease. Fetal tissue research
and therapies have long been controversial and, in fact, were banned by the
federal government up until 1994.

   Four or five abortions must be done to collect enough brain for a regular
tissue transplant, according to NeuralSTEM chief operating officer Chris Copple.

   ''That has been an ongoing problem,'' she said.  Instead of transplanting
formed tissue, researchers want to deliver cells. ''What we're able to do is
take the tissue from one post-mortem abortus and turn it into sufficient cells
to do hundreds of procedures.''

   More like millions.

   According to Johe, the company takes the same area of the brain, home to the
most dopamine-producing neurons, used in tissue transplants. That is roughly 5
million cells in a 6-week old fetus.

   About 80 percent of the cells will be developed neurons that can no longer
replicate.  Multipotential stem cells make up about 10 percent, or 500,000
cells. Those cells are stimulated to multiply with ''basic fibroblast growth
factor,'' which is natural to the body and commonly used in cell biology labs.

   After three months and 30 cell doublings, there are a billionfold cells, or
500 trillion stem cells.  Each Parkinson's patient needs about 20 million cells,
meaning 25 million transplants could come from a single fetus.

   Moreover, all the cells need not be used all at once - many can be held back
and restimulated to generate another round of cells.

   Johe said animal studies suggest that stem cells can be delivered into the
brain as is, and they will still differentiate into the various types of brain
cells.  However, cell maturation outside the body allows researchers to monitor
the proportions of the various cell types; there is no way to know which of the
three the stem cell is fated to become.

   They would transplant all the cell types to re-create the makeup of the
normal brain tissue, Johe said.  He believes that the support cells help build
neural communication networks that are more like the real thing.

   Not everybody might agree, but for now nobody can know for sure what works
best.

   ''Whenever you get to the cutting edge,'' Johe said, ''there is no
consensus.'' %BC% Preparing brain cells for transplant %EC%

   Brain cells that were transplanted into a stroke patient last month at the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center were prepared in a process developed at
the University of Pennsylvania.

   1. Immature cells obtained from a rare type of tumor are multiplied in
culture.

   2. Over the course of six weeks, retinoic acid is added to the cultures,
causing cells to develop into brain cells, or neurons.

   3. Neurons are harvested.

   4. Cells are tested for safety.

   5. Neurons are frozen and shipped to hospital.

   6. Neurons are thawed in a water bath.

   7. Samples are observed under microscope to ensure neurons are alive and
plentiful.

   8. Neurons are drawn into syringe and taken to operating room for injection
into patient.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: UPMC Health System;
Daniel; Marsula/Post-Gazette: (Preparing brain cells for transplant)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1998


                             1898 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 2, 1998, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA AND THE WEST;
 TRACING AIDS TO ITS LAST HIDING PLACE;
 HEALTH: SCIENTISTS ARE TRYING TO FIND WAYS TO ATTACK THE VIRUS IN LYMPH NODES,
TONSILS AND GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM.

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

DATELINE: GENEVA

BODY:


   Researchers are beginning to make some strides toward attacking the AIDS
virus in its last hiding place in the body, the hitherto impregnable forts of
the immune system, where HIV safely hides from the bomb bursts of combination
therapy.

   Scientists in California and elsewhere are attacking these redoubts with new
vigor because they know that HIV-positive people can never be weaned from toxic,
expensive AIDS drugs until the last viral troops are scourged from the body.

   A handful of immunologists reported preliminary success this week in Geneva
at the 12th World AIDS Congress. One team found that gene therapy can marshal
the body's own defenses to strike at the hidden foe. Other scientists are using
new drugs in an attempt to achieve the same goal, while others are poised to
launch therapeutic vaccines and synthetic antibodies at the target.

   Although none of these approaches is going to produce an immediate cure for
HIV infection in the near future, research reported here makes it clear that
efforts to stimulate the immune system represent the third great wave in AIDS
therapy, after AZT-like drugs and the protease inhibitors.

   Reports at the gathering of side effects and poor adherence to "cocktail"
therapies have increased the researchers' sense of urgency.

   "It's very difficult for patients to stay on combination therapy
indefinitely," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases. "We need to deal with these viral reservoirs, and deal
with them in a creative way."

   The eventual "cure of HIV infection is not a myth," said Dr. Roberto
Siciliano of Johns Hopkins University. "It is a problem we can tackle."

   Combination therapy incorporating the hot new class of drugs called protease
inhibitors has shown the remarkable ability to reduce the quantity of HIV in the
blood below detectable levels in the vast majority of patients who are able to
tolerate them.

   But even in the most successful treatments, HIV-infected white cells continue
to lurk in lymph nodes, tonsils and the gastrointestinal system, among other
places. These cells, called memory T-cells, lay dormant until they are
stimulated to venture back out into the blood, a process called activation.

   HIV continues to replicate in these sites, said David Ho of the Aaron Diamond
AIDS Research Institute, but it does not grow resistant to drugs--indicating
that the drugs do not enter the hideaways. Devising drugs that could sneak into
the nooks and crannies would be the obvious way to attack the memory cells, but
researchers have no idea what keeps the drugs out and thus no clues about how to
get them in.

   Perhaps the most promising way to attack the memory cells involves a form of
gene therapy devised by researchers at Cell Genesys in Foster City.

   They isolate CD4 and CD8 white blood cells--the so-called helper and killer
T-cells--from a patient and treat them with a harmless, genetically engineered
virus that teaches the cells how to recognize HIV-infected cells. The cells are
then grown in the laboratory for 10 to 14 days to increase their numbers by a
thousandfold or more, then infused back into the patient.

   In a preliminary experiment, Dr. Robert E. Walker of the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases recruited 30 sets of identical twins, one of
whom was HIV-positive and one not. He took white cells from the healthy twin,
treated them with a marker gene that had no therapeutic value, and infused them
into the infected twin.

   He reported here that the cells survived for at least 100 days, and that they
even proliferated. "This was an unexpected finding," he said. Most people
expected that the infused cells would be cleared from the body rather quickly.

   Biopsies by Dr. Peter Anton of UCLA showed that the engineered cells also
passed freely into the protected compartments.

   Continuing Experiments

   Based on those findings, Walker has recently begun a phase two trial in 40
patients whose HIV levels in the blood have been suppressed below detectability
by combination therapy. In four of the first five patients treated, said Cell
Genesys President Dr. Stephen Sherwin, "we are seeing a trend toward a decrease
in HIV" in the reservoirs in lymph tissues.

   Ho is ready to try two related experiments in patients with suppressed viral
concentrations. In one, he will inject them with an AIDS vaccine designed by
Pasteur Merieux Connaught. In the second, he will use a specially prepared
antibody that attacks another type of white cell called CD23. In both cases, the
hope is to activate the memory T-cells so that they shift into a form that can
be attacked by both the body and drugs.

   "We are ready to go," he said.

   Immunologist Charles Rinaldo of the University of Pittsburgh is extracting
another type of immune cell called dendritic cells. He told researchers here
that exposing the dendritic cells to proteins from HIV and to an immune system
component called interleukin-12 trains the cells to attack HIV-infected cells.

   Similar approaches using dendritic cells have proved useful in preliminary
experiments aimed at attacking cancer. Rinaldo said he will test the approach in
monkeys later this year and could proceed to human trials in the next two or
three years.

   The immune system can also be coaxed into attacking cells infected by HIV and
other opportunistic infections associated with AIDS. Dr. Brian Herndier and Dr.
Michael McGrath of UC San Francisco have been testing a drug called WF10,
developed by OXO Chemie of South San Francisco. WF10 has been approved in
several countries for speeding the healing of wounds, but Herndier and McGrath
found in the laboratory that it could stimulate macrophages, another immune
cell, to attack bacteria, fungi and infected cells.

   The Food and Drug Administration has been reluctant to allow tests of WF10
for fear that activated oxygen released by the drug would destroy red blood
cells. But McGrath reported that when researchers injected the drug into 18
HIV-positive patients whose viral levels were suppressed, they found the drug
"completely safe," with no side effects. More important, it reduced blood levels
of a cell called CD28. High levels of CD28 are generally considered a marker
that viral levels will rebound, so the decreased levels hint that WF10 is
stimulating memory cell destruction.

   The UC San Francisco scientists will also begin testing the drug in end-stage
AIDS patients because the drug stimulates macrophages to attack aspergillosis
and other bacteria that are typically the cause of death in AIDS patients. By
interfering with opportunistic infections, the drug could keep patients alive
longer.

   Finally, a team at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston is
studying glycyrrhizin, a drug found in licorice root. Dr. Fujio Suzuki told the
conference that tests in immune-deficient mice showed that glycyrrhizin could
increase natural resistance to Candida albicans and Cryptococcus neoformans, two
fungi that often cause death in AIDS patients.

   Glycyrrhizin has been approved for use in Japan for 30 years for treating
chronic hepatitis and other viral infections, as well as leukopenia, a condition
marked by abnormally low blood cell counts. It has never been used in the United
States, but the Texas researchers hope to begin testing it in people soon.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1998


                             1899 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 2, 1998, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1254 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE,
MEDICINE AND THE ENVIRONMENT;
 A SENSE OF CONTROL;
 TECHNIQUE FOR RARE DISORDER OFFERS HOPE FOR OTHERS WHO LOSE BRAIN FUNCTIONS
BECAUSE OF VARIOUS DISEASES

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Hannah Geisinger, only 22 months old, is a happy child, but not a healthy
one.

   Unlike most children her age, Hannah cannot see, speak, sit, crawl, hold up
her head or even hold a rattle in her hands. Developmentally, she is only one
month old. She suffers from Canavan disease, a devastating genetic disorder of
the brain that usually leaves its victims dead by the age of 10--often even as
young as 5.

   Later this month, however, Hannah and her mother, Sandra, will travel to the
Yale University Medical Center, where the infant will become the tenth child to
undergo an experimental gene therapy that her parents hope may delay, or even
reverse, the course of her disease.

   "It won't hurt her," said Sandra Geisinger, "and it offers her a chance. In
some way, we might be offering her up to science, but we would only do it as
long as it doesn't hurt her."

   If the trial is successful, it could have profound implications that go far
beyond Canavan disease, said Dr. Andrew Freese of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia. "If this technique works, we can replace function lost in the
brain due to a variety of diseases," he said, including Parkinson's disease,
epilepsy and stroke.

   Only a few years ago, gene therapy was viewed as the most promising way to
treat otherwise intractable genetic diseases. But its luster has been
dramatically dimmed by a long series of, in essence, failures. No one seems to
have been hurt by any of the early attempts, but few have been helped.

   In part, the problem has involved finding an appropriate "vector," a system
for getting the healthy gene into cells. That has been particularly difficult in
genetic diseases like muscular dystrophy, where the affected tissue is dispersed
throughout the body.

   The Canavan treatment appears to be a propitious situation in which a safe
and potentially effective vector can be used to treat a disease that is confined
to a relatively small area.

   Canavan disease, also known as Canavan's leukodystropy, is a relatively rare
disorder, affecting about one in 6,000 births. Like Tay-Sachs, it is more common
among Ashkenazi Jews, who trace their ancestry to Eastern Europe.


   *

   It is estimated that about one in every 35 members of this population carries
the gene. A genetic test is available to identify carriers, but it is rarely
used, experts said.

   The disease has remained largely ignored, perhaps because it is rarely
diagnosed correctly. Dr. Michel Philippart, a pediatric geneticist at UCLA who
diagnosed Hannah's condition, said he has seen only about six cases in his 30
years at that institution.

   "There must be many more cases," Philippart said. "The question is, where do
they go? They may die with no diagnosis having been made, or their problems may
be blamed on obstetricians. Who knows?"

   Canavan is caused by a defect in the gene for an enzyme called
aspartoacyclase, which is necessary to break down a compound known as
N-acetylaspartic acid. Accumulation of N-acetylaspartic acid in the brain causes
the central nervous system to deteriorate.

   Although researchers do not know precisely how that accumulation brings about
its effects, the results are dramatic. White matter in the brain--which protects
the cells that carry neural impulses from the brain to the rest of the
body--deteriorates, in effect short-circuiting the brain. The brain takes on a
spongy appearance and becomes saturated with fluid, swelling the head and
further damaging nerve cells.

   Canavan victims have little control of their arms and legs or their heads,
and are often blind. Other than supportive measures, there is no treatment for
the disease.

   The current impetus toward gene therapy was provided by Dr. Roger Karlin and
his wife, Helene, of New Fairfield Conn. When their daughter Lindsay was
diagnosed with Canavan in 1995, Karlin began searching for a treatment and found
there was none.

   But he also discovered that Dr. Matthew During, then at Yale, had developed a
new system for getting genes into the brain. Karlin convinced During to adapt
the system for the treatment of Canavan and he and other Canavan families raised
the initial $ 200,000 required for the study. Parents have subsequently raised
more than $ 3 million to keep the research going.

   During's approach was to encapsulate the healthy gene in small fat globules
called liposomes, which could then be infused into the brain. The fats in these
globules merge with fats in the membrane of brain cells, allowing the genes to
be released inside the cell, said Dr. Margretta Seashore of Yale, who is now the
principal investigator of the project.


   *

   Two years ago, Lindsay Karlin and Alyssa Mushin of Derby, Conn., received the
new therapy at the University of Auckland in New Zealand, where During had
moved.

   According to Lindsay's mother, she has shown some improvement since the
therapy. She is now able to touch things, kick her legs and control her head
movements. A basic communications system allows her to push buttons and watch
things happen.

   Alyssa also showed some initial improvement after the treatment, but then had
a regression. Her condition now is about the same as it was before the
treatment.

   Both girls received a second treatment this year.

   The team has some evidence that the gene is causing the missing enzyme to be
produced in the treated children's brains, Seashore said, but it is too soon to
draw any conclusions about its efficacy.

   If the tests with Canavan prove successful, the technique could be adapted
for treatment of other genetic disorders. Parkinson's disease patients are
deficient in a brain chemical called dopamine, and it should be possible to
insert a gene that would produce the neurotransmitter. Genes that serve as the
blueprint for various nerve growth factors, which stimulate development of brain
cells, might be used for the treatment of Parkinson's, Huntington's and other
diseases.

   Sandra Geisinger, meanwhile, is trying to restrain her hopes for the
procedure. She and her husband have brought in eating therapists, muscle
therapists and other experts to treat Hannah and, apart from her disease, the
infant is quite healthy.

   She has gone public with Hannah's treatment to try to alert other parents to
the potential danger of Canavan.

   "I had an amniocentesis. But nobody thought to look for Canavan disease. I
want public awareness of this disease."

   If the word gets out, she says, then Hannah's travails may have been
worthwhile.


   Gene Therapy

   Yale researchers are experimenting with gene therapy to threat children with
Canavan disease, a devastating disorder of the brain caused by a defective gene.
The goal is to inserta healthy form of the gene into the brain so that it can
produce a needed enzyme.

   1. The healthy gene is attached to short genetic sequences that will help it
produce protein in the brain.  That stretch of DNA is incorporated into a
microscopic globule of fat called a liposome.

   2. surgeons pull back a flap of skin on the top of the head and drill a
burrhole through the skull.

   3. A small, flexible egg-shaped reservoir is inserted under the skin,
attached to a catheter that passes through the burrhole and into the ventricular
space of the brain.

   4. Liposomes are injected into the reservoir, which can be pumped by hand to
force them into the brain.

   5. The reservoir remains in place in case the treatment needs to be repeated.

   Researched by Times medical writer THOMAS H. MAUGH II

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No Caption), REBECCA PERRY / Los Angeles Times PHOTO:
Sandra Geisinger holds her daughter Hannah, who will undergo an experimental
gene therapy at Yale University Medical Center, as outlined below.
PHOTOGRAPHER: AL SEIB / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1998


                             1900 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                    July 01, 1998, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 17 Metfront

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: A $ 10 million gift from the heart;
Jamails honor Cooley with donation toward cardiology treatment center

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER

BODY:

   Four months after his successful heart bypass surgery, Houston attorney Joe
Jamail and wife Lee gave Texas Heart Institute a $ 10 million gift Tuesday in
honor of his surgeon, Dr. Denton A. Cooley.

   The institute, founded by Cooley 36 years ago, is seeking to raise $ 75
million to build a nine-story facility in the Texas Medical Center. With the
Jamails' gift, $ 16 million has been collected.

   "It's a great honor for me and Lee to be in a position to help somebody who
helps people," Jamail, 72, said of Cooley.

   The institute, now housed in about 65,000 square feet on the fifth floor of
St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, hopes to move into a 270,000 square-foot facility
at Bates and Bertner, adjacent to St. Luke's, in 2000.

   St. Luke's will match the Jamails' gift, and Cooley said he is aiming for a
November groundbreaking.

   A colorful trial attorney, Jamail staked his greatest claim in 1987 by
representing Pennzoil against Texaco and winning a $ 10.5 billion verdict, later
settled for $ 3 billion.

   Jamail himself pocketed an estimated $ 345 million in the case, and Forbes'
1997 list of the richest Americans placed Jamail's wealth at $ 950 million.

   He gave $ 13 million to the University of Texas System, in 1992 and another $
5 million to UT, his alma mater, in 1996.

   He has since given gifts in excess of $ 1 million each to the Museum of Fine
Arts, Baylor College of Medicine and Rice University.

   "You can do three things with money," Jamail explained. "You can spend it,
you can give it away or you can die and let the government take it. I choose not
to let the government take it."

   Cooley and Jamail announced the gift at a ceremony that showcased Jamail's
respect for the surgeon.

   "I'm indebted to him and I will be forever," Jamail said, adding that since
his recovery, no one has approached him about a donation.

   Other physicians also praised Cooley, crediting him with pioneering numerous
techniques in treating heart problems.

   "I don't think anyone alive has given more to the conquering of heart
disease," said the institute's medical director, Dr. James Willerson. "And we're
going to extend that through this new building."

   Cooley said the institute needs more room for its research, which includes
improving artificial hearts.

   With extra space, he said, the institute can accept new research contracts
and look into promising cardiovascular treatments using lasers and gene therapy.

   U.S. News and World Report's 1997 ranking of hospitals placed the institute
sixth nationally in cardiology treatment.

   Cooley, a clinical partner of St. Luke's, said the institute has performed
93,000 open-heart operations and more than 700 heart transplants.

   Jamail and his wife were vacationing in Hawaii when chest pains forced him to
see a doctor, then return to Houston. Cooley cut short a hunting trip and
performed quadruple bypass surgery on Jamail, who says he feels better than he
has in 15 years.

   "He did it so good, I have tried two cases since the surgery," Jamail
quipped.

   Cooley, his friend for 30 years, never missed a beat.

   "And, I'm sure, you won them both."


GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Denton Cooley chats with attorney Joe Jamail before a news
conference Tuesday at the Texas Heart Institute (color); Ben DeSoto / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1998


                             1901 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                 June 30, 1998, Tuesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 4; View Desk

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: LOUNGING BY THE POOL;
 COCKTAILS ARE RAISED IN A TOAST TO THE O.C. CHAPTER OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS
FOUNDATION, WHICH CONDUCTS RESEARCH AND PROVIDES PATIENT SERVICES.

BYLINE: KATHRYN BOLD

BODY:


   The event: Miami, Memphis and Martinis--a hip cocktail party complete with
lounge lizards and an Elvis sighting--held poolside Saturday at the Sports
Club/Irvine. The summertime soiree benefited the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in
Anaheim.

   Shaken, not stirred: Bond--James Bond--would have been right at home among
the 500 party-goers who sipped martinis under the palm trees on the outdoor
terrace. "I've always liked martinis, and now they're stylish," said guest John
Archer of Corona del Mar, sampling a martini with a twist.

   To add to the sky-bar ambience, party planners set up black Naugahyde booths
overlooking the pool. DJ Mohamed Moretta spun disco and R&B platters. An Elvis
look-alike greeted guests, mostly Gen Xers. "We're trying to get a younger crowd
involved in a good cause," said Chris Collett, honorary chairwoman.

   Fighting a killer: Cystic Fibrosis is a genetic disease that causes chronic
and fatal lung infections. It affects about 30,000 children and young adults in
the United States, and there is no known cure. The CFF supports research for
treatment of the disease, including gene-therapy studies and patient care.

   Quote: "We have CF centers all over the country with respiratory and
pulmonary therapists, dietitians and physical therapists, where patients get
really specialized treatment," said Helen Johnson, executive director of the
local foundation. The Orange County treatment center is at Children's Hospital
of Orange County in Orange.

   Bottom line: The event was expected to net about $ 30,000 for the foundation.
Proceeds will go to research and care programs for patients.

   Faces: Rob Morey, event chairman; Ellen Amlie; Victoria Bahr; Cheryl Griffin;
Ava Guiness; Daran Lovell; Charley Pernice; George Sines; Rhonda Talpash;
Adrienne Terrazas; Susan Valen; and Eileen Waters.

   How to help: For information about the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation: (714)
938-1393.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The outdoor pool deck at the Sports Club/Irvine was the site for
the summertime soiree to benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in Anaheim.
PHOTO: Scot Bruce made like Elvis at the event Saturday.  PHOTO: Tammy Merfeld,
left, and Shannon McFarlane joined the party.  PHOTOGRAPHER: CHRISTINE COTTER /
Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1998


                             1902 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      June 28, 1998, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 2050 words

HEADLINE: Cyborg future looming byte by byte ;
Students research wearables: personal computers to access data

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: CHRIS ALLBRITTON

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   BOSTON - Even on a campus known for nerd high jinks, the three young men at
the top of the stairs in MIT's media lab look pretty weird.

   Leonard Foner resembles a collision between an oversized kid and a Nintendo
machine. A chunky eyepiece, apparently scavenged from a camcorder, protrudes
from his left eye, supported by Terminator sunglasses. A black vest girdled with
circuits and computer hardware wraps his upper body, and a hard drive nestles in
the small of his back.

   His buddy, Thad Starner, looks less menacing. He sports clear plastic safety
goggles and carries his computer in a shoulder bag.

   The third researcher, Brad Rhodes, looks too jolly to be scary. His kinky
hair is trying to escape from under a cap which has an eyepiece dangling from
its brim. He clutches a small keypad in his left hand, and his fingers twitch
furiously as he takes notes on a miniature computer.

   They belong to a group of grad students who have dubbed themselves the 'borg.
They are researching "wearables": personal - very personal - computers small
enough to fit into eyeglasses and hip pouches but powerful enough to access the
world's information. This technology looks clunky and a little intimidating
today, but it promises to shrink, streamline and grow more inconspicuous.

   The researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology envision a digital
paradise: instant translation among the world's tongues, the ability to monitor
or even affect events anywhere in the world, a constant connection to global
conversations in cyberspace.

   But by transcending the limits that nature imposed on our all-too-human
flesh, researchers at MIT and elsewhere find themselves poking at the edges of
fundamental questions.

   The answers may change forever what it means to be human.


    Powerful stuff, eh? Grand-cool visions of a Silicon Age. But is it science
or fiction? The root of the question lies in both.

   The term cyborg, for cybernetic organism, was proposed in the 1960s as a
solution to the harsh environment of space. It would be much easier, Manfred E.
Clynes and Nathan S. Kline believed, to adapt an astronaut's body instead of
protecting him from the vacuum. Breathing in space is cumbersome, they wrote.
"One proposed solution in the not too distant future is relatively simple: Don't
breathe!"

   But the idea of artificial humans goes back farther. Back at least to the
Middle Ages when the Golem, a clay creature brought to life by Jewish mysticism,
defended the ghetto in Prague. And back to 1818, when Mary Shelley wrote
"Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus."

   It took Hollywood to bring cyborgs into their own as modern bugaboos.
RoboCop, Arnold Schwarzenegger's Terminator, the chilling Borg Collective on
Star Trek: The Next Generation, a rakish collection of villains and flawed
heroes respectively gunning or pining for humanity.

   In real life, "cyborg" can be applied to anyone with a body-enhancing add-on.
Do you have a titanium alloy knee joint, a myoelectric arm, a pacemaker, breast
implants, contact lenses, a polio vaccination? Technically, you're a cyborg.

   So perhaps the 'borgs at MIT are onto something. Perhaps their explorations
using chunky, clunky electronics are a natural consequence of the increasingly
common merging of technology and flesh. As the Borg Collective announces: "Your
life, as it has been, is over. Prepare to be assimilated."


    That's the joke of the 'borgs' name: a double pun on cyborg and Star Trek.
And they've taken the image of the fictional characters to heart.

   In small pouches, they carry their processing chips, hard drives, wireless
modems and batteries. They often have a miniature video monitor - sort of like a
camcorder view-screen - affixed to modified eyeglasses or suspended from a hat
brim. Instead of a keyboard or a mouse, a hand-held keypad allows them to enter
data almost as fast as someone can talk.

   The wearable software can remind them of appointments, and let them take
notes and surf the Internet.

   But the potential is much greater. While the hand-held electronic organizers
of today can help schedule your life, those of the future may help you live it.

   Soon, says 'borg Rhodes, the wearables will be able to recognize speech and
faces. And software he is developing, called a "remembrance agent," will watch
over you 24 hours a day, every day, supplying you with the information you need
in any given situation.

   Example: You recognize someone but can't remember her name. Your wearable
analyzes her face and scans a database of people you've met. The machine makes a
match and displays the dossier on a tiny screen hanging in front of your eye or
maybe whispers through tiny speakers in your ears. Now you know her name,
occupation and any e-mail correspondence you may have had.

   While you two talk, your wearable parses the chit-chat, tapping into global
databases via a wireless modem for data relevant to your conversation. As you
talk about how hot it's been lately, the agent sifts through newspaper clippings
feeding you the latest news on, say, global warming.

   "Let's head to Union Square," you propose, and the computer gives you
directions, even pointing you to a coffee shop that serves excellent pastries.

   Over cappuccino and cannoli, you talk about impressionist paintings, Japanese
filmmaking, the backlash against existentialism and that weird Spice Girls fad a
few years back, all thanks to data pulled up by your wearable. It gives you
limitless memory and access to almost all knowledge.

   Data without end. Amen.


    Wearables may be only an interim step. As disk drives and computer chips
shrink and streamline, the next step may be to implant tiny computer parts under
the skin or behind the ears. The electrical energy in your body could supply the
power. Filings in your teeth could be the antennae for your Internet connection,
which could pump the data to a heads-up display built into your eyeglasses.

   "The line between human and computer at some point will become completely
blurred," predicted Alvin Toffler in his 1981 book, The Third Wave.

   That kind of technology, admittedly, is years away, but the implications are
troubling. Hacking the body to install a computer that becomes part of you, that
grants instant access to the sum of human knowledge. Well, it sounds almost
godlike.

   " 'Godlike' implies infinite comprehension," says MIT's Foner. "I don't think
we're getting there."

   Hans Moravec, however, can't wait. He's the director of the Mobile Robot
Laboratory at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, and in his 1988 book,
Mind Children, he suggested that in just 50 years, people would be downloading
their minds into infinitely better robot bodies. Imagine Homo Sapiens version
2.0, the postbiological human.

   "I have faith in these computers," he wrote. "You're going to be more
intelligent, you'll be able to do much more, understand much more, go more
places, not die - all those things."

   At MIT and Carnegie Mellon, and throughout America from Stanford in
California to Columbia in New York, researchers are investigating everything
from genetic engineering to advanced robotics. Companies such as Microsoft and
Apple are hard at work looking for ways to insinuate more computer technology
into our lives.

   And while the students at MIT work on programming their external computers,
researchers around the world are busy learning the language of our internal one.

   The human genome project aims to map all 80,000 human genes in DNA by 2005.
Once that's done the notion of "human" may change radically. As we take command
of our evolutionary destiny, not only will we deconstruct the human software, we
will be able to reconstruct it. Whether we use silicon or DNA, future humans
might be crafted by technology.

   Which is just fine, as "we're not really biological creatures anymore," says
Moravec. "Most of what we pass on to our children is culture, libraries." He
pointed out that the thousands of genes on human DNA only add up to 2 billion
bits of data, "and most hard drives have 10 times that today."

   Alan Marcus, a professor of history at Iowa State University at Ames, echoes
the view of genes as small units of "code," computer jargon for computer
commands. Our genes program us to react in certain ways, as if they were small
computer programs. And if so, why not plug new genes into an organism in a
different order and get something entirely new? Why not program life like a
computer? If you could do that, would there be any difference between the two?

   "Once you've reduced living matter to bytes, if you will, and once you think
about programming living things just as you would program nonliving things, then
that division doesn't exist anymore," says Marcus.


    Which means we may be standing at a crossroads. Whether we use biotechnology
or circuit boards, the new human - almost from birth - could be crafted by
technology on a scale not yet seen. Look for artificial organs, gene therapy,
even low-level eugenics. A sea change in the definition of "human" may be upon
us. MIT's 'borg are only tweaking the dictionary.

   Since the 1600s, when French philosopher Rene Descartes concluded, "I think,
therefore I am," being human meant being an immaterial mind trapped in a very
material body. This Renaissance sound bite split humanity into thought and
matter, which some cyberphilosphers today call "meat."

   It is this split that seems to be behind much of the thinking of humans as
complex machines, and it reduces the body to parts that can be replaced or even
sold. Today, people commonly donate semen, ova and plasma for cash, deeds that
would have been blasphemy 500 years ago. Organ transplants are common, and we
carry organ donor cards in our wallets.

   When we're able to replace parts of our bodies at will, or to reprogram our
genes, is it any wonder we don't know what to make of our bodies? Should we just
remake them since the clockwork meat that makes up the physical human is doomed
to fail anyway?

   "Why should a healthy mind die just because the body is not healthy?" asks
filmmaker David Cronenberg in Escape Velocity: Cyberculture at the End of the
Century, by Mary Deary. "There just seems to be something wrong with that."

   Cronenberg has directed some of the most horrifying films about the clash of
body and technology, such as The Fly and Crash. His simple query may be at the
root of the 'borg, the genetic researchers and other body hackers.

   "This is ultimately the refusal to accept finitude and the fear of death,"
says Don Ihde, a professor of philosophy at the State University of New York at
Stony Brook. "We don't want to be mortal."

   And like avoiding death, some things are impossible, he says.

   "Most 'cyborg' stuff of the present is a makeshift prevention, not an
improvement over the human body," he says in an interview via e-mail. "Were a
prosthetic arm shown to be stronger - able to crush steel cups - would you
choose to have yours amputated and have one? I doubt it."

   The desire to transcend the body, to shuffle off this mortal coil, is as old
as faith. And like the faith that billions place in God for ultimate
resurrection in heaven, today's cyber-utopians place their faith in technology
as a force that can resurrect them as new forms: leather-clad angels soaring on
hydraulic wings.

   Still, for everything that technology and computers can do for us, there is
something that can be done to us. With the reduction of the body to component
parts, will we see less value placed on those who can't or won't be "upgraded"?
For every utopia where invisible technology serves our every need, could there
be slums dominated by roving bands of cyberthugs harvesting human organs?

   "For every vision of digital heaven," warns Arthur Kroker, author of Hacking
the Future, "there is an equal image of digital hell."

   So instead of the bright and shiny future promised by the 'borg and other
futurists, perhaps we should instead listen to Donna Haraway, author of A Cyborg
Manifesto. She counseled us to create a society that neither demonizes
technology nor surrenders to digital flights of fancy.

   "Cyborg imagery can suggest a way out of the maze of dualisms in which we
have explained our bodies," she writes, and then adds, "I would rather be a
cyborg than a goddess."









GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Leonard Foner displays his customized computer, complete
with video display mounted on his sunglasses and a twiddler modified keyboard.;
2. Thad Starner and Josh Weaver, members of the "wearables" computer research
group, interact using their customized, wearable computers in the lobby of the
MIT media lab in Cambridge, Mass.; Both Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1998


                             1903 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     June 28, 1998, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 2058 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS PUSH LIMITS OF HUMANITY;
 CYBORGS: 'WEARABLE' COMPUTERS, DIGITAL IMPLANTS AND DNA ENGINEERING COULD
CHANGE FOREVER WHAT IT MEANS TO BE MORTAL. ENTHUSIASTS PUT THEIR FAITH IN
TECHNOLOGY, NOT RELIGION, TO FIND ETERNAL LIFE.

BYLINE: CHRIS ALLBRITTON, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:


   Even on a campus known for nerd hi-jinks, the three young men at the top of
the stairs in MIT's media lab look pretty weird.

   Leonard Foner resembles a collision between an oversized kid and a Nintendo
machine. A chunky eyepiece, apparently scavenged from a camcorder, protrudes
from his left eye, supported by Terminator sunglasses. A black vest girdled with
circuits and computer hardware wraps his upper body, and a hard drive nestles in
the small of his back.

   His buddy, Thad Starner, looks less menacing. He sports clear plastic safety
goggles and carries his computer in a shoulder bag.

   The third researcher, Brad Rhodes, looks too jolly to be scary. His kinky
hair is trying to escape from under a cap that has an eyepiece dangling from its
brim. He clutches a small keypad in his left hand, and his fingers twitch
furiously as he takes notes on a miniature computer.

   They belong to a group of grad students who have dubbed themselves the 'borg.
They are researching "wearables": personal--very personal--computers small
enough to fit into eyeglasses and hip pouches but powerful enough to access the
world's information. This technology looks clunky and a little intimidating
today, but it promises to shrink, streamline and grow more inconspicuous.

   The researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology envision a digital
paradise: instant translation among the world's tongues, the ability to monitor
or even affect events anywhere in the world, a constant connection to global
conversations in cyberspace.

   But by transcending the limits that nature imposed on our all-too-human
flesh, researchers at MIT and elsewhere find themselves poking at the edges of
fundamental questions.

   The answers may change forever what it means to be human.


   *

   Powerful stuff, eh? Grand-cool visions of a Silicon Age. But is it science or
fiction? The root of the question lies in both.

   The term "cyborg," for cybernetic organism, was proposed in the 1960s as a
solution to the harsh environment of space. It would be much easier, Manfred E.
Clynes and Nathan S. Kline believed, to adapt an astronaut's body instead of
protecting him from the vacuum. Breathing in space is cumbersome, they wrote.
"One proposed solution in the not too distant future is relatively simple: Don't
breathe!"

   But the idea of artificial humans goes back further. Back at least to the
Middle Ages when the Golem, a clay creature brought to life by Jewish mysticism,
defended the ghetto in Prague. And back to 1818, when Mary Shelley wrote
"Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus."

   It took Hollywood to bring cyborgs into their own as modern bugaboos.
RoboCop, Arnold Schwarzenegger's "Terminator," the chilling Borg Collective on
"Star Trek: The Next Generation," a rakish collection of villains and flawed
heroes gunning or pining for humanity.

   In real life, cyborg can be applied to anyone with a body-enhancing add-on.
Do you have a titanium alloy knee joint, a myoelectric arm, a pacemaker, breast
implants, contact lenses, a polio vaccination? Technically, you're a cyborg.

   So perhaps the 'borg at MIT are onto something. Perhaps their explorations
using chunky, clunky electronics are a natural consequence of the increasingly
common merging of technology and flesh. As the Borg Collective announce:
"Resistance is futile. You will be assimilated."


   *

   That's the joke of the 'borgs' name: a double pun on cyborg and Star Trek.
And they've taken the image of the fictional characters to heart.

   In small pouches, they carry their processing chips, hard drives, wireless
modems and batteries. They often have a miniature video monitor--sort of like a
camcorder view screen--affixed to modified eyeglasses or suspended from a hat
brim. Instead of a keyboard or a mouse, a hand-held keypad allows them to enter
data almost as fast as someone can talk.

   The wearable software can remind them of appointments, let them take notes
and surf the Internet.

   But the potential is much greater. While the hand-held electronic organizers
of today can help schedule your life, those of the future may help you live it.

   Soon, says 'borg Brad Rhodes, the wearables will be able to recognize speech
and faces. And software that he is developing, called a "remembrance agent,"
will watch over you 24 hours a day, every day, supplying you with the
information you need in any given situation.

   Example: You recognize someone but can't remember her name. Your wearable
analyzes her face and scans a database of people you've met. The machine makes a
match and displays the dossier on a tiny screen hanging in front of your eye or
maybe whispers through tiny speakers in your ears. Now you know her name,
occupation and any e-mail correspondence you may have had.

   While you two talk, your wearable parses the chitchat, tapping into global
databases via a wireless modem for data relevant to your conversation. As you
talk about how hot it's been lately, the agent sifts through newspaper clippings
feeding you the latest news on, say, global warming.

   "Let's head to Union Square," you propose, and the computer gives you
directions, even pointing you toward a coffee shop that serves excellent
pastries.

   Over cappuccino and cannoli, you talk about Impressionist paintings, Japanese
filmmaking, the backlash against existentialism and that weird Spice Girls fad a
few years back, all thanks to data pulled up by your wearable. It gives you
limitless memory and access to almost all knowledge.

   Data without end. Amen.


   *

   Wearables may be only an interim step. As disk drives and computer chips
shrink and streamline, the next step may be to implant tiny computer parts under
the skin or behind the ears. The electrical energy in your body could supply the
power. Filings in your teeth could be the antennae for your Internet connection,
which could pump the data to a heads-up display built into your eyeglasses.

   "The line between human and computer at some point will become completely
blurred," predicted Alvin Toffler in his 1981 book "The Third Wave."

   That kind of technology, admittedly, is years away, but the implications are
troubling. Hacking the body to install a computer that becomes part of you, that
grants instant access to the sum of human knowledge. . . . Well, it sounds
almost godlike.

   " 'Godlike' implies infinite comprehension," says MIT's Foner. "I don't think
we're getting there."

   Hans Moravec, however, can't wait. He's the director of the Mobile Robot
Laboratory at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, and in his 1988 book,
"Mind Children," he suggested that in just 50 years, people would be downloading
their minds into infinitely better robot bodies. Imagine Homo Sapiens version
2.0, the post-biological human.

   "I have faith in these computers," he wrote. "You're going to be more
intelligent, you'll be able to do much more, understand much more, go more
places, not die--all those things."

   At MIT and Carnegie Mellon, and throughout America from Stanford in
California to Columbia in New York, researchers are investigating everything
from genetic engineering to advanced robotics. Companies such as Microsoft and
Apple are hard at work looking for ways to insinuate more computer technology
into our lives.

   And while the students at MIT work on programming their external computers,
researchers around the world are busy learning the language of our internal one.

   The human genome project aims to map all 80,000 human genes in DNA by 2005.
Once that's done, the notion of "human" may change radically. As we take command
of our evolutionary destiny, not only will we deconstruct the human software, we
will be able to reconstruct it. Whether we use silicon or DNA, future humans
might be crafted by technology.

   Which is just fine, since "we're not really biological creatures anymore,"
says Moravec. "Most of what we pass on to our children is culture, libraries."
He pointed out that the thousands of genes on human DNA only add up to 2 billion
bits of data, "and most hard drives have 10 times that today."

   Alan Marcus, a professor of history at Iowa State University in Ames, echoes
the view of genes as small units of "code," computer jargon for computer
commands. Our genes program us to react in certain ways, as if they were small
computer programs. And if so, why not plug new genes into an organism in a
different order and get something entirely new? Why not program life like a
computer? If you could do that, would there be any difference between the two?

   "Once you've reduced living matter to bits, if you will, and once you think
about programming living things just as you would program nonliving things, then
that division doesn't exist anymore," Marcus says.


   *

   Which means we may be standing at a crossroads. Whether we use biotechnology
or circuit boards, the new human--almost from birth--could be crafted by
technology on a scale not yet seen. Look for artificial organs, gene therapy,
even low-level eugenics. A sea change in the definition of "human" may be upon
us. MIT's 'borg are only tweaking the dictionary.

   Since the 1600s, when French philosopher Rene Descartes concluded that "I
think, therefore I am," being human meant being an immaterial mind trapped in a
very material body. This Renaissance sound bite split humanity into thought and
matter, which some cyber-philosophers today call "meat."

   It is this split that seems to be behind much of the thinking of humans as
complex machines, and it reduces the body to parts that can be replaced or even
sold. Today, people commonly donate semen, ova and plasma for cash, deeds that
would have been blasphemy 500 years ago. Organ transplants are common, and we
carry organ donor cards in our wallets.

   When we're able to replace parts of our bodies at will, or to reprogram our
genes, is it any wonder we don't know what to make of our bodies? Should we just
remake them since the clockwork meat that makes up the physical human is doomed
to fail anyway?

   "Why should a healthy mind die just because the body is not healthy?" asks
filmmaker David Cronenberg in "Escape Velocity: Cyberculture at the End of the
Century," by Mary Deary. "There just seems to be something wrong with that."

   Cronenberg has directed some of the most horrifying films about the clash of
body and technology, such as "The Fly" and "Crash." His simple query may be at
the root of the 'borg, the genetic researchers and other body hackers.

   "This is ultimately the refusal to accept finitude and the fear of death,"
says Don Ihde, a professor of philosophy at the State University of New York at
Stony Brook. "We don't want to be mortal."

   And some things are impossible, he says--such as avoiding death.

   "Most 'cyborg' stuff of the present is a makeshift prevention, not an
improvement over the human body," he says in an interview via e-mail. "Were a
prosthetic arm shown to be stronger--able to . . . crush steel cups--would you
choose to have yours amputated and have one? I doubt it."

   The desire to transcend the body, to shuffle off this mortal coil, is as old
as faith. And, like the faith that billions place in God for ultimate
resurrection in heaven, today's cyber-utopians place their faith in technology
as a force that can resurrect them as new forms: leather-clad angels soaring on
hydraulic wings.

   Still, for everything that technology and computers can do for us, there is
something that can be done to us. With the reduction of the body to component
parts, will we see less value placed on those who can't, or won't, be
"upgraded"? For every utopia where invisible technology serves our every need,
could there be slums dominated by roving bands of cyber-thugs harvesting human
organs?

   "For every vision of digital heaven," warns Arthur Kroker, author of "Hacking
the Future," "there is an equal image of digital hell."

   So instead of the bright and shiny future promised by the 'borg and other
futurists, perhaps we should instead listen to Donna Haraway, author of "A
Cyborg Manifesto." She counseled us to create a society that neither demonizes
technology nor surrenders to digital flights of fancy.

   "Cyborg imagery can suggest a way out of the maze of dualisms in which we
have explained our bodies," she writes, and then adds: "I would rather be a
cyborg than a goddess."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sporting possible look of the future are MIT's Thad Starner,
left, Josh Weaver, research group members.  PHOTOGRAPHER: VICTORIA AROCHO /
Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1998


                             1904 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 27, 1998 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: San Diego and California

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Collateral trims IPO price Collateral Therapeutics Inc. of San Diego said it
filed an amendment to its proposed initial public offering, cutting the
estimated per share offering to $8 a share from the previous range of $11 to
$13. Collateral Therapeutics develops and commercializes gene therapy products
for the nonsurgical treatment of cardiovascular diseases. TomaHawk II gets 6
orders Alabama-based Intergraph Corp. has placed six orders totaling $2.5
million with San Diego-based TomaHawk II Inc. As part of the deal, TomaHawk will
provide document imaging and conversion services for the Pentagon under an
already established agreement between TomaHawk and Intergraph.

   Tomahawk II, a subsidiary of Canada's TomaHawk Corp., is an engineering
company that specializes in document imaging and conversion services. Rockwell
may cut 4,800 jobs Rockwell International Corp. of Costa Mesa, the world's
largest maker of computer modem chips, reportedly plans to cut as many as 4,800
jobs because of a slump in demand for its chips and slowing sales in its
industrial-automation business.

   The job cuts, which could affect up to 10 percent of Rockwell's work force,
first were reported in The Wall Street Journal.

   Rockwell spokesman Terry Francisco declined to comment. Imaging Tech makes
board changes Imaging Technologies Corp. of San Diego named Warren T. Lazarow, a
Palo Alto lawyer, to its board of directors.

   The company also announced the departure of another director, attorney Irwin
Roth. The company specializes in the development of controllers and related
technology for printers, multifunction peripherals, digital image storage
devices and software. TriTeal to pay $9.5 million TriTeal Corp. of Carlsbad said
it signed a memorandum of understanding to pay $9.5 million to the plaintiffs in
the settlement of a class action securities lawsuit against the company.

   The defendants included some former officers and directors of the company and
some of the underwriters of the company's public stock offerings. Priority drug
review OK'd Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Carlsbad and Novartis AG's Ciba Vision
Corp. unit said the Food and Drug Administration accepted for priority review
the new drug application for formivirsen, a treatment for cytomegalovirus
retinitis.

   The FDA, according to Isis, will convene a public advisory committee July 22
to review data and issue recommendations.

   Isis discovers and develops human therapeutic compounds. Pacific Research
names president Pacific Research & Engineering Corp. said that it had named
Donald C. Naab president of the Carlsbad-based firm.

   Naab was president of Hazard Sensing Sector, a unit of Kidde International
U.K. Pacific Research makes broadcast studio products and provides studio
design-integration services. Bank of Commerce opens offices San Diego-based Bank
of Commerce has opened four new loan production offices in Texas.

   The new offices, serving Houston, Dallas-Fort Worth, Austin and San Antonio,
will operate under the name of Commerce Loan Company, a division of Bank of
Commerce.

   In all, the bank now operates 16 loan production offices in seven states.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1905 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        JUNE 22, 1998 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2190 words

HEADLINE: A NEW FOCUS IN THE FIGHT RESEARCHERS ARE ATTACKING CANCER ON A GENETIC
LEVEL, ZEROING IN ON THE WAYS FAULTY GENES WREAK HAVOC. HERCEPTIN, FIRST IN A
NEW CLASS OF DRUGS, IS A PRODUCT OF THIS THINKING.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   With all the news last month about a class of cancer drugs that wipes out
tumors in mice, another cancer breakthrough - this one in humans - was nearly
overshadowed.

   Researchers reported promising results of a new breast cancer drug,
Herceptin. It is the first of a new class of drugs designed to thwart cancer in
a highly selective way: by blocking the specific chemical made by an errant
gene.

   Many similar "gene-based" drugs aimed at other cancers are in the research
pipeline. "We will have an explosion of new drugs within the next 5, 10, 20
years," predicted Carlo Croce, director of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas
Jefferson University Hospital.

   Gene-based drugs differ from what is known as "gene therapy."

   Gene therapy aims to correct faulty or damaged genes. Gene-based therapies
instead target the functions of those genes. Most try to disable the proteins
the genes instruct cells to manufacture.

   In animal testing, a number of these drugs either shrink tumors or kill them
outright, though scientists don't expect any of them to become a universal cure
for all cancers. Most of these drugs will be tailored to fight certain types of
cancer cells amid the great variety out there.

   "Cancer is something like 106 different diseases," says Kenneth Tew, a
researcher at Fox Chase Cancer Center. Gene-based drugs, such as Herceptin,
would exploit those differences, each one zeroing in on different types of
cancer cells.

   Scientists are beginning to classify cancers not so much by their location -
breast, colon or prostate - but by the type of genetic damage that prompted the
malignancy.

   "That's the big thing we're stressing - we think of cancer not as tissue
types but as genetic types," says Jefferson cancer researcher Richard Fishel,
who discovered two genes involved in colon cancer.

   Breast cancer, for example, can be seen as different diseases. One,
representing 20 percent of breast cancers, responds to Herceptin. Like
Herceptin, other gene-based therapies promise to work only on a segment of
patients, but for them, the drugs may work far better than what's available
today.

   "All the drugs we have today were developed 20 years ago, when we didn't know
anything about the molecular genetics of cancer," says Croce. Chemotherapy and
radiation are still essentially poisons, given in the hope that they will kill
the cancer before killing the patient. Until recently, no one knew how they
worked, or why, in many patients, they didn't work well enough.

   In retrospect, scientists seemed poorly equipped to enter the so-called War
on Cancer, which President Nixon officially launched in 1971 and hoped to have
won by 1976.

   "People thought it was a technological problem, like going go the moon," said
Allen Lichter of the University of Michigan and president of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology.

   Reality was much more complicated. More than two decades later, cancer still
kills 560,000 people every year.

   Lichter compares the challenge to that of repairing a broken-down car with no
idea of how the engine works. Now, by understanding the genetics of cancer, he
says, "we are starting to see what's under the hood."

   This means looking into the genetic code stored in the form of DNA inside
cells. "Cancer is a genetic disease," says Croce. Humans have about 100,000
genes and 100 of those have already been associated with cancer.

   When he says cancer is genetic, Croce does not necessarily mean it is
inherited, though people do sometimes inherit a flawed gene which predisposes
them to cancer. But even in those born with no predisposition, the genes -
stretches of code-carrying DNA - lie vulnerable to attacks from stray radiation,
cigarette smoke, sunlight, and a host of other carcinogens.

   There are three ways in which genetic trouble can lead to cancer, explains
Allen Oliff, executive director of cancer research at Merck & Co.

   * First, there are oncogenes - abnormal genes carried in cancer cells that
signal them to grow out of control or otherwise behave abnormally.

   * Second, there are tumor-suppressor genes, which check the growth of normal
cells, and, when damaged, can allow cancers to proliferate.

   * Third, there are DNA-repair genes, which protect people from cancer by
preventing genetic mistakes from accruing as cells divide. Inherited
predispositions to cancer are generally attributed to faulty versions of such
genes, which are passed down through families.

   ONCOGENES Oliff's work is focused on the most common oncogene, called RAS.
RAS genes are found in normal cells, but about 30 percent of all cancer cells
carry defective copies.

   The RAS genes signal the cells to make a RAS protein, which acts as a switch
telling cells when to divide. In cancer, the faulty RAS proteins made by faulty
RAS genes cause the switch to stick in the "on" position, telling the cancer
cells to divide like mad.

   Oliff and his colleagues have developed a drug that disables these RAS
proteins by attacking a secondary protein, abbreviated as FT, needed for RAS to
function. In animal tests, Oliff said the drug looked spectacular. "We saw huge
tumors that took up 10 percent of the body just melt away."

   Now, Merck and at least two other drug companies are testing RAS-attacking
drugs in humans.

   Oliff worried about side effects because normal cells require some functional
FT. "We were very lucky," he said, in that healthy cells seemed to tolerate the
loss of this protein, while cancer cells died.

   The breast cancer drug Herceptin is also based on an oncogene, HER2, which
occurs in normal cells but is abnormally abundant in certain breast cancers.

   "It's a lovely scientific story," says Lichter, of the drug's development.

   HER2 genes carry instructions for making a protein called growth factor
receptor, and the cancer cells were making hundreds of times the normal amount.
These receptors sit on the surfaces of cells and act as docking ports, shaped to
grab and hold onto another protein, called growth factor. The docking of the
growth factor and its receptor must happen for the cells to grow and multiply.

   The receptors in the cancer cells, however, were docking to each other,
explains Lichter. "That's what make these types of cancers so aggressive - it
could stimulate its own growth."

   Herceptin reverses action of the excess HER2 genes with an antibody that
blocks these abnormal growth factor receptors. That checks the growth of tumor
cells.

   "This is one of the first therapies that we followed through from a molecular
event," said Lichter.

   The scientists tested the drug in women dying from advanced breast cancer and
found that a group receiving the drug along with chemotherapy survived an
average of three months longer than those getting chemotherapy alone. A few of
the women showed spectacular remissions, said Lichter.

   Researchers expect Herceptin to work much better in less advanced cases, and
point out that it does not cause nausea and hair loss. "But it's not for every
woman with breast cancer," Lichter stresses.

   TUMOR-SUPPRESSOR GENES Croce and his colleagues at Jefferson are studying the
second type of gene linked to cancer - tumor suppressor genes. They are
examining one in particular, called FHIT, which has been associated with lung
cancer.

   Everyone is equipped with two copies of the vigilant FHIT genes in every
cell, and in the vast majority of us, both copies start out healthy. But FHIT is
a "fragile site," explains Croce, especially those housed in lung cells. Over
time, assaults, mainly from cigarette smoke, damage FHIT genes. The lungs
accumulate cells with bad FHIT genes and occasionally, some - lacking the tumor
suppressor - turn cancerous.

   FHIT genes are involved in a number of other cancers as well.

   Jefferson's Fishel, aware of this sub-cellular vulnerability, says he avoids
taking his lunchtime runs on the Benjamin Franklin Bridge or other
traffic-congested areas.

   "You can just feel your FHIT genes breaking." he says.

   Croce says he is seeking substances that can kill FHIT-damaged cells, whether
cancerous or healthy, while sparing cells with healthy FHIT genes. Such a
substance might work as a cancer drug or as a preventive.

   University of Pennsylvania cancer researcher Wafik El-Diery is also
interested in therapies that repair broken tumor-suppressor genes, but his
approach is to start with a known treatment, chemotherapy. By trying to
understand how chemotherapy agents kill cancer cells, he hopes to find drugs
that will do the job more efficiently.

   El-Diery has found that sometimes chemotherapy stimulates the action of a
gene called p53, which then kicks off a multistep process causing the cancer
cells to commit suicide.

   The name p53 is notorious in cancer research because damage to this gene is
seen in about half of all cancers.

   "It's an amazing gene," says El-Diery. "About 7,000 papers have been
published on it."

   Like the FHIT gene, p53 is a vulnerable part of the human complement of
genes. It acts as a sort of master switch, controlling the action of many other
genes. So when both copies of the p53 gene in a cell become damaged, it can set
off a cascade of errors leading to cancer.

   El-Diery found that one of the crucial jobs done by healthy p53 is to
stimulate "killer/DR5" genes. Despite the dangerous-sounding name, they serve a
protective function, causing damaged or worn-out cells to die.

   Adding extra copies of these genes to cancer cells isolated in culture does
indeed kill them, he found - a promising start.

   DNA REPAIR GENES Jefferson's Fishel has been concentrating on the third
category of cancer-genes - the protective genes that are sometimes inherited in
a damaged form. He has discovered two such genes associated with colon cancers
that run in families, often with striking frequency.

   For now, simply testing for these genes isn't much help, but that would
change if new medicines could either fight or prevent cancer.

   Fishel, a biochemist, did not start out as a cancer warrior. "I'm interested
in DNA - it's the basis of all life, it is life. I think about it all the time."

   But his interest in DNA intersected with cancer research in the early 1990s,
when Johns Hopkins University researcher Bert Vogelstein noted that colon cancer
seemed to run in families and suggested a faulty gene.

   Scientists now believe that 15 percent to 50 percent of colon cancer have an
inherited component. "Some get cancer in their teens," said Fishel, showing a
diagram representing a particularly devastated family in which about half the
members got colon cancer, two at age 36 and one at age 16.

   What makes the inherited cases so much harder to avoid is that these people
carry abnormal genes in every cell of their bodies, not simply in some small
clump of carcinogen-damaged cells.

   Such people aren't doomed to get cancer because all genes come in pairs - one
from each parent - so they still have one healthy version of the cancer gene in
every cell. But carrying one damaged copy imparts a vastly increased risk.

   Vogelstein identified one gene, called APC, which, when damaged, contributes
to some familial colon cancer. Fishel suspected there were others.

   He noticed some colon cancer patients carried new variations in their genes
that clearly didn't come from either of their parents.

   Fishel reasoned, these patients were accumulating new genetic mistakes as
their cells were dividing.

   Every time a cell divides, he points out, all the DNA in a cell must be
copied - a string of code totaling three billion characters. Each time, the code
would accumulate about 3,000 mistakes if not for the work of special genes
responsible for repairing these mistakes. Such "mismatch repair" genes are found
in nearly every organism.

   These cancer patients were inheriting an error in a gene whose function was
to prevent errors.

   Such new errors would accumulate when cells divide, and one place where cells
divide fast is in the colon.

   "It was like an instant of light and everything fell into place," said
Fishel. He identified two such error-fixing, or mismatch repair genes, dubbed
MSH2 and MLH1. He estimates that inherited defects in these genes account for
between 20 percent to 30 percent of familial colon cancer.

   For him, the next step will be to find ways to prevent cancer in people
carrying these inherited deficits.

   While scientists in the cancer world are optimistic about the gene-based
approach, their hopes are tempered with the knowledge that cancer cells can
develop resistance, and that, as a general rule, tumors in laboratory animals
are easier to kill than those in humans.

   Winning the war on cancer would be great, says Fox Chase's Tew, "but it ain't
that simple."

   FOR MORE INFORMATION * Doctors answer your cancer questions on Philadelphia
Online, The Inquirer's site on the Internet: http://health.phillynews.com

   Previous articles in The Inquirer's series "Advancing on Cancer" can be found
elsewhere on the same site:

   * June 8: Traditional cancer treatments are being used in new ways.

   * May 18: A new therapy targets blood vessels that nourish a tumor.

NOTES: Advancing on Cancer
One in a series of occasional articles
on new approaches to fighting cancer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DRAWING;
PHOTO
A cancerous cell (right) has more genes carried on extra strands of DNA, shown
here in red and yellow, than a normal cell (left). (Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, RICHARD FISHEL)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1906 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  June 21, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3931 words

HEADLINE: The Berlin Patient

BYLINE: By Mark Schoofs;  Mark Schoofs is a staff writer and columnist for The
Village Voice.

BODY:

   When the harvard aids researcher Bruce Walker first learned about the Berlin
patient last September, he had one overriding thought: get a sample of his
blood. He dashed off E-mails to the scientists studying the patient and then
phoned his research associates, saying, "You won't believe what I just heard."

   Word of the unusual German case quickly spread to a support group for
patients in one of Dr. Walker's clinical trials at Massachusetts General
Hospital in Boston. Since then the group has had an extra, invisible member: the
Berlin patient, who is discussed and analyzed almost as if he were actually
present. "I've never met him, and I don't even know his name, but I've followed
his case," says one member of the group. "He is what we want to be."

    The source of all this excitement is a young German man who became infected
with the AIDS virus just over two years ago and quickly started taking a
combination of anti-H.I.V. drugs. After just six months of therapy, however, he
ignored the advice of his doctor and stopped taking the drugs. When that
happens, the virus ordinarily comes roaring back, resuming its advance to
full-blown AIDS. What makes the Berlin patient so intriguing is that his virus
hasn't come back. The most precise tests detect no H.I.V. in his blood and only
trace amounts in his lymph tissue, the major reservoir for the virus. He harbors
so little H.I.V. that in order to detect it in one of its hiding places, Dr.
Robert Siliciano, a researcher at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
had to redesign his assay, making it five times as sensitive. What little virus
remains in the patient is fully capable of reigniting an infection, so he is not
cured. But his immune system is apparently suppressing H.I.V. without drugs. He
has not taken an AIDS pill in a year and a half.

   The Berlin patient fascinates researchers, who hope that clues to this
singular case may lead to new treatments, especially for those patients lucky
enough to get an early diagnosis. At the same time, researchers are terrified
that news of his case might encourage other patients to abandon their drugs, a
rash decision that virtually always frees the virus to continue its destruction
of the immune system and, possibly, mutate into drug-resistant strains. Indeed,
another patient in Berlin -- infected at nearly the same time and treated by the
same doctor with the same drugs -- similarly stopped taking his pills.
Immediately, his virus reared up. The overwhelming majority of AIDS doctors
agree with Marcus Conant, a veteran AIDS doctor in San Francisco, who says, "If
someone comes to me and says, 'I want to go off drugs,' I look him in the eye
and say, 'You're nuts."'

   Nonetheless, two world-class labs have confirmed that the Berlin patient's
viral infection is being held in check, and a third is scrutinizing his immune
system; their interest reflects a recent shift in thinking about the disease. At
the last international AIDS conference, held two years ago in Vancouver, Dr.
David Ho, director of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York,
projected a slogan onto the screen that could have been a motto for H.I.V.
research at the time: "It's the virus!" And, indeed, targeting the virus has led
to a class of antiviral drugs known as protease inhibitors, the primary force
behind a remarkable two-year decline in AIDS death rates.

   No one is suggesting a retreat from this front, but as 10,000 researchers,
doctors and advocates gather in Geneva next week for the 12th World AIDS
Conference, the research focus is broadening from simply attacking the virus to
strengthening the immune system as well. The Berlin patient, along with several
similar, but less well documented cases just now coming to light, are helping to
spur this shift. Such cases are "really pivotal for how we think about H.I.V.,"
says Walker, an immunologist who obtained and analyzed the Berlin patient's
blood. "What they're banging us over the head with is that the immune system can
control this virus."

   The renewed interest in the immune system comes at a time when AIDS research
has reached a plateau following the development of protease inhibitors. Despite
a Presidential commitment to create a vaccine, and despite the recent approval
by the F.D.A. to begin large-scale testing of one experimental vaccine, there is
widespread sentiment that vaccine research lags behind drug development.
Meanwhile, an estimated 16,000 people are infected with H.I.V. every day, and 90
percent of them live in developing nations that can't afford the expensive new
medications.

   At the same time, early euphoria over protease inhibitors has been tempered
by the realization that they achieve a stalemate, not a victory. Cocktails of
two to four drugs can stop H.I.V. from replicating and halt disease progression
but can't eliminate the virus, because it integrates into the DNA of every cell
it infects. Scientists hoped that if H.I.V. were paralyzed long enough, the body
might purge every infected cell. But that possibility dimmed last year when
three independent research teams found that H.I.V. can hide indefinitely in
long-lived cells known as resting T cells.

   So unless new strategies are developed, patients might have to take their
drugs for life. But the drugs can cause persistent nausea and diarrhea, and
frightening long-term side effects have recently been emerging, including
redistribution of body fat and possible heart complications. Moreover, the drugs
currently fail to suppress H.I.V. in as many as a third of all patients, and
that proportion may grow over time. When drugs fail, it often means that the
virus has mutated into a strain that is resistant to many drugs, even ones the
patient has never taken, leaving few or no options for effective therapy. "We
could be on a short-term euphoria," warns Dr. Ronald Desrosiers of Harvard. If
toxicities or drug resistance forces enough patients off medication, he says,
the two-year decline in the AIDS death rate could prove short-lived. "Ten years
from now," Desrosiers says, "we could be back to where we were five years ago."

   Yet despite their limitations, the drugs do pin down the virus, at least for
a while, thus providing a window of opportunity for researchers to revive the
overwhelmed immune system. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (N.I.A.I.D.) in Bethesda, Md., says that it
might not be necessary to decrease the viral level to zero. "You may just need
to get it low enough so that the immune system can kick in and keep it in
check," he says. Ho agrees: "Control without eradication might be something we
could call remission."

   That's why the Berlin patient, who seems to fit precisely this description,
is so exciting to researchers. "What we're looking for," Walker says, "are
clues, experiments of nature that will allow us to understand how to tweak the
immune system so that it can control the virus. And it's patients like this guy
in Berlin who will give us those insights."

   At 30, he is still a student, and he dresses like one: jeans, a plaid shirt
open at the neck and, on his wrist, one of those colorful cloth bracelets from
Mexico. He has short, alfalfa hair and eyes that often look away, for he is
almost painfully shy. He has never before spoken publicly about his situation,
and -- fearful of discrimination against both himself and his parents, who still
live in a small town in southern Germany -- he agreed to talk only if his
identity were concealed.

   I met the Berlin patient in his doctor's office, and we walked a few blocks
through the heart of West Berlin's gay neighborhood to a cafe, where he
explained how he became a celebrated medical mystery. It began on May 10, 1996,
when he had sex that wasn't safe. Three weeks later, he came down with what is
called primary infection syndrome, the fever, swollen lymph nodes and fatigue
signaling that H.I.V. is gaining an initial foothold. Heiko Jessen, a Berlin
doctor with a large AIDS practice, suggested an H.I.V. test. On June 20, Jessen
delivered the bad news. "I could not move," recalls the Berlin patient. "I
didn't even cry."

   Ten days later, the Berlin patient started on a cocktail of three drugs --
the protease inhibitor indinavir, ddI and an experimental and controversial drug
called hydroxyurea. The amount of virus in his blood quickly plummeted.

   Then, less than three weeks after starting his medication, he developed a
testicular infection requiring an emergency hospitalization. But he hadn't taken
his H.I.V. pills with him. So for several days he didn't take his medicine, and
his virus popped back, though only to low levels. Restarting the drugs squelched
it.

   After that the Berlin patient took his pills religiously until, about four
months later, he started feeling weak and eating began to make him vomit. He had
contracted hepatitis A, which forced him to interrupt his medication again. When
he recovered two weeks later, Jessen advised him to resume taking his H.I.V.
drugs. Curiously, the virus didn't come back as it had during his testicular
infection.

   But it wasn't the lab tests that ultimately persuaded the Berlin patient to
take the dangerous step of ending his drug regimen. "When the hepatitis
stopped," he says, leaning forward, "I felt so healthy. I remember especially
one evening. I was listening to some music, and it was really, really cold -- it
was November -- but I opened the windows and I was breathing and I thought: 'My
body, it's O.K. Everything's fine."' After that he took his pills only
half-heartedly. "One day I took all of them," he laughs, "and the next day it
was only two, and some days I really took nothing."

   Jessen calls his patient a "dream boy." Indeed, he relies on intuition and
feeling more than logic and fact. And before becoming infected, he had never
known anyone with H.I.V., and no one close to him had ever died. So he is
totally sincere when he says he was "not so surprised" that his virus didn't
come back, because "it was almost my will to become healthy."

   With 400 AIDS patients under his care, Jessen couldn't afford to be so naive.
When the Berlin patient admitted, just before Christmas 1996, that he wasn't
taking his medicine regularly, Jessen told him, "This is not a good idea."
Jessen tried to bargain, proposing that his patient postpone his decision for a
few more months. "But he said he had definitely decided," Jessen remembers with
resignation. "What could I do?"

   Yet Jessen realized that something fascinating was happening in his patient.
The virus should have already come back. Indeed, a concurrent infection like
hepatitis normally stirs up H.I.V. So Jessen said: "You must come at least twice
a month to the office. You owe me that."

   The Berlin patient has certainly fulfilled his debt to science, according to
Dr. Franco Lori, the principal scientist working on his case and director of the
Research Institute for Genetic and Human Therapy in Washington and Pavia, Italy.
Lori once joked that the reason the Berlin patient has virtually no virus left
is that researchers have removed it all by drawing so much blood. Yet he feels
no larger debt, no new lease on life. "I really did not suffer," he says. "Only
the pills reminded me I was ill."

   Lori first presented the Berlin patient's case at a September 1997 conference
organized by the lab of Dr. Robert Gallo, co-discoverer of H.I.V. Two similar
cases had already been reported in the British medical journal The Lancet, but
many researchers doubted those cases. The lead scientist -- Dr. Jorge Vila,
medical director at the French drug company Compagnie de Developpement Aguettant
in Lyons -- isn't well known to AIDS researchers. And Vila's two patients had
such small amounts of virus in their blood before starting therapy that
scientists even speculated that they might not have been infected at all. (The
Berlin patient had a substantial infection, verified by two separate tests.)

   But now there is growing evidence of more cases. David Ho revealed in an
interview that he is following two patients who, like the Berlin patient,
started treatment soon after they were infected and then decided to stop therapy
against medical advice. Their virus, Ho says, has not returned "in a detectable
way with traditional tests." He declined to give additional details until he has
studied them in more depth.

   And Vila now says that he has eight additional patients who have had no
detectable H.I.V. rebound 3 to 12 months after stopping their medication. One
was treated early, but the others are what are known as A1 patients, meaning
they have suffered no AIDS symptoms and retain relatively strong immune systems.
All of them started therapy with blood tests showing H.I.V. counts of less than
10,000, a low number. None of these 10 new cases have been formally presented in
scientific conferences or journals. But if they hold up, there could be 13
patients who are suppressing H.I.V. after stopping treatment. "That's not a
trend," says Dr. Beatrice Hahn, a University of Alabama AIDS researcher, "but
it's more than an anecdote. These are some of the most important patients to
study." The Berlin patient is the best documented of all, and clinical trials
are about to begin that, in essence, try to repeat certain key elements of his
case.

   Bruce Walker was eager to get the Berlin patient's blood because he had
developed a theory that predicted cases exactly like his. Engaging and
confident, Walker spoke with me in what seemed to be the only quiet spot in
Massachusetts General Hospital that afternoon: the old operating theater, a
rooftop rotunda that is white, austere and as simple as his theory. "The problem
with H.I.V.," Walker says, his voice dissipating into the rotunda, "is that it's
an infection of the immune system."

   The conductor of the immune system is the helper T cell, so named because it
helps the two main arms of the body's defense system. The immune system has
billions of helper cells, and each one is genetically programmed to recognize
one and only one germ. A helper cell that recognizes the flu virus, for example,
will blithely pass by the virus that causes hepatitis. But when a helper cell
comes in contact with its germ, says Dr. H. Clifford Lane, an AIDS researcher at
the N.I.A.I.D., "it sort of says, 'Oh, my God, I've waited my whole life for
this moment,' and it immediately starts dividing." The activated cell multiplies
until millions of its progeny are circulating through the blood. These cells
help by sending out chemical signals to B cells, which produce the antibodies
that snare freely circulating virus, and to the killer T cells, which kill off
any cell in which the virus is hiding. Many researchers, including Walker and
Hahn, believe killer T cells are capable of keeping H.I.V. in check -- but only
if the helper cells are there to give them orders.

   H.I.V., however, infects helper T cells, especially those that are dividing.
So when helper cells that recognize H.I.V. go on red alert and start dividing,
they simply provide more fodder for the virus. The helper cells can never
multiply to the number needed to orchestrate a full and effective immune
response, because the virus is picking them off. Within 12 months, H.I.V. is
believed to wipe out the vast majority of the body's H.I.V.-specific T cells.

   But scientists have known for some time about a small group of people they
call long-term nonprogressors, who suppress the virus without ever taking drugs.
They often have extremely large numbers of H.I.V.-specific helper T cells, which
may explain why their immune systems keep the virus in check. Walker and his
colleague Dr. Eric Rosenberg found that if H.I.V. is pinned down with aggressive
drug treatment soon after infection, ordinary patients develop
H.I.V.-specific-helper-cell responses indistinguishable from those in long-term
nonprogressors. When Walker and Rosenberg first published these results last
year in Science, researchers were heartened because of the obvious implication:
early, aggressive treatment might transform ordinary patients into long-term
nonprogressors who don't need drugs to contain H.I.V. And that's what Walker
thinks probably happened with the Berlin patient.

   This theory has yet to be tested, and some people in the field think it's too
good to be true. "You either have the right genes or you don't," says Dr. Steven
Miles, an associate professor of medicine at the University of California at Los
Angeles. He points to another case, reported in Annals of Internal Medicine last
month, in which a patient was treated soon after being infected. Six months
later he went off therapy and went through the symptoms of primary infection,
suggesting that early intervention merely delayed, but did not alter, the course
of his disease.

   Still, many major researchers think Walker's theory is plausible and want to
see it tested. It's so logical, "you might have expected it from first
principles," says Dr. William Paul, chief of the N.I.A.I.D. Laboratory of
Immunology and former director of the Office of AIDS Research at the National
Institutes of Health. "I've totally bought into Bruce Walker's hypothesis," says
Desrosiers of Harvard, who studies how AIDS vaccines stimulate immunity. Even
Robert Gallo, who has doubts about parts of Walker's theory, says, "Bruce has
got the only data I know of that say early, hard therapy is doing anything
good."

   The only way to test any theory that suggests patients can do without their
drugs is, of course, to stop the drugs and see what happens. Doing so is
controversial, but some fears have diminished. While there is still a strong
consensus against letting patients go off their medicine by themselves, there is
a growing sense that with very careful scientific monitoring the danger might be
tolerable. There are clinical reports of patients being able to recommence
therapy and suppress the virus, just as the Berlin patient did after his
testicular infection. So if, under careful observation, Walker's theory failed
and the virus popped back, doctors could immediately restart medication. "I
don't think the damage would be severe," Paul says. "But of course I could be
wrong, and it's someone else's life."

   If the immunologists are right, then lab tests of the lucky patients who have
stopped therapy without rebound should show a potent helper-T-cell response.
Vila and Ho haven't finished testing their patients, but Walker has tested the
Berlin patient. During a lecture in February, he accidentally displayed results
with an identifiable reference to the Berlin patient. That first round of tests
indicated that he does indeed have potent H.I.V.-specific helper responses. "You
weren't supposed to notice that," Walker sighs. "We have not retested. What if
we're wrong?" He hopes to release follow-up tests at the AIDS conference next
week. Having a lab test that could help predict which patients might do well
without medication would be a boon to the trials that Walker and others are
eager to start.

   Walker's hypothesis is hardly the only one. another theory involves
hydroxyurea, the experimental drug taken by the Berlin patient and by Vila's 10
patients. Used for 35 years against certain cancers, hydroxyurea does not target
H.I.V. itself but rather the cells that H.I.V. infects. Its main effect seems to
be to boost the power of some AIDS medications like ddI, and it also keeps
immune-system cells from dividing.

   Vila's company is testing hydroxyurea, and Franco Lori is a longtime
proponent, but many other researchers agree that use of the drug might explain
why the virus didn't come back. "I don't think so," Ho counters. The two
patients he is following never took hydroxyurea, which strongly suggests that
the drug isn't required for such success. But Vila's and Lori's unusual cases
have reinvigorated interest in the drug, and several new trials are being
planned, including one by the prominent virologist Dr. Douglas Richman of the
University of California at San Diego.

   The Berlin patient's unpleasant testicular episode suggests another possible
treatment strategy. Sometimes the immune system needs prolonged or repeated
exposures to a germ before it develops a full, robust response. (That's why many
vaccines require booster shots.) When the Berlin patient was hospitalized for
his testicular infection, his short interruption of therapy allowed H.I.V. to
come back and circulate in his body. Could that have acted as a kind of booster
shot, priming his immune system for the moment he went off medication for good?

   "That's one of the hypotheses we wish to test," Ho says -- but not, he is
quick to add, by interrupting medication. Instead, both he and Walker are
planning trials in which they will inject patients on therapy with an H.I.V.
vaccine to see if it stimulates a strong immune response.

   Of course, there are many other possible explanations. Maybe some of these
patients have a defective strain of H.I.V., and maybe the rest will turn out to
be flukes. Finally, these patients might simply be long-term nonprogressors, who
would never have needed drugs to suppress the virus. "So," Ho wonders, "is it
anything we've done?"

   Even if early treatment can train the immune system to handle H.I.V. on its
own, "I really wonder how relevant this will be," says Dr. Steven Deeks, a
researcher at San Francisco General Hospital. "It's very hard to identify people
that early during infection."

   In the short term, only a tiny fraction of patients -- well educated, with
access to good medical care -- stand to benefit. But long term, "the
implications are much broader," says Dr. Michael Lederman, an immunologist at
Case Western Reserve University. Even if the immune system proves unable to
supplant H.I.V. medications on its own, it might be mobilized to complement the
drugs. It is known that people treated early respond better than people treated
after the virus has wreaked its damage. Strengthening the immune system,
therefore, might be like adding a drug to the cocktail. Certain experimental
vaccines, like the one developed by the late Jonas Salk, can stimulate
H.I.V.-specific responses. Walker will soon be testing the Salk vaccine, and a
2,500-patient trial is already under way. The goal: to see if it improves the
effectiveness of existing H.I.V. medicines.

   That is also the idea behind a strategy from the far edges of biology: gene
therapy. Several researchers, including Lori's colleague Julianna Lisziewicz,
have spliced genes into cells, which might make them invulnerable to infection.
Thus protected, H.I.V.-specific helper T cells could survive viral attack and
orchestrate the rest of the immune response. Dr. Philip Greenberg at the
University of Washington plans to test that strategy by isolating the few
surviving H.I.V.-specific helper T cells in patients, growing billions of
genetically modified copies in the lab and reinfusing these "protected" cells.
Such a therapy might benefit a larger population.

   As it stands, the Berlin patient's luck is still unexplained -- and still
provisional. "I don't think the virus will come back," he says. "We have a
German phrase for my situation, uber den Berg," over the hump. "It's finished
for me."

   Perhaps. But he must continue practicing safe sex, because he might still be
infectious, and he went to his first H.I.V. support group only after he had
stopped taking drugs and had suppressed the virus. "Once you are
H.I.V.-positive," he explains, less naive now, "the virus is always in you."

GRAPHIC: Photos: (Thomas Sandberg for The New York Times); A helper T cell
(white) infected with H.I.V. particles (green). (S.P.L./C.M.S.P.); A computer
rendering of the AIDS virus (right) entering a helper T cell. (Michael
Freeman/Bruce Coleman Inc.)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1998


                             1907 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 21, 1998 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 1085 words

HEADLINE: PENN ENGINEERING NEW PROFITS FROM SCHOOL'S SCIENTIFIC WORK / LICENSING
FEES HAVE INCREASED TENFOLD SINCE 1996, SPURRING OTHER LOCAL COLLEGES TO LINK
WITH INDUSTRY.

BYLINE: Bob Fernandez, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For years, the University of Pennsylvania watched from the sidelines as other
big-name research schools got rich off the discoveries made by their professors.

   Now Penn is joining the entrepreneurial elite as it turns its first-ever
profits on the inventions made in its laboratories.

   The inventions - which run the gamut from computer software that maps
investment strategies, to new treatments for cancer, to antidotes for depression
- will bring about $8 million in licensing fees into Penn's coffers this year
alone. That is a tenfold increase from 1996.

   "For years, Penn wasn't even in the game. Now we're in the game and we're
looking for some home runs," said Louis Berneman, the managing director of
Penn's Center for Technology Transfer, which helps shepherd new technologies
from the laboratory to the marketplace.

   With Berneman, who was hired in 1995, Penn has dramatically increased its
pace of deal-making with private companies. About half of Penn's 125 commercial
ventures have come in the last year. These involve either a direct ownership
stake in a company or a royalty-producing agreement.

   Penn still ranks far below some of its peers, such as Michigan State,
Stanford, Columbia and MIT, in technology-derived income. But Berneman said the
gap was closing.

   The entrepreneurial spirit sweeping the Penn campus is being seen at research
universities all over the city as they forge alliances with industry to move
inventions into the marketplace.

   For example, Thomas Jefferson University, in partnership with Kimeragen Inc.
of Newtown Township, Bucks County, has developed a potential way to repair the
genetic defects that cause sickle-cell anemia; Temple University has established
its own firm, TheraCardia, to market a new type of cardiopulmonary resuscitation
device; and Allegheny University of the Health Sciences has licensed about a
dozen patents to InKine Pharmaceutical Co. Inc., in Blue Bell, that could lead
to novel anti-cancer drugs.

   All of this could spell good news for the regional economy, which is
competing to create high-tech jobs.

   "In the realm of economic development, this is top-priority stuff," said
David Thornburgh, the executive director of the Pennsylvania Economy League. "We
live in an economy built on technology and the application of technology. The
race is won by the companies that can put it to work, build wealth and employ
people."

   Penn's aggressive drive to market its professors' inventions has been led by
Berneman, who grew up in Philadelphia's Oxford Circle and was a top official
with an economic development agency in Virginia before being lured back to
Philadelphia by Penn.

   For years many researchers at the Ivy League school were loath to dirty their
hands in the business of turning out profit-making products, for fear of
tainting the school's reputation as a center for the pursuit of pure knowledge.

   But federal budget cuts in the 1980s and the technology transfer successes at
rival schools, such as Harvard and Stanford, helped change all that.

   With a staff of 14, Berneman seizes on any opportunity to turn the ideas of
scientists in campus laboratories into marketable products.

   Under his leadership, Penn's technology-transfer office has generated its
first profits, taking in more money this year than what it has spent on such
expensive items as patent-lawyer fees and running his office.

   Berneman, for instance, has pushed to find a way to license the academic work
of psychology professor Martin E.P. Seligman, 55, to a Blue Bell company called
Basis Learning.

   Seligman gained national attention for developing a theory of cognitive
psychology known as "learned helplessness." He has now developed its correlate,
a theory called "learned optimism," which is one of the hottest ideas in
psychology.

   The practitioners of Seligman's theory teach people how to replace negative
thoughts with positive thoughts. So far, the technique has been used in
Philadelphia-area schools to help children at risk for depression. But Basis
Learning hopes to market the program to corporations and other groups, where it
might be used to improve performance.

   Basis, which has seven employees, is one of the 24 companies in which Penn
has exchanged technology for equity, an ownership stake.

   Another company in which Penn has part ownership is Cytometrics Inc., in
Philadelphia's Old City section. The two collaborated in developing a
"bloodless" blood test that takes a blood count by way of a probe placed under a
patient's tongue. The probe sends a video image of blood coursing through tiny
capillaries to a computer, which analyzes the makeup of the blood.

   Cytometrics has raised $42 million in private capital to support the research
and now employs 50 people, at an average annual salary of $75,000. Neither the
firm nor Penn would say how big Penn's share is in the company.

   The blood-testing probe has yet to go to the FDA for approval, but
Cytometrics is optimistic about its potential for use in hospitals and doctors'
offices.

   "I hope this will be a great return" for Penn, said Richard Nadeau, the
chairman and chief executive officer of Cytometrics.

   Despite Penn's progress in growing such commercial ventures, the university
has yet to make a multimillion-dollar windfall on any single technology.

   Some are hopeful that will come from the laboratory of biologist James M.
Wilson, whom Berneman calls "'a true superstar in the field of gene therapy."

   Wilson heads Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy and is hot on the trail
of gene-therapy techniques for treating a variety of diseases, including cystic
fibrosis. Under an agreement with Penn, any gene products that result from the
work will be licensed to Genovo Inc., a Sharon Hill company founded by Wilson.

   During the next 18 months, Wilson said, he hopes to prove that the therapy
works in cystic fibrosis patients. And if it does, he said, Genovo will ensure
that the technique moves from the laboratory bench to the bedside of patients.
"We have a moral responsibility to transfer technology," he said.

   In the meantime, Penn continues to sign on to good prospects.

   Just last week,Penn announced that it had licensed a technology for quickly
measuring lung function to SpectraMedix Corp., in State College. Berneman said
the technology, while still in development, was "quite interesting, with great
potential."

   Inquirer staff writers Huntly Collins and Marian Uhlman contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1908 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 21, 1998 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2316 words

HEADLINE: COLLEGES SEE PROFIT, LOSS IN RESEARCH / AS UNIVERSITIES BOND WITH
INDUSTRY, CAN ACADEMIA KEEP ITS OBJECTIVITY?

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, Bob Fernandez and Marian Uhlman, INQUIRER STAFF, WRITERS

BODY:

   Richard Nadeau has a new kind of blood test. There's no painful skin prick
and no waiting for lab results. A nurse simply places a probe under the
patient's tongue and a computer beeps back a response.

   But Nadeau, the head of Cytometrics Inc., a Philadelphia medical instrument
company, can't take all the credit for this revolutionary technology. He had the
idea, but research help from the University of Pennsylvania made it work.

   In exchange, Penn was given part ownership in Cytometrics. And now Penn
stands to make big money from the painless blood test, if it gets U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approval.

   Deals such as the one between Penn and Cytometrics are mushrooming around the
country as companies look to academia for new ideas to turn into profits, and
universities, in turn, try to cash in on their scientific discoveries.

   In the last decade, university-industry alliances have led to such advances
as a vaccine against the cause of childhood meningitis; diagnostic tests for
breast cancer and osteoporosis; and a medicine that allows premature babies to
breathe.

   Now the pace is quickening as more companies, many of them start-up
biotechnology firms, seek a stake in even preliminary and far-from-proven
research. At the same time, many scientists facing increased competition for
federal dollars are welcoming the very corporate funding they once disdained.

   But as business plays a bigger role on campus, universities are wrestling
with the issue of bias, considering how to ensure that commercially funded
scientific work remains objective.

   Not only are scientists getting research grants from private industry, they
also are becoming equity owners, consultants, advisers and directors of the
for-profit firms that are financing their work. Some are even starting their own
companies.

   Concerns about such arrangements have prompted new government regulations
that require researchers to disclose potential conflicts of interest. As part of
that, universities are also drawing up their own guidelines on what is
permissible.

   At issue is the integrity of the process: Can scientists be objective about
their findings if they have a financial stake in a positive outcome?

   "There is an entrepreneurealism in the universities, which is consistent with
the times but which creates potential problems," said David Blumenthal, a
physician and health policy researcher at Harvard Medical School and
Massachusetts General Hospital.

   Blumenthal, who has tracked university-industry ties in biomedical research
for more than a decade, said the flow of private money into campus labs had
created "extraordinary incentives" for scientists to put a positive spin on
their science.

   Tufts University researcher Sheldon Krimsky examined more than 750 scientific
papers published in 14 leading medical journals in 1992. He found that more than
one-third of the scientists had a patent on the subject they were writing about,
held a seat on the board of the company funding their work or served as the
firm's scientific adviser.

   None of those potential conflicts, he said, was disclosed in the articles.

   "It very much matters where your money comes from," said Mildred K. Cho, an
associate professor of ethics at Penn's Center for Bioethics. She has proposed a
national commission to examine conflicts of interest in university-industry
alliances.

   In a 1996 survey of more than 150 scientific articles, Cho found that studies
funded by drug companies were much more likely to be favorable to a particular
drug than those that weren't company-funded.

   The boom in commercializing campus research - known as technology transfer -
began in 1980 when Congress changed federal law to give universities the right
to hold patents on campus inventions made under federal research grants.

   The new law encouraged schools to develop collaborative research projects
with private industry and required them to give campus inventors a share of the
royalties.

   Before 1980, fewer than 250 patents a year were issued to universities
because they had no financial incentive to go after them; instead, profits went
to the government.

   Now, more than 1,500 patents are awarded to universities every year,
according to the Association of University Technology Managers. University
applications for patents have also swelled, from 1,684 in 1991 to 2,799 in 1996.

   Income to universities from licensing agreements alone more than doubled
nationwide between 1991 and 1996 and now exceeds $320 million a year, according
to the association.

   "Ultimately, new inventions move from the university to the marketplace when
industry gets involved," said Stanley V. Jaskolski, vice president of the Eaton
Corp., who headed a recent National Science Foundation study on industry
involvement in research.

   To make all those deals happen, universities are spending tens of millions of
dollars on legal fees and priming their researchers not to be shy about speaking
up about the marketability of their work.

   Many researchers take offense at the notion that money might influence the
objectivity of their science.

   David Berd, an oncologist at Thomas Jefferson University who is developing a
proposed cancer vaccine in conjunction with AVAX Technologies Inc., of Kansas
City, said his "emotional investment" in the work was far more important than
any profits he might eventually earn if the therapy pans out.

   Berd, who has been working on a vaccine for melanoma since the 1980s, has
watched some of his cancer patients improve after getting inoculated with a
vaccine made from their own tumor cells. "I see patients all the time," he said.
"I've convinced myself that the therapy works. I try to be objective, but there
is an emotional stake."

   Some scientists argue that industry standards are often more exacting than
those in the university because industry must win FDA approval to recoup its
investment.

   And sometimes having the backing of a company lends credence to novel
research, scientists say.

   "The National Institutes of Health wouldn't have taken us as seriously unless
we had a company involved," said David B. Weiner, a molecular immunologist at
Penn who collaborated with Apollon Inc., of Malvern, to develop a DNA vaccine
for AIDS. The work, which has moved from mice to preliminary tests in humans,
has also been supported by $7 million in federal funds.

   Nonetheless, critics say it's not uncommon for researchers getting industry
funding to put a favorable spin on their research.

   For instance, Canadian researchers examined the debate over the
high-blood-pressure medicines known as calcium channel blockers.

   The researchers found that authors who supported the use of the medicines
were sigificantly more likely to have financial ties with the drug firms selling
the drugs than neutral or critical authors.

   Last year, a researcher at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation found himself in
the middle of a debate about the propriety of his stock purchases in a company
making the zinc cold lozenges he was studying.

   The researcher, Michael L. Macknin, bought stock from the company, Quigley
Corp., of Doylestown, after the data he was collecting in 1994 showed that the
lozenges appeared to reduce the severity and duration of common colds.

   Macknin disclosed his stock holdings to the clinic and to the medical journal
that published his study in 1996. The journal didn't note the fact that he held
stock. The stock rose sharply after the article, and Macknin made a $145,000
profit. Macknin later said that he had followed the rules in disclosing his
stock holdings and didn't feel as if he had a conflict of interest.

   The federal government is still the biggest funder of campus biomedical
research - it provided about 68 percent of the estimated $11.9 billion spent
nationwide last year - but the hand of industry is growing, particularly in
emerging fields such as gene therapy.

   "Virtually everybody who works in this area has some relationships with the
biotechnology industry," said James M. Wilson, the director of Penn's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy, which gets about 18 percent of its $25 million annual
budget from industry.

   After shunning overtures from venture capitalists for fear they were out for
short-term profits, Wilson founded his own company, Genovo Inc., of Sharon Hill,
which has licensing rights to gene products developed in his Penn lab.

   Wilson said he set up the business to have more control over the quality of
the products, not to get rich. He declined to disclose the value of his Genovo
stock but said it is non-voting stock and constitutes a minority share.

   Still, while university-industry alliances are becoming almost routine, the
deals bring into focus the often competing values of academia and the
marketplace.

   Most private collaborators, for instance, demand that they be allowed to
review journal articles before researchers submit them for publication. Some go
further, discouraging any publication at all for fear of giving away trade
secrets. This flies in the face of the free exchange of ideas that is a hallmark
of academia.

   Under NIH and the National Science Foundation rules adopted in 1995,
universities receiving grants from these agencies must have conflict-of-interest
policies. Researchers must disclose to university officials any financial
interest of more than $10,000. Such disclosures are to be passed on to federal
officials if the university deems there is a conflict, but there is no
requirement on either the university or the government to make disclosures
public.

   Although most universities have such policies, very few have gone beyond
disclosure to set limits on the ties faculty can have with industry, said Penn's
Cho, who is surveying the policies nationwide.

   At Jefferson, researchers are permitted to own equity in firms that are
funding their research, and they can serve as consultants and scientific
advisers. But they cannot be part of the company's management team or sit on its
board.

   Under one commercial deal at Jeff, a gene-therapy experiment targeting the
AIDS virus is being funded by Intracel Corp., a Seattle-area biotechnology
company. Under the agreement, the firm would get first rights to license
commercial products that result from the work, while Jefferson would hold the
patent rights. Royalties would be shared with the gene-therapy inventors -
scientist Lingxun Duan and Roger J. Pomerantz, Jefferson's infectious-diseases
chief.

   In addition, Pomerantz is a scientific adviser to Intracel and was given
stock options.

   The financial arrangement between Jefferson and Intracel was reviewed during
a Jefferson investigation last year into allegations that the gene-therapy
experiment headed by Duan was flawed and that the research was misrepresented in
journal articles.

   The Jefferson investigating committee found that the research was marred by
"extraordinarily careless science" and ordered corrections in published reports
but found no deliberate wrongdoing. Its report is being reviewed by the federal
Office of Research Integrity.

   Alan B. Kelly, Jefferson's chief counsel, said the university had "examined
and re-examined" Pomerantz's financial ties to Intracel and concluded that they
were "not material enough" to pose a conflict of interest. He said Pomerantz's
position as scientific adviser at Intracel was unpaid and that the value of his
stock options amounted to "significantly less" than a 5 percent stake in the
company. Both Kelly and Pomerantz declined to disclose the amount. Intracel is
privately held, so the options cannot be exercised unless the firm goes public.

   At Harvard, which has more than 10,000 medical clinicians and researchers,
faculty members are not allowed to own more than $20,000 in equity in a company
that is funding their research, and they can't have any equity interest at all
if it is a privately held company.

   Among Harvard's other restrictions, researchers doing clinical studies - in
which experimental therapies are tested on patients -- can serve as advisers to
companies, but they can't receive more than $10,000 a year.

   At Penn, a 10-member faculty committee meets monthly to review potential
conflicts and report them to the provost's office.

   Cho, who has a doctorate in molecular biology, is a member of that committee.
She said scientists go to great lengths to avoid bias in experiments through
such techniques as double-blind studies, in which neither researchers nor
subjects know whether patients are getting an experimental therapy or a placebo.

   "Why don't we do the same with funding?" she asked.

   Penn's policies, however, have drawn some clear lines.

   Under the rules, for instance, Wilson is forbidden to have any management or
fiduciary role in the company he founded. He cannot sit on its board of
directors or be a scientific adviser.

   "The University of Pennsylvania makes the rules," Wilson said. "What I'm in
it for is to make the therapy a success."

   In the case of the Cytometrics blood-testing deal, the company signed an
agreement to comply with Penn's conflict-of-interest rules. As part of that, the
company agreed that it wouldn't conduct any financial dealings on campus and set
up a separate office in Old City.

   Federal officials are especially concerned about commercially funded clinical
trials.

   Beginning next year, new rules at the FDA will require companies to disclose
to federal officials whether their clinical researchers, many of them in
academia, have financial interests that could affect the reliability of data.

   Michael A. Friedman, a deputy commissioner at the agency, said there may be
nothing inherently wrong with scientists' having financial ties to the products
they study, but the new regulations "will help ensure that the process is
thoroughly open and above-board."

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1909 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    June 21, 1998, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 988 words

HEADLINE: INJECTIONS FOUND PROMISING FOR LIVER CANCER TREATMENT

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Doctors are wielding needles rather than scalpels in a pair of clinical
trials now under way to treat liver cancer - a malignancy that is frequently
deadly.

   In a study at Allegheny General Hospital, Dr. Mark Roh is injecting a
combination of ethyl alcohol and a chemotherapy agent directly into inoperable
liver tumors. The alcohol, Roh said, permeates membranes rapidly and thus
carries the cancer-killing drug into the furthest reaches of the tumor.

   In the other study, at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, doctors
are injecting liver tumors with tumor-suppressing genes. Rather than poison the
tumor, the genes produce proteins that halt tumor growth and may stimulate the
body's immune system to attack the cancer.

   ''They're both reasonable things to try,'' said Dr. Brian Carr, director of
the Liver Cancer Center at the Pitt cancer institute, though he cautioned that
for now both techniques are suitable for only a subset of cancer patients.

   For Kim Hebert, 25, however, the prospect of avoiding surgery was worth a
try. The Chicago actress underwent surgery five years ago for abdominal cancer.
When tumors subsequently appeared in her liver, she looked for other treatments.

   She was in a show at the time, but she insists that wasn't the issue. ''I
just don't believe the only option is surgery,'' she said.

   So in December 1996, she sought out Roh, who was then at M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center in Houston. Using ultrasound images to guide his needle, Roh injected the
mixture of alcohol and the chemotherapy drug carmustine during Hebert's one-day
hospital stay.

   ''It definitely took a lot less time than surgery,'' Hebert said, who is
appearing in a stage play, ''Shakin' the Mess Outta Misery,'' in Kansas City
this summer.

   Although the injection damaged most of the tumor, later CT scans showed
possible signs of life in the tumor. She underwent surgery in May 1997 at
Allegheny General, where pathologists determined that the tumor was dead.

   Roh, now director of surgical oncology at Allegheny General, said Hebert's
case was unusual because her liver tumor was easy to cut out. More typical of
the patients in Roh's clinical study was the first Pittsburgh patient, who had
four tumors that could be surgically removed, but had a fifth that was
uncomfortably close to a blood vessel. In that case, Roh cut out the first four
tumors and injected the fifth.

   Carmustine isn't normally used for treating liver tumors, but it dissolves in
alcohol. Roh began testing the mixture in liver cancers after a neurosurgery
colleague at M.D. Anderson, Dr. Samuel Hassenbusch, found it effective against
brain tumors.

   ''It was very impressive in the animal studies,'' Hassenbusch said. ''The
brain tumors just basically disappeared.''

   In a clinical trial of 25 patients, Hassenbusch found that the injections
killed the tumors and extended the cancer-free period before recurrences from 3
months to one year.

   ''We're not curing patients yet,'' Hassenbusch emphasized, ''but it's a big
step forward.''

   Roh plans to treat 16 patients in his trial here.

   At the Pitt Cancer Institute, Carr and Dr. Chandra Belani have begun a trial
that involves transferring a gene called p53 into cancer tumors. The p53 gene is
a natural defense against cancer, serving to delay cell division to give the
cell time to repair damaged genetic material. Scientists speculate that when the
p53 gene itself is damaged, cells can turn malignant.

   The Pitt researchers have packaged the p53 gene inside a harmless virus,
which carries the gene inside the cell where it joins with the rest of the
cell's genetic machinery.

   This form of gene therapy already has shown some preliminary success in head
and neck cancers. Dr. Sanjiv Agarwala, the principal investigator of that study,
reported at a major oncology conference this spring that he had successfully
transferred a working version of the p53 gene into all the patients in the Pitt
study and that some showed a positive response.

   In animal studies, the addition of p53 genes has caused cancer cells to die.

   Carr said the new liver cancer study initially would look at 12 patients with
advanced liver cancer to determine if the injections had any effect on the
injected tumors.

   If the results are encouraging, Carr said, researchers may try to infuse the
entire liver with the p53 genes, rather than rely on injecting each tumor.

   The problem with injections, he said, is that many patients have more tumors
in their liver than can be practically injected. It thus would be better if
doctors could treat the entire liver.

   Cancers that originate in the liver are not common in the United States. The
American Cancer Society estimates 13,900 cases will be diagnosed this year.

   But most of those diagnoses occur relatively late in the disease, Carr said,
when the tumors have grown too large or too numerous to be cut out. An estimated
13,000 Americans will die of the disease this year.

   The liver also is a prime spot to find cancers that originated elsewhere in
the body, such as the colon or breast, and have since spread.

   Intravenous chemotherapy is ineffective against liver cancers, Carr said, but
oncologists have enjoyed success in recent years by using a catheter to infuse
the drug cisplatin directly into the hepatic artery, which feeds the liver. This
prevents the drug from being diluted in the blood stream before it reaches the
liver.

   This therapy, called intrahepatic artery chemo-embolization, also involves
infusing gelatin particles. A kind of ''smart Jello,'' the gelatin helps block
blood flow to the tumors, further increasing their uptake of cisplatin, Carr
explained.

   Though not a cure, this therapy has dramatically improved survival. In
patients with inoperable liver cancer, who otherwise might expect to live four
months, 60 percent survive at least one year and 40 percent survive two years,
Carr said.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1998


                             1910 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1998 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              June 21, 1998 Sunday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1678 words

HEADLINE: MEASURING MEDICINE'S EFFECTIVENESS THE QUEST FOR QUALITY

BYLINE: STEVE WOODWARD of the Oregonian

BODY:

   Sunday, June 21, 1998 MEASURING MEDICINE'S EFFECTIVENESS   THE QUEST FOR
QUALITY

   Summary:  A quiet revolution now under way may transform the American way of
providing health care

   ``While we've had this belief we have the best health care system in the
world, I think that many Americans in their hearts, based on our experience,
aren't so sure.'' --  David Lansky, president of the national Foundation for
Accountability

   Never mind gene therapy, bioengineered superdrugs and laser surgery.

   Does your doctor even bother to read your chart?

   In an age of medical marvels and $1 trillion-a-year health care spending,
four out of every 10 Americans say medical care actually has harmed a family
member. More than 80 percent of diabetics don't receive even minimal, basic
care from the doctors who treat their disease. And if airlines had the safety
record of hospitals -- with their annual toll of 5,000 fatal accidents and
80,000 deaths from hospital-acquired infections -- Americans would see a jumbo
jet crash every day of the year.

   ``While we've had this belief we have the best health care system in the
world, I think that many Americans in their hearts, based on our experience,
aren't so sure,'' said David Lansky, a Portland-based social scientist who
heads the national Foundation for Accountability.

   So Lansky and other health care leaders are fomenting a quiet revolution
that's forcing their own industry to vault beyond its obsession with cost
containment.

   They are demanding results.

   Not only that, they're demanding that those results be measured and  reported
in ways that are meaningful to consumers.

   It's an odd revolution, waged not so much by boisterous consumers as by a
growing legion of employers who want proof their premium dollars are healing
something other than a health care company's bottom line. The employers, in
turn, are driven by the nationwide consumer backlash against managed care.

   The soldiers in this revolution are sedate quality improvement committees
laboring in the bowels of insurance companies, hospitals and physician group
practices. The revolution's weapons are databases, statistical software and
studies in medical journals. Its targets are doctors and hospitals that
underperform or bureaucratic systems that get in the way of doing a good job.

   It's not the stuff of fiery insurrection and fast-paced TV dramas. But the
revolution packs a low-key

   90s punch that promises to improve the odds you'll live a healthier and  more
satisfying life.

   A real-life case in point:

   By measures of traditional medicine, Dorothy was getting thousands of
dollars' worth of top-notch care.

   Suffering from congestive heart failure and high blood pressure, the
75-year-old woman was getting the right medicines from her doctor. She had  lost
80 pounds, dropping from 300 pounds a year before. And each time she went to the
hospital, twice for overnight stays and four times for emergency room  visits,
she got the proper treatments.

   So what was the problem? The hospital visits, and her chest pains, were
largely unnecessary.

   Problem uncovered

   Dorothy's managed care company, Regence HMO Oregon, discovered the woman's
underlying problem after a quality improvement committee overhauled the health
maintenance organization's approach to treating congestive heart failure.
Following new protocols that called for regular patient contact, a case  manager
discovered that Dorothy was in deep debt. Homebound and suffering from boredom,
she entertained herself by making mail-order purchases that she  couldn't
afford. When creditors called each month to threaten her, she  developed chest
pains that sent her to the emergency room.

   The HMO arranged a home visit from a credit counseling agency. A counselor
put her on a budget and arranged a debt repayment schedule with her creditors.
And Dorothy has been to the emergency room just once since then.

   Largely out of sight of consumers, the health care industry is scrambling  to
launch thousands of such quality improvement projects, large and small, to
upgrade its primary product: your health.

   * Providence Health Plans is paying out $3 million in bonuses to Portland
doctors who meet quality standards for everything from practicing preventive
medicine to customer service.

   * Kaiser Permanente invited the National Committee for Quality Assurance to
conduct a voluntary white-glove inspection, earning bragging rights as the  only
Oregon HMO to earn a top accreditation from the nation's HMO quality  watchdog.

   * Regence BlueCross BlueShield of Oregon is overhauling its approach to
common, high-cost diseases such as depression and asthma, pouring effort into
patient education, treatment guidelines for doctors and cutting red tape  within
its own bureaucracy.

   * PacifiCare of Oregon is using focus groups and surveys to measure  customer
satisfaction with waiting room time, referrals to specialists and  doctors'
``art of caring.''

   Costs accepted

   For years, Americans have assumed that a $60 office visit and $100 in
prescriptions were buying top-of-the-line care. Even in a period of consumer
distrust, people who agonize for months about buying a set of tires don't
hesitate to rack up $2,628.53 -- the U.S. average per-capita health spending  in
1996 -- in doctor, hospital and drug charges they barely understand.

   Despite massive spending, the health care industry hasn't been able to  prove
that it's actually improving the health of Americans.

   Four out of every five eligible heart attack patients, for example, are  sent
home with expensive, second-rate prescription drugs. Only 21 percent of  those
patients get a beta blocker, a low-cost drug that reduces deaths from  second
heart attacks by 43 percent, according to research that's widely  available to
doctors.

   But now, every player in health care has begun to sweat about results --  how
to choose them, measure them and report them to employers and consumers.

   ``Was it effective? Did it make a difference?'' asks Susan Boardman, one of
several quality improvement specialists at BlueCross and the insurer's liaison
with the National Committee for Quality Assurance. ``We want to make sure we
spend money in a responsible manner.''

   Views differ

   A big stumbling block has been the vastly different ways that consumers and
health professionals look at quality.

   Doctors tend to focus on diagnosis and treatments, relying on test results,
research, their own experience and advice from informed colleagues. Patients
tend to focus on quality of service, noting how well a doctor communicates  with
patients, how convenient the service is and how easily patients get  referred to
specialists.

   The objective is to combine the best of both worlds and package the
information specifically for consumers.

   ``The next evolution in this quality measurement movement is to measure
clinical results,'' said Jack Friedman, executive director of Providence  Health
Plans in Oregon. ``If you look at most health plans, they continue to  reward
physicians for efficient use of resources. . . . But wouldn't it be  interesting
for women to know how effective one health plan was in diagnosing  Stage 1
breast cancer and treating it, (compared with) another one?''

   The Foundation for Accountability, in fact, already has issued proposed
guidelines for assessing how well health plans treat breast cancer patients.
The federal government and the National Committee for Quality Assurance also
have breast cancer recommendations under study.

   Guidelines under study

   And not just breast cancer. The foundation has guidelines for adult asthma,
diabetes and depression, with guidelines under study for alcohol dependency,
coronary artery disease, AIDS, low back pain and end-of-life care.

   Meanwhile, Providence Health Plans is attacking the quality conundrum in a
startlingly straightforward way: It's buying it.

   ``We said, `Let's go beyond utilization and concentrate on quality,' ''  said
Dr. James Waskey, head of the 1,200 doctors who contract to provide care  to
members of Providence Health Plans. `` `Let's build a reward structure  around
quality indicators we can agree on.' ''

   So the managed care company set aside a pool of money for quality bonuses.
Doctors who met their targets would get bonuses of up to $2 a month for each
Providence member under their care. In the modern world of big HMOs and big
medical clinics with thousands of patients, that's a tidy sum of money --
$15,000 to $20,000 a year for each doctor.

   The incentive seems to be working. Rates for a variety of preventive health
measures -- flu shots for the elderly, childhood immunizations, screenings for
breast and cervical cancer -- all rose significantly in 1997. Providence  handed
out 72 percent of the $3.8 million bonus pool in 1997, compared with 59 percent
in 1996.

   The ability to measure such clinical results is the health care industry's
Holy Grail. But consumers might be disappointed when the numbers finally roll
in.

   ``The problem is,'' said Lansky of the Foundation for Accountability,
``there are very few areas we can point to where we have evidence that we're
doing a great job.''

   Steve Woodward covers the business of health care for The Oregonian's
Health/Medicine/Science Team. He can be reached by phone at 503-294-5134, by
fax at 294-4150 or by e-mail at stevewoodward@news.oregonian.com.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo by KATHRYN SCOTT OSLER - of The Oregonian staff<  Color
Photo by CARRIE PRATT/The Oregonian

   Sidebar text -- HEAD OF FOUNDATION CARRIES BANNER OF HEALTH CARE REFORM

   Sidebar text -- BLUECROSS TAKES INITIATIVE AGAINST CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE

   Sidebar text -- PROSTATE CANCER RESEARCH GETS $59 MILLION GRANT

   Graphic -- Chart by The Oregonian -- DEFINING QUALITY DIABETES CARE

   Graphic -- Chart by The Oregonian -- THE SEAL OF APPROVAL

   Graphic -- Chart by The Oregonian -- THE RATINGS GAME

   (LIBRARY NOTE: To view complete text see the bound volume, Oregonian
microfilm or graphics notebook located in the Library. Copy was not sent to  the
Library computer.)

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = STEVE WOODWARD  of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1911 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       June 17, 1998 Wednesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: BOOSTING BIOTECH;
TINY SEGMENT OF STATE INDUSTRY SETS FOOT ON NATIONAL STAGE

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   At one of the life sciences industry's major showcases this week, Connecticut
has mobilized a delegation the size of a Broadway production crew to spotlight
its biotechnology stars.

   "This is the first time Connecticut has stepped out on the international
stage in biotechnology," said Debra Pasquale, president of Connecticut United
for Research Excellence, which represents the state's biomedical research
industry and is a co-host of the Connecticut delegation at the Bio '98
International Biotechnology Meeting & Exhibition at the New York Hilton Hotel.

      The problem, however, is that Connecticut has a small cast of actors to
show off. With only about a dozen biotechnology companies and 500 employees,
Connecticut's biotechnology industry is decidedly still way off- Broadway.
   And that's one reason that Connecticut officials had not previously
bothered showing up at events such as Bio '98.
   "It used be just Debra making a presentation," Debra Pasquale laughed.
   Pasquale has plenty of company this week.
   Representatives from three major pharmaceuctical companies with research
and development centers in Connecticut are part of the state's delegation. So
are representatives of Yale University, the University of Connecticut, the
UConn Health Center, and the state's community-technical colleges.
   New London area economic development officials are in New York trying to
drum up interest in a new biotechnology park planned for New London, part of
Pfizer's expansion from its Groton campus across the Thames River.
   Connecticut Innovation Inc., the state's high-tech development arm, is
represented, as is the private, nonprofit Connecticut Economic Resource
Center, which spent $25,000 designing and manning a Connecticut booth for the
show.
   And today, Gov. John G. Rowland is scheduled to give the main luncheon
address at the conference.
   Why such an effort for what amounts to a tiny segment of the state's
economy?
   At the dawn of an era dubbed the "Biotech Century" by some headline
writers -- a time when sheep are cloned and novel new gene therapies are
showing promise in the war against cancer -- Connecticut wants to be a player.
   "The potential is phenomenal," Rowland said. "The future for this part
of the industry is limitless."
   The biotechnology sector is also important to an industry that does have a
big impact on the state -- the four major pharmaceutical research centers that
spent $1.5 billion last year within Connecticut.
   Biotechnology companies create a vibrancy that attracts top molecular
biologists and chemists to the state, said Gary Wilson, director for science
and technology at the pharmaceutical division of Bayer Corp. in West Haven.
   And having biotechnology companies nearby creates a collegial environment
for collaborations in the development of new drugs, he said.
   "We are very good at spotting applications of ideas," Wilson said.
"Biotech companies go after those ideas early and add value to them, which
tend to make them more visible to us."
   The industry's potential has not translated into tangible growth.
Connecticut's entire biotech contingent represents only a small fraction of
the companies that have sprouted up in areas such as northern California or
Boston.
   And that is true even if four companies created at Yale earlier this year
find the laboratory space to stay in Connecticut.
   Yet boosters such as Rowland and Pasquale point to recent improvements in
that gloomy picture. The General Assembly freed up $30 million in bonding to
spur the creation of new lab space, and recently completed a $40 million
research center at the UConn Health Center that is ready for occupants.
   And in the past year, Connecticut companies have been involved in some big
biotech deals in one of the industry's hottest fields -- genomics.
Norwalk-based Perkin-Elmer Corp. and a Maryland biotechnology company have
promised to sequence the entire human genome, or genetic code, by 2002.
   CuraGen Corp., with laboratories in both Branford and New Haven, is being
paid $5 million a year by Iowa seed giant Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc.
to look for genes that can improve its seeds.
   Those are the stories that state officials want to see more often.
   Rowland said it is worth a trip to New York to talk to nearly 5,000 people
in attendence this week at Bio' 98 and add to the overall total.
   "I never pass up a chance to talk to . . . potential customers," Rowland
said.  "You've got to light the fire."


   Connecticut Biotech jobs, spending

   * Both employment and spending on biotechnology research and development in
Connecticut registered double-digit percentage gains in 1997 from 1996 levels.
Still, biotechnology remains a tiny industry in the state.

   Research & development jobs
                                1996            1997           Pct.
   Sector                       jobs            jobs           gain

   Pharmaceutical companies    4,920           5,427            10
   Academic institutions       3,500           4,000            14
   Biotechnology companies       345             485            40
   Total R&D employment        8,765           9,912            13

   Research & development spending

   Sector                       1996            1997            Gain
                              spending       spending
                          ($ millions)   ($ millions)

   Pharmaceutical companies $1,308.1         $1,467.9             12
   Academic institutions     $  279.3         $  296.0              6
   Biotechnology companies   $   55.8         $   76.5             37
   Total R&D spending        $1,643.2         $1,840.4             12

   SOURCE: Connecticut United For Excellence Inc. (CURE)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (color), MARC YVES REGIS I / THE HARTFORD COURANT; HARRY H.
PENNER JR., left, president and chief executive of
Neurogen Corp., of Branford, chats with John Markowicz, executive
director of the Southeastern Connecticut Enterprise Region, of New
London, on Tuesday at the Bio '98 conference in New York.


COLUMN: The Leading Edge

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1998


                             1912 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            June 17, 1998 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN BOOSTERS OBSTACLES GENE THERAPY?News Focus

BYLINE: Newsweek

BODY:

   Wednesday, June 17, 1998 BRAIN BOOSTERS  OBSTACLES   GENE THERAPY?

   News Focus

   Enthusiasts have embraced a range of herbs, vitamins and hormones as  mental
elixirs. Unfortunately, few have been shown to sharpen recall in  healthy
people, and some have dangerous side effects.

   GINKGO BILOBA: The most popular purported memory aid comes from the leaves of
an ornamental tree. Ginkgo might help increase oxygen flow to the brain while
acting as an antioxidant. One preliminary study suggests it might help relieve
mild dementia.

   VITAMIN E: This antioxidant helps prevent heart disease and boost immune
function. Preliminary studies suggest it also might slow the progression of
Alzheimer's disease. But no one has shown it can improve memory in healthy
people.

   DHEA: After the age of 30, the adrenal glands produce less and less of this
hormone. Mice given DHEA supplements excel on learning tasks. It's not clear
whether people do.

   ASPIRIN: Regular use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, such as aspirin and
ibuprofen, might delay the onset of Alzheimer's disease. These drugs can cause
gastrointestinal damage, but new versions might not.

   ESTROGEN: Besides lowering the risk of Alzheimer's disease in postmenopausal
women, estrogen helps support normal brain function. Studies suggest that
estrogen-replacement therapy helps maintain verbal and visual memory.

   DHA: This omega-3 fatty acid, abundant in breast milk, is critical for
babies' brain development. No one has shown that it enhances cognition later in
life,  but supplements are popular.  OBSTACLES

   Researchers have identified various influences that can keep the brain from
working at full capacity:

   -- High blood pressure: Hypertension can impair mental function, even if it
doesn't cause a stroke. -- Too little sleep (or too many sleeping pills): Both
can disrupt the formation of new memories. So can too much alcohol, or a
dysfunctional thyroid gland. -- Other memory busters: Depression, anxiety and  a
simple lack of stimulation keep us from paying full attention to our
surroundings.

   -- Information overload: ``You used to have time to reflect and think,'' says
Barry Gordon, head of the memory-disorders clinic at the Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine. ``Now you're just a conduit for a constant stream of  information.

   -- Stress: Like a strong cup of coffee, a stressful experience can energize
the brain in the short run. It triggers the release of adrenaline and other
glucocorticoid hormones, which boost circulation and unleash the energy stored
in our tissues as glucose. But this fight-or-flight mechanism causes harm if
it's turned on all the time. After about 30 minutes, says Robert Sapolsky, a
neuroscientist at Stanford University, stress hormones start to knock out the
molecules that transport glucose into the hippocampus -- leaving the brain low
on energy.

   GENE THERAPY?

   A Columbia University neuroscientist, Eric Kandel, has formed a company
called Memory Pharmaceuticals to exploit his seminal findings about memory.

   The brain stores information by strengthening the connections among
stimulated neurons. To lock in a memory, the neurons in question sprout new
branches,  creating more avenues for the exchange of chemical signals.

   Kandel has identified a pair of genes -- CREB1 and CREB2 -- that help
regulate that process. CREB1 initiates the growth process, while CREB2 holds it
in  check. Together, they act as a kind of thermostat. Kandel hopes that by
selectively inhibiting one gene or the other, we might be able to change the
setting on that thermostat.

   Partially disabling CREB2 might help anyone retain things more easily,
without becoming an indiscriminate sponge. And a drug that activated CREB2 (or
hogtied CREB1) might help trauma victims avoid having painful experiences seared
so  vividly into their brains.

   -- Newsweek:

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1913 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     June 16, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C, Maryland Watch

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: BioReliance will build viral production facility

BODY:


   Riding the wave of growth in outsourced drug manufacturing, BioReliance Corp.
of Rockville said yesterday that it will build, with help from the state, a new
viral production facility about two blocks from its headquarters on Blackwell
Road.

   The site will house BioReliance subsidiary Magenta Inc., a contract
manufacturer of gene therapy, viral vaccine and viral cancer therapy products.

   Mike Thomas, chief financial officer of BioReliance, said the facility will
cost between $ 20 million and $ 40 million and should be operational next year.

   BioReliance received a $ 3 million loan from the state's Sunny Day fund that
will be interest-free if the company adds at least 392 jobs in the state by the
end of 2003. If it falls short, the interest rate would be between 3.75 percent
and 7.5 percent.

   The company, which has six facilities in Maryland, two in Germany and two in
Scotland, had $ 47.9 million in sales in its fiscal year ended Dec. 31, up 27
percent from $ 37.7 million in 1996.

   Outsourcing of drug testing and manufacturing is expected to expand into a $
650 million market by 2000, a 20 percent annual growth rate.

   Pub Date: 6/16/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1998


                             1914 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 15, 1998, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1649 words

HEADLINE: GROWTH SPURTS;
Researchers report early success growing new coronary arteries to restore blood
supply

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    At 9:20 a.m. on March 17, cardiac surgeon James Symes stood in an operating
room at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston, picked up a syringe that a
nurse had playfully labelled "Good for Heart," and poked it into the hole he had
cut between John Barlow's ribs.

   Symes stuck the needle into Barlow's beating but battered heart at a spot
where he thought there was still some viable muscle. Taking care not to pierce
through the heart wall into the pumping chamber, he squeezed off an injection.
Two. Three. Four.

   Each shot of "the good stuff," as Symes called it, contained several million
pieces of "naked DNA" carrying the genetic code for a protein called vascular
endothelial growth factor, VEGF for short. Doctors expected about five percent
of the genes to get into Barlow's heart muscle cells, and hopefully induce them
to secrete VEGF.

   The goal was as revolutionary as the procedure was straightforward: To grow a
new blood supply for oxygen-starved sections of Barlow's 70-year-old heart.

   It may actually work. Recent preliminary results in dozens of patients are
raising cardiologists' (and drug companies') hopes that the field may be on the
threshold of the next big thing in treating advanced heart disease, an advance
comparable to the advent of coronary bypass surgery in the 1970s, or of
angioplasty, the artery-reaming technology of the 1980s.

   Before the VEGF gene injections, Barlow, a Cape Cod retiree who has survived
three heart attacks and multiple heart operations, needed a dozen or more
nitroglycerine pills for severe angina pain every day. Now he pedals an exercise
bicycle for 20 minutes at a time and bench-presses 100 pounds without a twinge.

   "It seems to have done a lot of good," he says.

   "We've seen improvement in almost every one of the eight patients we've
treated to date," says Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, chief of cardiovascular research at
St. Elizabeth's. "Some have done spectacularly well, with changes every bit as
profound as you get with successful bypass surgery or angioplasty."

   Results across town at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, involving a
similar blood vessel-promoting protein called fibroblast growth factor or FGF,
are equally encouraging.

   "We've seen patients go from Class IV symptoms - basically bedridden because
of angina pain - to power-walking," says Dr. Michael Simons, who will report his
first results on 24 patients this month in the Annals of Thoracic Surgery. "We
think this is going to work."

   Next month, a "large, definitive study of FGF" will get underway in multiple
US medical centers, Simons says. Patients will get the protein - not its gene -
or an inert placebo, both injected through a catheter that has been snaked into
the coronary arteries, an approach that obviates the need for surgery.

Older therapies still the standard

    Whatever the outcome, it will be a long time before coronary angiogenesis,
as this budding new field is called, will replace bypass surgery and
angioplasty. Those warhorse procedures have liberated countless patients from
angina pain and often extended their lives. A million Americans have one or the
other procedure every year.

   But heart researchers have long dreamed of finding a way to mimic the natural
process by which oxygen-starved heart tissue calls forth new blood vessels,
called "collaterals," to compensate for diminished flow through clogged
coronaries. In advanced disease, this natural process can't compensate
adequately, so scientists hope to amplify it.

   Not only would brand-new coronary vessels be less likely to reclog rapidly,
as bypass grafts and angioplasty-cleared coronaries often do, but they would
sprout exactly where they are needed, researchers say. That's because the
receptors on blood vessel walls that grab VEGF or FGF are naturally more
plentiful in areas where muscle tissue is most ischemic, or oxygen-starved.

   "For VEGF to work, it has to bind to receptors, which are only presented in
ischemic tissues," says Dr. Timothy Henry, director of interventional cardiology
at Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis. "That's the beauty of the
system."

   Therapeutic angiogenesis would be the polar opposite of the anti-cancer
strategy of starving tumors, which recently captured worldwide attention on the
basis of animal experiments. But it is rooted in the same research, pioneered
since the early 1970s by Boston surgeon M. Judah Folkman. In fact, one of the
experimental anti-angiogenesis drugs for cancer is called anti-VEGF.

   Isner, who is credited with pathfinding angiogenesis work in animals, last
November presented persuasive evidence that it can often work in a disabling
disorder called peripheral vascular disease, which obstructs blood flow in leg
arteries and causes excrutiating pain during walking, or even at rest, often
leading to gangrene and amputations.

   VEGF genes injected into patients' legs grew new blood vessels in 15 of 20
patients (the total is now up to 37, with similar results). Some patients
avoided amputation, their leg ulcers healed, and they were able to walk longer
distances. Among those who improved, the effect has lasted up to three years so
far.

   "About one-third of these patients have a virtually complete response, a
third have a very favorable response - allowing them to get by with only a toe
amputation, for instance - and a third don't respond at all," Isner says.

   Older patients with more advanced disease don't respond to VEGF gene therapy
as well, a finding that may hint at which heart patients will benefit.

   The partial but often impressive success of efforts to grow new blood vessels
in the leg unleashed a competitive rush among scientists and drug companies to
demonstrate the same thing in heart disease patients, a far bigger market. In
February, German researchers claimed preliminary success, although skeptics
noted that the increased blood flow could have been due to the bypass surgery
performed at the same time they injected FGF.

Biotech companies jump in

    But Genentech, Chiron, and other companies are betting heavily that the
technology will work. Isner recently announced the formation of a new company,
Vascular Genetics, to commercialize the work after $ 10 million in research
funding provided thus far by St. Elizabeth's.

   Questions and competing approaches abound. The first issue is safety,
although the experience so far has flashed a yellow light that is allowing
researchers to move ahead cautiously.

   The main worry is that the blood vessel growth factors could either nourish
the blood supply of undetected cancers and promote their growth, or cause
damaging overgrowth of vessels in tissues such as the retina of the eye or the
kidneys.

   Patients receiving angiogenesis genes or proteins are screened and monitored
for cancer or other diseases, and so far there has been no suggestion of a
problem. "You may actually promote tumor metastases, but that's a concern we
probably won't know too much about for many years," says Dr. Stephen Ellis, a
Cleveland Clinic cardiologist.

   Proving efficacy is the other big hurdle. The symptom relief felt by Barlow
and a few others is impressive to doctors and patients, and there is some data
suggesting that blood flow to the heart has improved.

   In Barlow's case, for instance, preoperative radionuclide scans showed two
dark spots in his heart after doctors injected a drug that increases the heart's
oxygen demands. The dark spots represent areas of poor blood flow.

   Two weeks after the VEGF gene injections, a repeat scan revealed that one of
the dark spots had vanished, which Isner considers clear evidence of new blood
flow. "It's almost inconceivable that the improvement on radioisotope scans
could be from chance," Isner says.

   But skeptics remain, even among those who would like to believe. "I would
caution that physically injecting anything into the heart muscle might stimulate
angiogenesis without any effect from VEGF," notes Simons. "Whenever you injure
the heart muscle, you stimulate angiogenesis."

   To be convincing, Simons and other say, studies will have to compare patients
with similar severity of disease who received angiogenesis stimulators or
placebo injections.

   Researchers also must compare the effects of VEGF and FGF, direct injections
into heart muscle versus intravenous infusions, whether injection of genes or
the actual proteins themselves works better, different doses, and dozens of
other variables.

   For instance, studies thus far suggest that VEGF produces smaller vessels,
while FGF stimulates larger vessels, perhaps approaching the diameter of
original coronary arteries. Both effects might be helpful, although some believe
that larger vessels will be better. Ultimately, the growth promoters might be
given in combination or in sequence.

   One big question, which must await many further studies of safety and
effectiveness, is who will benefit.

   The first candidates for coronary angiogenesis will be patients like Barlow
who are out of other options. "Perhaps 60,000 to 120,000 patients who undergo
cardiac catheterization every year are not good candidates for bypass surgery or
angioplasty" because their coronary arteries are so extensively clogged or they
are considered high-risk, notes Ellis of the Cleveland Clinic.

   But ultimately, researchers hope angiogenesis factors will be used either in
conjunction with conventional bypass surgery or angioplasty, or possibly long
before they become necessary, in the hope of deferring these invasive procedures
- perhaps permanently for some.

   "If this were simple and safe enough to perform, it might be enough to reduce
the amount of medication patients need or put off the need for surgery or
angioplasty," Isner says. "In your dreams, that's what you'd like to
anticipate."

 JOHN BARLOWS HEART HISTORY

    PLEASE SEE MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA GLOBE STAFF CHART

GRAPHIC: CHART PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS/STEPHEN ROSE

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1998


                             1915 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JUNE 12, 1998, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1456 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Makeover;

Rhone-Poulenc has big plans for gene therapies

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
Faint hints of a French accent are starting to surface in the U.S. biotechnology
industry.

    As part of a major corporate makeover, the 102-year-old Rhone-Poulenc SA,
one of the old-line industrial giants in Europe, has latched onto cutting-edge
medicine as its new raison d'etre.

    The strategy's centerpiece is Hayward-based RPR Gencell, a 4-year-old
division of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., the French company's pharmaceutical group.
The division is trying to pioneer gene therapies for cancer, cardiovascular
disease and nervous-system disorders.

    Jean-Rene Fourtou, Rhone-Poulenc's chairman and chief executive, outlined
the new game plan during a recent West Coast visit, portraying RPR Gencell as a
fleet-footed biotech startup scouting the world for the most promising
technology leads.

    "We cannot continue to rely on huge battalions of researchers inside our own
corporate offices," he said. "Even if you go out and hire the best biologists
today, they may not be the best five years from now."

    The 380-employee Bay Area division has set up an elaborate consortium of 18
independent collaborators, including teams at Stanford University, Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratories and outside companies such as San Diego-based Vical Inc.
and privately held Introgen Therapeutics Inc. in Texas.

    The goal is to make Rhone-Poulenc one of the first two or three drugmakers
to fashion a commercial success out of the still-unmet promises of gene therapy.

    The approach, touted for years but held back by some nasty technical
surprises, is aimed at treating diseases at the source of the problem, either by
injecting patients with specially packaged bits of genetic material or by
doctoring their own genes.

    At Rhone-Poulenc, the most promising projects include a potential cancer
treatment, now in mid-stage clinical trials, based on the famed p53
tumor-suppressor gene.

    It's been dubbed a "master" gene that essentially guards over your DNA,
making sure any defective cells are repaired or destroyed. Defects in the p53
gene have been implicated in more than half of all cancers.

    By injecting a healthy form of the gene into and around a tumor,
Rhone-Poulenc hopes to override the defective gene and activate the patient's
own cancer-killing mechanisms. Although Rhone-Poulenc isn't the only company
working on a p53 treatment, the French company claims to be the furthest along.
It plans to file for U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in 1999 to
market a p53 treatment for head and neck cancer.

    "A treatment is not so far away," Fourtou said. "We actually thought it
would take longer than it has taken to get this far."

    In a move designed partly to elevate the strategic role of gene therapy, RPR
Gencell's general manager, Thierry Soursac, was named to a top-level executive
vice president position this week.

    "Gene therapy is an integral part of the Rhone-Poulenc strategy and
commitment to life sciences," Soursac said yesterday. "The area of molecular
medicine cannot be ignored by any major industry player."

    Until lately, Rhone-Poulenc was better known for its strong unions,
polluting chemical plants and moribund finances than high-tech medical research.

    It was considered moribund in the early 1980s, when it was nationalized by
the Mitterrand government. Fourtou was hired in 1986 to turn things around,
eventually leading the company back into the hands of private investors in 1993.

    When Fourtou took the helm, the bulk of sales were in chemicals, industrial
plastics and fibers. Only 30 percent had anything to do with the sexier "life
sciences" categories now in vogue.

    That balance has shifted dramatically. Drugs, vaccines and agricultural
products last year comprised 60 percent of sales and continue growing.

    It wasn't a smooth transition. Fourtou inherited a dizzying collection of
120 separate business units and 80,000 employees worldwide.

    Now, all but 30 businesses have been sold off, shut down or diverted into
joint ventures with outside firms. Jobs have been cut to 68,000, a move that has
occasionally drawn union pickets to Fourtou's doorstep.

    On the plus side, the company's profile outside France and Europe has been
steadily rising, particularly in North America, which now accounts for 26.5
percent of sales, nearly triple the share 10 years ago.

    The company took the final step in its reorganization plan on Monday, when
it spun off a 30 percent stake in its revamped specialty-chemicals unit, called
Rhodia, through a public stock offering.

    "We've come to the end of a 12-year period of painful transformation,"
Fourtou said. "The demonstrations at my home -- that phase, I hope, is done. Our
intent now is to innovate."

    Participants in the RPR Gencell consortium speak confidently of spearheading
a revolution in the way incurable diseases like cancer are treated.

    "Twenty years from now we will all look back and wonder why we were ever
treating cancer with poisons," said Vical CEO Alain Schreiber.

    Despite all the promise, however, there's still no proof that the new-style
gene medicines will prove effective for large numbers of patients.

    Investigators only recently claimed to have perfected ways to deliver the
therapy into the cells where it can do some good.

    Questions are also being raised about the consortium approach taken by
Rhone-Poulenc.

    Comparable ventures in other high-tech fields like semiconductors and
computer-networking have been hard to hold together, noted G. Steven Burrill,
head of Burrill & Co., a San Francisco merchant bank specializing in medical
ventures.

    "By and large, consortia don't work," Burrill said. "It's a neat idea, but
it's tough. You can have a hub-and-spoke system that works well in theory, but I
don't know that all the spokes want to stay connected."

    The key question is who will end up with the profits from any technology
developed by the consortium, and who will end up footing the bill for the
inevitable failures.

    In most other collaborations between big pharmaceutical companies and small
biotech outfits, there's a clear understanding of what each party will
contribute and how the pie is divided.

    That doesn't seem to be the case at RPR Gencell. But Soursac said the setup
has the advantage of flexibility.

    "The concept behind our partnerships is that we are an assembler of
technology -- not the creator of each technology," Soursac said. "Our
partnership structure is less about control and more about building commercial
possibilities."

    Analysts said the consortium is just one approach among many in a very
complicated field.

    "All of these companies are still trying to sort out what's the most
effective business model," said Scott Morrison, a biotech analyst at Ernst &
Young, the big accounting and consulting firm.

    Merger rumors also swirl around the company. Some analysts still consider it
undervalued and therefore a possibly attractive merger partner in the rapidly
consolidating drug industry.

    For now, at least, Fourtou is not ruling out anything, including a merger if
the right deal came along. But he said his main focus is to build a strong
product pipeline internally and through his "loose but nevertheless managed" RPR
Gencell consortium.

    The company aims to deliver at least 15 percent annual revenue growth over
the next several years. "Merger or no merger," Fourtou said, "we are striving
for innovation."


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   GENE THERAPY FOR CANCER

   Rhone-Poulenc's gene therapy division, Hayward-based RPR Gencell, plans to
seek FDA approval next year for a new cancer treatment using a gene called p53.
Here's how it's designed to work:

   1. A special virus is loaded with the p53 gene and injected into a cancerous
tumor.

   2. The virus, which cannot cause disease, delivers the healthy p53 gene into
wildly dividing cancer cells.

   3. Once inside the cell, the new gene makes a protein that recognizes
defective cancer cells and either directs them to stop dividing (right) or marks
them for destruction (left).


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   RHONE-POULENC SA / At a Glance

   HEADQUARTERS: Paris

   CHAIRMAN/CEO: Jean-Rene Fourtou

   EMPLOYEES: 68,000 worldwide

   BUSINESSES: Rhodia (specialty chemicals); Pasteur Merieux Connaught
(vaccines); Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. (pharmaceuticals); RPR Gencell (gene
therapy).

   STOCK SYMBOL/EXCHANGE: RP/NYSE (American depository receipts)

   52-WEEK HIGH/LOW: $58.63/$33.50.

   YESTERDAY'S CLOSE: $54.88

   CURRENT MARKET CAPITALIZATION: $74 billion

   1997 RESULTS:REVENUES: $15 billion

   NET INCOME: $832 million loss ($570 million profit excluding one-time
charges)



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC, PHOTO CUTLINE: Rhone-Poulenc Chairman and CEO Jean-Rene
Fourtou toured the Hayward office of RPR Gencell, where senior research
scientist Shian Jiun Shih explained a viral-formulation project to him. / BY
MICHAEL MACOR/THE CHRONICLE; GRAPHIC CUTLINE: TERRI HUNTER-DAVIS/THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1998


                             1916 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    June 10, 1998, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Lawmakers approve $ 16.4 million in aid for businesses; High-tech
companies, glassmaker get grants; Sunny Day Fund

BYLINE: JoAnna Daemmrich, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Maryland lawmakers approved $ 16.4 million in economic development aid to
private industry yesterday, boosting a group of high-tech companies and a
hand-blown glass manufacturer moving into depressed Garrett County.

   In contrast to last year, the Legislative Policy Committee gave its blessing
to the latest round of business grants and low-interest loans with little
debate.

   None of the expenditures from the state's Sunny Day Fund was politically
sensitive, unlike the $ 500,000 sought by the Glendening administration last
year for an influential chain of radio stations. Cathy Hughes, the stations'
co-owner, turned down the controversial loan in January to protest the General
Assembly's expulsion of Baltimore Sen. Larry Young for ethics transgressions.

   According to state officials, the 10 business development initiatives
approved yesterday are expected to create as many as 3,600 new jobs and keep an
existing 4,800 jobs in Maryland.

   One of the smallest yet potentially most far-reaching aid packages went to a
pottery and glass manufacturer that is moving to Garrett County.

   Simon Pearce, based in Vermont, is taking over the old Bausch & Lomb plant
that was the county's biggest employer until it closed in 1996.

   The company won $ 500,000 in start-up aid, though some lawmakers expressed
reservations because it did not come up with the required private investment
match.

   State business officials, however, touted the project as a way to put 150
people to work in the northwestern corner of Maryland. Unemployment in the
Appalachian hills of Garrett County has hit double digits, and the new jobs
could help 7 percent of the jobless, said James D. Fielder Jr., acting secretary
of the state Department of Business and Economic Development.

   "These are extraordinary economic development conditions," he said.

   Sen. Clarence W. Blount, a Baltimore Democrat, agreed the county "needs all
the help it can get."

   Of the successful applicants chosen from 59 firms seeking Sunny Day
assistance, half were high-tech and biotechnology companies.

   In the highly competitive technology industry, companies generally try to
preserve as much of their cash flow as possible for research. Many have sought
state aid for construction of new headquarters or new labs.

   Among them were the Rockville-based BioReliance Corp., which won a $ 3
million, interest-free loan to help a subsidiary expand and to lease a new
manufacturing plant.

   The subsidiary, Magenta Corp., received $ 3.5 million in federal contracts
last fall to produce viral materials for experimental gene therapy studies by
the National Institutes of Health.

   Manugistics Group Inc., a manufacturing software maker based in Rockville,
obtained a $ 1.75 million loan to help lease or purchase new offices.

   The loan will be forgiven if the company keeps 445 of its 1,300 employees in
Maryland and creates an additional 555 jobs.

   Manugistics recently acquired Tyecin Systems Inc., a Los Angeles software
manufacturer, after a tumultuous few months in which its stock value soared 40
percent in March, only to plummet in May after disappointing first-quarter
earnings.

   Other expenditures included $ 1 million to AlliedSignal Corp. to buy
equipment as part of a $ 17.2 million new facility in Columbia; and $ 2.4
million to Maryland Casualty Co. for renovations and construction of a parking
garage in North Baltimore's Roland Park.

   Pub Date: 6/10/98

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1998


                             1917 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    June 10, 1998, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B03; METRO IN BRIEF: MARYLAND

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: Economic Development Loans Approved

BODY:


   Maryland legislative leaders approved $ 16.4 million in state economic
development loans yesterday meant to encourage corporations to increase jobs and
expand operations in the state.

   Companies benefiting include: AlliedSignal Technical Services Corp., which
received $ 1 million to lease a new headquarters in Howard County; Bell Atlantic
Mobile Inc., which got $ 1.5 million to lease a new headquarters in Howard
County; BioReliance Corp., which got $ 3 million to renovate a headquarters in
Montgomery County; and Digene Corp., which got $ 1 million to lease a new
laboratory and office in Montgomery.

   Also: Genetic Therapy Inc., which received $ 2 million to build a laboratory
and offices in Montgomery; Manugistics Inc., which got $ 1.75 million to lease a
new headquarters in Montgomery; Maryland Casualty Co., which got $ 2.4 million
to build a parking garage in Baltimore and Montgomery County; and U.S.
Foodservice, which got $ 250,000 to build a headquarters in Howard.

   Legislators also approved $ 1.5 million for Northrop Grumman, the third
installment of a $ 11.5 million loan the company is receiving over five years.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1998


                             1918 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 9, 1998, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; GLOSSING OVER; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: 'Owner's manual' for women's health

BYLINE: BY CYNTHIA DOCKRELL

BODY:


   Health makes wealth for plenty of folks these days, and not just insurance
companies. With the topic of women's health in particular gaining both
respectability and research dollars, publishers would be nuts not to report on
it in depth.

   Scientific American has sure done so, in "Women's Health: a Lifelong Guide."
Part New England Journal of Medicine, part Our Bodies, Ourselves, this special
issue wants to be all things to all women. Considering the breadth of its
ambition, it succeeds pretty well.

   The editors have organized it like a reference book, with sections that
correspond to age: teens and 20s, 30s and 40s, 50s and 60s, and 70s and up. Each
begins with a fact sheet telling what kinds of checkups to have and when, and
then branches into articles about issues common to the age group. The usual
subjects show up -- eating disorders, pregnancy, menopause, osteoporosis -- but
whereas other magazines might stop there, this one goes on to consider
public-health concerns: the huge cost to society of violence against women,
gender differences in disease, the ethics of assisted reproduction, and so on.
The stories are thoughtfully presented, the Q&A's with physicians authoritative
yet accessible.

   Intending to skim, I instead found myself reading at length about the ages
I've been and the ages I've yet to be. Stories about medicine and health are
irresistible. They're the closest thing we have to an owner's manual for our
bodies.

   How about building new bodies? Thanks to the explosive growth in genetics
research and experimentation, we've all imagined an Aldous Huxley-like scenario
of clones and genetically engineered humans taking over the world. Leave it to
Mother Jones to show us how easily the fantasy could come true.

   A pull-out in the June issue considers everything from patenting body parts
to designing custom babies. The fear that one day we'll deem any number of
common traits defective and edit them out of our genetic profile is not new, of
course, but it's one thing to think about this in the abstract and another to
look at it in detail. As Jeremy Rifkin points out here, in an excerpt from his
new book, few of us would hesitate to eliminate genes for such scourges as
cancer and diabetes, but what's to stop us from then getting rid of
colorblindness or dyslexia? Heck, we might as well program for perfection.
Rifkin cites a poll in which 43 percent of respondents said they'd use gene
therapy to improve their babies' physical characteristics.

   Other articles here report on Iceland's isolated gene pool, which is a gold
mine for biomedical researchers; the question of regulating research; and how
the debate over cloning has gotten all wrapped up, inappropriately, with the
abortion debate. As William Saletan writes, "Cloning abolishes the genetic
difference between parent and child. If gay parenthood means that Heather has
two mommies, cloning doesn't just mean that Heather has one mommy; it means
that, genetically, Heather is her mommy. So if Heather's mommy has a husband and
daughter, then genetically, Heather is her sister's mommy and her daddy's wife."

GRAPHIC: BOSTON GLOBE

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1998


                             1919 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 8, 1998 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1964 words

HEADLINE: FEELING BETTER WHILE GETTING TREATMENT

BYLINE: Stacey Burling, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   After Mary Ann Snyder was diagnosed with small-cell lung cancer in March
1997, doctors at Fox Chase Cancer Center hit her with a barrage of treatments
that would have been unthinkable 20 years ago.

   Twice a day for three weeks, she got radiation, aimed at her tumor with the
help of a computer and a CAT scan. Every three weeks for three months, she
received a cocktail of three chemotherapy drugs.

   Even in her doctors' carefully chosen words, the treatment was "toxic" - and
not just to her cancer. Unlike earlier cancer patients, though, Snyder received
a powerful anti-nausea drug along with her chemotherapy. She got pain pills for
the excruciatingly sore throat the treatment caused, and other medicine to calm
her inflamed esophagus. If she'd developed anemia or another blood problem - and
many cancer patients do - her doctors could have given her several relatively
new drugs that boost the production of red and white blood cells and platelets.

   Snyder, 53, is back at work now as an account administrator for Travelers
insurance in Wyomissing. Her cancer is in remission. As for the treatment, she
says, "it wasn't as bad as I thought it would be." Snyder still had days when
she could barely get out of bed and her throat still hurt horribly. She landed
in the hospital once with a potassium deficiency. But the dreaded nausea wasn't
all that awful, she said. She only threw up seven times or so a day for the
three days after a treatment. From what friends had told her, she was expecting
to retch 30 times a day, indefinitely.

   While frontier cancer scientists experimenting with gene therapy, vaccines
and tumor growth inhibitors are grabbing the headlines, the overwhelming
majority of cancer patients still receive the traditional treatments: surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy. These treatments have been around for decades, but
doctors use them differently now.

   Snyder's experience typifies much of what has changed in cancer treatment in
recent years. While doctors once tried one therapy at a time, they now wallop
the cancer cells with as much as possible right from the start, often combining
more than one type of treatment and more than one drug. They've gotten better at
targeting radiation, so there's less damage to nearby tissues. Some of their
biggest advances have come in treating the misery the treatments inflict, but
they're still not foolproof.

   All in all, doctors said, it's giving patients a better chance at survival -
in some cases, even cure - and letting them live more fully during their
treatment. Many patients now have little nausea after chemotherapy. They can go
to work the next day. Some have enough energy to play golf even in the final
stages of the disease.

   But this is a field of medicine in which success is still measured in
hard-fought inches, not miles. Just 30 years ago, a lung cancer patient like
Snyder would already have died; less than 10 percent of patients were alive even
two years after their diagnosis, said Benjamin Movsas, Snyder's radiation
oncologist at Fox Chase. Today, almost half make it two years, but
three-quarters are dead within five.

   Even small improvements, though, affect thousands of people; 170,000 new
cases of lung cancer are diagnosed each year in this country.

   Doctors are doing much better with breast and colon cancer. The majority of
childhood cancers are now cured, as are some adult cancers. There could soon
come a time when cancer, kept at bay by repeated rounds of chemotherapy, could
be considered a chronic disease, such as heart disease or diabetes.

   "The paradigm is shifting toward managing of the disease," said Robert Ozols,
senior vice president for medical science at Fox Chase. "Hopefully, more people
will be dying with their disease than of their disease."

   As testimony to these successes, the National Cancer Institute two years ago
established the Office of Cancer Survivorship. Its job is to foster research
into the problems of people alive more than five years after their diagnosis.
More than 8 million people in this country fall into that category.

   Anna T. Meadows, a pediatric oncologist at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia who directs the Office of Cancer Survivorship, said more research
is needed on quality of life, second cancers and reproductive issues.

   Better control of cancer, she said, also calls for a change in the way the
disease is viewed. The key issue is not cure, but whether cancer causes
"premature" death. Eighty percent of women with breast cancer now live at least
10 years, she said. "If you're 40 when you get breast cancer, that's not
enough," she said. "But if you're 70 when you get breast cancer, that may be
OK."

   While the public may speak of cancer as if it's one disease, it is actually a
hundred different diseases, and a modern doctor needs to know a lot more than
whether it's malignant or not, said John Glick, director of the University of
Pennsylvania Cancer Center. There are four major kinds of lung cancer. Breast
cancer comes in many different varieties. Liver cancers rarely start in the
liver; they've spread from somewhere else.

   In the last 10 years, pathologists have gotten increasingly sophisticated at
sorting out these differences. They now can better tell where the cancer
originated. They can identify more subtypes and genetic differences. They are on
the verge of knowing whether a lung tumor discovered 10 years after a woman was
treated for breast cancer is a metastasis from the original cancer or a new
tumor, said Virginia Livolsi, a Penn pathologist. All this information helps
doctors determine prognosis and tailor treatment to the individual.

   Doctors now are more likely to combine multiple types of treatment early on
to get their best shot at eradicating the errant cells.

   "A patient's best chance to be cured is the first time they're diagnosed,"
Glick said.

   Surgery, still a mainstay of cancer treatment, is often combined with
chemotherapy or radiation. This approach is more likely to lead to cure and less
likely to leave patients feeling maimed and disabled. Mastectomies are less
common. People with rectal cancer do not always need colostomies. Those with
cancer of the larynx may not lose their voices.

   Radiation has become ever more sophisticated. Doctors now use computers to
target the radiation beams. They aim at a tumor from several different
directions so that cancer cells get a bigger dose of radiation while surrounding
tissues get less. With the aid of CT scans, they create more precisely drawn
shields to protect normal tissues. In some cases, such as prostate cancer,
doctors also can implant tiny radioactive "seeds" in a tumor, either temporarily
or permanently.

   "Computer planning makes the old radiotherapy from 10 or 15 years ago look
very primitive today," Glick said.

   Some tumors can best be treated with proton beams directed from giant
machines that deliver radiation with even more precision. Only two are in use
now in the country, but Penn is exploring buying one of the three-story devices.

   When it comes to chemotherapy, doctors now have more drugs to work with, but
most still cannot target cancer cells alone. Instead, they attack all rapidly
dividing cells. That's the reason they make people feel so bad and make them
lose their hair.

   But the doctors have found chemotherapy drugs that do not make people as
sick. For example, cisplatin, once a widely used chemotherapy drug, has largely
been replaced by carboplatin, a related and equally effective drug that's easier
on patients.

   Through years of clinical trials, doctors are getting better at figuring out
how best to combine drugs to get the biggest hit. Patients are often given
chemotherapy earlier in the course of their disease to prevent recurrence
entirely or forestall it. Such adjuvant therapy is a big reason survival is up
for colon and breast cancer patients. It also allows patients to get
chemotherapy for shorter periods of time, at least in the early stages of the
disease.

   Nonetheless, said Robert Comis, director of Allegheny University's Center for
Cancer Clinical Trials, much of chemotherapy is still the equivalent of "cluster
bombing the genome." As scientists learn more about cancer cells, they're trying
to find drugs they can target more effectively. "We're moving toward the Exocet
missile approach," Comis said.

   In the meantime, patients are still getting treatments that can feel like an
assault, treatments that have as much to do with cancer's terrible reputation as
its death toll.

   "It's the only disease I can think of where people are equally afraid of the
treatment as they are of the disease," said Dr. Paul Wallner, director of the
Cooper Cancer Institute at Cooper Hospital/University Medical Center.

   "I see patients all the time who say, 'Under no circumstances will I ever
consider chemotherapy.' "

   In fact, he and other doctors said patients' image of cancer treatment is out
of step with the modern reality. Some of the greatest recent improvements have
come in what doctors call supportive care: alleviating symptoms both of the
disease and the treatment.

   "It's only within the past few years that doctors have begun paying attention
to the impact of their treatment," said Ann Berger, a former oncology nurse who
went to medical school and is now in charge of supportive services at Cooper
Cancer Institute.

   New anti-nausea drugs like Zofran that Penn's Glick calls "truly miraculous"
have become more prevalent in the last five years and are now used routinely.

   "When I was a nurse, I remember patients vomiting nonstop," Berger said. "You
just don't see that anymore."

   Doctors have also come a long way in treating pain, which is more often a
problem in later stages of cancer but can also occur after treatments.

   And new drugs such as erythropoietin, Neupogen and Neumega, that stimulate
the body to produce more blood cells are helping to fight the fatigue and immune
problems that often accompany chemotherapy.

   More work needs to be done, Berger said, on combating weight loss, breathing
problems and mouth sores, another common side effect of chemotherapy.

   No one has figured out a way to stop patients from losing their hair.

   Despite all the improvement, cancer treatment can still be a harrowing
experience, but there is more help available.

   Diane Carswell suffered miserably through radiation and chemotherapy for
cancer of the larynx. She got horrible sores in her throat that made it almost
impossible to swallow. If she did manage to eat something, she soon threw it up.

   "Oh, my God, it was hideous," the 46-year-old Stratford, Camden County, woman
said. "I thought I was going to die. At best, if I was going to live, I didn't
want to."

   She was referred to Berger's program and given different pain medication.
With her pain under better control, the nausea got better, too. With a doctor
she could talk to, she felt better.

   Berger was a "godsend," said Carswell, who has been cancer free for eight
months.

   On the other hand, Sonya Whynman, an Egg Harbor Township woman who is being
treated at Penn for lung cancer, has had few problems. Her cancer had
metastasized to her hip bone. She had surgery and radiation to the bone plus
chemotherapy. Aside from a couple of days of fatigue after a dose of
chemotherapy, and some flushing in her face, she's had few side effects. She got
intravenous anti-nausea medicine with her chemotherapy and never needed to fill
a prescription for more drugs afterward. "I was very pleasantly surprised," she
said.

   PHILADELPHIA ONLINE * Doctors from The Cooper Health System will answer your
questions on cancer therapies through Friday on Philadelphia Online, The
Inquirer's site on the Internet: http://health.phillynews.com

NOTES: One in a series of occasional articles on new approaches to fighting
cancer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Benjamin Movsas, a radiation oncologist at Fox Chase Cancer Center, explains how
imaging is used to direct radiation treatment more precisely. (The Philadelphia
Inquirer, MICHAEL MALLY)
At Cooper Cancer Institute's Supportive Care Services, Ann Berger (left) has
relieved some of the "hideous" pain Diane Carswell suffered while being treated
for larynx cancer. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, MICHAEL MALLY)
Mary Ann Snyder's small-cell lung cancer is in remission, thanks to aggressive
therapy she received at Fox Chase Cancer Center.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1920 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 7, 1998, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2037 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
 VIAGRA SHOWS THE POTENCY OF INSURERS;
 THIS DRUG AND OTHER MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGHS RAISE QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW COMPANIES
DECIDE WHAT TO COVER AND HOW THAT AFFECTS PEOPLE'S LIVES.

BYLINE: DAVID R. OLMOS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The simple e-mail posting on an Internet discussion group about sexual
impotence asked an intriguing question.

   "My insurance is paying for eight Viagra pills every 30 days," read the
message from "Theodore." "Are they trying to tell me something?"

   Although Theodore didn't answer his own question, the implication seemed
clear: His insurance company had determined that sex twice a week--not once a
week, not once a month--was about right. If he wanted more frequent sex, he'd
have to pay for it himself.

   Of all the reverberations triggered by the anti-impotence pill
Viagra--ranging from an apparently endless supply of jokes to new marital
dynamics among senior citizens--one of the most important is more subtle.

   Viagra has brought into sharp focus the increasing role that health insurers,
by default, play in deciding what's important to society. Through a process that
largely takes place behind closed doors, health insurers decide what to cover,
shaping the behavior of millions of Americans.

   Employers, who pay for most health insurance in this country, also play an
important role in the process. They can decide whether a particular benefit,
such as contraceptives, will be included in workers' health packages. This
influence is increasingly felt as employers pressure insurers to reduce medical
costs and premiums.

   Health insurers traditionally have made important decisions for people, but
in most cases the judgments are straightforward. They pay to inoculate children
against measles or for an operation to treat cancer. They generally don't pay
for cosmetic surgery--a breast enlargement, for example--or for baldness or diet
drugs (except when obesity poses a severe health risk).

   But as medical technology moves at a dizzying pace, where is the line between
"medically necessary" services and those that simply enhance our lives by making
us feel or look better, or enable us to enjoy an active sex life? And who should
draw this line?

   Today, medical innovations, the climate of medical cost containment and a new
generation of so-called quality of life drugs--of which Viagra is only the
beginning--have driven the debate into new territory.

   And some observers, including managed care executives, are questioning the
role of insurers.

   "We find ourselves in the role of being private regulators and making public
policy by HMO," said Alan Hoops, chief executive officer of PacifiCare, the big
HMO based in Santa Ana. "We're in the business of constantly passing judgment on
the societal value of a given protocol."

   Hoops added: "We are making very difficult decisions on questions that,
frankly, have no right answer."

   Take, for example, Theodore's question on the Internet.

   How did his health insurer conclude that twice-a-week sex was "medically
necessary"? Should members of Theodore's health plan have to pay for him, and
others, to enjoy sex if it means premiums for everyone--including those barely
able to afford insurance at all--go up?

   Moreover, sexual "need" varies greatly from one person to the next, noted
Emily Friedman, a Chicago-based health policy analyst.

   "There are people who commit suicide because of sexual incapacity," she said.
"But on the other hand, there are people who write Ann Landers and say, 'My
husband and I just decided we didn't need to have sex anymore.' "

   While many managed care firms say they are still reviewing whether to cover
Viagra, Blue Cross of California was one of the first to decide to pay for the
erection pill. The insurer will pay for six pills per month for men with an
underlying medical condition, such as diabetes or prostate cancer, associated
with impotence.

   In arriving at the six-pill figure, Blue Cross said it consulted major
teaching hospitals and university researchers and, of course, its own
accountants.

   "We decided that one pill a month clearly would cause a lot of ill will among
the membership, and if you paid for 30 pills it would become cost-prohibitive,"
said Peter O'Neill, a company spokesman.

   Emotional Issues

   The issue of medical necessity has become complex and emotional. It has
surfaced in debates over whether insurers should pay for risky bone marrow
transplants for breast cancer patients, and how quickly new mothers and their
babies should be discharged from the hospital.

   How much reconstructive surgery is truly needed for children with severe
facial disfigurement? Surgeons could simply restore normal functions or do more
elaborate, and more costly, work that would dramatically improve patients'
lives.

   "Do we reconstruct the entire face or simply improve it?" asked John
Golenski, a medical ethicist in Berkeley who does consulting for HMOs. "How to
draw those lines is not clear in any insurance organization I've ever worked
with."

   At the center of such questions is the fact that health care economics have
become a zero-sum game. The drive to rein in medical costs means that when a
health plan or employer decides to pay for a treatment such as Viagra, everyone
pays--in higher premiums or lost coverage.

   "We've had discussions with several large employers expressing significant
concern over coverage of Viagra and what it would do to their pharmacy budgets,"
said Dr. Sam Ho, PacifiCare's medical director.

   At roughly $ 10 a pill retail, Viagra forces the issue because it is
expensive--and arguably optional from the insurer's point of view. It has been
estimated that perhaps 30 million U.S. men might have some form of erectile
dysfunction. If 10 million of them began taking Viagra once a week, the cost
would total about $ 5.3 billion a year.

   "That we have a drug that appears to enhance male sexual capacity is a good
thing," said Friedman. "But is it worth it if it means losing a benefit for
someone else, raising the cost of insurance for the poor or further stressing
the finances of the public health care system? My feeling is the trade-off is
not worth it."

   Who Decides?

   Indeed, Viagra has opened a Pandora's box of controversy over the insurance
industry's seemingly inconsistent coverage of other sexual and reproductive
activity. Many cover birth control, but some don't. Insurers generally do not
pay for costly reproductive treatments, including certain infertility
treatments.

   To some, the willingness of insurers or employers to pay for Viagra--a drug
used mainly by men beyond the normal child-rearing age, and thus to simply make
life more enjoyable--is a clear reflection of who runs the nation's economy.

   "If this were reversed, and this was a drug that gave women better and longer
orgasms, there wouldn't be an insurer in the country that would pay for it,"
said Friedman. "This is an issue of extremely powerful interest to men, and men
are the decision-makers."

   As drug companies ponder Viagra's blockbuster success and the prospects of a
growing baby boomer population eager to look and feel younger, the impetus for
more quality-of-life drugs seems obvious.

   Golenski says that a decade from now the Viagra debate will "look primitive.
The new pharmacology will have an enormous capacity to improve the performance
levels of the human body, to let us live longer or better. And all of this will
cost a lot of money."

   As it now stands, decisions about how to allocate medical resources and which
benefits to cover, or not, mostly are made by insurers.

   As health care is increasingly dominated by large, publicly traded
corporations intent on maximizing profits for shareholders, should insurers be
taking the lead on issues of such importance to society? Can the competitive
marketplace handle these issues in a way that society will find acceptable?

   Some ethicists think not.

   "When you have the private marketplace answering these questions, the poor
end up with less insurance and the better off with better insurance through
private plans," said Arthur Caplan, a bioethicist at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Golenski says the free market competition that helped rein in medical
inflation may be inappropriate for addressing the "bare- bones issues of how
much of our national wealth are we willing to allocate for health care versus
other needs we have."

   Some experts suggest that government--or some type of independent body
outside the health insurance industry--would be a better way to address tough
social policy issues raised by the new medical technologies.

   A few states already have attempted to tackle these problems. Seeking to
reduce its uninsured population, Oregon in the mid-'90s pioneered a
controversial program in which medical services for Medicaid recipients are
ranked by costs and benefits.

   In New York, a state task force of physicians, nurses, lawyers and
bioethicists is charged with issuing policy recommendations on a host of medical
technology issues. In a recent report on reproductive technologies, the panel
recommended that the state should not require insurers to pay for infertility
treatments when millions of New Yorkers lacked insurance coverage and had no
access to basic health care services.

   Although HMOs have generally opposed efforts for stronger government
regulation, PacifiCare's Hoops sees a need for "more coordinated benefit
decision making."

   "I think this is where HMOs could give up some local autonomy to a more
centralized entity that would provide consistent guidelines," he said.

   Managed care companies contend that an advantage of their system is that
health decisions are made on the basis of what's best for a "population" of
patients--not any one individual. Many health policy experts applaud that
approach as a more equitable means of allocating finite medical resources and
improving the health of the general population.

   So how do health plans make decisions on how to allocate their members'
medical dollars? Most plans have committees made up of their own physician
administrators, as well as doctors, pharmacists and other health professionals.

   PacifiCare has several committees that review such issues as contractual
obligations, medical need and cost effectiveness, and pharmaceutical issues.

   The committees, usually meeting in private, review scientific literature and
other clinical data to decide if a new drug or treatment will be a covered
benefit.

   One problem with this approach is that it's not often clear to the plan's
members how or why a decision was reached. HMOs often argue that such
information is "competitive" and could be used by rivals. But the lack of
openness about the process can be a sore point with the public.

   "It's relatively poorly understood how health plans make their decisions, and
part of the problem is they tend to cloak their benefit decision in secrecy,"
said Golenski.

   In reality, benefit decisions don't happen in a vacuum in which good medicine
and science always win out. Insurers have learned by experience that a decision
to not cover a particular treatment--even one they believe is justified from a
medical standpoint--can bite them back.

   "People say, 'I'm going to go to the newspaper if you don't give me gene
therapy for my brain cancer,' " said Caplan.

   Indeed, the strategy of "going to the press" seems to have mushroomed as the
media focus on the controversy surrounding managed care.

   And sometimes they go to court. A New York man who says his insurer denied
coverage for Viagra sued Oxford Health Plans and other unidentified insurers in
federal court in Brooklyn seeking to get them to pay for the impotence pill.

   PacifiCare's Hoops acknowledges the problem: "When we have a special interest
group that makes its voice heard loud enough, we sometimes relent and give them
what they want."

   Doctors are sometimes a special interest, too. Already, local urologists and
other specialists who have a financial stake in the matter are pushing Los
Angeles County health officials to approve covering use of Viagra by the poor,
several doctors said.

   Indeed, Caplan says the public pressure to pay for Viagra is intense.

   "When the upper and middle class sees a drug that can bring back sexual
function, improve the quality of life and restore a central aspect of life, it
is laughable to think that the pressure won't be overwhelming."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1998


                             1921 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             June 05, 1998, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy;
seen promising;
in treatment;
of sickle cell

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A new type of genetic therapy might provide a way to control
sickle cell anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black
people.
In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists were able to change
sickled blood cells into normal cells using proteins that snip, clip and correct
mutated genetic instructions.
Dr. Bruce Sullenger of Duke University, lead author of the study published today
in the journal Science, said the new technique doesn't change the mutated genes
but rather corrects the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message
to blood cells.
A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.
In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said the sickle cell mutation was corrected
by changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other attempts at
gene therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions instead of the
RNA that carries the instructions to the cell.
Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the cells in the body.
Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed and don't
circulate with the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells, so they can cause
stroke, kidney disease, swollen and painful joints and difficulty in breathing.
Death is often caused when blood flow is cut off to vital organs.
Sickle cell disease was once lethal at an early age, but now patients, treated
with blood transfusions and other therapies, often live past 40.
Eight to 13 percent of Americans whose ancestors came from Africa or the Middle
East carry at least one sickle cell gene. But both genes that make hemoglobin
must be mutated for the disease to occur. About one-third of 1 percent of all
blacks in America have the disease.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1998


                             1922 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 5, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for sickle cell shows promise; Scientists able to correct
mutation in laboratory

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control
sickle cell anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black
people.

   In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists were able to change
sickled blood cells into normal cells using proteins that snip, clip and correct
mutated genetic instructions.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger, lead author of the study to be published today in the
journal Science, said the new technique does not change the mutated genes but
rather corrects the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message to
blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by ribonucleic acid (RNA).

   Sullenger said the sickle cell mutation was corrected by changing the
instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other attempts at gene therapy have
targeted the genes that write the instructions instead of the RNA that carries
the instructions to the cell.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed and do
not circulate with the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause
stroke, kidney disease, swollen and painful joints, and difficulty in breathing.
Death is often caused when blood flow is cut off to vital organs.

   Pub Date: 6/05/98

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1998


                             1923 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 5, 1998, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21; S

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: Sickle cell gene therapy promising

BYLINE: BY PAUL RECER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control sickle cell
anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black people.

   In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists changed sickled blood
cells into normal cells by using proteins that snip, clip and correct mutated
genetic instructions.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger, lead author of the study to be published today in the
journal Science, said the new technique doesn't change the mutated genes but
rather corrects the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message to
blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said, the sickle cell mutation was
corrected by changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other
attempts at gene therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the cells in the body.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed, so they
don't circulate as easily as normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause
stroke or joint pain.

   Sickle cell disease once was lethal at an early age, but now patients,
treated with blood transfusions and other therapies, often live past age 40.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1998


                             1924 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      June 05, 1998, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: Genetic therapy advance may offer way to control sickle cell anemia

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control
sickle cell anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black
people.

   Duke University scientists changed sickled blood cells into normal cells
using proteins that snip, clip and correct mutated genetic instructions.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger of Duke University, lead author of the study published
today in Science, said that the technique does not change the mutated genes but
rather corrects the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message to
blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said the mutation was corrected by
changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other attempts at gene
therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions instead of the RNA
that carries the instructions to the cell.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the body's cells.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and and do not circulate with
the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause stroke, kidney
disease, swollen joints, and difficulty in breathing. Death often is caused when
blood flow is cut off to vital organs.

   Sickle cell disease was once lethal at an early age, but now patients,
treated with blood transfusions and other therapies, often live past age 40.

   Eight to 13 percent of Americans whose ancestors came from Africa or the
Middle East carry at least one sickle cell gene. However, both genes that make
hemoglobin must be mutated for the disease to occur. About one-third of 1
percent of all blacks in America have the disease.

   In the Duke study, scientists created a ribozyme, a type of enzyme that can
clip and correct the message carried in RNA, to fix sickled hemoglobin in a test
tube and in laboratory dishes. The work has not been tested yet in animals or
humans.

   Sullenger said his team mixed the ribozyme carrying the normal hemoglobin
pattern with immature red blood cells that carried the sickled pattern. He said
the ribozymes cut out the mutated instructions and replaced them with the
correct genetic pattern. The result: red blood cells that are normal.

   The technique does not change the fundamental mutation in a patient's DNA.
Instead, it changes the instructions given by the DNA.


LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1998


                             1925 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      June 05, 1998, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: Genetic therapy advance may offer way to control sickle cell anemia

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: PAUL RECER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control
sickle cell anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black
people.

   Duke University scientists changed sickled blood cells into normal cells
using proteins that snip, clip and correct mutated genetic instructions.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger of Duke University, lead author of the study published
today in Science, said that the technique does not change the mutated genes but
rather corrects the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message to
blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said the mutation was corrected by
changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other attempts at gene
therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions instead of the RNA
that carries the instructions to the cell.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the body's cells.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and and do not circulate with
the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause stroke, kidney
disease, swollen joints, and difficulty in breathing. Death often is caused when
blood flow is cut off to vital organs.

   Sickle cell disease was once lethal at an early age, but now patients,
treated with blood transfusions and other therapies, often live past age 40.

   Eight to 13 percent of Americans whose ancestors came from Africa or the
Middle East carry at least one sickle cell gene. However, both genes that make
hemoglobin must be mutated for the disease to occur. About one-third of 1
percent of all blacks in America have the disease.

   In the Duke study, scientists created a ribozyme, a type of enzyme that can
clip and correct the message carried in RNA, to fix sickled hemoglobin in a test
tube and in laboratory dishes. The work has not been tested yet in animals or
humans.

   Sullenger said his team mixed the ribozyme carrying the normal hemoglobin
pattern with immature red blood cells that carried the sickled pattern. He said
the ribozymes cut out the mutated instructions and replaced them with the
correct genetic pattern. The result: red blood cells that are normal.

   The technique does not change the fundamental mutation in a patient's DNA.
Instead, it changes the instructions given by the DNA.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004


                             1926 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           June 5, 1998 Friday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 5

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may control sickle cell anemia

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control sickle cell
anemia, the disabling disease that strikes many black people.

   In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists were able to change
sickled blood cells into normal cells using proteins that snip, clip and correct
mutated molecules that carry genetic instructions.

   Bruce Sullenger of Duke University, lead author of the study published today
in the journal Science, said the new technique did not change the mutated genes
but rather corrected the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message
to blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said the sickle cell mutation was
corrected by changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other
attempts at gene therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions
instead of the RNA that carries the instructions.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the cells in the body.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed and do
not circulate with the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause
stroke, kidney disease, swollen and painful joints and difficulty in breathing.

   Between 8% and 13% of Americans whose ancestors came from Africa or the
Middle East carry at least one sickle cell gene. However, both genes that make
hemoglobin must be mutated for the disease to occur. About one-third of 1% of
all U.S. blacks have the disease.

   In the Duke study, scientists created a ribozyme, a type of enzyme that can
clip and correct the message carried in RNA, to fix sickled hemoglobin in a test
tube and in laboratory dishes. The work has not been tested yet in animals or
human beings.


LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1998


                             1927 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 5, 1998 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: THERAPY TARGETS SICKLE-CELL ANEMIA / SCIENTISTS USED GENETIC THERAPY
TO CHANGE SICKLED BLOOD CELLS INTO NORMAL CELLS IN A LAB EXPERIMENT.

BYLINE: Paul Recer, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control sickle-cell
anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black people.

   In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists were able to change
sickled blood cells into normal cells using proteins that snip, clip and correct
mutated genetic instructions.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger of Duke University, lead author of the study to be
published today in the journal Science, said that the new technique did not
change the mutated genes but rather corrected the mutation in a molecule that
carries the genetic message to blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said, the sickle-cell mutation was
corrected by changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other
attempts at gene therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions
instead of the RNA that carries the instructions to the cell.

   Sickle-cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the cells in the body.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed and do
not circulate with the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause
stroke, kidney disease, swollen and painful joints, and difficulty in breathing.
Death often is caused when blood flow is cut off to vital organs.

   The disease was once lethal at an early age, but now patients, treated with
blood transfusions and other therapies, often live past age 40.

   Eight percent to 13 percent of Americans whose ancestors came from Africa or
the Middle East carry at least one sickle-cell gene. However, both genes that
make hemoglobin must be mutated for the disease to occur. About one-third of 1
percent of all blacks in America have the disease.

   In the Duke study, scientists created a ribozyme, a type of enzyme that can
clip and correct the message carried in RNA, to fix sickled hemoglobin in a test
tube and in laboratory dishes. The work has not been tested yet in animals or
humans.

   Sullenger said his team mixed the ribozyme carrying the normal hemoglobin
pattern with immature red blood cells that carried the sickled pattern. He said
the ribozymes cut out the mutated instructions and replaced them with the
correct genetic pattern. The result: red blood cells that are normal.

   The technique does not change the fundamental mutation in a patient's DNA.
Instead, it changes the instructions given by the DNA. This is like a courier
changing a message as he carries it from the boss to a work crew. The crew will
end up following the revised instructions instead of what the boss ordered.

   Sullenger said it may be possible to treat sickle-cell anemia by mixing
immature red blood cells, called progenitors, with the ribozymes and then
returning them to the patient.

   "All of the daughter cells from those progenitor cells would then have the
ribozyme to repair the sickle RNA," he said.

   Dr. William P. Winter, a sickle-cell researcher at Howard University, praised
the study but said its clinical value still must be proven.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1928 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        June 5, 1998 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC THERAPY PROMISING FOR SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

BYLINE: By PAUL RECER; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control sickle cell
anemia, the painful, disabling disease that strikes many black people.

   In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists were able to change
sickled blood cells into normal cells using proteins that snip, clip and correct
mutated genetic instructions.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger of Duke University, lead author of the study to be
published today in the journal Science, said the new technique did not change
the mutated genes but rather corrected the mutation in a molecule that carries
the genetic message to blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said the sickle cell mutation was
corrected by changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. Other
attempts at gene therapy have targeted the genes that write the instructions
instead of the RNA that carries the instructions to the cell.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the cells in the body.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed and do
not circulate with the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause
stroke, kidney disease, swollen and painful joints and difficulty in breathing.
Death often is caused when blood flow is cut off to vital organs.

   Sickle cell disease was once lethal at an early age, but now patients,
treated with blood transfusions and other therapies, often live past age 40.

   Eight to 13 percent of Americans whose ancestors came from Africa or the
Middle East carry at least one sickle cell gene. But both genes that make
hemoglobin must be mutated for the disease to occur. About one-third of 1
percent of all blacks in America have the disease.

   Dr. William P. Winter, a sickle cell researcher at Howard University, praised
the study, but said its clinical value must be proven.

   "It is interesting and exciting that this could work," he said, "but it is a
long way from being a real therapeutic possibility."

   Winter said researchers still had to find a way to efficiently target the
blood cells that must be changed to correct the sickling disease.

   Sullenger agreed that targeting was a problem when correcting mutations, but
he said if tests on mice show the technique works, testing in humans might be
possible in about three years.

   The Duke researcher also said that replacing as few as 5 to 10 percent of the
mutated blood cells would relieve symptoms and that replacing half the cells
would be enough to make the blood function normally.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1998


                             1929 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              June 5, 1998, Friday

SECTION: SEMINOLE TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: SEMINOLE TIMES; LARGO TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS
TIMES; PASCO TIMES; CITY & STATE

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Events to raise money, hope for a cure

BYLINE: DEBORAH O'NEIL

DATELINE: SAFETY HARBOR

BODY:


   They are changes probably only a mother or father would notice.

   On the outside, Danny Gorman remains a happy-go-lucky 7-year-old playing
video games and romping around outside. But lately, Danny struggles to climb
just the few small steps leading to his front door. He falls over for no
apparent reason several times a day, and he is having trouble riding his
bicycle.

   Two years ago, he was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a fatal
form of the disease that strikes boys.

   His parents, Debbie and Don Gorman, knew the disease was taking its toll
when Danny's physical therapist recently recommended he begin wearing
orthopedic splints every day.

   "It's the next step, and it just freaked me out," Mrs. Gorman said.

   So Danny will begin wearing the devices inside his shoes, but his parents
refuse to give up hope that one day soon he won't need them. The cure will
come, they believe, in time to save their son.

   That resilient hope is what drives the Gormans to plan a yearly event to
raise money for Duchenne muscular dystrophy research. The Danny Foundation the
Gormans founded two years ago will host the third annual charity golf
tournament Saturday at Belleview Biltmore Country Club.

   The tournament is booked, but the public can attend an auction after the
tournament, around 2 p.m.

   The foundation has raised more than $ 50,000 in two years. Last year, the
foundation gave $ 19,000 to a research project that was about to be shut down
at the Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Research Center at the University of
Pittsburgh, the hub of some of the world's most promising research.

   Each research effort, the Gormans say, could lead to a cure.

   "The money you give is to research," Mrs. Gorman said. "It doesn't go
through channels."

   In Duchenne muscular dystrophy, an essential protein is missing in the
muscles, causing them to break down. The muscles weaken, until eventually the
boys lose use of their limbs. Victims usually need a wheelchair by age 12.  They
are vulnerable to cardiac problems because the heart, too, is a muscle.
Duchenne victims usually die in their late teens.

   The most promising research for Duchenne is in gene therapy. Earlier this
year, scientists in Ohio and Michigan announced they will soon begin the first
human testing of gene therapy for Duchenne.

   Although Danny will not be eligible for the study because of other
medications he is taking, Mrs. Gorman said the news is inspiring.

   "That was the most exciting news we got this year," she said. "This is  an
actual application of what we see will be the cure. We're so close."  To help

Debbie and Don Gorman of Safety Harbor founded the Danny Foundation two years
ago to raise money for Duchenne muscular dystrophy research. Their 7-year-old
son, Danny, was diagnosed with the disease in 1996. Donations can be made to
the foundation through any AmSouth Bank or by calling the foundation at
726-4657.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, SCOTT KEELER; COLOR PHOTO, SCOTT KEELER; BLACK
AND WHITE PHOTO; Danny Gorman and his friend Christopher Rhodes, who both have
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, ride horses in Pinellas Park. (ran SE, CITY &
STATE); Danny Gorman and his friend Christopher Rhodes ride horses in Pinellas
Park. (ran LA, CT, NT); Danny Gorman (ran PT)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1998


                             1930 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 5, 1998, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A13

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: THERAPY MAY HELP WITH SICKLE CELL ANEMIA, STUDY SHOWS

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A new type of genetic therapy may provide a way to control sickle cell
anemia, which afflicts up to 13 percent of Americans whose ancestors came from
Africa and the Middle East.

   In a laboratory experiment, Duke University scientists were able to chan ge
sickled blood cells into normal cells, using proteins that snip, clip and
correct mutated genes.

   Dr. Bruce Sullenger, lead author of the study published today in the journal
Science, said that the new technique does not change the mutated genes but
rather corrects the mutation in a molecule that carries the genetic message to
blood cells.

   A cell makes proteins, including those for red blood cells, based on the
blueprint contained in the genes. The protein instructions are carried into the
cell by a molecule called RNA.

   In the Duke experiments, Sullenger said the sickle cell mutation was
corrected by changing the instructions contained in the RNA molecule. The
experiments were done on laboratory mice. Sullenger said potential testing in
humans might be possible in about three years.

   Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that causes the production of an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen
to all the cells in the body.

   Cells with sickle-shaped hemoglobin are fragile and easily destroyed and do
not circulate with the ease of normal, rounded hemoglobin cells. This can cause
stroke, kidney disease, swollen and painful joints and difficulty in breathing.
Death often is caused when blood flow is cut off to vital organs.

   Dr. William P. Winter, a sickle cell researcher at Howard University in
Washington, praised the study. But he said researchers still have to find a way
to target the blood cells that must be changed to correct the sickling disease.

   "It is interesting and exciting that this could work," he said of the
research, "but it is a long way from being a real therapeutic possibility."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1998


                             1931 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             June 4, 1998, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 6C

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: COMPUTER PROGRAM MAY HELP FIND GENETIC FLAWS LINKED TO CANCER

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson , Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Cancer researchers at Ohio State University have a new tool they hope will
offer genetic clues to a disease that will kill more than 500,000 people in the
United States this year.

   A few weeks ago, the Comprehensive Cancer Center set up its GeneChip machine,
a $ 180,000 computer system that allows researchers to compare normal genes to
those of cancer patients with suspected genetic flaws.

   Looking for mutations could lead to new cancer gene discoveries.

   ''It will point the way, perhaps,'' said Paula Gregory, director of outreach
and education for the center's human cancer genetics program. ''It will give us
a clue to where we should start looking.''

   Although scientists have identified dozens of genes, including many that are
associated with cancer, there are an estimated 100,000 genes in human cells that
remain a mystery.

   In 1989, the Human Genome Project was created to identify and determine the
function of all these genes. Organizers estimated that unlocking this
information would help fight more than 3,500 diseases, including cancer, cystic
fibrosis, neurological disorders, immunodeficiency conditions and heart disease.

   OSU joins about 75 other institutions worldwide that are using GeneChip
machines, including the government's National Human Genome Research Institute.

   Affymetrix, a Santa Clara, Calif.-based biotechnology company, developed the
GeneChip. Its heart is a microchip the size of a postage stamp that contains
synthetic copies of DNA.

   So far, there are chips that contain copies of BRCA1 and BRCA2, genes
associated with breast cancer; p53, a tumor-suppressor gene that when mutated is
present in about half of all cancers; and a potluck of 7,000 ''gene
expressions.''

   The gene expression chip will be used to scan for a wide variety of
mutations. Researchers say that when they are unsure of mutations, they can
sample the DNA from a tumor and compare it to the normal genes. The software can
be programmed to signal genetic differences.

   Confirming a genetic flaw conventionally takes as many as two weeks. The
GeneChip will cut that to a few hours.

   But Ralf Krahe, an assistant professor of human cancer genetics at OSU, said
the computer will be used only for research, not patient diagnosis.

   The research, however, will involve using unidentified patient DNA to compare
to the synthetic DNA.

   The idea behind GeneChip is that patient DNA strands bind to the synthetic
DNA strands, and researchers simply look for differences.

   Those differences could signal a mutation.

   Cancer is the result of a number of genetic mutations. Understanding them
could lead to cancer treatments down the line, Gregory said.

   There already are clinical trials testing gene therapy based on correcting
the p53 mutation in a number of cancers.

   ''When we do a scan, we are looking for common threads,'' Krahe said. ''We
want to see if there are common mutations.''

GRAPHIC: Photo, Tom Dodge., Ralf Krahe, an assistant professor of human cancer
genetics at Ohio State University, holds a GeneChip, onto which synthetic copies
of DNA are loaded.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1998


                             1932 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 3, 1998, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. F3

LENGTH: 969 words

HEADLINE: Women's health checkup; tripping on Tripp;
LITERARY LIFE

BYLINE: By Cynthia Dockrell, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

    Health makes wealth for plenty of folks these days, and not just insurance
companies. With the topic of women's health in particular gaining both
respectability and research dollars, publishers would be nuts not to report on
it in depth. Scientific American has sure done so, in Women's Health: A Lifelong
Guide. Part New England Journal of Medicine, part "Our Bodies, Ourselves," this
special issue wants to be all things to all women. Considering the breadth of
its ambition, it succeeds pretty well.

   The editors have organized it like a reference book, with four sections that
correspond to age: teens and 20s, 30s and 40s, 50s and 60s, and 70s and up. Each
begins with a fact sheet telling readers what kinds of checkups they should have
and when, and then branches into articles about issues common to the age group.
The usual subjects show up - eating disorders, pregnancy, menopause,
osteoporosis - but whereas other magazines might stop there, this one goes on to
consider public-health concerns: the huge cost to society of violence against
women, gender differences in disease, the ethics of assisted reproduction, and
so on. The stories are thoughtfully presented, the Q&As with physicians
authoritative yet accessible.

   Intending to skim, I instead found myself reading at length about the ages
I've been and the ages I've yet to be. Stories about medicine and health are
irresistible. They're the closest thing we have to an owner's manual for our
bodies.

   How about building new bodies? Thanks to the explosive growth in genetics
research and experimentation, we've all had the opportunity by now to imagine an
Aldous Huxley-like scenario of clones and genetically engineered humans taking
over the world. Leave it to Mother Jones to show us how easily the fantasy could
come true.

   A pull-out in the June issue considers everything from patenting body parts
to designing custom babies. The fear that one day we'll deem any number of
common traits defective and edit them out of our genetic profile is not new, of
course, but it's one thing to think about this in the abstract and another to
look at it in detail. As Jeremy Rifkin points out here, in an excerpt from his
new book, few of us would hesitate to eliminate genes for such scourges as
cancer and diabetes, but what's to stop us from then getting rid of
colorblindness or dyslexia? Heck, we might as well program for perfection.
Rifkin cites a poll in which 43 percent of respondents said they'd use gene
therapy to improve their babies' physical characteristics.

   Other articles here report on Iceland's isolated gene pool, which is a gold
mine for biomedical researchers; the question of regulating research; and how
the debate over cloning has gotten all wrapped up, inappropriately, with the
abortion debate. As William Saletan writes, "Cloning abolishes the genetic
difference between parent and child. If gay parenthood means that Heather has
two mommies, cloning doesn't just mean that Heather has one mommy; it means
that, genetically, Heather is her mommy. So if Heather's mommy has a husband and
daughter, then genetically, Heather is her sister's mommy and her daddy's wife."
And if Heather hasn't even been conceived the old-fashioned way, the
anti-abortion forces are barking up the wrong tree.
 The New Yorker for June 8 aims to straighten the record on writer Jane Mayer's
profile of Linda Tripp, which appeared in March and resulted in Mayer's being
subpoenaed by the conservative group Judicial Watch. Mayer succeeded in quashing
the subpoena, but because such a dust storm now surrounds the details of Tripp's
arrest at the age of 19, which Mayer reported on in March, Mayer has further
investigated the arrest and brings us up to date here.

   That this little story is so big is just plain amazing. It's the New Yorker's
lead; it's preceded by a full-page editor's note explaining the background and
justifying the piece's existence. Tripp has admitted to the arrest but says she
was set up; Mayer unearths witness upon witness who says she wasn't. You can see
Mayer scrambling to protect herself, leaving no stone unturned in defense of her
original story. That any journalist should have to write such a thing is an
ironic twist on Mayer's own conclusions: "Whether or not Linda Tripp told the
full truth about this embarrassing moment in her past, it is remarkable that
American politics now seems to hinge on such trivial pursuits."
 Is there some kind of contest going on among magazine publishers to see who can
put out the most eye-catching emptiness? Every time this reader approaches a
newsstand, it seems, another slick new collection of substanceless images winks
out at passersby. Time Warner has so narrowed the line between advertising and
editorial that the two are barely distinguishable in its new mag wallpaper*.
(Yes, there really is an asterisk here, which keys the subtitle "The stuff that
surrounds you"; perhaps we can't be trusted to find it ourselves.)

   Full of bold photos featuring things like gorgeous young people lounging
half-naked in very expensive sheets, or vintage wines in $ 75 glasses, or
interior spaces neither affordable nor possessed of any warmth, wallpaper* is a
genuflection to decadence. Even in the feature stories, the items in every photo
are accompanied, ad-like, by the designer name and price. Because this is an
international publication, those prices are sometimes given in dollars and
sometimes in pounds sterling.

   It's bizarre to read the Douglas Coupland account of riding around Santiago
in a taxi with a local grande dame who actually has some interesting things to
say about Chile's capital, but whose portrayal by a model wearing $ 119
sunglasses makes her words less meaningful.

   Maybe this whole magazine is a joke that I don't get.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1998


                             1933 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      June 2, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: A better life, if test translates to human beings

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   An experiment with fruit flies has produced what appears to be
the most powerful life-extending gene seen so far, reseachers
report today.

   The findings, reported in the journal Nature Genetics,
show that fruit flies lived 40% longer when given a healthy human
gene that fights cell damage.

   Though human life-extending experiments are a big technical and
ethical step away, to- day's findings have implications for diseases
that destroy the brain and nervous system, such as Lou Gehrig's,
Huntington's and Parkinson's, says Tony Parkes, University of
Guelph, Ontario, Canada.


   The gene, called superoxide dismutase, or SOD1, normally helps
cells fight the equivalent of rusting. It is considered to be
an extremely important gene because it is found in all cells in
the body in all living creatures, from humans to fruit flies.

   In people, a certain mutation of the gene in nerve cells is known
to cause Lou Gehrig's disease. It appears to be vital to keeping
the overall cellular machinery of the nervous system clean and
humming.

   Indeed, scientists suspect that a variety of malfunctions of the
gene make nerve cells especially sensitive to damage from toxic
oxygen molecules called free radicals. That's the kind of damage
that anti-oxidant vitamins are touted to protect against.

   Parkes and colleagues at Guelph and the University of Torontowere
trying to learn more about why nerve cells appear to be so sensitive
to oxidation. They put the human SOD1 gene in the fruit flies'
nerve cells. Unexpectedly, the human gene and the fruit flies'
version combined forces and offered super-protection against oxidation.

   Parkes says the findings suggest strategies for developing gene
therapy or drugs to offer similar protection for nerve cells in
people with neurodegenerative diseases.

   Douglas C. Wallace, Emory University, Atlanta, agrees. He has
conducted extensive research involving superoxide dismutase and
its cellular roles. He says in an accompanying News and Views
article that the findings support the notion that cumulative
oxidative damage to nerve cells may be a key factor in how long
a person lives.

   And in the long term?

   "If that translates to humans, we may be able to increase the
healthy and enjoyable lifespan of humans," Parkes says.

LOAD-DATE: June 02, 1998


                             1934 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 1, 1998, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 5; Op Ed Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

HEADLINE: COMMENTARY;
 PERSPECTIVE ON SCIENCE;
 CONSIDER THE COSTS OF EACH PATH TO THE 'BIOTECH CENTURY';
 WE CAN CHANGE SPECIES' BLUEPRINTS OR SEEK SUSTAINABLE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
SPECIES AND THEIR ENVIRONMENTS.

BYLINE: JEREMY RIFKIN, Jeremy Rifkin is the author of "The Biotech Century:
Harnessing the, Gene and Remaking the World" (Tarcher/Putnam, 1998)

BODY:


   After more than 40 years of parallel development, the information and life
sciences are fusing into a single, powerful technological and economic force
that is laying the foundation for the "biotech century." The computer
increasingly is being used to decipher, manage and organize the vast genetic
information that is the raw resource of the new global economy.

   The biotech century promises a cornucopia of genetically engineered plants
and animals to feed a hungry population, genetically derived sources of energy
and fiber to propel commerce and build a "renewable" society, wonder drugs and
genetic therapies to produce healthier babies, eliminate human suffering and
extend the human life span. But a nagging question remains: At what cost?

   The new genetic commerce raises more troubling issues than any other economic
revolution in history. Will the artificial creation of cloned, chimeric and
transgenic animals mean the end of nature and the substitution of a
"bioindustrial" world? What are the consequences for the global economy and
society of reducing the world's gene pool to patented intellectual property
controlled by a handful of life-science corporations? What will it mean to live
in a world where babies are genetically engineered and customized in the womb
and where people are increasingly identified, stereotyped and discriminated
against on the basis of their genotype? What are the risks we take in attempting
to design more "perfect" human beings?

   Over the past 20 years, I've expressed growing concern about many aspects of
the emerging biotech revolution, leading many to ask if I'm simply opposed to
technology. The question is not whether one is in favor or opposed, but rather,
what kind of technology one favors. The biotech revolution is a good case in
point. Two broad technological approaches to the biotech century are beginning
to emerge, each based on very different premises.

   Agriculture offers an example of these approaches. Molecular biologists are
inserting genes from exotic nonfood organisms into the biological code of food
crops to make them more resistant to herbicides, pests, bacteria and fungi. They
envision these engineered hybrids living in a kind of genetic isolation. A
growing number of environmentalists worry that the mass release of these
genetically engineered plants into the environment could cause genetic pollution
and irreversible damage to the biosphere.

   Many ecologists, on the other hand, are using the new genomic data to better
understand the many ways environmental factors affect genetic expressions and
mutations in plants. They eschew the genetic engineering of plants in favor of
creating a sophisticated, organic-based approach to agriculture that relies on
integrated pest management, crop rotation, natural fertilization and other
sustainable methods designed to make farming compatible with surrounding
ecosystems.

   Similarly, in medicine, many molecular biologists are focusing their research
on somatic gene surgery--pumping altered genes into patients suffering from
illnesses and disorders. Other researchers, however, are using the wealth of new
genetic information to explore the ties between genetic mutations and
environmental triggers with the hope of fashioning a more scientific approach to
preventive health. They are using the new genetic science to better understand
how diet, exercise and other environmental factors affect illness, with an eye
toward keeping people well.

   In short, one approach--the hard path--uses the new genetic science to
engineer radical changes in the very blueprint of species to advance progress,
while the other approach--the soft path--uses the same genetic science to create
a more integrative and sustainable relationship between existing species and
their environments.

   Some argue that both approaches should exist side by side, each enriching the
other. In reality, the commercial market favors the former approach for the
obvious reason that for now, that's where the most money can be made. Although
there is a growing market for organic foods and preventive health products and
services, far more money is being invested in biotech agriculture and
illness-based medicine.

   That could change, but it would take a profound shift in the way we think
about science and its applications. However, it is not difficult to imagine a
turnaround of sorts, with the more ecological and preventive health
biotechnologies taking precedence.

   The principal players in biotechnology might find it inconceivable that
genetic engineering, with all its promise, could be rejected. Nevertheless, that
could easily happen. Recall that nuclear energy, once considered the greatest
power source ever developed, has been partly or largely abandoned in many
countries, thanks to growing public awareness of its true financial and
environmental impact. Society also could choose to accept some uses of genetic
engineering and reject others. For example, one could make a solid case for
genetic screening--with the appropriate safeguards--to better predict the
onslaught of disabling diseases, especially those that can be prevented with
early treatment. On the other hand, the use of gene therapy to make corrective
changes in human sperm, eggs and embryonic cells, affecting the evolution of
future generations, is far more dangerous.

   It isn't a matter of saying yes or no to the use of science itself. Rather,
the question is: What kind of biotechnologies will we choose in the coming
century?

   We should keep open as many options as possible. This means that when
choosing among alternative biotech applications, we are best served by taking
the less radical, more conservative approach, the one least likely to create
environmental, social and economic disruptions. "First, do no harm" is a
well-established and long-revered principle in medicine.

   The moment has arrived for a broad and spirited public debate over which of
the two very different technological paths to the biotech century better
reflects the values and sensibilities of our generation.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jeremy Rifkin GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (No caption, Flower), MAXIMO
SANJUAN ARRANZ, Madrid

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                             1935 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 1, 1998, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 5; View Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE;
 PHARM REPORT;
 A NEW TEST, NEW DRUGS AND NEW OPTIONS

BYLINE: Shari Roan

BODY:


   Today's Pharm Report looks at a new bladder drug, a promising vaccine for ear
infection, a new test to improve the accuracy of prostate cancer detection,
another choice for postmenopausal women, a generic form of the anti-psychotic
drug clozapine, and an increase in research on children's medication.


   *

   Treating Overactive Bladder: The first new medication in more than 20 years
has been approved for the treatment of overactive bladder. The Food and Drug
Administration granted Pharmacia & Upjohn the go-ahead to market Detrol, a
tablet that may help the estimated 17 million Americans with bladder-control
problems.

   Overactive bladder is marked by symptoms of urinary urgency and frequency
(urinating more than eight times in 24 hours). The problem affects people of all
ages, and the medication is thought to work well for all age groups. In studies,
Detrol reduced the median number of times people urinated in a 24-hour period.
Possible side effects include dry mouth, headache, constipation and indigestion.

   Detrol, which must be obtained with a prescription, should be available in
all pharmacies soon.


   *

   Option to Estrogen Therapy: Postmenopausal women who are struggling with the
decision of whether to take estrogen therapy now have another alternative. The
lowest effective dose of estrogen--about half the usual dose--has been approved
by the FDA for prevention of osteoporosis.

   The medication, called Estratab, which comes in a 0.3-milligram estrogen
tablet, was found in studies to help women preserve or slightly increase their
bone mineral density in the spine, hip and whole body. Women on this low dose
may also experience fewer of the side effects typical of estrogen therapy, such
as headache, nausea, breast tenderness and bleeding.

   In addition to helping protect against bone loss, Estratab provides some
relief for hot flashes and night sweats. Moreover, the women using Estratab did
not experience an increase in endometrial hyperplasia, a precursor of
endometrial cancer--which is a drawback of traditional estrogen therapy.


   *

   Prostate Cancer Test: A new blood test to improve the accuracy of prostate
cancer detection is now available.

   The FDA approved the new blood test, Hybritech Free PSA, for marketing by
Beckman Coulter of Fullerton. It is expected to reduce the number of unnecessary
prostate biopsies by 20%. The test should help doctors to differentiate between
prostate cancer and benign prostate conditions. Studies show Hybritech Free PSA
detects the disease accurately in 95% of cases.

   High PSA (prostate specific antigen) can indicate prostate cancer, but levels
can also rise due to non-cancerous conditions. The new test will be used as a
follow-up test to an initial PSA test when moderate or high levels of the
antigen are detected. Thus, the availability of the Hybritech should resolve
some of the controversy about liberal use of the PSA test.


   *

   Clozapine Generic on the Market: A generic form of the anti-psychotic drug
clozapine is now available. The new medication is made by Zenith Goldline
Pharmaceuticals. It will be about 15% less expensive than the brand-name
Clozaril but will still require the weekly blood that is required of Clozaril
use.

   According to the Central San Fernando Valley Alliance for the Mentally Ill,
Medi-Cal, so far, has not demanded that patients on Clozaril switch to the
generic version. Patients should consult with their physicians before switching.
To avoid a switch occurring without their knowledge, patients or caregivers
should check the label for the phrase "generic for Clozaril" or
"clozapine-Zenith Goldline."


   *

   Hope for Ear Infections: An experimental vaccine for childhood ear infections
is a step closer to reality. A study in the April issue of the journal
Pediatrics showed that the vaccine against pneumococcal disease is safe and
effective. Pneumococcal disease is a group of illnesses, such as ear infection,
pneumonia, bacteremia and bacterial meningitis, caused by a bacteria
Streptococcus pneumoniae. The illnesses are usually treated with antibiotics.
But there is an alarming trend in cases showing antibiotic-resistant strains of
the bug.

   Two major studies to look at the effectiveness of the vaccine in preventing
ear infection are underway--one in Northern California. However, the vaccine is
still probably a few years away from FDA approval.


   *

   Medicines for Children: The pneumococcal vaccine is among 23 vaccines that
are now being studied for use in children, according to the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America. Overall, the association said in a recent
report, 187 drugs and vaccines for children are under development--a 28%
increase in the past year alone.

   The increase represents a new effort by drug makers to test medications
specifically for safety and effectiveness in children--despite the potential for
practical, legal and ethical dilemmas inherent in such research.

   In addition to vaccines, 44 cancer drugs are in development. AIDS, asthma,
cystic fibrosis, infectious diseases and respiratory diseases have also been
targeted as priorities among manufacturers.

   Among the promising research is a nasal spray vaccine against flu, three new
medications for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, a gene therapy for brain tumors
and a medicine to treat psychotic disorders in children as young as 5 years of
age.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                             1936 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                   June 1, 1998, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Peter Schwartz

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1856 words

HEADLINE: Long Boom or Bust;
A Leading Futurist Risks His Reputation With Ideas on Growth And High Technology

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Peter Schwartz is a professional marketer of big, brow-furrowing ideas. By
2020, he says, the internal combustion engine will probably have gone the way of
the dodo bird as conventional automobiles are replaced by hybrid cars powered by
fuel cells that mostly use hydrogen.

   A telecommunications revolution, Mr. Schwartz believes, is coming even
sooner. Thanks to big satellite projects, connections for high-speed Internet,
telephone and video will be commonplace in six years or so. The world will be
wired, inexpensively. By 2005, teen-agers in villages in developing countries
will be chatting on video phones as they surf the Net.

    By 2010, Mr. Schwartz predicts, breakthroughs in biotechnology and gene
therapy may enable science to reverse aging and extend life. The prospect here,
he insists, is not merely a prolonged old age but living for decades in one's
biological 40's.

   Yet these are mere ingredients of Mr. Schwartz's biggest idea, which he calls
the "Long Boom." Its thesis is that the world is witnessing what Mr. Schwartz
calls "the beginnings of a global economic boom on a scale never experienced
before," driven by waves of fundamental technological change and free-market
economics.

   The Long Boom, which he sees running through about 2020, is a vision of
almost unabashed technological optimism about the future from Mr. Schwartz, a
leading futurist and chairman of the Global Business Network, a research and
consulting firm. His manifesto first appeared as a cover story last summer in
Wired magazine, whose pages generally celebrate the virtues of technology.

   Ever since, he has found himself at the center of a spirited debate about
technology and the future. Bearded, affable and articulate, Mr. Schwartz is a
skillful salesman who has won supporters for his ambitious idea, but he has been
roundly criticized as well.

   In March, a loose-knit group calling itself the "Technorealism Project"
emerged. Among the tenets proclaimed on its Web site at www.technorealism.org is
the assertion, "The Internet is revolutionary, not utopian."

   Andrew L. Shapiro, a fellow at the Harvard Law School's Center for the
Internet and Society and a founder of the Technorealism Project, said, "We're
just skeptical of the kind of sheer boosterism that Peter Schwartz is
promoting."

   Mr. Schwartz recently debated the merits of the Long Boom with Daniel
Yankelovich, the public opinion analyst and president of Public Agenda, a
research organization, at a conference in San Diego. In Mr. Yankelovich's view,
the Long Boom betrays a "remarkable naivete" not only about technology but also
about the working of market economics. "The market is great at distributing
economic goodies," Mr. Yankelovich said, "but it doesn't have all these moral
virtues that Peter Schwartz attributes to it."

   Such reactions, Mr. Schwartz says, are precisely why he wrote the Long Boom.
It has provoked thought and, he insists, changed the debate about the future.
The Long Boom, he asserts, represents "a better vision of what could be if we
make the right choices; it is what I think could and should happen."

   As a futurist, Mr. Schwartz has impressive credentials. An alumnus of the
Stanford Research Institute, now SRI International, he led a planning team at
the Royal Dutch/Shell Group in London from 1982 to 1986. One of three
possibilities drawn up in 1982 by Mr. Schwartz and his team was that oil prices
would collapse.

   That possibility was taken seriously by Shell's senior management, which
piled up cash to prepare. After prices fell precipitously, Shell began a $3.5
billion buying spree in 1986, buying oilfields and locking in a long-term cost
advantage over most of its rivals.

   The Shell legacy gave Mr. Schwartz and four colleagues a head start in
attracting corporate clients when they founded the Global Business Network in
1988. "Everybody wanted the Shell magic," he recalled.

   The Global Business Network, known as GBN, is no ordinary consulting firm.
Based in Emeryville, Calif., where it occupies a converted factory in the shadow
of the Bay Bridge, GBN is eclectic if not eccentric. Its character is evident in
the backgrounds of its five founders. Besides Mr. Schwartz, they are Jay Ogilvy,
a former philosophy teacher at Yale University who headed values and life styles
research at SRI International; Napier Collyns, who spent 30 years in Shell's
planning group; Stewart Brand, creator of the Whole Earth Catalog and a founder
of the Well computer network, and Lawrence Wilkinson, former president of
Colossal Pictures.

   Today, GBN is a small but thriving specialist firm. Compared with mainstream
consultants like McKinsey & Company or Andersen Consulting, GBN is minuscule.
Its revenues are running at $10 million a year, about double the level in 1994,
while its staff has also doubled, to 55 people. (McKinsey says it has 4,500
consultants in 81 countries.)

   GBN has roughly 100 clients, about half of which sent executives to the
company's four-day annual conference in San Francisco last month. The client
list is as eclectic as the firm, ranging from I.B.M. and AT&T to the Pentagon,
the Government of Singapore and the National Education Association.

   The conference concluded with an advance screening of the Dreamworks SKG
movie "Deep Impact," which has since become a box-office hit. GBN worked with
Dreamworks on developing the film, and Mr. Schwartz and a few other GBN members
are mentioned in the film's credits.

   The narrative spine of "Deep Impact" is how people behave in the months after
they learn that a comet is going to collide with Earth. The movie, in essence,
illustrates the fulcrum of scenario building -- a what-if question. And creating
scenarios is GBN's specialty.

   At the San Francisco conference, four scenarios for the next decade were
presented as narratives for the participants to read and debate. They ranged
from crisis and decline to an equivalent of the Long Boom, all rendered in
imaginative detail.

   In the gloom-and-doom scenario, for example, the year 2000 computer bug and
global warming are culprits in the tailspin. The European Union is shattered,
the Middle East has water shortages, oil prices surge and inflation is ignited.
In 2003, the scenario said, "the Dow plummeted from 10,000 to 6,000 in a matter
of months." In Mexico, the economy crumbles, South American drug cartels move
in, guerrilla wars flare and refugees flood north. "In 2010," the scenario
asserted, "President Wilson sent in the U.S. Army to establish order in Mexico."

   Certainly provocative and undoubtedly more entertaining than most business
reading, but what use is this kind of thing to corporations? Most companies say
the GBN scenarios -- whether broad ones, like those presented at the San
Francisco conference, or ones tailored for specific industries or nations -- are
useful mainly as complementary planning tools.

   The scenarios are built upon in-depth research of demographic, political and
technology trends. Daniel McGrath, a business strategy consultant at I.B.M.,
said the scenarios then sketched out "causative chains that stretch your
imagination and broaden your thinking."

   GBN tries to broaden its own thinking through a network of about 100 people
in diverse fields. They include Francis Fukuyama, the political scientist; Bruce
Sterling, a science fiction writer, and Donella Meadows, an environmentalist.
Yet the membership roster is heavy with technophiles including Danny Hillis, a
computer scientist and research fellow at Walt Disney; Esther Dyson, an author
and newsletter publisher, and John Gage, chief scientist at Sun Microsystems.

   Another GBN member is Kevin Kelly, the executive editor of Wired. Both GBN
and Mr. Schwartz personally were original investors in Wired, a fact not
mentioned in the magazine when it published Mr. Schwartz's Long Boom article.
"It's very incestuous in some ways," Mr. Schwartz allowed.

   For $35,000 a year, corporate clients get to join the GBN network members on
the company's private Web site to discuss all sorts of subjects, from the future
of the car to computing's millennium bug.

   In addition, clients are mailed two books a month, selected by Mr. Schwartz
and Mr. Brand. "We've basically solved the problem of executives' reading
guilt," Mr. Schwartz observed. Recent selections include "Remaking Eden," about
cloning by Lee M. Silver, and "The Commanding Heights," a history of the triumph
of free-market policies, by Daniel Yergin and Joseph Stanislaw.

   GBN has prospered in recent years, partly because so many corporations,
observing developments like the end of the cold war to the rise of the Internet,
sense that change is accelerating. Divining traits of an uncertain future, more
than ever, seems an essential corporate survival skill.

   But GBN has also done a deft job of marketing its mainstay business of
scenario building. "Scenarios have become the leading tool in thinking about the
future, and GBN is the best at it," noted Michael Marien, editor of the Future
Survey, a monthly newsletter.

   A central tenet of the discipline, Mr. Schwartz wrote in his 1991 book, "The
Art of the Long View," is that "scenarios are not predictions.

   "It is simply not possible to predict the future with certainty," he wrote.
"Rather, scenarios are vehicles for helping people learn." Scenarios are
typically presented in groups of three or four, not alone.

   Yet the Long Boom concept appears to be more a prediction than a scenario.
And Mr. Schwartz, planning experts say, is taking a real risk with his
reputation by championing the Long Boom. Professionals in the field of
forecasting will talk cautiously about reducing uncertainty, while predictions
suggest the hucksterish world of crystal balls, soothsayers and shamans.

   "I think you are moving down a dangerous slope in this business if you become
identified with one view of the future," said Paul Saffo, a director for the
Institute of the Future, a research organization.

   Mr. Schwartz acknowledges that risk, but he feels it is worth taking. "I
wanted to influence the future," he said.

   And Mr. Schwartz is an inherent optimist -- a trait reinforced by his
personal life and his professional experience. His parents were survivors of
Nazi concentration camps. Mr. Schwartz was born in a refugee camp in 1946,
outside Stuttgart, Germany, and lived until he was 5 in a Norwegian refugee
camp. His family then immigrated to New Jersey, living in one room of a
brownstone.

   His father, Benjamin, a self-trained engineer, quickly became a model of
postwar upward mobility, steadily increasing his skills and income. He ended up
designing advanced computer systems, and the family moved to a wealthy suburb of
Philadelphia.

   Professionally, Mr. Schwartz said, he has missed trends most often because of
a failure to grasp the forces behind positive outcomes. In the early 1980's, he
said, he consistently misread the outlook for the American economy because he
failed to imagine the entrepreneurial effect of new industries led by the
personal computer business.

   "It was a big miss, and that was a real learning experience for me," he said.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Schwartz, chairman of the Global Business Network, has set
off a spirited debate about the future. (Jenny Thomas for The New York Times)

Charts: "Some Visions'
Peter Schwartz foresees a long boom of growth driven by technology. Here are
some of its ingredients:

By 2005, phone and high-speed Internet access for everyone.
By 2010, gene therapies to reverse aging.
By 2015, simultaneous language translation, made possible by computer chips 100
times more powerful than today's.
By 2020, the death of the internal combustion engine. Cars are powered by
hydrogen fuel cells.

"Some Stumbles"
Though often prescient, Peter Schwartz has also misread the future:

In 1981, he was an author of a book that assumed oil prices were on their way to
$85 a barrel.
In the early 1980's, he was too gloomy about the prospects for the American
economy. He failed to understand the entrepreneurial impact of the PC industry.
In 1994, he missed the Mexican financial crisis. He was the host of a conference
on Mexico's future a few weeks before, but did not consider the possibility.


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                             1937 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                      May 31, 1998, SUNDAY, First Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Malaria vaccine developed;
Researchers use gene therapy

BYLINE: BY ROBERT COOKE

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   After decades of searching and dismal results, scientists have developed a
vaccine effective against malaria, one of the most widespread and devastating
diseases in the world.

   The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is based on injection
of purified genes -- so-called naked DNA -- directly into muscle tissue. Tests
show that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount of DNA, read its genetic
message and make the protein specified by the gene, in this case a malaria gene.
The protein's presence then alerts the immune system that an infection may be
occurring, touching off a strong protective response without incurring the
disease itself.

   Development of the vaccine has not yet been announced publicly, but it was
discussed Friday during the first annual meeting of the American Society of Gene
Therapy. Although the naval researchers expect to publish their initial results
soon, the vaccine still must undergo large-scale testing before it becomes
available.

   Richard Hedstrom, director of molecular biology at the Naval Medical Research
Institute in Rockville, Md., Friday said early testing in volunteers has shown
"much higher protection, dramatically higher protection" than other candidate
vaccines. And he said the tests showed it also "is very well tolerated . . .
even at the highest doses."

   Hedstrom called it exciting that the vaccine can activate T-cells, powerful
agents of the immune system.  T-cells can hit the malaria parasite when it seems
most vulnerable, as it is infecting the liver.

   Malaria is a debilitating disease that destroys red blood cells and in some
cases enters the brain, causing death. Malaria has been difficult to attack
because it has several life-cycle stages in which it enters the blood, goes to
the liver, multiplies rapidly, then infects red blood cells. Mature parasites
circulate with the blood, and then can be picked up by mosquitoes and passed on.

   Vaccine specialists say the beauty of the naked DNA approach is that it fires
up the entire immune system, not just the blood-borne response that produces
antibodies.

   An estimated 2 million to 3 million people die of malaria yearly worldwide.

GRAPHIC: NEWSDAY

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                             1938 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                May 31, 1998, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Gene vaccine fights malaria;
Shot activates immune system

BYLINE: BY ROBERT COOKE

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   Scientists have developed a vaccine effective against malaria, one of the
most widespread and devastating diseases in the world.

   The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is based on injection
of purified genes -- so-called naked DNA -- directly into muscle tissue. Tests
show that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount of DNA, read its genetic
message and make the protein specified by the gene, in this case a malaria gene.
The protein's presence then alerts the immune system that an infection may be
occurring, touching off a strong protective response without contracting the
disease itself.

   Development of the vaccine has not yet been announced publicly, but it was
discussed at a meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy. Although the
naval researchers expect to publish their initial results soon, the vaccine
still must undergo large-scale testing before it becomes available.

   Richard Hedstrom, director of molecular biology at the Naval Medical Research
Institute in Rockville, Md., said Friday that early testing in volunteers had
shown "much higher protection, dramatically higher protection" than other
candidate vaccines. And he said the tests showed it also "is very well tolerated
. . . even at the highest doses."

   Hedstrom called it exciting that the vaccine can activate T-cells, powerful
agents of the immune system. T-cells can hit the malaria parasite when it seems
most vulnerable, as it is infecting the liver.

   Malaria is a debilitating disease that destroys red blood cells and in some
cases enters the brain, causing death. Malaria has been difficult to attack
because it has several life-cycle stages in which it enters the blood, goes to
the liver, multiplies rapidly, then infects red blood cells. Mature parasites
circulate with the blood, and then can be picked up by mosquitoes and passed on.

   Vaccine specialists say the beauty of the naked DNA approach is that it fires
up the entire immune system, not just the blood-borne response that produces
antibodies. An estimated 2 million to 3 million people die of malaria each year
worldwide.

GRAPHIC: NEWSDAY

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                             1939 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      May 30, 1998, Saturday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 06A

LENGTH: 727 words

SERIES: Final

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF;
Malaria vaccine shows promise

BODY:


   After decades of searching and dismal results, scientists have developed a
vaccine effective against malaria, one of the most widespread and devastating
diseases in the world. The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is
based on injection of purified genes --- so-called ''naked DNA'' --- directly
into muscle tissue. Tests show that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount
of DNA, read its genetic message and make the protein specified by the gene, in
this case a malaria gene. The protein's presence then alerts the immune system
that an infection may be occurring, touching off a strong protective response
without incurring the disease itself. Development of the vaccine has not yet
been announced publicly, but it was discussed Friday during the first annual
meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy in Seattle. Although the naval
researchers expect to publish their initial results soon, the vaccine still must
undergo large-scale efficacy testing before it becomes available. Richard
Hedstrom, director of molecular biology at the Naval Medical Research Institute
in Rockville, Md., said Friday that early testing in volunteers has shown ''much
higher protection, dramatically higher protection'' than other candidate
vaccines. And he said the tests showed it also ''is very well tolerated . . .
even at the highest doses.'' HEALTH Snub may cost hospital Medicare The federal
government threatened to cancel Medicare for a Chicago hospital that did nothing
to help a young gunshot victim dying just outside the building. The Department
of Health and Human Services said Ravenswood Hospital Medical Center will lose
its authorization to participate in Medicare on June 21 unless it proves it has
changed its ways. In Washington, President Clinton issued a statement saying the
administration will take similar action against any hospital that fails to
assist in a medical emergency. CRIME Ex-boyfriend blamed in school
murder-suicide A former boyfriend fatally shot a 26-year-old teacher in the
parking lot of a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., high school, then killed himself, police
said. Michael Grammig, 30, had been waiting for Nicole Weiser to arrive in
Stranahan High School's staff parking lot. Minutes before classes began, he
reportedly walked up to her open door and shot her in the head as she tried to
escape through the passenger door. Four bullet casings from a 9mm handgun were
found near the car. MILITARY Gulf War syndrome unproved, Powell says There is no
conclusive evidence that Persian Gulf War veterans are suffering from illnesses
directly linked to the conflict, retired Gen. Colin Powell said. But Powell, who
was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the war, said compensation for
some might be appropriate. Despite widespread reports of Gulf War syndrome, the
theory remains unproved, he told a gathering of business leaders on Mackinac
Island, Mich. COURTS Mom gets prison for abandoning tot A woman who abandoned
her 14-month-old son for days, leaving him malnourished and suffering from
diaper sores, was sentenced in Kent, Wash., to more than two years in prison.
Damon Jump was found in November by a police officer evacuating an apartment
building because of a fire. He was so hungry that he had sucked his thumb until
it bled. LaDawn Jump, 21, told investigators she left her son behind when she
and her 2-year-old daughter moved in with a boyfriend because she was afraid the
man would not accept Damon. She said she visited the baby every four or five
days. Secondhand smoke lawsuit reinstated Six tobacco companies can be sued over
the lung cancer death of a nonsmoker exposed to secondhand smoke, the New
Hampshire Supreme Court ruled. The court reinstated the lawsuit filed by Roxanne
Ramsey-Buckingham, who died in 1996 at the age of 44, a year after claiming in a
suit that tobacco companies either knew or should have known their products
could be harmful to nonsmokers. Man pleads guilty in burning, beheading A white
man pleaded guilty in Independence, Va., and was sentenced to life in prison for
burning a black man alive and cutting his head off with a dull ax. Louis
Ceparano, 43, interrupted jury selection to enter his plea, though he insisted
he did not commit the crime. He said prosecutors had enough evidence to convict
him and that he wanted to avoid the death penalty.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1998


                             1940 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          May 30, 1998 Saturday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 9

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Scientists develop effective malaria vaccine
 New treatment based on injection of purified genes directly into muscle tissue

SOURCE: Newsday

DATELINE: Seattle

BODY:

   After decades of searching and dismal results, scientists have developed a
vaccine effective against malaria, one of the most widespread and devastating
diseases in the world.

   The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is based on injection
of purified genes so-called "naked DNA" directly into muscle tissue. Tests show
that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount of DNA, read its genetic message
and make the protein specified by the gene, in this case a malaria gene. The
protein's presence then alerts the immune system that an infection may be
occurring, touching off a strong protective response without incurring the
disease itself.

   Development of the vaccine has not been announced publicly, but it was
discussed Friday during the first meeting of the American Society of Gene
Therapy. Although the naval researchers expect to publish their initial results
soon, the vaccine still must undergo large-scale efficacy testing before it
becomes available.

   Richard Hedstrom, director of molecular biology at the Naval Medical Research
Institute in Rockville, Md., said Friday that early testing in volunteers had
shown "much higher protection, dramatically higher protection" than other
candidate vaccines. He said the tests showed it also "is very well tolerated . .
. even at the highest doses."

   Hedstrom said the vaccine's ability to stimulate so-called T-cells (cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes) into action was an "exciting result." T-cells which are the
immune system agents that cause rejection of transplanted organs can hit the
malaria parasite when it seems most vulnerable, as it is infecting the liver.

   Malaria is a debilitating disease that destroys red blood cells and in some
cases enters the brain, causing death.

   Vaccine specialists say the beauty of the naked DNA approach is that it fires
up the entire immune system, not just the blood-borne response that produces
antibodies. The very potent cellular arm of the immune system, the T-cells, also
are activated, allowing the immune system to eliminate infected cells anywhere
in the body, even within liver cells.

   In the past, malaria was partly controlled by a worldwide attack on
mosquitoes. But since World War II, mosquitoes gradually have developed genetic
resistance to pesticides such as DDT, and malaria has rebounded tragically. An
estimated 2 million to 3 million people worldwide die of the disease yearly.


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                             1941 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  May 30, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: Study Finds Risks to Patients in Drug Trials

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29

BODY:

   Federal investigators said today that patients who participated in clinical
trials of new drugs were often exposed to unsafe and unethical practices because
no one policed the research to protect their interests.

   In a draft report, the inspector general of the Department of Health and
Human Services said participants often had no real protections because the
review boards that supervised the clinical testing of experimental drugs and
medical devices were overwhelmed with work.

    The boards, which are supposed to protect the interests of patients, "review
too much, too quickly, with too little expertise," said the inspector general,
June Gibbs Brown.

   As a result, Ms. Brown said, there is no assurance that patients "understand
what they are consenting to when they agree to participate in a research
effort."

   In her report, to be issued in two weeks, Ms. Brown found that doctors and
drug companies often recruited people for their research with misleading
advertisements in buses and subways and on university campuses. These
advertisements, she said, lure people with promises of free treatments or cash
payments, but often make no mention of the risks, and as a result patients often
do not understand the experimental nature of the treatment.

   Scientists are reporting explosive growth in promising new biomedical
research, with hundreds of products being tested on tens of thousands of
patients, including children and people with severe mental illnesses.

   The number of clinical trials is likely to grow, because President Clinton
and Congressional leaders of both parties have vowed to increase spending on
research to fight cancer, Alzheimer's and other diseases.

   The review boards established by hospitals and medical schools are often
deluged with reports of drugs' harmful side effects, but cannot always follow up
such reports and may spend just "one or two minutes of review per study," the
inspector general said. In some cases, she said, a review board supervises more
than 2,000 research protocols and cannot do much more than a "perfunctory
review" of serious problems.

   One review board member told the inspector general that he scrutinized the
summaries of clinical trials only if a patient died. "If no patient has died,
then he generally will not raise questions," the report said.

   Ms. Brown said the review boards were riddled with potential conflicts of
interest because they were under pressure to accommodate the needs of academic
health centers that depend heavily on the money they receive for clinical
research from drug companies and other businesses.

   The boards are "expected to be responsive to the financial pressures facing
their parent institutions and/ or sponsors," the report said.

   Dr. Bert Spilker, senior vice president of the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America, a trade group that represents drug companies,
acknowledged that review boards were "harried by an enormous workload." But Dr.
Spilker said he was "surprised and offended" by the suggestion of conflict of
interest.

   Drug companies might accept new rules or guidelines for the protection of
patients in research, he said, but they but see no need for new laws.

   Ms. Brown said her findings should send a "very serious warning signal" to
consumers, drug companies and Federal agencies. Huge amounts of research are
financed by the National Institutes of Health, and hundreds of studies involve
products regulated by the Food and Drug Administration.

   Dr. Wendy Baldwin, deputy director of the health institutes, declined to
comment on the draft report. Another N.I.H. official, speaking on the condition
of anonymity, insisted that there had not been any widespread violation of
patients' rights. But the official agreed that "review boards are being asked to
do more and more work at a time when research is getting much more complicated."

   In her report, the inspector general also made these points:

   *Members of review boards often lack expertise in techniques like genetic
testing, gene therapy and the transplanting of organs and tissues from animals
to humans. Such techniques raise "moral and ethical questions that might not be
apparent to the untrained eye."

   *After members of a review board approve clinical trials, they rarely visit
sites where the research is conducted. Nor do they solicit comments from
patients in the studies.

   *Biomedical researchers often depart from the research protocols approved by
an institutional review board. In one study, doctors implanted experimental
medical devices in "three times the number of human subjects" allowed in the
protocol.

   Ms. Brown said that "the long-established system for protecting human
research subjects" seemed to be breaking down. She called for "a fundamental
re-examination and re-engineering" of the process by which Federal officials
supervise human testing of new drugs and devices.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1998


                             1942 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     May 30, 1998, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 774 words

HEADLINE: MAKING NEW CANCER DRUGS COMMON;
GENE THERAPY WOULD ENCOURAGE CELLS TO MASS-PRODUCE TUMOR-SHRINKING PROTEINS

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, POST-GAZETTE WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:


   Dr. Judah Folkman, whose research on the drugs angiostatin and endostatin
triggered nationwide hope for a cancer cure, is announcing use of gene therapy
to transform body cells into ''factories'' for making the scarce drugs.

   The step could overcome the major obstacle to wide use of the compounds on
humans, Folkman and his associates say in a research paper on the new
achievement. They said it ''may open new avenues for the gene therapy of a
variety of human cancers.''

   As naturally occurring proteins, angiostatin and endostatin are very
difficult to produce with technology used to make commercial amounts of other
drugs, Folkman said. The drugs, which have had dramatic effects in treating
cancer in laboratory mice, thus are not available in larger amounts needed for
tests on humans.

   But tests in laboratory mice have had such dramatic effects in shrinking
tumors that some scientists regard angiostatin and endostatin as among the most
promising future treatments for cancer.

   Other cancer drugs in the same medicinal family - termed anti-angiogenic
medicines - have been tested in humans. The term means ''against blood vessel
growth.'' But the effects are not as dramatic as seen in mice.

   Folkman chose the national meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy in
Seattle as a forum for announcing the research. He and his team are from Harvard
University Medical School, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Genetix
Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge, Mass.

   Yesterday, another group of researchers, headed by Dr. Charles Lin, reported
first use of a similar gene therapy approach for cancer in lab mice. They used
gene therapy to make mice cells produce another anti-angiogenic compound. Lin's
group includes scientists from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Tarrytown,
N.Y.

   Angiostatin, endostatin and other anti-angiogenic drugs work by preventing
growth of new blood vessels into tumors. Without blood vessels to supply
nutrients and oxygen, and to carry away waste products, cancerous tumors cannot
grow and spread. They remain small and harmless.

   Cancer is such a deadly disease because tumors get an ever-more-bountiful
network of blood vessels. It enables them to grow and destroy surrounding normal
tissue as well as to spread to distant sites in the liver, brain, bone and other
parts of the body.

   In mice, angiostatin and endostatin also cut off blood supply to existing
tumors. Researchers have reported that the drugs cause huge tumors to shrink and
virtually disappear.

   Experts believe, however, that the drugs must be taken for a lifetime to
constantly keep growth of blood vessels in check.

   ''This could be very expensive,'' Lin noted.

   But if perfected for human use years from now, gene therapy could avoid that
problem, he said, making cells constantly produce compounds that block growth of
new blood vessels.

   Folkman's team took genes with the instructions for making angiostatin and
endostatin and inserted them into viruses. The viruses served as delivery
vehicles, infecting and inserting the genes into bone marrow cells. The cells
then were transplanted into mice, where tests showed that they did produce
angiostatin and endostatin.

   Researchers then transplanted cancer cells into the mice and noted a decrease
in tumor growth in mice treated with gene therapy.

   Duke researchers used a simpler and more direct approach. It involved
intravenously injecting mice with a virus containing a gene with instructions
for making a protein termed ''ExTek.'' ExTek blocks a ''pathway,'' or series of
biochemical steps, that results in growth of new blood vessels. The virus
infected cells inside blood vessels in the mice and delivered its chemically
coded instructions for making ExTek.

   Lin and his associates gave ExTek to animals with the mouse version of breast
cancer and melanoma, a deadly skin cancer. It reduced the growth rate of breast
cancers by 64 percent and of melanoma by 47 percent.

   They also tested ExTek's ability to reduce the spread of cancer. Mice
injected with a plain virus developed many large metastases in their lungs, and
the new tumor colonies had a rich supply of new blood vessels.

   Mice given the ExTek virus developed what Lin characterized as ''few, if
any'' metastases. He said his group was trying to overcome a major problem that
exists with ExTek and other forms of gene therapy: The medically beneficial
genes stop working too soon.

With ExTek, the genes stop pumping out large amounts of the beneficial protein
after about 10 days. In humans, ExTek genes probably would have to continue
working for years, Lin indicated.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1998


                             1943 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   May 30, 1998, Saturday, FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 25, NATION / WORLD BRIEFS COLUMN

LENGTH: 1625 words

HEADLINE: NATION / WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

WASHINGTON

Anti-terrorism exercise is set for today at Pentagon

   Police and rescue vehicles will be rushed to the Pentagon today in a Defense
Department exercise to test emergency response to a terrorist attack at the U.S.
military's sprawling headquarters.

   The simulated crisis will include the taking of hostages in the office of
Defense Secretary William Cohen and the accidental release of a simulated
chemical agent causing mass contamination.

   Cohen and other senior U.S. officials have been warning of the growing
international threat of chemical and biological agents in the hands of rogue
states or terrorist groups. The exercise will include about 700 civilian and
military police, emergency and medical personnel and the FBI.

HOUSTON

Smoke from Mexico clears; Texans can breathe easier

   Texans breathed easier by the end of the week as a pall of smoke from fires
in Mexico and Central America cleared for the first time in three weeks. Texas
officials have canceled health alerts that urged people to stay indoors to avoid
the smoke, which had obscured the skylines of the state's major cities and
delayed flights because of reduced visibility.

   "Levels (of smoke) are lower and are expected to continue at this low level
through the weekend," said Terry Hadley, a spokesman for the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission.

   He said a change in weather patterns was keeping the smoke from drifting
north. But there were also reports that recent rain had cut some of the fires
that have burned a million acres in southern Mexico and parts of Central
America.

WASHINGTON

Greenhouse gases rise in U.S., EPA study says

   The net U.S. emissions of gases that cause global warming rose by 20 percent,
from 1990 to 1996, the Environmental Protection Agency said in a draft study
released Friday. Total emissions of heat-trapping gases, such as carbon dioxide,
increased by 10 percent during that time.

   But, meanwhile, forests and other natural absorbers of the carbon gases
decreased by 33 percent, accounting for the bigger net rise in emissions, the
EPA study said.

   Carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels - by far the biggest source of
greenhouse gases - grew by 9 percent over the seven-year period and accounted
for more than two-thirds of the rise in overall emissions. The biggest jump was
in 1996, when fuel use drove carbon dioxide emissions up by 3.7 percent, the
study said.

SEATTLE

Scientists report vaccine is developed for malaria

   After decades of searching and dismal results, scientists have developed a
vaccine effective against malaria, one of the most widespread and devastating
diseases in the world.

   The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is based on injection
of purified genes - so-called "naked DNA" - directly into muscle tissue. Tests
show that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount of DNA, read its genetic
message and make the protein specified by the gene, in this case a malaria gene.

   The protein's presence then alerts the immune system that an infection may be
occurring, touching off a strong protective response without incurring the
disease itself. Development of the vaccine has yet to be anno unced publicly,
but it was discussed Friday during the first annual meeting of the American
Society of Gene Therapy.

WORLD

BEIJING

Early flooding kills 273, injures 20,000 others

   China's annual flood season began earlier than usual this year because of El
Nino and already has killed 273 people and left more than 20,000 sick or
injured, state media reported Friday. Since March, at least 10 of China's 30
provinces have been hit by flooding and storms, including usually arid areas in
the north and northwest.

   The floods have also damaged or destroyed 1 million houses and affected
nearly 5 million acres of farmland, including nearly 500,000 acres where the
harvest was wrecked, the Xinhua News Agency reported. Direct economic losses
were estimated at $ 890 million, Xinhua said, quoting the Civil Affairs
Ministry.

PARIS

Legislation calls killings by Armenians genocide

   Lawmakers in the National Assembly voted unanimously Friday to formally
recognize the 1915 killings of ethnic Armenians in Turkey as a genocide - a move
that drew sharp protests from Turkey.

   If the Senate also passes the motion, France would become the first major
European country to use the term "genocide" to describe the deaths of about 1.5
million Armenians in Ottoman Turkey between 1915 and 1923.

   Genocide is the systematic annihilation of a racial, political or cultural
group. Turkey denies that the deaths constituted genocide, insisting instead
that they were the result of a civil war. Turkey strongly criticized the motion
and suggested it will embolden Armenian militants, who killed 34 Turkish
diplomats and relatives in the 1970s and early 1980s.

LONDON

Nazi war-crimes suspect is ordered to stand trial

   A magistrate ordered a trial Friday for a 77-year-old man suspected of
Nazi-related murders, setting the stage for Britain's first war crimes trial.

   The suspect, Anthony Sawoniuk, is charged with killing four Jews in late
1942. An earlier war crimes case, held under a controversial act of Parliament
passed in 1991, collapsed in 1996 when the defendant, Szymon Serafinowicz, was
declared mentally unfit to stand trial. Serafinowicz died last year at age 87.

   Sawoniuk, who is deaf, looked strained and anxious at Friday's hearing in
London's Central Criminal Court. He is charged with killing four Jewish people
in Domachevo, which is now part of Poland. The town is on the border of Belarus
and Poland and has passed back and forth between the two countries repeatedly as
boundaries changed. He was granted bail and is due to appear in court on July 24
to make his plea. He has denied the charges.

SLOVAKIA

Parliament fails again to vote in a president

   The Slovak Parliament's seventh attempt to vote in a president ended in farce
on Friday in Bratislavia when the sole candidate failed by a huge margin to get
elected. Slovakia, long regarded by the West as a maverick in post-communist
eastern Europe, has been without a head of state since March 2, when President
Michal Kovac completed his term.

   A three-fifths parliamentary majority, or 90 votes, is required to vote in a
president, but the government of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar and the
opposition are too divided to agree on a compromise candidate. Neither
government nor opposition bothered to field candidates.

SPAIN

Thousands of air travelers are stranded by slowdown

   Chaos reigned in airports in Madrid and elsewhere Friday with about 200
flights canceled and thousands of passengers stranded as air controllers staged
a second day of work slowdowns in a contract dispute, officials said.

   Passengers were left cooling their heels at airports or scrambling to change
travel plans because of a work-to-rule action declared by controllers who are
battling with Spanish airports authority AENA over overtime requirements.

   However, fears that problems might continue over the weekend were minimized
after the air traffic controllers said they would not conduct any "selective"
actions then.

MEXICO CITY

Pollution costs Mexico millions, official says

   Poisonous air and choking smoke from forest fires are costing Mexico millions
of dollars a day in lost industrial production and extra health costs, the
government's environmental health chief said Friday.

   Also on Friday, Mexico City declared a fourth consecutive day of smog
emergency as a coffee-colored haze smothered the skyline despite the year's
first heavy rains late Thursday. Pollution control measures, such as curtailing
driving and reducing factory output, have meant an economic loss of at least $ 8
million a day, said Gustavo Olaiz Fernandez, director general of Environmental
Health.

OTTAWA

Court lifts limitations on publishing election polls

   Canada's Supreme Court struck down a government ban Friday on publishing
polls in the last three days of an election campaign as a "serious invasion of
the freedom of expression of all Canadians."

   The court voted 5-3 to overturn the ban, which was imposed to prevent
inaccurate polls from swaying voters and to allow critical reflection at the end
of a campaign.

   "In my view, the doubtful benefits of this ban are outweighed by its
significant and tangible deleterious effects," Justice Michel Bastarache wrote
for the majority. "The impact on freedom of expression in this case is profound.
This is a complete ban on political information at a crucial time in the
electoral process."

   The ban had applied from midnight on Friday before an election until the
polls closed on the Monday evening.

NETHERLANDS

Dutch watch and sigh at rare royal wedding

   As the nation watched and sighed, Queen Beatrix's nephew married his commoner
sweetheart Friday in the Netherlands' first royal wedding in 23 years. Smiling
and a bit giddy, Prince Maurits and his bride waved to dozens of news
photographers as they stepped out of their convertible for a civil ceremony at
the Palace Het Loo in Apeldoorn. A church ceremony takes place today.

   The prince's new wife is Marilene van den Broek, the daughter of European
Commissioner and former Dutch Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek. Friday's
ceremony and palace garden reception were nationally televised.

   Maurits, 30, who works as head of logistics services at Amsterdam's Schiphol
Airport, met Marilene, 27, five years ago at Groningen University. Queen
Beatrix, unwilling to break a prior commitment for Friday's ceremony, will
attend today's service.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Color Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Newlyweds Dutch Prince
Maurits and his bride, Marilene van den Broek, prepare to release balloons
Friday after their wedding.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1998


                             1944 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 May 30, 1998, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 25, NATION / WORLD BRIEFS COLUMN

LENGTH: 1591 words

HEADLINE: NATION / WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

WASHINGTON

Anti-terrorism exercise is set for today at Pentagon

   Police and rescue vehicles will be rushed to the Pentagon today in a Defense
Department exercise to test emergency response to a terrorist attack at the U.S.
military's sprawling headquarters.

   The simulated crisis will include the taking of hostages in the office of
Defense Secretary William Cohen and the accidental release of a simulated
chemical agent causing mass contamination.

   Cohen and other senior U.S. officials have been warning of the growing
international threat of chemical and biological agents in the hands of rogue
states or terrorist groups.

   The exercise will include about 700 civilian and military police, emergency
and medical personnel and the FBI.

HOUSTON

Smoke from Mexico clears; Texans can breathe easier

   Texans breathed easier by the end of the week as a pall of smoke from fires
in Mexico and Central America cleared for the first time in three weeks. Texas
officials have canceled health alerts that urged people to stay indoors to avoid
the smoke, which had obscured the skylines of the state's major cities and
delayed flights because of reduced visibility.

   "Levels (of smoke) are lower and are expected to continue at this low level
through the weekend," said Terry Hadley, a spokesman for the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission.

   He said a change in weather patterns was keeping the smoke from drifting
north.

   But there were also reports that recent rain had cut some of the fires that
have burned a million acres in southern Mexico and parts of Central America.

SEATTLE

Scientists report vaccine is developed for malaria

   After decades of searching and dismal results, scientists have developed a
vaccine effective against malaria, one of the most widespread and devastating
diseases in the world.

   The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is based on injection
of purified genes - so-called "naked DNA" - directly into muscle tissue.

   Tests show that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount of DNA, read its
genetic message and make the protein specified by the gene, in this case a
malaria gene.

   The protein's presence then alerts the immune system that an infection may be
occurring, touching off a strong protective response without incurring the
disease itself.

   Development of the vaccine has yet to be announced publicly, but it was
discussed Friday during the first annual meeting of the American Society of Gene
Therapy.

WORLD

BEIJING

Early flooding kills 273, injures 20,000 others

   China's annual flood season began earlier than usual this year because of El
Nino and already has killed 273 people and left more than 20,000 sick or
injured, state media reported Friday. Since March, at least 10 of China's 30
provinces have been hit by flooding and storms, including usually arid areas in
the north and northwest.

   The floods have also damaged or destroyed 1 million houses and affected
nearly 5 million acres of farmland, including nearly 500,000 acres where the
harvest was wrecked, the Xinhua News Agency reported. Direct economic losses
were estimated at $ 890 million, Xinhua said, quoting the Civil Affairs
Ministry.

PARIS

Legislation calls killings of Armenians genocide

   Lawmakers in the National Assembly voted unanimously Friday to formally
recognize the 1915 killings of ethnic Armenians in Turkey as a genocide - a move
that drew sharp protests from Turkey.

   If the Senate also passes the motion, France would become the first major
European country to use the term "genocide" to describe the deaths of about 1.5
million Armenians in Ottoman Turkey between 1915 and 1923.

   Genocide is the systematic annihilation of a racial, political or cultural
group. Turkey denies that the deaths constituted genocide, insisting instead
that they were the result of a civil war. Turkey strongly criticized the motion
and suggested it will embolden Armenian militants, who killed 34 Turkish
diplomats and relatives in the 1970s and early 1980s.

TURKEY

Troops, Kurdish rebels clash; 13 are killed

   Two Turkish soldiers and 11 Kurdish rebels were killed in clashes in
Diyarbakir in the country's Southeast, officials said Friday. Security forces
killed eight guerrillas in southeastern Batman province, the emergency rule
governor's office saids.

   The office, based in the regional capital of Diyarbakir, said three more
Kurdistan Workers Party rebels were killed in separate clashes in the eastern
province of Van. The two government soldiers died in that clash, the governor's
office said.

   More than 28,000 people have been killed in 13 years of conflict between
Turkish security forces and guerrillas, who are fighting for self-rule in the
mainly Kurdish southeast.

LONDON

Nazi war-crimes suspect is ordered to stand trial

   A magistrate ordered a trial Friday for a 77-year-old man suspected of
Nazi-related murders, setting the stage for Britain's first war crimes trial.

   The suspect, Anthony Sawoniuk, is charged with killing four Jews in late
1942. An earlier war crimes case, held under a controversial act of Parliament
passed in 1991, collapsed in 1996 when the defendant, Szymon Serafinowicz, was
declared mentally unfit to stand trial. Serafinowicz died last year at age 87.

   Sawoniuk, who is deaf, looked strained and anxious at Friday's hearing in
London's Central Criminal Court. He is charged with killing four Jewish people
in Domachevo, which is now part of Poland.thtbbJ He has denied the charges.

SLOVAKIA

Parliament fails again to vote in a president

   The Slovak Parliament's seventh attempt to vote in a president ended in farce
on Friday in Bratislavia when the sole candidate failed by a huge margin to get
elected.

   Slovakia, long regarded by the West as a maverick in post-communist eastern
Europe, has been without a head of state since March 2, when President Michal
Kovac completed his term.

   A three-fifths parliamentary majority, or 90 votes, is required to vote in a
president, but the government of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar and the
opposition are too divided to agree on a compromise candidate.

Neither government nor opposition bothered to field candidates.

SPAIN

Thousands of air travelers are stranded by slowdown

   Chaos reigned in airports in Madrid and elsewhere Friday with about 200
flights canceled and thousands of passengers stranded as air controllers staged
a second day of work slowdowns in a contract dispute, officials said.

   Passengers were left cooling their heels at airports or scrambling to change
travel plans because of a work-to-rule action declared by controllers who are
battling with Spanish airports authority AENA over overtime requirements.

   However, fears that problems might continue over the weekend were minimized
after the air traffic controllers said they would not conduct any "selective"
actions then.

MEXICO

Zedillo steps up attack against liberal bishop

   Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo stepped up his government's attacks on
controversial Catholic Bishop Samuel Ruiz, an outspoken defender of Indian
rights in the troubled state of Chiapas.

   During a visit to the divided southern state on Friday, where Zapatista
Indians rebelled in 1994, Zedillo railed against practitioners, like Ruiz, of
liberation theology, a liberal brand of Catholic doctrine that urges the poor
not to wait until the afterlife to free themselves from misery.

   "There is no ideology that can be valid if it is based on the threat of
violence, nor is there any justifiable theology that allows for the use of
violence," Zedillo said on a visit to Paraiso, near the Zapatistas' jungle
stronghold.

   Critics accuse Ruiz of stirring up Chiapas' Indians into the January 1994
uprising.

OTTAWA

Court lifts limitations on publishing election polls

   Canada's Supreme Court struck down a government ban Friday on publishing
polls in the last three days of an election campaign as a "serious invasion of
the freedom of expression of all Canadians."

   The court voted 5-3 to overturn the ban, which was imposed to prevent
inaccurate polls from swaying voters and to allow critical reflection at the end
of a campaign.

   "In my view, the doubtful benefits of this ban are outweighed by its
significant and tangible deleterious effects," Justice Michel Bastarache wrote
for the majority. "The impact on freedom of expression in this case is profound.
This is a complete ban on political information at a crucial time in the
electoral process."

   The ban had applied from midnight on Friday before an election until the
polls closed on the Monday evening.

NETHERLANDS

Dutch watch and sigh at rare royal wedding

   As the nation watched and sighed, Queen Beatrix's nephew married his commoner
sweetheart Friday in the Netherlands' first royal wedding in 23 years. Smiling
and a bit giddy, Prince Maurits and his bride waved to dozens of news
photographers as they stepped out of their convertible for a civil ceremony at
the Palace Het Loo in Apeldoorn. A church ceremony takes place today.

   The prince's new wife is Marilene van den Broek, the daughter of European
Commissioner and former Dutch Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek. Friday's
ceremony and palace garden reception were nationally televised.

   Maurits, 30, who works as head of logistics services at Amsterdam's Schiphol
Airport, met Marilene, 27, five years ago at Groningen University.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Color Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Newlyweds Dutch Prince
Maurits and his bride, Marilene van den Broek, prepare to release balloons
Friday after their wedding.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1998


                             1945 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      MAY 29, 1998, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B2; PEOPLE IN BUSINESS

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: People in Business

BYLINE: Colleen Benson

BODY:
Cygnus Solutions, a Sunnyvale provider of embedded software, named Alex Daly CEO
and president. He was chief marketing officer and SVP of worldwide sales and
corporate marketing for C-Cube MicroSystems Inc.

    Synopsys Inc., a Mountain View provider of semiconductor equipment,
appointed Chi-Foon Chan president. He continues as COO.

    Larry Yarberry, former CFO of Southern Pacific Rail Corp. until its 1996
merger with Union Pacific, was named CFO of Pacer International Inc., a
Lafayette provider of trucking and logistics services.

    Quokka Sports, a San Francisco digital sports media company, named Les
Schmidt CFO and SVP. He was CEO of MECON. Thomas Newell joined as VP of business
affairs. He was EVP and general counsel of GGP Productions.

    Hewlett-Packard Co., a Palo Alto computer systems provider, named Manuel
Diaz VP of customer advocacy. Keith Goodwin, former general manager of the
Americas Enterprise accounts organization, succeeds Diaz as VP and general
manager of the worldwide enterprise accounts organization. William Sullivan was
promoted to VP and continues as general manager of the components group.

    Intraware Inc., an Orinda provider of Intranet software and services,
promoted Dave Dunlap to VP of operations. He was director of product lines.
James Brentano, former director of systems engineering, was promoted to VP of
knowledge services.

    AdKnowledge, a Palo Alto provider of Web advertising management products,
said Kevin Wandryk joined as VP of business development. He was director of
product management at Adobe Systems Inc.

    American Management Systems, a Fairfax, Va., business and information
technology consulting firm, said Alex Kramer joined the San Francisco office as
a VP in the finance industry group. He was COO of Venue Software Corp.

    Megabios Corp., a Burlingame developer of gene delivery systems, appointed
John Warner VP of research. He was VP of gene therapy and immunology at Inex
Pharmaceuticals Corp.

    SCO, a Santa Cruz provider of server operating systems software, promoted
Wayne Bergland to VP of U.S. field sales. He was director of strategic sales.

    ALZA Corp., a Palo Alto pharmaceutical company, promoted Susan Rinne from
director to VP of regulatory affairs.

    Sally Abel, a partner with Fenwick & West in Palo Alto, was named to the
board of the International Trademark Association.

   BOARD MOVES

    The PMI Group Inc., a San Francisco mortgage insurance company, elected
company President and CEO Roger Haughton to the additional role of board
chairman.

    Andrew Ludwick, former CEO and president of Bay Networks Inc., joined the
board of IPHighway, a San Jose provider of networking products which deliver
mission-critical information over the Internet.


   To have a top management appointment considered for publication in People in
Business, send a brief notice, including the individual's background and photo,
to: People in Business, Business Dept., S.F. Chronicle, 901 Mission St., San
Francisco 94103 (Fax: 415-543-2482.)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), (1) Dunlap, (2) Daly

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1998


                             1946 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     May 28, 1998, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: EXPERTS FIND GENE THERAPY NOT MEETING EXPECTATIONS

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, POST-GAZETTE WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:


   Gene therapy, billed as a miracle cure for cancer and other conditions upon
its debut in 1990, has neither cured nor improved treatment of any disease,
according to experts gathering in Seattle for a major gene therapy conference.

   Summaries of 700 new reports being presented at the inaugural meeting of the
American Society for Gene Therapy, or ASGT, indicate that it will take years for
gene therapy to foster the revolution in everyday medicine heralded when the
first approved human tests began eight years ago.

   About 1,700 scientists from around the world are expected for this first
national meeting of the major U.S. scientific organization devoted to gene
therapy.

   Gene therapy involves replacing abnormal genes with normal copies produced
with genetic engineering technology. Genes are pieces of the genetic material,
DNA, found in packets called chromosomes, in the central nucleus of most body
cells.

   Genes influence all life processes by ordering cells to make proteins that
act as hormones, catalysts for biochemical reactions and structural material. An
abnormal gene may lead to disease by producing too little protein or defective
protein that can't work properly.

   Early optimism about the new, ''breakthrough'' field of medicine persisted
until about five years ago, according to Dr. W. French Anderson. Scientists
envisioned administering genes like penicillin, insulin and other drugs to treat
and cure disease.

   Then it began to yield to a more sober reappraisal, rooted in the
difficulties involved in getting genes into diseased cells and getting them to
work.

   Anderson, a human gene therapy pioneer while at the National Institutes of
Health but now with the University of Southern California at Los Angeles,
counted more than 300 clinical trials approved worldwide for gene therapy of
cancer and other diseases since 1990.

   The results clearly indicate that gene therapy has potential for treating
cancer, heart disease, AIDS, hereditary disease and other conditions. Gene
therapy also is attractive because it seems to cause few adverse reactions.

   But Anderson concluded in a special report in the scientific journal, Nature,
that gene therapy's overall effectiveness in patients has been ''disappointingly
low.''

   Anderson looked at data on 232 clinical trials that had been approved in the
United States as of February 1998. Most involved gene therapy for different
forms of cancer, genetic diseases like cystic fibrosis and AIDS.

   The biggest and most advanced clinical trial involves 246 patients with
giloblastoma, a deadly form of brain cancer. It is a so-called Phase III
clinical trial, the final phase before a drug company can apply for U.S. Food
and Drug Administration permission to market a drug.

   Most other human gene therapy tests are in earlier stages and involve small
numbers of patients.

   Anderson believes that as many as five more years of additional research will
be needed before gene therapy proves successful in a clinical trial. He defined
success as scientifically valid data showing a substantial improvement in
patients' conditions.

   As many as 25 more years of work may be needed for gene therapy to fulfill
its promise and revolutionize medicine by offering treatment, cures and
prevention for many diseases, he added.

   Several major barriers are hindering development of human gene therapy,
Anderson said. Perhaps the most important is the lack of effective ways of
delivering genes to diseased cells.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1998


                             1947 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       May 28, 1998 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 463 words

HEADLINE: COMPUTERS EXPANDING HORIZONS FOR CHEMISTS

BYLINE: By ULYSSES TORASSA; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Beakers and test tubes are increasingly giving way to computers and
algorithms in the hunt for new chemical compounds.

   Meanwhile, other chemists are moving into biology, as they search for answers
about diseases such as AIDS and Alzheimer's, and venture into gene therapy
strategies.

   Those two themes are evident this week as more than 1,000 chemists descend on
downtown Cleveland for the regional meeting of the American Chemical Society.

   "We don't have to do research in an Edisonian manner anymore," said David W.
Ball, a chemistry professor at Cleveland State University, who helped organize
the meeting. "We don't have to try everything and see what works. We can use the
computer to provide direction."

   Indeed, software companies in the exhibition area are hawking inexpensive
packages people can load on their personal computers and test the properties of
various hypothetical compounds.

   The Ohio Supercomputing Center is offering workshops for chemists on how to
use high-speed computers to tease out the complex interactions of atoms and
molecules.

   Meanwhile, more than 400 presentations are focusing on using traditional
chemical techniques for analyzing large biological molecules, including those
that make up the genetic code. That is leading to new insights into basic
biology as well as specific diseases, Ball said.

   And often the two overlap. Anne M. Chaka, a research chemist with Lubrizol
Corp., the Wickliffe maker of specialty chemicals, recalled going to a chemical
conference not long ago and wandering into a session on how proteins fold.
Suddenly, it gave her an insight into a frustrating problem of wax crystals
forming in fuels in cold weather.

   "You never know where a new idea is going to come from," Chaka said.

   Indeed, Ball expects the proportion of industrial chemists to be higher at
this meeting because Cleveland has such a large and diverse chemical base,
including Lubrizol, BP Chemical Co., Sherwin-Williams Co., and B.F. Goodrich Co.

   For Chaka, who is speaking on "Quantum Mechanics and Your Automobile," the
use of advanced equations for understanding the structure of individual atoms
has led to better additives for fuels and lubricants.

   For instance, she and others at Lubrizol were able to unravel a mystery as to
why compounds made of longer chains of sulfur atoms tended to corrode
copper-based parts more than those made of shorter links. That, in turn, led to
a better formulation for lubricants now used widely in cars, trucks and
industrial gears.

   "Computers are getting fast enough and the science robust enough to start
applying some of these very high theoretical chemical physics," Chaka said. "In
the computer, we're all powerful gods. We can put in what we want to consider
and eliminate what we don't."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY JAMES ROSS / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; Anne M. Chaka,
research chemist at Lubrizol Corp.: "You never know where a good idea is going
to come from."

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1998


                             1948 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    MAY 26, 1998 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 9F

LENGTH: 778 words

HEADLINE: THOUSANDS WITH EARLY-STAGE BREAST CANCER HAVE MORE AGGRESSIVE
MASTECTOMIES

BYLINE: Free Press Staff and News Services

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   Tens of thousands of American women with breast cancer are losing breasts
unnecessarily each year because their doctors do not follow national guidelines
in treating the breast cancer, the first comprehensive study of current
practices shows.

   About 65 percent, or 117,000, of the 180,000 breast cancers diagnosed among
American women each year are classified as early stage (1 and 2). Of these,
three-fourths are eligible for breast conserving therapy, which involves
removing the cancer in a surgical procedure known as a lumpectomy, followed by
radiation therapy.

   Yet, scientists reported here last week that in the study of nearly 18,000
women treated for early-stage breast cancer in 1994, more than half of those
eligible for this treatment underwent mastectomy instead.

   Only 44 percent received the breast-sparing treatment in the study, Dr.
Monica Morrow, the lead author of the study, told a meeting of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology.

   A number of studies published over the last 15 years have shown that survival
rates after mastectomy and breast-conserving surgery were equal.

   National guidelines published in 1992 say that doctors should not use age,
prognosis and tumor type as criteria in choosing mastectomy over
breast-conserving therapy. The guidelines list four absolute reasons not to
perform such conservation therapy. They are:

   Multiple tumors in the same breast;

   A history of prior irradiation therapy to the breast region;

   First- or second-trimester pregnancy;

   Diffuse areas of calcifications on X-rays.

   The most important message from the study for patients is: "If you are told
you need a mastectomy, ask why," Morrow said.

   Other news from the conference includes:

   Routine testing reduces deaths from prostate cancer: The study of frequent
screenings, carried out on 46,000 men by Dr. Fernand Labrie and colleagues at
Laval University in Quebec, found that men who underwent screening had a death
rate from prostate cancer less than one-third that of men who were not screened.
Such a 69-percent reduction in deaths would translate into 27,000 fewer deaths
from prostate cancer in the United States each year, Labrie said.

   Two more big studies, one in the United States and one in Europe, are under
way to address the question of whether screening saves lives, but results are
not expected for years.

   Prostate cancer is the second most frequent cause of cancer death in men,
after lung cancer. It is estimated that 184,000 cases will be diagnosed in the
United States this year and that 39,000 people will die.

   The issue of testing for prostate cancer remains controversial because many
elderly men develop prostate tumors that grow slowly, do not spread elsewhere in
the body and do not kill.

   Screening all American men above age 40 or 50 for prostate cancer would cost
$12 billion a year by one estimate -- and errors would subject men to needless
surgery or radiation therapy that can cause impotence and incontinence and, in
rare cases, even death. The errors arise because the blood test used to detect
prostate cancer, which looks for a protein called prostate-specific antigen, or
PSA, is not that reliable an indicator of whether a patient has cancer or how
advanced the disease is.

   Still, some studies have shown that the PSA test, combined with a digital
rectal examination, can detect most prostate cancers. But no study until now has
shown that detection efforts save lives.

   Gene therapy development: An experimental gene therapy that turns off a
signal instructing cancer cells to divide may one day be added to the treatment
arsenal for cancers of the breast, colon and prostate, a Philadelphia cancer
expert said.

   This type of treatment -- called anti-sense therapy -- is one of many new
approaches aimed toward a more targeted treatment of cancer. Working at the
genetic level, the new drug -- Raf-1 antisense ODN -- halts the production of
cancerous cells by interrupting communication between a cancer-causing protein
called Raf and the cancer cell. In certain cancers, Raf instructs the cell to
grow and proliferate.

   In a study of 31 patients, investigators confirmed that they could suppress
the Raf gene, which produces the Raf protein. In addition, two patients in the
study showed no signs of disease progression.

   The new study is a Phase I trial. Such trials are designed to test for drug
side effects and proper doses, but not such factors as tumor shrinkage and
increased survival.

   "This drug has significant potential and further trials in specific tumors
are warranted," said study author Dr. P.J. O'Dwyer of Thomas Jefferson Hospital
in Philadelphia.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             1949 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      May 25, 1998, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: COMING ON STRONG;
Texas' biotech sector emerging as major economic player

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   The Texas Medical Center has long been recognized internationally for its
outstanding medical and research facilities. But Texas' health-care technology
and bioscience industry are quickly emerging as among the nation's most highly
regarded as well as economically vibrant.

   There are 500 such companies operating in Texas. They are engaged in
everything from developing pharmaceuticals and medical devices to gene therapy
to treat cancer. In 1997, the industry totaled $ 6.5 billion in sales, according
to a study released recently by the Texas Healthcare and Bioscience Institute.
Moreover, there are more than 100 biotech companies operating in the Houston
area, employing more than 1,000 workers.

   If further economic evidence is needed as to the vibrancy of Texas' biotech
industry, consider that it accounted for $ 11.6 billion in gross state product,
with total expenditures exceeding $ 20 billion. That a little over $ 1 billion
in tax revenue was generated for state and local coffers should be an eye-opener
for lawmakers considering policies that would help Texas better recruit biotech
companies and assist existing ones to grow and develop.

   There is no good reason why Texas cannot compete with Washington state and
California for biotechnology companies. The state's 55 medical research
facilities, many of which are in Houston, are natural partners for the industry.
It makes good economic sense for lawmakers to take an aggressive attitude in
positioning Texas as a major player in attracting biotech companies and their
highly skilled work forces. Congress' passage of legislation last year that
accelerated the Food and Drug Administration's process for approving lifesaving
drugs and medical devices only helped Texas companies.

   Economics is only part of the picture. There's a human side as well.
Suffering patients are the ultimate beneficiaries of medical breakthroughs. That
sometimes can get lost in the discussion of why more needs to be done to
encourage the work in health-care technology and the bioscience industry.



TYPE: Editorial Opinion

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1998


                             1950 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         MAY 24, 1998 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1305 words

HEADLINE: CRACK DOWN ON CHEATERS IN SCIENCE, CRITICS SAY / A CASE AT JEFFERSON
SHEDS LIGHT ON "SCIENTIFIC MISCONDUCT."

BYLINE: Marian Uhlman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A pathology professor at the University of Southern California lifted the
text from another researcher's grant application.

   At Dartmouth College, a psychology graduate student admitted misrepresenting
data on tests involving animals.

   And a research-program coordinator at the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine got into trouble by fabricating interviews with cancer patients.

   About 15 medical researchers a year are found by the federal Office of
Research Integrity (ORI) to have committed scientific misconduct - a finding
that can strip researchers of federal funds and bar them from serving on
government boards.

   But some question whether that number accurately reflects the degree of
scientific misconduct that goes on in medical research, given that hundreds of
allegations of cheating and falsifying are made each year. Some allegations are
groundless, but critics say that many legitimate cases never emerge from their
institutions and that ignoring them damages the scientific process and wastes
tax-funded research dollars.

   "It is a serious issue," said Robert L. Sprague, a professor of psychology,
special education and community health at the University of Illinois and a
national expert on scientific misconduct. "Often, things are not adjudicated
fairly, justly, thoroughly, in an unbiased way."

   ORI, a branch of the Department of Health and Human Services responsible for
overseeing the truthfulness of taxpayer-supported medical research, is now
reviewing a case from Thomas Jefferson University, where allegations of
scientific misconduct involving a high-profile AIDS-research project have been
raised.

   After learning about the allegations, Jefferson launched an internal probe
that identified serious problems in the research, but the problems did not
amount to scientific misconduct, according to the Jefferson investigators.

   Under ORI policy, misconduct is reserved for serious breaches in scientific
behavior. The evidence must show that a researcher fabricated, falsified or
plagiarized research. Moreover, the fraud must be found to have been a
deliberate act - not an accident or error.

   "For many people in the scientific community, a public finding of scientific
misconduct is equivalent to the death penalty," said Chris Pascal, ORI's acting
director. "They consider it an extremely serious sanction that can ruin a career
for life."

   The restrictive definition is one reason that relatively few researchers are
found to have engaged in scientific misconduct, according to some observers.

   Another reason, they say, is the investigative process. Research
institutions, under ORI guidelines, are responsible for policing the integrity
of their scientific work. That can be tricky, critics say, because a finding of
misconduct can harm colleagues' careers, damage the institution's reputation,
and jeopardize government funding.

   "No one likes to deal with misconduct. Everyone likes to define it so
whatever is in front of you is not misconduct," said Dr. John Bailar, chairman
of health studies at the University of Chicago and an advocate of expanding the
term's definition.

   ORI's definition of scientific misconduct has been a source of controversy.
Many scientists want it tightly drawn so that inadvertent mistakes do not
balloon into career-threatening incidents. Other observers say the definition
excludes offenses that should be covered. Bailar is concerned that scientists
may repeat experiments until they get the desired answer or may neglect to
disclose problems in data or analysis.

   Plagiarism is another issue. ORI excludes many authorship disputes between
collaborators. These cases do not fall under ORI's definition because joint
contribution implies joint ownership, Pascal said. Others say plagiarism is a
problem in science and should be dealt with more forcefully.

   "If it is accepted that one can take credit for the work of another, it
erodes the integrity of the system," said C.K. Gunsalus, associate provost at
the University of Illinois, who has served on several national groups examining
scientific misconduct.

   Jefferson investigated after a former researcher cast doubt on the premise of
a gene-therapy project, singling out Lingxun Duan, a rising star who headed the
project.

   The therapy was built around a gene designed to produce antibodies that would
kill an essential protein of the AIDS virus. Without the protein, the AIDS virus
cannot reproduce.

   The allegations questioned whether the gene was what Jefferson researchers
purported it to be. The internal probe concluded that it was "very questionable"
that the gene worked as reported. Investigators described the research as
fraught with "sloppy" science.

   The committee recommended that Duan be fired for careless science and
misleading testimony. They cleared him of scientific misconduct, because they
found no "direct evidence" that he had willfully falsified data.

   Duan stands by his work, saying the science will ultimately vindicate him.

   The ORI has 10 people on its staff of 37 who review cases such as
Jefferson's. They often wade through thousands of pages of documents on each
case to determine whether the conclusions are appropriate. Cases typically
become public only when ORI renders a decision of scientific misconduct. A
defendant can appeal the ruling. The confidential nature of such cases has led
ORI to decline to confirm or deny whether it is reviewing the Jefferson case.

   The policing of scientific misconduct has come a long way since the early
1980s, when government and research institutions had few policies and resources
to deal with the problem. A series of highly publicized cases, including one
involving the discovery of the AIDS virus, spurred reform.

   ORI now requires research institutions to develop and adhere to a misconduct
policy if they want to receive public-health money. Jefferson officials said
they implemented their first such policy in 1992.

   "We look at it as being an agent for the federal government," said Alan
Kelly, university counsel for Jefferson. "And you have a tremendous amount of
oversight by ORI."

   In Jefferson's recent case, Kelly said, an enormous amount of work went into
examining the misconduct allegations. Jefferson's policy is not much different
from those of other research institutions.

   "When the process first started, many institutions were reluctant to put in a
good effort," Pascal said. "[Today] most of the institutions are trying to do a
reasonable job."

   But, critics say, it is daunting for anyone inside a research institution to
come forward and allege misconduct against a colleague. There is a fear of
reprisals, despite new laws aimed at protecting whistle-blowers.

   "No one teaches you how to have a professional dispute and survive it,"
Gunsalus said.

   Once the cases are adjudicated, junior researchers are almost twice as likely
as their bosses to be found responsible for committing scientific misconduct,
according to ORI statistics.

   While some observers say junior researchers may be more prone to cut corners,
others note that the investigating committees generally include high-ranking
university scientists who identify - and may even be friendly - with the accused
senior scientists.

   "Most of the power lies with the senior faculty," said Dan Pearson, a
spokesman for U.S. Rep. George Brown (D., Calif.), who is investigating academic
misconduct for the House Committee on Science. "The incentive to find the
faculty member guilty is not there."

   Margaret Dale, associate dean for faculty affairs at Harvard Medical School,
acknowledged that a perception of institutions whitewashing investigations
lingers.

   "It can cut both ways," she said. "While institutions don't like findings of
misconduct, one thing that is worse is to try to cover it up."

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1951 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         MAY 24, 1998 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1448 words

HEADLINE: WILLS FOCUSES ON OUTPATIENT SURGERY SITES / THE EYE HOSPITAL IS
BUILDING A NETWORK OF CENTERS IN THE AREA. IT IS ALSO EXPANDING INTO NEW
SPECIALTIES.

BYLINE: Karl Stark, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   June Ray was wide awake last week while her surgeon used a vacuum-like device
to suck a cataract out of her right eye. She could hear the high-pitched
whirring sound that a computer made to let the surgeon, Jack Dugan, know how
much his miniature vacuum was removing.

   But she couldn't feel a thing when he made a tiny, 3.5-millimeter incision
and ultimately inserted a new lens.

   The surgery was so routine that, immediately after, the 78-year-old woman
pulled herself up from the table and was wheeled to a recovery area. She sipped
some decaffeinated coffee, ate a cookie, and, with little more ado, went home a
short time later. "I was comfortable with the experience," Ray said by phone the
next day. "I pick up things better, especially on the printed page. Objects are
clearer."

   So went another operation at the Wills Surgery Center of Cherry Hill, owned
by the Wills Eye Hospital of Philadelphia. This tradition-rich hospital isn't
waiting for patients such as Ray to find their way to its Center City campus.
Instead, the teaching hospital is mounting an aggressive effort to develop a
ring of surgery clinics around the Philadelphia area.

   The strategy is costly. It requires about $2.5 million to $4 million to
establish one center. And the $13 million the hospital has already spent
represents a big gamble for Wills, a nationally known eye hospital established
166 years ago to help poor, blind people.

   But Wills executives believe they have no choice. Because most eye patients
are elderly, the nonprofit hospital is highly vulnerable to the Medicare cuts
now in full swing. Left unaltered, Wills could become isolated in Center City
and subject to a spiraling decline in reimbursements that could threaten its
independence.

   Executive director D. McWilliams Kessler and his staff have created seven
surgery centers in the last three years.

   Some, such as the Havertown site, are joint ventures. Others, including the
North Brunswick, N.J., site, are just managed by Wills. The hospital owns the
Cherry Hill center, its biggest and best-established. Its four operating rooms
and 16,000 square feet of space generate about $8 million in revenue annually.

   An eighth surgery center is planned for Wilmington, and as many as 16 centers
could be in place by 2000, Kessler said.

   Surgery centers look to be a natural fit for Wills. About 95 percent of eye
surgeries, such as cataract removal, are done as outpatient procedures. The
patients go home after treatment.

   Wills is relying on its eye expertise to provide a financial base for its
centers. But that's not all the centers offer.

   Wills is using some centers to diversify into the fields of pediatric,
orthopedic and even plastic surgeries, because more procedures are becoming less
invasive and suitable for surgery without hospitalization.

   "If you can do it with eyes, why not other parts of the body?" asked Joseph
P. Bilson, who heads Wills' surgical network.

   Wills executives imagine that their surgery centers will become the focal
point for many new kinds of care, from genetic therapy to brain surgery, as
these treatments become available outside the hospital over the next decade.

   Reflecting the new diversification, the latest Wills centers are in the
process of removing the word eye from their titles.

   Wills' strategy is not without risk. Only two of the centers are in the
black, although executives say the others have just opened and will become
profitable if trends continue.

   Wills is competing with community hospitals, which are also jumping
vigorously into outpatient surgery, several consultants said. The Crozer
Keystone Healthplex, for example, opened the Moore Eye Institute in Springfield,
Delaware County, in February to provide eye surgery and related services.

   Wills, in short, could be building a network just as the market is becoming
glutted.

   The hospital also must straddle a fine line so as not to offend
ophthalmologists who operate at Wills and usually have their own private
practices.

   Wills can't expand so greatly that it threatens the surgical business of its
doctors, who operate at different hospitals and sometimes in privately owned
facilities.

   "Wills has to be very careful," said Michael J. Parshall, vice president of
the medical-practice management firm Health Care Group Inc., in Plymouth
Meeting. "It's a delicate thing."

   There also is the matter of Wills' original charter. James Wills, the Quaker
merchant who bequeathed money to create the hospital in 1832, specifically
intended his hospital to be "for the relief of the Indigent, Blind & Lame,"
according to his will. The hospital, overseen by the Philadelphia Board of City
Trusts, the group that oversees Girard College, has cut its spending for charity
care from $615,000 in 1995 to $230,000 in 1997, according to financial records.

   Some observers worry that executives at Wills and other nonprofit hospitals
are being compelled to move away from core responsibilities to help the poor.
"Institutions are getting squeezed, and a lot of them are dropping their
commitment to provide charity care, as the numbers in the Wills case suggest,"
said Richard Weishaupt, a senior attorney who specializes in health care for
Community Legal Services in Philadelphia.

   Wills officials dispute that, pointing out that bad debts and other writeoffs
at the hospital came to $4.2 million in 1997, up from $2.6 million in 1996. The
officials say the hospital can't continue to help many people if it isn't secure
and growing. "You can't write everything off," said Sita Ramakrishnan, Wills'
chief financial officer. "We wouldn't have a hospital."

   Wills is operating in a perilous environment. Eye hospitals nationwide are
struggling with falling Medicare payments and the rise of HMOs, which are often
reluctant to pay for what they perceive as high-cost, specialty care.

   Harsh market forces have meant the closing of three eye hospitals in Los
Angeles, Atlanta and Charlotte, N.C., in recent years, said Robert Betz,
executive director of the American Association of Eye and Ear Hospitals in
Washington. Two others, in Birmingham, Ala., and Richmond, Va., have been bought
out, he added.

   All eye hospitals are searching for new ways to ensure fiscal stability. Betz
said Wills' expansion plan is at "the cutting edge of hospital administration."

   "They'll be in the textbooks," he said.

   Wills' plan also gets high marks from Tom Beeman, senior vice president of
hospital operations at the University of Pennsylvania Health System, whose
Scheie Eye Institute is an academic competitor of Wills'.

   Wills has a natural workforce of trained graduates in the Delaware Valley who
can operate at the hospital's surgery centers, Beeman said. "I think this is a
great alternative for them."

   Herbert Nevyas, who owns the Delaware Valley Laser Surgery Institute in Bala
Cynwyd, said he sometimes has operated on his New Jersey patients in Wills'
Cherry Hill site. "I think they're doing a smart thing," he said.

   By teaching-hospital standards, Wills is small - about $63 million in revenue
and $1.7 million in profits last year, compared with a half-billion dollars or
more in revenues for a full-service, academic hospital.

   Wills' leaders declined to participate in an expensive competition with
regional health systems to snap up doctors' practices in an effort to keep
hospital beds filled. Instead, they chose to diversify into geriatric psychiatry
and brain surgery, which have kept the main hospital at Ninth and Walnut Streets
vital. Wills owns the region's only gamma knife, a $2.9 million machine that
dissolves brain tumors.

   The reluctance to buy practices appears to have been prescient. By choosing
to focus on surgery centers, Wills avoided getting into the bidding wars for
doctors that are bringing regional health systems millions of dollars in losses.

   Even companies that specialized in buying eye practices have gotten into
financial trouble, observed Robert A. Wade, managing partner for the health-care
law firm Wade, Goldstein, Landau, Abruzzo, Mackarey & Davidson, in King of
Prussia.

   Wills' outpatient-surgery business is supported by HMO executives and
patients alike.

   Insurers like the concept, because costs at surgery centers are about 30
percent to 60 percent less than for the same operations in hospitals. Patients
such as June Ray appreciate the convenience of receiving care at a local clinic
affiliated with a teaching hospital.

   Her time at the Cherry Hill center was made easier, she said, because she
didn't have to check into a large, forbidding hospital. "I would go here again,"
she said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND MAP;
PHOTO
June Ray receives eye drops from nurse Marla Janor before her cataract surgery
in Wills' Cherry Hill center. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, APRIL SAUL)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1952 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 24, 1998 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. I-5

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: Safeskin earnings estimates get boost; Dura shows recent strength

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Merrill Lynch has raised its earnings estimates for Safeskin, saying shares
of the maker of disposable latex gloves are a buy long term and can be
accumulated intermediate term. "No debt, high return on equity and a consistent
high earnings per share growth rate justify a price-earnings multiple of 35,"
says analyst Russell Mosteller. Mosteller has raised his earnings per share
forecast for this year by eight cents to 95 cents (six cents above the
consensus). He has 1999 at $1.20, or four cents above the consensus. This year's
earnings will be up 35.7 percent, justifying the lofty multiple, he says. In its
very successful first quarter, Safeskin's gross margins jumped because of
currency devaluations and improved manufacturing efficiencies. The company has
manufacturing plants in Asian countries that have been hit with currency
declines and have very low wage rates. Safeskin's quarterly sales are rising at
around 25 percent, the analyst says. Dura rebound? Stock of biotech Dura
Pharmaceuticals, which has been belted this year, has shown recent strength.
"The stock's price-earnings multiple is well below the company's projected
growth rate," says Richard Vietor of Merrill Lynch.

   He looks for earnings per share of 88 cents this year (down from 99 cents
last year) and $1.15 next year. There is increased competition for Dura's Ceclor
treatment, but the company's critical Spiros dry powder inhaler "is the key to
the company's future growth," Vietor says. The first Spiros product, Albuterol,
is being reviewed by the Food and Drug Administration. Vietor, bullish on both
the inhaler and Albuterol, is neutral on the stock for the intermediate term but
rates it a long-term buy. Gerard Feenan of Value Line expects Albuterol to get
the FDA's approval by year-end. Also, Dura will use its $385 million in cash to
buy at least one product or company this year, Feenan says. However, higher
sales and general expenses could put pressure on margins, and Feenan is looking
for earnings per share of 85 cents this year. The stock has great appreciation
potential, but only for those who are venturesome, Feenan says.

   Value Line gives the stock an average (3) for both timeliness and safety.
Another biotech Prudential Securities initiates coverage of Immune Response with
a buy rating but warns that the risk is high. The company's loss per share
should drop to $1.15 this year from $1.58 last year, but it should swell again
to $1.33 in 1999, says analyst Caroline L. Copithorne. The company has
developmental programs in four areas: HIV, autoimmune diseases, cancer and gene
therapy, the analyst says. The most advanced potential product is Remune, a
possible HIV treatment now in Phase III testing.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1953 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    May 24, 1998, Sunday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A3

LENGTH: 952 words

HEADLINE: CONGRESSMAN GOES PUBLIC WITH PRIVATE ILLNESS

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   * Rep. Lane Evans of Illinois has suffered from Parkinson's disease for
several years. Now, he wants the world to know.

   He thinks he's smiling, but often he's not - the muscles in his face refuse
to respond to signals from his brain. A man known for his cheerfulness ends up
looking mean or exhausted much of the time.

   He can't stand painlessly and gets stiff sitting for long - even if it's to
listen to a favorite rock band.

   It's tough to write his name on tiny lines on credit card slips and to pull
money out of his wallet.

   But Rep. Lane Evans, 46, can play basketball and, ever the politician, is
thankful he can still shake hands properly. Parkinson's disease, the
neurodegenerative illness he was diagnosed with three years ago, mostly affects
his left side.

   Evans, the eight-term Democratic lawmaker from western Illinois, disclosed
his illness last week after a private struggle that has been at times
frustrating, embarrassing and painful. But whether the deeply private ex-Marine
doesn't want to complain or is struggling to come to terms with his illness, he
insists he is OK.

   "It isn't a disease I would wish on anybody, but at least at this point it's
not that bad," he said.

   Now, Evans is weighing the idea of becoming an activist on Parkinson's, an
issue in which he's been little involved publicly. At the same time, he faces
one of the nation's toughest re-election battles, standing near the top of the
Republicans' list of Democrats to defeat this November.

   Evans' symptoms are mild, although complicated by longtime back problems. His
arm trembles when he leans on it. He has to inch along the House floor to
navigate extremely narrow aisles.

   But he jogs two or three times a week, though not very fast or without pain
once he's stopped. And medication has eased severe leg cramps.

   "The misperception people have is that you're going to go downhill
immediately," he said, shifting in his seat to counter discomfort. "I've talked
to so many people who've acted like this might be my last phone call."

There are occasional reminders of what the future may hold.

   When Evans was told in 1995 that Parkinson's was the reason he couldn't wave
his left hand in a Labor Day parade, he thought immediately of former Rep.
Morris Udall. The one-time Democratic presidential candidate now lies totally
disabled from Parkinson's in a Veterans Affairs nursing home in Washington. The
powerful image remained with Evans after a tour of the facility.

   And telling his two young nieces, who along with their parents live with him
in his Rock Island, Ill., home, has been the hardest moment so far.

   But Evans realizes he is lucky and remains upbeat. His closest friends say
that's typical.

   "Lane has borne up under a lot of extraordinary stress over the last few
years," said fellow Illinois Democratic Rep. Glenn Poshard. "But as he goes
through this, he will not fall prey to depression or discouragement or any of
those things because he has an inner strength and inner self that really knows
what's important."

   Their 20-year friendship began back home and blossomed in Congress through
weekly meetings with a few members to talk about faith. But although Poshard
noticed his friend's flagging energy, he didn't know of Evans' illness until
last week and never heard him complain.

   Evans summed up his outlook and decision not to leave office by saying his
main goal is to "work for what is right." For times when that optimistic spirit
is hard to muster, rock 'n' roll is his solace - he's a huge Beatles fan.

   "I can take a lot," Evans said. "But again I'm not the worst case. I'm not
sure what I would do if it was worse."

   Until now, getting involved in Parkinson's in Congress wasn't an option.  The
same year he was diagnosed, his mother died of a brain tumor and his father
entered a nursing home.

   But even though his re-election race is time-consuming, he wants to do what
he can. Parkinson's advocates say they desperately need high-profile victims to
lobby for more research funding.

   The federal government spends far more money per patient studying diseases
such as multiple sclerosis and AIDS than on Parkinson's, even though MS and AIDS
strike fewer people, said Joan Samuelson, who heads the Parkinson's Action
Network.

   "We are a small community and we don't have that much clout," she said.

   GOP Reps. Joe Skeen of New Mexico and Joseph McDade of Pennsylvania, who is
retiring, also have said they have Parkinson's. Last year, Congress authorized
the government to nearly triple Parkinson's research funding to $ 100 million a
year. But the real battle is in getting the money appropriated.

   "I do believe in the right of privacy very strongly," said Evans. "But now
that it's out there, I'm going to be talking about it."

******** Parkinson's at a glance

   SYMPTOMS: Tremors, stiffness, slowing of movement, slurred speech, loss of
balance and sometimes uncontrollable shaking. It gets progressively worse and
eventually leaves victims unable to move, swallow or speak. It doesn't affect
mental ability.

   CAUSE: Although scientists don't know what causes the disease, they know it
kills the brain cells that produce the neurochemical dopamine, which directs the
brain to control movement.

   VICTIMS: Between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans suffer from Parkinson's,
including Attorney General Janet Reno, Muhammad Ali and the Rev. Billy Graham.

   TREATMENT: Medication, called L-dopa, can mask most symptoms but loses
effectiveness after several years. Researchers are studying gene therapies and
human and fetal brain cell transplants. Most scientists believe major
breakthroughs or even a cure could be found within five years.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Rep. Lane Evans, D-Ill., who has
Parkinson's Disease, stands next to a portrait of John Lennon in his Capitol
Hill office.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1998


                             1954 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 24, 1998, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: TV WEEK; Pg. Y03; THIS WEEK'S PICKS

LENGTH: 775 words

HEADLINE: 'Cancer Wars'; 'Cures,' Weapons, Nazi Science

BYLINE: Patricia Brennan, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Sometimes real life overtakes even the best of documentarians.

   PBS's "Cancer Wars" (Monday at 10) is a four-part production focusing on the
tools that oncologists and other physicians use to treat cancer patients.

   But it doesn't mention angiostatin and endostatin, drugs found to eradicate
tumors in mice without side effects. Excitement over the news catapulted the
stock price of EntreMed, the Maryland biotech company that and markets them.

   That's okay with Robert Proctor, a history of science professor at
Pennsylvania State University and author of the book of the same title. He
agrees with British producer Jenny Barraclough and executive producers Richard
Thomas and George Carey that such enthusiasm could be premature, since the drugs
haven't been tested on humans.

   Anyway, he'd rather concentrate on prevention.

   "There are 'breaththroughs' every three or four months," he said. "The same
thing was true of interferon, for example. Then it was gene therapy. My
publisher bet me three years ago that within 10 years, gene therapy is going to
cure cancer. She's got seven years to go."

   Gene therapy might work on 5 percent of cancer cases, he estimated.

   What interests Proctor is research that has been overlooked or ignored. In
1995, when he was at the University of Jena, in Germany, researching his book
"Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis," Proctor located documentation of
research conducted by Nazi scientists. They had concluded that the major cause
of lung cancer was smoking tobacco. Their work persuaded Adolph Hitler, already
a vegetarian, to quit smoking. Under his regime, use of tobacco was banned on
trams and trains and other public places, and policemen on duty and pregnant
women were forbidden to smoke. Germans were encouraged to exercise and eat
whole-grain bread, fresh fruits and vegetables and to drink mineral water rather
than beer.

   "The Nazis were also opposed to exposing healthy Germans to lead,
petrochemical dyes, preservatives and pesticides," said Proctor. "They were the
first to link asbestos with cancer, the first to ban yellow food coloring in
butter. They had a strong program promoting healthy diet and published the
world's first manuals on how to do breast self-exams."

   But Nazi science had a dark side as well, as the world came to learn, and
after the Germans were defeated in World War II, that research was filed away in
the university's library and forgotten.

   "The Nazis had the most aggressive antismoking campaign in the world," said
Proctor, a nonsmoker who has testified against the U.S. tobacco industry. "It's
been ignored. You could say there's a community of disinterest. It was in no
one's interest to point out the research. Nobody outside Germany paid a lot of
attention to Nazi scientists. And when the Germans lost, many of the
anti-tobacco activists committed suicide because they [feared they] would be
brought up for trial as war criminals."

   During that same war, American soldiers had been given cigarettes free with
their rations, and Hollywood had made smoking seem glamorous. As a result,
between 1940 and 1950 the number of Americans who smoked nearly doubled, while
the number of Germans who smoked was halved.

   Proctor, who specializes in what he calls "political controversy in science
and the social construction of ignorance," knows that many people do not like
hearing anything positive about Adolf Hitler or Nazi scientists. Some have
already protested PBS's airing it here, he said. "Cancer Wars" aired in Britain
in January and February.

   But that doesn't dissuade him. Growing up in southern Texas, he said, he came
from a family that included both Klansmen and liberal Baptists. He knows about
prejudice.

   Proctor's work is part of the first hour of "Cancer Wars," a program that he
said "is more concerned with therapies than the issues I developed. There's a
tendency to make things upbeat."

   He, however, isn't particularly optimistic about the battle against cancer.
Current research concentrates on finding cancer cures, he said, not on
preventing cancer, even though he believes that many causes of cancer are
avoidable.

   To Proctor, politics is the obstacle.

   "We know how to prevent half of all cancers," he said. "What has not been
done is that political steps have not been taken. For every carcinogen, such as
tobacco, asbestos, saccharine, petrochemicals, there are strong lobbies. They're
very good -- the tobacco industry [lobby] is brilliant. And we need a lot more
comparative, cross-cultural research. Very little of that has been done. The
point is that the war on cancer is not being won."

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1998


                             1955 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     May 23, 1998, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 12A, Letters to the Editor

LENGTH: 1308 words

HEADLINE: Team of 1998 bears little resemblance to pride of Orioles past

BODY:


   For the first time, I am totally and utterly embarrassed to be an Orioles
fan.

   As if it is not bad enough that the Orioles are unable to win, the entire
organization has shown a lack of drive, beginning with its lackluster
performance against the Indians in the American League Championship Series last
season and culminating with the recent series sweep to the expansion Devil Rays
and the May 19 "game" against the Yankees.

   More importantly, the organization has shown its thorough lack of character
with its employment of talentless, classless players such as Armando Benitez.

   This is not the way it used to be. The "Oriole Way" is no more.

   Not long ago, Orioles fans could quip about other organizations. Now, the
Orioles are becoming the butts of jokes. The excuses are wearing thin. It
sickens me to realize that my children might never know the pride and joy a
baseball team can bring.

   I am resigned to continue to support my hometown team and attend the games
for which I have already bought tickets, but I will do so for the first time
ever with my head slightly down.

   C. Calvin Jefferson III

   Towson

   Never in my life did I think I would be ashamed to be an Orioles fan. Once
the class of the major leagues, last week's disgraceful display in Yankee
Stadium proved my once-beloved O's not only losers, but sore losers.

   The "Oriole Way" truly is a thing of the past, and I, for one, am saddened
greatly. What the last players' strike didn't kill within me, this team will.

   Bill Martinak

   Edison, N.J.

Drug treatment center gave new life to its participants

   This response is to Dan Odenwald's article "Center hits hard times," (April
16), concerning the funding woes of the Mattie B. Uzzle Outreach Center.

   David Le Tourneur, a former fund-raiser, suggested that success stories among
addicts "are rare."

   At best, this depiction is ill-advised, uninformed and drawn by one who is
outside his sphere of expertise. At worst, it is a deliberate act of sabotage.

   However, I can speak authoritatively and credibly to reality. I am an unpaid
volunteer enrolled in Morgan State University's social work program and blessed
with a degree from Essex Community College in mental health and human services.
I also am delivered from the abysmal pit of substance dependence and discipled
at nearby Israel Baptist Church.

   Regularly, former residents flock back to share their new lives with current
occupants and volunteer their services to Melva Jones, our God-sent leader.
While some do relapse, they are nevertheless blessed with life-saving knowledge,
which they might not otherwise have gleaned had they not been granted sanctuary
at "Mattie B's."

   While the dormitory is the crown jewel, other functions, such as
substance-related education of children, are equally vital.

   Any money tendered to this center is not to a lost cause.

   Money used has not been spent; rather, it has been invested.

   Each former addict not incarcerated saves the state at least $ 20,000 to $
30,000 annually. Because these once-dying men now choose to live, residents and
entrepreneurs no longer lose property and lives to them, while relatives sleep
more peacefully.

   However the fund-raising efforts pan out, God has his hands on this project
and he will continue to bless it and be glorified.

   Edgar L. Thompson

   Baltimore

Police officer Joseph Folio performed job with dignity

   The late Joe Folio was an outstanding police officer, who set an example for
all of us to follow ("Joseph C. Folio Sr., 63, won many awards in police
career," May 9). He was dedicated to the service of the citizens of Baltimore
and performed his duties with pride and respect.

   As diligent as he was, Joe always wore a smile and made everyone with whom he
came in contact feel comfortable. Once you got to know him, he was your friend.

   As a prosecutor and then as a defense attorney, I found Joe Folio to be the
model police officer.

   He was dedicated to his job but never lost sight of the rights of an
individual, whether a defendant or victim. He truly performed with dignity.

   We will miss him and the standards he set for members of the Baltimore City
Police Department.

   Howard L. Cardin

   Baltimore

One person's political pork is lifesaver for community

   Having been born and raised in Cumberland and having seen the majority of my
generation leave the area because of the economic decline, it is difficult to
continue to read the criticism of the letter to the editor "Fed up with pork, no
matter who serves it," May 1.

   It saddens me to return to my home and see how depressed the area has become.

   I commend House Speaker Casper R. Taylor Jr. for doing what he was elected to
do, which includes spending money to generate money for the county and its
people.

   The Western Maryland Railroad is a great source of tourism dollars for the
Cumberland-Frostburg area and would unlikely be able to continue without the
rail depot.

   To an area that cannot lose more business, $ 600,000 for the depot was well
spent. And yes, it is in the best interest of its citizens. I am glad Gov.
Parris N. Glendening agrees.

   The "fat cats" who live in Baltimore and the surrounding counties are unable
to relate to the deprivation the citizens of Western Maryland have faced.

   I just wonder if it would be considered political pork if the money were
being spent on another project in Baltimore County.

   Mary Stakem

   Baltimore

We abuse animal 'friends' by using them for research

   In the letter about how animal research has given us new drugs ("Progress in
our fight against cancer came with animal research," May 18), the last sentence
read, "We can learn a thing or two from our friends in the animal kingdom."

   It should have read, "We can learn a thing or two from the deaths and
sufferings we inflict on our friends in animal kingdom."

   It is absolutely terrible that people who are into animal research write
letters to the newspapers or make statements that lead people who are uninformed
about what actually goes on in research labs to think that our "animal friends"
are so happy to be used for research. They aren't happy about it at all. But
because they have no voice, they have no choice. Animal abuse by any name is
still animal abuse.

   Janet Paul

   Pasadena

Giving an unapproved drug is playing lottery with lives

   Concerning your article "Breast cancer gene therapy shows success" (May 18),
let me get this straight: Herceptin has great promise in lengthening the lives
of breast cancer victims.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration will not make it available "until it
wins FDA approval," but in the interim, the National Cancer Institute will run a
lottery to distribute small amounts that are now available.

   How can any amount of this drug be distributed without FDA approval? Why not
wait until it is FDA approved instead of baiting women to gamble on their luck
for life?

   Linda P. Ford

   Owings Mills.

Missile systems are not the country's best defense

   In your article "Missile-defense debate heats up" (May 19), it was made clear
that there are many in our government who feel the only way our nation can be
safe from a nuclear threat is behind an umbrella of lasers and counter-missiles.

   But such thinking led to the rearmament process during the early 1980s, which
nearly destroyed the strategic arms limitation treaties (SALT I and SALT II).
SALT II was the most monumental arms reduction plan to date, destroying
thousands of missiles in the Soviet Union and United States.

   Do we want to encourage other nations to build up their nuclear arsenals, or
do we want to divert this defense money to more useful causes? Diplomacy is a
far more effective defense than that most complex missile-defense systems.

   Michael Mathieson

   Glen Arm

   Pub Date: 5/23/98

TYPE: COLUMN, LETTER

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1998


                             1956 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                     May 21, 1998 Thursday, 2 WEST CENTRAL

SECTION: MANCHESTER EXTRA; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: THE GENETIC LINKS BETWEEN HUMANS, CATS MAY YIELD CURES

BYLINE: ALLAN LEVENTHAL Dr. Allan Leventhal is a veterinarian with the Bolton
Veterinary Hospital.

BODY:

   Although dogs are called "man's best friend," cats are challenging that
claim. This challenge is not based on faithfulness, courage or schmoozing with
their owners, but on genetic links that may help in finding cures for some human
diseases.

   It's been long known by veterinarians that cats and humans are afflicted with
similar diseases, such as some cancers and immunodeficiency viruses such as HIV,
which is similar to the feline immunodeficiency virus, or FIV. These
similarities have led researchers to investigate the genetics of the feline
family. Genetic researchers found some surprising similarities between human and
cat chromosome organization.

   It was discovered that long strings of human genes sometimes extending over
an entire chromosome are repeated when the same genes are mapped in cats, even
though humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes, compared to 19 pairs in cats.

   This discovery has led researchers to explore how certain diseases affect
humans and cats. Research done on the feline leukemia virus has already taught
scientists more about how some cancers develop in humans.

   More recently, in the 1990s, when scientists saw cats dying from FIV,
wildlife vets became worried that feline AIDS would find its way into wild cats
and possibly wipe out some endangered species.

   Just a few years ago it was discovered that the FIV virus was already in wild
cats, such as lions, pumas, leopards and cheetahs. But interestingly, these big
cats weren't ill; they seemed to have developed an innate resistance to the
virus. It didn't kill them; it only kills domestic cats.  This meant that the
domestic cat was the latest unfortunate feline species to become infected with
FIV, the other species undoubtedly developed genetic resistance long ago.

   This is the normal progress in infectious diseases -- the longer they've been
around, the more the hosts develop resistance. New species that become infected
usually suffer the most. It was speculated that FIV might have been in wild cats
for millions of years, but only recently in domestic cats.

   Genetic research may turn more to animals' natural genetic adaptations that
they have acquired, which has allowed them to overcome some of the diseases now
incurable in humans. The 5,000 mammalian species in the world today represents
less than one-tenth of those that originally existed.

   The animals of old didn't have the medical attention, facilities and care
that domestic animals have today. All they had was natural selection, so each
surviving species has generated genetic adaptations allowing them to fight off
some of the diseases humans are starting to see.  The survivors may contain a
wealth of information waiting to be discovered.

   And cats, more so than dogs or mice, may hold the genetic answer to a
possible cure or resistance to a particular disease, such as hepatitis, some
cancers, HIV, arthritis or Alzheimer's disease, for which now there are just
symptomatic cures.

   Sounds improbable? The 21st century study of gene therapy may well provide
these dreams with reality.

COLUMN: PETS

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1998


                             1957 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 21, 1998 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: GRAPHICS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 1233 words

HEADLINE: CHECKLIST OF CANCER TREATMENTS WHO'S WHO IN ANGIOGENESISNews Focus

BODY:

   Thursday, May 21, 1998 CHECKLIST OF CANCER TREATMENTS    WHO'S WHO IN
ANGIOGENESIS

   News Focus

   For years doctors and cancer patients had only three options:  surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy. But that's starting to change as a new  generation
of more sophisticated treatments moves out of the lab.

   TREATMENT Anti-angiogenesis factors

   TARGETS Multiple

   HOW THEY WORK A growing tumor requires plenty of nutrients, and to make  sure
it gets them, the tumor secretes substances that stimulate the growth of  new
blood vessels. A number of agents can block this process, at least in  animals.

   STATUS See chart below

   TREATMENT Anti-metastatic factors

   TARGETS Multiple

   HOW THEY WORK What kills most cancer patients is not the primary tumor but
its metastatic spread. Scientists have identified a class of enzymes that
enables cancer cells to enter the bloodstream by dissolving tissue and boring
holes through capillary walls. New drugs could keep cancer cells confined to
one spot.

   STATUS Human tests have just begun.

   TREATMENT Anti-oncongenic factors  TARGETS Multiple, including breast,
colon, pancreatic and lung  HOW THEY WORK Tumors do more than pick up growth
factors that circulate in the bloodstream; they also make them by switching on
oncogenes. Many cancers, for example, have been found to contain mutations in
the RAS oncogene, and companies are racing to develop drugs that inhibit its
growth-promoting activity.  STATUS Human tests are in early stages.

   TREATMENT Chemoprevention therapies  TARGETS Breast, head and neck  HOW  THEY
WORK Many breast cancers depend on the female hormone estrogen to  stimulate
their growth. Tamoxifen, which acts as an anti-estrogen in the  breast, has been
shown to prevent the development of this form of cancer.  Preliminary evidence
suggests that a newer compound, raloxifene, might confer  a similar benefit
without serious side effects. Compounds known as retinoids,  derivatives of
vitamin A, can prevent recurrence of certain head and neck  cancers.  STATUS
Tamoxifen has been approved as a treatment for breast cancer, raloxifene as a
treatment for osteoporosis.

   TREATMENT Gene therapies  TARGETS Multiple, including breast, ovarian and
small-cell lung cancers  HOW THEY WORK In tumors, genes that are supposed to
serve as checks on runaway cell growth are often so damaged that they stop
functioning. Scientists hope to correct this problem by engineering viruses
that can infect cancerous cells with healthy tumor-suppressor genes.
Preliminary evidence suggests that this approach sometimes can cause tumors to
stop growing and even shrink.  STATUS Testing in humans has just begun.

   TREATMENT Chemotherapy  TARGETS Multiple HOW THEY WORK New, more selective
compounds and powerful but less toxic versions of older drugs are being added
to the oncologist's arsenal. Oral and wafer formulations of injectable drugs
have made the delivery of chemotherapy more convenient for patients. Enclosing
cancer-killing toxins in a protective lipid envelope can increase their
effectiveness while sparing normal tissues. STATUS In the past two years, the
Food and Drug Administration has approved two dozen new chemotherapy agents.

   TREATMENT Monoclonal antibodies  TARGETS Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, breast,
colon and melanoma  HOW THEY WORK Like miniature guided missiles, these
biological constructs home in on specific proteins displayed on the surface of
cancer cells. By blocking strategic sites, monoclonals can interfere with a
tumor's ability to absorb growth factors from the bloodstream. They also can
carry radioactive and chemical toxins that directly destroy malignant tissue.
STATUS Rituxan won FDA approval last year; Bexxar and Herceptin could be on  the
market within a year.

   TREATMENT Radiation therapies  TARGETS Multiple: often prostate, solid
tumors in internal organs and lymphomas  HOW THEY WORK Radiation destroys
cancerous cells but can damage healthy ones as well. Using three-dimensional
computer images and new delivery techniques such as radiation seed implants,
doctors can aim doses with microscopic precision, sparing healthy tissue.
STATUS In use

   TREATMENT Surgical procedures  TARGETS Multiple  HOW THEY WORK Doctors are
always looking for ways to make this standard treatment more effective and  less
traumatic for the patient -- for example, by removing part rather than  all of a
breast or preceding surgery with other treatments. One promising new  technique
is lymphatic mapping, in which surgeons use dyes and radioactive  tracers to
help them be more selective in removing nodes.  STATUS Widely  available; the
newest procedures are performed at most large cancer centers.

   TREATMENT Vaccines  TARGETS Melanoma, breast, colon, ovarian, pancreatic  and
many others  HOW THEY WORK Malignant growths have a deadly knack for  skirting
the body's immune system. But scientists are finding that by  vaccinating
patients with antigens derived from tumors, they sometimes can  goad white blood
cells into attacking cancerous tissues.  STATUS Dozens of  vaccines are being
tested.

   Who's who in angiogenesis

   Dr. Judah Folkman's approach is not the only one -- or the most advanced.

   DRUG Marimastat  WHO'S WORKING ON IT British Biotechnology and the National
Cancer Institute  HOW IT WORKS Blocks the activity of enzymes needed to build
tumor blood vessels  SOURCE Synthesized in the lab  STATUS Being tested in
breast-cancer patients

   DRUG SU5416  WHO'S WORKING ON IT Sugen and the University of California at
Los Angeles  HOW IT WORKS Prevents a tumor blood-vessel growth factor from
binding to its receptor  SOURCE Synthesized in the lab  STATUS Being tested  for
safety in patients

   DRUG Neovastat  WHO'S WORKING ON IT Aeterna Laboratories  HOW IT WORKS
Inhibits activity of enzyme involved in the growth of tumor blood-vessel cells
SOURCE Derived from cartilage of spiny-dogfish sharks  STATUS Safety tested  for
lung, breast and prostate cancer

   DRUG Combretastatin  WHO'S WORKING ON IT Oxigene  HOW IT WORKS Destroys
tumor blood-vessel cells  SOURCE Originally derived from African bush willow
STATUS Human studies to begin this fall

   DRUG THP-dox WHO'S WORKING ON IT University of Texas Southwestern and ILEX
Oncology  HOW IT WORKS Attaches to blood-vessel cells and delivers toxin to
vessels and tumors SOURCE Synthesized in the lab  STATUS Still being studied  in
animals

   DRUG Angiostatin and endostatin  WHO'S WORKING ON IT Children's Hospital in
Boston and EntreMed  HOW IT WORKS Somehow blocks the growth of tumor blood
vessels SOURCE Originally derived from mouse urine  STATUS First human trials
expected within a year

   DRUG Tamoxifen  WHO'S WORKING ON IT Zeneca Group will evaluate HOW IT WORKS
Mechanism unknown; might block growth of tumor blood vessels SOURCE  Synthesized
in the lab  STATUS New trials to block blood vessels might begin  shortly.

   DRUG TNP-470  WHO'S WORKING ON IT TAP Pharmaceuticals  HOW IT WORKS Blocks
enzyme that instructs tumor blood-vessel cells to divide  SOURCE Originally
derived from a fungus  STATUS Being tested in patients

   The best prevention

   Changes in lifestyle -- chief among them quitting smoking -- can remove  risk
factors that cause cancer in the first place. Other common-sense advice:
Exercise regularly, don't drink heavily, avoid overexposure to the sun, go
light on fats, serve sole instead of sirloin, and eat plenty of fruits and
vegetables. - The Oregonian

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1958 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     May 19, 1998, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 693 words

HEADLINE: 'THE GREATEST' IN CITY TO KO PARKINSON'S;
MUHAMMAD ALI'S BIGGEST FIGHT

BYLINE: SHARON VOAS, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Muhammad Ali, who floated like a butterfly when he was one of the world's
greatest boxers, lumbered up the aisle, leaning on an assistant.

   A processional march of trumpets played and the 600 people in the room rose
to give him a standing ovation.

   The Champ still carries a lot of the bulk from when he was the three-time
heavyweight boxing champion of the world. Parkinson's syndrome, caused by the
rain of blows that damaged his brain, makes him move in slow motion and leaves
his face expressionless. The syndrome differs from the disease because it is
caused by head trauma. Ali, 56, came to Pittsburgh yesterday as spokesman for
the National Parkinson Foundation, a private organization that supports
Parkinson's research around the world. He was the guest of honor at a $ 150 a
plate fund-raiser at the Pittsburgh Marriott City Center that raised $ 150,000
for research.

   He speaks only a rare word or two. But seeing him says all he needs to say
about the disease.

   Ali's visit was intended to focus attention on the need for money for
research on Parkinson's disease, an incapacitating nerve disorder that afflicts
1.5 million Americans.

   Congress in February passed the Udall Bill, which raised spending for
research focused on Parkinson's disease from $ 30 million a year to $ 100
million a year for five years. But Parkinson advocates say the National
Institutes of Health diverted the money to research on other diseases and counts
all research on other neurological diseases as part of its obligation for
Parkinson's.

   They say the shift comes just as researchers are on the verge of a major
breakthrough and possibly a cure for Parkinson's disease.

   In people with Parkinson's disease, the nerve cells in the part of the brain
that control muscle movement degenerate. Those cells produce a chemical called
dopamine that is important in transporting signals from one part of the brain to
another.

   As the cells deteriorate, they may cause the person to shake with tremors,
slow his movement, leave him shuffling, make his limbs rigid, have trouble
speaking and swallowing, and lose facial expression.

   ''I can't shower, tie my tie, drive any distance,'' said James Cordy,
president of the Pittsburgh chapter of the National Parkinson Foundation, whose
face is immobilized by the disease. ''What really scares the hell out of me, and
all of us with Parkinson's disease, is ending up like (former U.S. Rep.) Morris
K. Udall - in bed, not even able to talk.''

   Dr. Michael Zigmond, co-director of a National Parkinson Foundation Center
for Excellence and a neurochemist at the University of Pittsburgh, said many
promising therapies or cures are on the near horizon.

   ''We don't know how close we are to a cure,'' he admitted. ''But in 1998, I
can say, a cure in five years is no longer a crazy idea.''

   Several types of research hold great hope, he said, but need to be refined by
further research. Three new drugs came into use this year that help control the
symptoms, and other drugs are in the pipeline that may either slow the disease
or reverse it. An implant for the brain similar to a cardiac pacemaker may
control the tremors and shaking. And using gene therapy, scientists may be able
to make brain cells produce dopamine or resist attacks on dopamine.

   The people at the luncheon championed Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., chairman of
the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that oversees NIH funding, for trying to
get Congress to appropriate the full research money authorized for Parkinson's
research, and to pressure NIH to spend the full amount on Parkinson's research.

   A spokeswoman for the NIH said the agency will spend $ 98 million on research
on Parkinson's in fiscal 1998, but she could not say whether that was money
spent directly on Parkinson's.

   Although Ali's face is expressionless and every movement labored, Ali still
works the crowd. As he shuffled back down the aisle after the luncheon, he
raised his hand to touch a young girl and boy.

   Later, trailing a horde of local and national TV cameramen and photographers
who had taken shot after shot, Ali turned and made a few jabs at them in jest.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Peter Diana/Post-Gazette: Muhammad Ali speaks only a rare
word; or two. But seeing him says all he needs to say about Parkinson's disease.
The; former boxer was the guest of honor at a fund-raising luncheon for the;
Pittsburgh chapter of the National Parkinson Foundation. (Photo, Page A-1)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1998


                             1959 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     May 19, 1998, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. D-2, COVER STORY

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: AN EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENT STILL IN ITS INFANCY

BYLINE: MARY NIEDERBERGER

BODY:


   Cord blood transplants are still experimental and cord blood collection and
storage is not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, although
regulations are expected within a year.

Worldwide, between 650 and 700 cord blood transplants have been performed mostly
on children - since the first one in took place in France in 1988 to treat a boy
with a blood disease called Fanconi's anemia. At the time, such transplants were
not being performed in the United States.

   The boy, Matthew Farrow of Salisbury, N.C., is doing well and continues
regular checkups at Duke University Medical Center, which now has become a major
center for cord transplants.

   Duke and the University of Minnesota, which both regularly perform cord
transplants, report nearly identical success rates: 50 percent in children and
36 percent in adults.

   Nationally, bone marrow transplants for all ages have a 50 percent success
rate, although with some cancers it's as high as 70 percent.

   The only cord blood transplant performed at Children's Hospital in Oakland
was unsuccessful.

   In April 1994, Apryl Purington, 4, of Kittanning, received a transfusion of
cord blood from her infant sister, Tesla, to try to arrest her aplastic anemia,
a condition that destroys healthy bone.

   Apryl died shortly after the transplant.

   Stem cells from the cord blood transplants are supposed to restore the bone
marrow's ability to produce healthy blood.

   These transplants can treat leukemia, lymphoma and childhood cancers known as
neuroblastomas as well as such nonmalignant diseases as aplastic anemia, sickle
cell anemia, immune deficiencies and genetic diseases such as Hunter Syndrome.
Stem cell transplants also have been used to treat breast and ovarian cancer.

   As gene therapy treatments increase so will applications for cord blood use,
medical experts predict.

   Researchers also are experimenting with growing or expanding the number of
cord blood cells available in each sample.

   There are several advantages to cord blood transplants over bone marrow
transplants:

   * Cord blood is easier to collect than bone marrow, which requires a one-day
hospital stay and a painful procedure for the donor.

   * Graft vs. host disease, another complication of bone marrow transplants,
appears to occur less when the cord blood donor and transplant recipient are
unrelated. There would be no complications if a child's own cord blood was used.

   *In transplants performed on patients unrelated to the donor, cord blood
appears easier to match.

   The NIH has estimated that between 10,000 and 15,000 Americans each year need
a bone marrow transplant but can't find a donor. Racial minorities and people
with mixed ethnic backgrounds have the most difficulty finding matches. Public
cord blood banks might provide such matches.

   The first cord blood transplants were mostly among children who received cord
blood from newborn siblings. Later transplants were performed on unrelated
donors and patients and then tried on adults. Doctors originally questioned
whether there would be enough stem cells in the cord blood to treat adults.

   So far, the heaviest adult treated weighed 195 pounds.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: A brochure cover from a company that stores cord blood.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1998


                             1960 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 19, 1998, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z09

LENGTH: 1051 words

HEADLINE: Ethics and Today's Medicine

BYLINE: Edmund D. Pellegrino, MD, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:


   Am I My Brother's Keeper?

   The Ethical Frontiers of Biomedicine

   By Arthur L. Caplan

   Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind.

   241 pp., $ 24.95

   The ethicist who reviews another ethicist's book has two choices: He can
respond to the arguments in the text, or he can describe that text with a
minimum of commentary. In this review I shall opt for the latter. The
intelligent reader will recognize that my silence on many of the author's
controversial opinions does not necessarily mean assent.

   The prodigious advances of biomedical science have enabled humans to control
every facet of their lives and those of other species -- their beginnings,
endings and genetic constitution. What we have yet to achieve is any semblance
of moral consensus on the ethical boundaries within which such powers are to be
exercised. Without such boundaries, we are all at peril of becoming victims as
well as beneficiaries of our own creations.

   Caplan's purpose in this new book is to confront this question of the
complexities of moral consensus in democratic societies. Despite what he
perceives as the prevalent climate of moral skepticism, and even cynicism, he
believes consensus is possible. To that end, Caplan takes us through 19 loosely
connected chapters devoted to most of the puzzling ethical issues now
confronting our society.

   For each topic, Caplan's approach is roughly as follows: He begins with a
concrete case, vividly described, usually one that has been in the public eye.
He quickly and accurately sketches in the relevant details, following which he
raises a series of significant and perceptive ethical questions. Most of the
questions, as might be expected by their number and complexity, are not
answered. Where they are answered, Caplan's moral compass points are practical
-- fairness, preservation of personal freedom wherever possible, and public
regulation and policy constraint whenever freedom might become license. To his
credit, Caplan takes clear positions. Sometimes they are inarguable, but most
are worthy of careful debate.

   Caplan's choice of topics is broad and his opinions challenging. A sampling
from this rich menu should assure potential readers that they will find topics
to intrigue and stimulate them. Caplan's topics fall into five sections.

   In the first set of essays, Caplan takes the position that reproductive
technology cannot be left in private hands at the workings of the marketplace.
He urges strong public policy control of reproductive technologies. In another
essay he warns against the careless use of experimental data obtained from the
Nazi war camps. He believes such data might be used legitimately, but the first
step in any use should be the consent of the actual subjects. Then, examining
the history of the development of artificial hearts, Caplan underscores the
vulnerability and exploitability of experimental subjects facing death. He notes
the conflicts in the physician's dual role as caregiver and experimentalist.
Lastly, Caplan attempts a balanced analysis of both sides in the intense debate
about fetal tissue and embryo research. He raises questions of fact and ethics
but skirts the deeper questions of the moral status of the fetus and embryo. His
emphasis is on consent, carefully defining fatherhood and motherhood, and
avoidance of errors he perceives in the debate thus far.

   In the second set of essays, Caplan takes up the issue of withholding and
withdrawing treatment. He begins with the famous Baby Doe regulations aimed at
protection of severely or terminally ill infants. He believes attempts to
monitor or implement such regulations are unwarranted unless they involve
parents and caregivers. Caplan then warns against the use of analogies from the
Holocaust to buttress current opinions about euthanasia and assisted suicide. He
sets out the criteria for the proper use of analogy in ethical debate. In the
last essay in this section, he also warns that under managed care and pressure
for the legalization of assisted suicide, hospices may be compelled to include
physician-assisted suicide among their services to dying patients.

   The third set of essays is devoted to transplantation. Here Caplan takes a
firm stand against any form of compensation, makes as good a case as I have
encountered against use of xenografts (from other species), and calls for policy
protection for live donors and their recipients.

   In the fourth section, Caplan warns against "monkeying" with the definition
of death lest we open the door to abuses prompted by the desire to contain costs
or to obtain organs for transplant. He is critical of the gatekeeper concept so
vital to managed care, sees few virtues in a market approach to health care, and
warns us of the dangers to professional integrity. Paradoxically, he sees no
intrinsic harm in for-profit medicine.

   In the fifth section, Caplan repeats earlier work of his on the conceptual
definitions of health, illness and disease. Their fundamental relevance to all
the other issues in bioethics is emphasized. Caplan also urges more careful
philosophical reflection on the validity of the medical model of care and its
relationship to concepts of health and illness.

   In three closing essays Caplan takes up gene therapy and genetic
manipulations. Here as elsewhere, he opts for open debate, freedom within policy
constraints and a democratic process for decision-making.

   This volume will interest the general public. It is a good survey of a broad
range of current ethical issues, as seen by one prominent bioethicist who has
thought much about them. Caplan's well-merited reputation as a commentator and
interpreter between the scholar's study and the public arena is reaffirmed in
this book.

   Caplan occasionally trivializes views he does not espouse. Except for the
sections on the use of analogy, the concepts of health and disease, and
futility, there is little engagement with the theoretical underpinnings of the
ethical questions. In most of the book, strong opinions are sometimes asserted
too freely.

   This is a book for anyone who seeks a quick introduction to the growing, but
still vaguely defined, field of bioethics.

   Edmund D. Pellegrino, MD, is a professor of medicine and medical ethics at
Georgetown University Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1998


                             1961 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      May 18, 1998, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer gene therapy shows success; New drug extends lives of
terminally ill patients with defective gene

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   LOS ANGELES -- In the first success of a new approach to fighting cancer,
scientists have shown they can lengthen the lives of some terminally ill breast
cancer patients with a medicine that thwarts the defective genes causing their
disease.

   Attacking cancer at its genetic roots has been a goal of science for two
decades, but researchers said yesterday that this is firm evidence they can
actually do this.

   Experts predict that the drug, called Herceptin, will come on the market in
the fall and could quickly become a standard treatment for the one-quarter or
more of breast cancer patients whose tumors are driven by multiple copies of a
gene called HER-2. It substantially boosts the power of ordinary chemotherapy
and carries none of the usual cancer drug side effects, such as nausea and hair
loss.

   But perhaps more important, doctors say, is that this treatment works at all,
since it shows that one of the hot areas of cancer research is likely to pay
off.

   "This proves the paradigm. If we understand what is broken in the malignant
cell, we may be able to fix it," said Dr. Dennis Slamon of the University of
California at Los Angeles.

   Dozens of other drugs in earlier stages of development are aimed at
sidestepping genetic flaws that make tumors grow uncontrollably, and several of
these could be available in a few years.

   "This is not the end of the story. It is the beginning of the story," said
Dr. Allen S. Lichter of the University of Michigan, incoming president of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   Results of the first large studies of Herceptin were presented yesterday at
the society's annual scientific meeting, attended by about 18,000 cancer
specialists.

   Doctors tested it on women with advanced breast cancer that had spread to
other parts of their bodies. When added to standard treatment, they found it
lengthened their lives an average of three months. While this may seem modest,
researchers said it represents a major impact in such a late stage of the
disease.

   Researchers are unsure of the treatment's ultimate impact on survival, but a
few cases suggest that it could be substantial in those with the HER-2 defect.
Typically, such women die within 10 to 18 months after the cancer spreads;
however, one of the earliest patients to get Herceptin is still alive after
almost six years and another has survived nearly four years.

   Researchers predict that the results could be much more impressive when the
drug is given at earlier stages of the disease before it has moved beyond the
breast and lymph nodes.

   "There is absolutely no question that there will be a lot of use of this drug
once it's available," said Dr. Larry Norton of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center in New York City, one of the doctors who tested it.

   Herceptin is made by Genentech Inc., a leading biotechnology company, which
financed two studies presented at the conference by Slamon and Dr. Melody
Cobleigh of Rush Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.

   Herceptin is given once a week in half-hour infusions. Doctors are unsure
whether the treatment can ever be safely stopped.

   Slamon recommended that breast cancer patients ask their doctors to check
them for HER-2. Although the drug will not be routinely available until it wins
Food and Drug Administration approval, small amounts are distributed through a
lottery run by the National Cancer Institute. Those interested in entering the
lottery for Herceptin can obtain information by calling the National Cancer
Institute at 1-800-4-CANCER.

   Pub Date: 5/18/98

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1998


                             1962 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                              May 17, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS - INSIGHT , Pg. 7C

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: EXCITEMENT OVER FOLKMAN'S WORK IS PREMATURE

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson

BODY:


   You can bet that Dr. Judah Folkman is wondering whether he should just leave
his Sunday paper on his porch this morning.

   Two weeks ago today, Folkman, a cancer surgeon and researcher at Children's
Hospital in Boston, found his name and 30 years of his work displayed on the
front page of The New York Times. While many say any publicity is good
publicity, Folkman is going to have some problems living up to the hype the
Times created.

   Its story about Folkman, written by medical reporter Gina Kolata, said within
a year, cancer patients will begin receiving two drugs, angiostatin and
endostatin, that appear to make tumors disappear - in mice.

   Newspapers (including The Dispatch) and newscasts around the world followed
the story, playing it as if Folkman's work would transfer into humans without
any problems.

   I don't blame Folkman, who grew up in Bexley and graduated from Ohio State
University. He told Kolata that it is dangerous to make predictions about
experimental therapies.

   Remember interferon, the ''miracle'' cancer cure of the '70s? When the drug
finally went from lab to human studies, it did remarkably well but was labeled a
failure because it didn't live up to the media hype.

   But Folkman's warnings came late in the story and followed quotes such as
those from Dr. Richard Klausner, director of the National Cancer Institute. He
called the combination of the drugs Folkman is working with ''the single most
exciting thing on the horizon.''

   Nobel laureate Dr. James Watson, who directs a cancer-research center in New
York, said, ''Judah is going to cure cancer in two years.''

   After those statements, it is easy to see why the phones at the National
Cancer Institute rang nonstop last week from callers begging to sign up for
clinical trials.

   The day after the Times story ran, I took a call from a woman wanting
Klausner's phone number so she could sign up her mother to test the drug
combination.

   The Dispatch also got calls from angry readers who wanted more stories about
Folkman and his ''miracle cure'' or who criticized the paper for ''burying'' the
story on Page 12A that Sunday.

   I sat at my desk scratching my head.

   Where in the world did this story come from? Folkman hadn't published new
data since 1997, and no immediate plans apparently existed for human trials of
endostatin and angiostatin until the Times called Klausner.

   In fact, Klausner was in Columbus a few months ago, and when asked about new
cancer therapies, he said nothing of Folkman and angiogenesis inhibitors. He
said genetic therapy was the future of cancer research.

   Folkman himself was in Columbus two years ago, and The Dispatch ran a
front-page story about his work. No hoopla erupted afterward.

   Other researchers are testing angiogenesis inhibitors in humans, but their
work has not received the same coverage.

   As the week went on, however, a number of interesting things happened. First,
Watson wrote a letter to the Times stating that he never said Folkman would cure
cancer in two years.

   Then, the Times published a story saying that on the day the Folkman piece
ran, Kolata got a call from a literary agent who promised her $ 2 million to
write a book about Folkman's work. Although she wrote a proposal to the agent,
she has withdrawn it.

   The accusation that Kolata misquoted Watson doesn't bother me as much as the
revelation about the book deal. People often say they were misquoted after they
see their words in print. The book deal, however, makes me wonder about Kolata's
motive.

   Here is a new story about old medical news. Why feature a therapy that has
yet to prove itself in humans? Why create false hope about curing a disease that
will kill 500,000 people in the United States this year?

   Medical reporters have a responsibility to explain new therapies, drugs and
treatments in a way that will inform but not mislead. If a therapy is
experimental and so far effective only in mice, tell readers that. If the side
effects are awful, explain them.

   When it comes to writing about cancer, reporters have to remember that
context is everything to a patient desperate for treatment.

   Mark D. Somerson is medical reporter for The Dispatch. He can be reached at
msomerso@dispatch.com or at 461-8521.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1998


                             1963 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                         May 17, 1998 Sunday, STATEWIDE
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1419 words

HEADLINE: CANCER WAR FOUGHT IN STATE LABS;
SCIENTISTS OPTIMISTIC ABOUT ADVANCES

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   On May 3 in New Haven and Wallingford, the telephones began to ring almost as
soon as the Sunday New York Times thumped down on doorsteps across the nation.

   The front-page tale of the latest cancer "breakthrough," the identification
of two proteins that safely eradicated tumors in mice, prompted thousands of
calls from cancer patients seeking information from the prestigous Yale
University Cancer Center.

   "We must have gotten double that," despite the preliminary nature of the
reported findings, said Dr. Renzo Canetta, vice president of clinical cancer
research at the pharmaceutical division of Bristol-Myers Squibb in Wallingford.

   Yet scientists such as Canetta of Bristol-Myers, which with a Maryland
biotechnology company is developing one of the proteins for human trials late in
1999, have come to reject the public perception that science will one day
discover the "magic bullet" that slays cancer.

   Twenty-seven years after President Richard Nixon declared a war on cancer,
scientists say the reality of cancer research is that it is actually a series of
prolonged and costly skirmishes fought against 100 distinct diseases, each of
which may require a distinct combination of treatments to fight, they say.

   Yet researchers in the Connecticut, while maintaining scientific caution, say
they are more optimistic than ever about the fight because advances have been
made on so many fronts.

   Those skirmishes are being waged in laboratories across the globe, but the
full diversity and magnitude of the effort can be seen in research centers
scattered across a tiny state such as Connecticut.

   "If it were easy, it would be done already," said Dr. Alan Sartorelli, a
world-renowned cancer researcher and professor of pharmacology at Yale. "But we
all have a conviction that one day we will be able to cure a lot of these
different diseases. One disease after another, they will fall."

   Yale Cancer Center Director Dr.  Vincent T. DeVita Jr. knows all about media
reports of "breakthroughs" and jammed phone lines.  As director of the National
Cancer Institute in the 1980s, DeVita rememberswatching "Good Morning America"
in 1982 when a researcher on the show said he had cured melanoma in mice.

   "Congressmen were calling me telling me to get this stuff into trials right
away," DeVita recalled.

   Like so many other "breakthroughs" in the past, the "Good Morning America"
researcher found that what worked in mice didn't work in people, DeVita said.

   The cycle of high hopes dashed began with a sort of deal with the devil
scientists struck with Congress when Nixon launched a $28 billion "War on
Cancer" in 1971, said DeVita, who has been involved with cancer research for
more than 30 years and edited a text that is still a standard in oncology.

   Slow, steady progress

   What the public didn't know was that scientists at the time lacked knowledge
about cancer's most basic mechanisms. Cancer's origins, the cunning way it leaps
from one area to another, how fatal metastases get triggered, all remained a
mystery to researchers.

   "People started to do body counts before we were ready to have any real
impact at all," said DeVita, who became director of Yale Cancer Center in 1993.

   Yet the $28 billion windfall ignited research efforts at Yale, which receives
$65 million annually in cancer funding, and other research centers across the
country, DeVita said. Those efforts have led to a slow, but steady reduction in
mortality or incidence rates of many cancers, DeVita said. And the research gold
mine unlocked 30 years ago is responsible for today's promising cancer therapies
such as those developed by Dr. Judah Folkman, the Boston Children's Hospital
researcher whose work inspired the New York Times story.

   "When I hear people talk about the war on cancer is a failure, I have to
laugh," DeVita said.

   That perception of failure stems in part from the fact that standard cancer
treatments remain radiation and chemotherapy, which was first introduced at Yale
in the 1940s.

   Bristol-Myers Squibb, which today runs its clinical oncology research program
north of Yale on I- 91 in Wallingford, historically has been a leader in
developing new cancer treatments, particularly in chemotherapy.

   In fact, today one of the company's hottest products is Taxol, a chemotherapy
product that has been shown to reduce tumors substantially in a significant
number of breast cancer patients. It has also been approved for use in ovarian
cancer.

   Companies such as Bristol-Myers continue to strive to improve the
effectiveness of chemo, while reducing toxic side effects of both chemo and
radiation treatments on patients. Yet during the 1990s, new strategies based on
the genetic understanding of the disease have started to show up in drug company
laboratories.

   Bristol-Myers and state research centers such as those run by Pfizer Inc. in
Groton, Bayer Corp. in West Haven, and Boehringer Ingelheim in Ridgefield and
Danbury are also investing heavily into nontraditional areas of cancer research
such as vaccines or gene therapies.

   That trend is why Bristol-Myers Squibb in 1995 licensed angiostatin, one of
the proteins discovered by Folkman and being developed by EntreMed in Rockville,
Md.

   Folkman is investigating whether the proteins angiostatin and endostatin will
act to prevent cancer from forming the blood vessels it needs survive.

   And Bristol-Myers is just one of a dozen companies trying to develop
compounds that act on the same principle, once scorned by Folkman's colleagues.

   Like most scientists, Canetta is quick to point out just how big a jump it is
from eradicating tumors injected into genetically similar mice and stopping
tumors spontaneously arising in genetically diverse humans.

   "Our position is a realistic one," Canetta said. "We'll look for a magic
bullet, but we are not abandoning our classic agents."

   The long, expensive process

   The sheer diversity of the attacks on cancer matches the complexity of the
disease.

   Vion Pharmaceuticals in New Haven, for instance, has developed a technique to
deliver cancer-killing agents into tumors and is colloborating with Boehringer
Ingelheim on developing a new anti-cancer compound.

   The University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington is also
experimenting with a new drug delivery strategy. A UConn scientist has also
developed a promising therapy that uses the body's own immune system to fight
cancer.

   The Veterans Administration Hospital in West Haven conducts basic cancer
research on proliferation of cancer cells, and as a member of Yale Cancer
Center, works closely with Yale in developing potential therapies discovered at
the University.

   In fact, advances in knowledge of cancer "have come so fast we haven't been
able to exploit them all in therapeutics," Sartorelli of Yale said.

   The painful reality that remains for many cancer patients is that it takes
years and hundreds of millions of dollars to develop a promising drug candidate
and guide it through the clinical trial process.

   And even near the end of those trials, cancer researchers can face obstacles
as simple as a lack of information.

   While phone lines were jammed at Yale and Bristol-Myers by people seeking
information on a drug that hasn't even been made, much less proven, Dr. Mel
Sorensen hasn't received enough phone calls from cancer patients.

   About a decade in development, a drug compound discovered by Sorensen and
Bayer Corp. at the company's research division in West Haven is in the final
stage of clinical trials needed for federal approval. Even though the hope is
that the trials will prove the compound to be effective in slowing or even
stoppng the spread of two of the deadliest forms of cancers -- pancreatic and
lung -- Bayer can't find enough people to participate in the trials.

   Sorensen believes there are many reasons why.

   "Not every patient gets the protocol described in a clear enough way to make
an informed decision whether to participate. Some simply don't have access to
information," he said. "There is also a wide variety of responses from doctors.
Some are activists. Some are passive."

   Sorensen emphasizes that there is no guarantee the compound will work as
intended. That is what the trials are for, he said. However given the excitement
over Folkman's early-stage work, he is aware of the irony of soliciting phone
calls from severely-ill patients who might benefit from an experimental drug
today.

   ***********************************************************************

CORRECTION:
Correction was published May 27, 1998 on Page A2.
* A drug compound being tested in clinical trials as a potential cancer therapy
was discovered by Bayer Corp. The discovery of the compound was incorrectly
attributed in a story on page 1, May 17.

GRAPHIC: MAP: (b&w), The Hartford Courant; Cancer research in Connecticut; Some
major cancer research centers in Connecticut.; 1. Bayer Corp. West Haven. The
global drug company is increasing its investment in oncology. Bayer's most
advanced research project is a compound that has shown promise in slowing or
even stopping the spread of lung and ancreatic cancers and is currently in the
final stage of clinical trials.; 2. Bristol-Myers Squibb. Wallingford.  The
facility is the major clinical development center for the company, which is a
leader in development of new cancer drugs. Historically a leader in chemotherapy
products, Bristol-Myers also is developing newer therapies and has license
rights to angiostatin, the much publicized protein discovered at Boston
Children's Hospital.; 3. Pfizer Inc. Groton. Has several novel compounds under
investigation and has a drug candidate in Phase I trials designed to inhibit
uncontrolled cell growth associated with growth of cancer tumors.; 4. Boehringer
Ingelheim, Ridgefield/Danbury -- Looking for potential cancer therapies arising
from its immunology and anti-inflammatory research.; 5. Vion Pharmaceuticals.
New Haven. Has developed system to deliver a variety of anti-cancer therapies
directly to cancer tumors, and has alliance with Boehringer Ingleheim to
investigate potential cancer drugs.; 6. Genassaince Pharmaceuticals. New Haven.
Is investigating genetically customized treatments for a variety of diseases,
including breast cancer.; 7. Veterans Administration Hospital, West Haven.
Conducts basic research in concentrating how cancer cells proliferate. Also
helps in clinical development of therapies originating at Yale.; 8. Yale
University. New Haven. One of the top recipients of federal biomedial research
dollars in the country and one of 32 cancer research centers designated by the
National Cancer Institute. The Yale Cancer Center has about 350 scientists and
doctors working on full range of cancer strategies.; 9. University of
Connecticut Health Center in Farmington. -- UConn School of Medicine is
currently investigating three separate cancer therapies, including work to use
immune system to fight cancer.; 10. Wesleyn University. Middletown. -- Has two
scientists working on basic research grants from the American Cancer Society.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1998


                             1964 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      May 17, 1998, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2640 words

HEADLINE: Doctor close to finding if cancer therapy works;
Scientist outlines research, addresses critics

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Dr. Judah Folkman's pioneering research began more than 30 years ago with the
observation that tumors remained small until blood vessels grew to support them.

   But once blood vessels began to provide the oxygen they needed, the tumors
became almost unstoppable. The process of growing new blood vessels is called
angiogenesis.

   What Folkman proposed as early as 1970 was to treat cancer without touching
the cancer cell itself. While conventional chemotherapy killed cancer cells, his
proposed therapy would literally starve tumors to death by depriving them of
their blood supply.

   It was a revolutionary proposition. Doggedly and against great odds, he has
pursued that course. Now he appears close to finding out if his plan will work
in people.

   The work gained worldwide attention earlier this month when a New York Times
front page story trumpeted two new angiogenesis blockers discovered in his
laboratory. But while other scientists were quoted as predicting great results,
Folkman was characteristically cautious. He could, he said, cure cancer in mice.
But there is a long jump between mice and men.

   What Folkman and the workers in his laboratory at Boston Children's Hospital
had discovered were two powerful proteins that appeared to turn off the chemical
switch that caused the production of blood vessels that feed tumors. The two -
angiostatin and endostatin - were not the first angiogenesis inhibitors ever
found. Nor is it likely they will be the last.

   But they are the most powerful so far. And for Folkman, 65, and those who
work with him, these two chemicals, tested in only a few mice at a time, are the
best proof of the scientific principle upon which they had based their careers.

   In two standing-room-only lectures at the University of Texas Medical School
at Houston last week, Folkman outlined the chronology of his efforts and tried
to put into perspective what had been criticized in the media as hype.

   Hype is the last thing Folkman wants. But there is gratification in being
close to a success that so many colleagues had predicted would not occur. Dr.
James Willerson, the namesake of one of the lectures Folkman gave, called him
the "father of angiogenesis."

   But if so, his paternal feelings are reflected in the pride he shows in those
who are part of the field with him. Angiogenesis workers maintain a careful
collegiality, he said, with scientists sharing knowledge and rejoicing in the
success of others.

   "One way to do that is to stay out of the paper," he said in an interview.
"Don't hype it. We want to keep this field going until it
(angiogenesis-inhibition treatment) is solidly in the clinic. When there are
10,000 patients and there really is regression of human tumors, then you can put
it in the New England Journal (of Medicine).

   "But when it's not available yet, it's hard for patients. They call all day.
And if it's a year off, they may not make it."


    IT ALL BEGAN more than 30 years ago. Folkman and Dr. Fredrick Becker were
drafted and put to work at the Naval Research Institute in Bethesda, Md., to
develop a fluid that could carry hemoglobin - a blood substitute that could be
used aboard nuclear ships during long tours of duty. (Becker is now vice
president for research at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.)

   Their work with the hemoglobin was superseded after six months, but they were
allowed to spend the rest of their duty following their own course in the
laboratory. They began implanting cancer cells in thyroid glands in the
laboratory.

   Without a blood supply, the tumors grew a little and then stopped. "The
tumors were angiogenesis dependent," Folkman said.

   The research paper the two published was among the first in the new field.

   Folkman continued his work in angiogenesis in the late 1960s, even though the
theory went against conventional wisdom. Cancer specialists did not think tumors
had to grow new blood vessels to survive, but that they could thrive on the old
ones.

   But Folkman theorized that, somehow, the tumors were sending a signal telling
tissues that they needed a flow of blood to survive. He needed to uncover that
signal or signals. Then he had to find a way to halt the process.

   If he stopped the growth of new blood vessels, then the tumors would not grow
big enough to threaten life.

   But there was much groundwork to be laid. Before he could find proteins that
stopped angiogenesis, he had to find the ones produced by tumors to promote it.
Before he could find the angiogenesis promoters, he had to do the basic
laboratory work that allowed him to grow endothelial cells which form blood
vessels.

   The 1970s were spent building that basis. Then it took six years to purify
the first protein they found that could encourage the growth of these blood
vessels.

   The published report on that protein, basic fibroblast growth factor,
appeared in 1984. "There are now at least 14 others," he said. Some were found
in his lab, but most are the products of others.

   "These were the things that turned it (angiogenesis) on," he said. "Those we
had in the 1980s, but no one could turn angiogenesis off."

   But the early work showed that progression of the disease might be followed
by looking at these factors that caused angiogenesis.

   For example, when breast cancer patients are first diagnosed, their tumors
make only one of two angiogenic factors - basic fibroblast growth factor or
vascular endothelial growth factor. But as the disease progresses, the tumors
begin to make four, five or even six of the factors.

   In the mid-1980s, Folkman and others in the field began to find proteins that
would turn angiogenesis off. But their action was weak.

   Alpha interferon, the immune response enhancer tested against a variety of
cancers in the 1980s, was the first, said Folkman. Although it was very weak, it
was useful in treating specific kinds of blood tumors called hemangiomas. In
some cases, these are life-threatening because they grow to huge sizes in the
brain, liver or heart area.

   Alpha interferon, as weak as it is, causes these tumors to go away and has
saved the lives of several babies.

   But for the most part, the early angiogenesis-inhibitors could not cause
tumors to get smaller or to disappear. "You could slow tumors down, but you
couldn't reverse them," said Folkman. "In the 1980s, we basically thought the
angiogenesis inhibitors would never kill a tumor. They would be adjuncts to
established treatment. That's where we thought the field would settle out."

   But he continued to search for stronger and stronger anti-angiogenesis drugs.
He knew that sometimes cancers occurred as single tumors. But once the tumor was
removed, it was as though some governing influence was lifted. Small tumors grew
in far parts of the body - a process called metastasis.

   Dr. Michael O'Reilly, a young physician in Folkman's lab, took on the
challenge of finding that governing influence. In 1994, he reported the
discovery of angiostatin, a fragment of a protein called plasminogen. It was a
naturally occurring protein in the body.

   In 1997, he and Folkman found another protein called endostatin.

   "These proteins could regress tumors in mice with no escapes," said Folkman.
"We have been trying to find a tumor we could not regress. In the lab, no one
cares about the name of a tumor any more. It doesn't matter. The drugs don't
work on the tumor cells; they work on the endothelium that the tumor recruits.

   "All you do is raise the dose to match the angiogenic production by the
tumor. When the tumor regresses, that's what you use.

   "And there's no toxicity. No one believes it because we haven't been in a
place before where that is possible."

   The treatment is not stymied by the size of the tumor in the mice. He has
successfully treated mice with tumors that weighed 400 milligrams, the equal of
a 1.5 pound tumor in people. Such tumors are untreatable with chemotherapy, but
in a paper published in the journal Nature in November, he and his colleagues
showed that treating the mice with endostatin causes the tumor to dwindle to a
tiny size.

   Stop treating the mouse, and the tumor starts to grow again. Give it
endostatin, and the tumor shrinks. There is no apparent drug resistance, said
Folkman. After a few cycles of allowing the tumor to grow and shrink, the
pattern of growth just stops, he said.

   "There's an amazing thing. They don't come back. They are dormant."

   Two sentences in that November paper say that combining endostatin and
angiostatin can eradicate the tumor all together. Folkman plans to publish full
results of that study as soon as the mice die of old age.

   It has now been more than 18 months since the mice were treated with the
combination, and they are tumor-free. "We want them to drop dead with a natural
death. Anytime you sacrifice them before that, they will say, 'Oh, you did it
prematurely.' "

   But shrinking tumors in mice does not mean that the treatment will work in
people. Some of the early angiogenesis inhibitors are already being tested in
people, but results of effectiveness studies are pending.

   "We think that anti-angiogenic therapy, if and when - let me repeat that - if
and when it gets to the clinic in significant numbers will be added to
chemotherapy to improve it. It will be added to radiotherapy, to vaccine
therapy, to immunotherapy, to gene therapy. We can keep tumors dormant, and they
can wipe them out.

   "It's not going to displace anything in the foreseeable future."

   The National Cancer Institute, which has supported Folkman's work
consistently for 30 years, has made getting his angiogenic inhibitors to studies
in people a priority.

   "The problem is that translating therapy from mice to people is full of
failure and full of pitfalls," he said. "Mice (used in the laboratory) are
identical twins and humans are not."

   Because the mice are all the same, the kind of treatment they receive is the
only thing different. If there is a change in the course of disease in the mice,
it can then be attributed to the treatment.

   But in a diverse population, differences among individuals can affect disease
in different ways. "It's like working with field mice," said Folkman. "Some are
allergic; some are not. Some have genetic backgrounds you don't know about."

   But many of the successful treatments used today started in mice and other
animals. "You just have to keep going," Folkman said.


    MOST NIGHTS, Folkman sits down at a telephone and returns the calls of at
least five patients who are asking about his treatment. "I ask them, 'How late
will you take a call?' " They always say they will take it any time.

   After the story in the New York Times, the volume jumped to thousands of
calls a day. They tell him they need hope. Their doctors have told them to go
home and get their affairs in order. "I think the media gives hope and that's
important," he said.

   Hope is what patients like the little girl with the aggressive tumor on her
jaw needed after it was removed twice, only to regrow.

   Folkman and his colleagues advised her doctors to check for evidence of
fibroblast growth factor in her urine - a sign that angiogenesis was encouraging
regrowth of the tumor.

   She was treated with alpha interferon, that weak angiogenesis inhibitor. In a
series of photos taken from 1995 until 1997, Folkman showed that her tumor
slowly shrank as she received daily low doses of the treatment.

   He ended his last presentation with the story of that little girl. In a rare
moment, the standing-room-only crowd at UT gave him a standing ovation.

   It was as much a tribute to the man as to his work.

   Today, tributes pour in.

   Susan Franzheim, whose 12-year-old son died nearly 30 years ago while a
patient of Folkman's in Boston, praises his compassion and his ability. She and
her former husband funded a fellowship that allowed him to support a young
investigator training in his laboratory.

   Dr. Isaiah Fidler, chairman of the department of cell biology at the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, is an admiring collaborator of
Folkman's.

   "All cells are angiogenesis-dependent," he said. "No cell in the body
survives without oxygen."

   In the normal body, there is a balance between signals that tell blood
vessels to grow more capillaries and those that halt such growth. But in tumors,
that balance does not exist, said Fidler.

   There are caveats to Folkman's encouraging research, he said. Angiostatin and
endostatin are so difficult to produce that he has been able to test it on only
four or five mice at a time.

   There is also a major difference between animals who weigh only 20 grams and
human beings, he said.

   "But he is a beacon of hope. He is a national treasure. He is intuitive,
brilliant and unafraid of the unknown. He persisted, and he got there," Fidler
said.



    Starve a cancer


   Adults grow new blood vessels - a process known as angiogenesis - in wound
healing and when they have pathological tissue growth such as cancer.


    1.  Isolated, pea-sized tumor and blood vessel.

   2. Tumor, capillary.

   Tumors and other diseased tissue can thrive only when tiny networks of new
blood vessels supply them with nutrients and oxygen.


   3. Blood vessel, Angiogenesis-promoting proteins, Tumor, Capillaries

   The tumor encourages the growth of new blood vessels with
angiogenesis-promoting proteins.


   4. Blood vessel, Primary tumor, New tumors

   As the tumor grows, cells can break off and metastasize - spread to other
parts of the body.


   5. Secondary tumors

   When a patient has multiple tumors, the primary tumor suppresses the growth
of other tumors in the body. When the primary tumor is removed, secondary
metastatic tumors grow rapidly.


   6. Angiogenesis-inhibiting proteins

   Anti-angiogenesis drugs prevent blood vessel growth. The capillaries wither
and the tumor starves. Secondary tumors cannot get a foothold with no blood
supply.

   Because anti-angiogenesis drugs like angiostatin and endostatin are naturally
occurring proteins that work on normal tissue, the cancer does not mutate to
forestall the drug's action.

   Dr. Judah Folkman has cured cancer only in mice. Human trials are not
expected to begin for another 12-18 months. If the human trials are successful,
wide distribution is still years off.




   Angiogenesis-inhibiting drugs


   Early versions of anti-angiogenesis drugs are in various states of testing in
humans. However the two most potent in animal studies - angiostatin and
endostatin - have only been tested in mice.

   Phase I human studies are designed to determine safety of the drug.

   Phase II helps determine effectiveness and dosage.

   Phase III is the final phase before the drug goes to market. Phase III trials
usually involve hundreds or thousands of people. They help determine the percent
of people in whom the drug will be effective and identify small groups of people
who may be adversely affected by the drug.


   Drug - Test stage - Sponsor


   TNP-470 - Phase II - TAP Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Deerfield, Wis.

   Squalamine - Phase I - Magainin Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Plymouth Meeting, Pa.

   Vitaxin - Phase I - Ixsys, Inc., San Diego, Calif.

   Thalidomide - Phase II against Kaposi's sarcoma, breast, prostate and primary
brain cancers - EntreMed, Inc., Rockville, Md.

   RhuMab VEGF - Phase II - Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, Calif.

   SU5416 - Phase I - Sugen, Inc., Redwood City, Calif.

   Marimastat - Phase III against pancreas, lung, gastric and breast cancers and
glioma - British Biotech, Inc., Annapolis, Md.

   Bay 12-9566 - Phase III against lung and pancreas cancers - Bayer Corp., West
Haven, Conn.

   AG3340 - Phase III against lung and prostate cancers - Agouron
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., LaJolla, Calif.

   Col-3 - Phase I - CollaGenex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Newton, Pa.

   CM101 - Phase I - Carbomed, Brentwood, Tenn.










GRAPHIC: Graphs: 1. Starve a cancer (b/w, p. 21, text); 2.
Angiogenesis-inhibiting drugs (b/w, p. 21, text); Photo: 3. Dr. Judah Folkman of
Boston Children's Hospital is known as the "father of angiogenesis." The
well-known scientist is shy of cameras but is shown in his laboratory here in a
1995 photograph. (b/w, p. 21, color on p. 1, 4-star edition); 1. B.C. Oren /
Chronicle, Sources: Dr. Judah Folkman, EntreMed, Houston Chronicle News
Services, , 2. B.C. Oren / Chronicle, Source: National Cancer Institute, 3.
Boston Globe

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1998


                             1965 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     May 16, 1998, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 63 words

HEADLINE: Lecture slated for Tuesday

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   A free public lecture titled "Gene Therapy of Cancer" will be presented by
Dr. Malcolm Brenner at Baylor College of Medicine's Cullen Auditorium at 4 p.m.
Tuesday.

   Brenner is director of the Center for Cell and Gene Therapy at Baylor, Texas
Children's Hospital and The Methodist Hospital, and a Baylor professor of
pediatrics, medicine, and molecular and human genetics.


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1998


                             1966 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 16, 1998 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-8:7; B-6:6; B-10:1

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Athletic event for elderly, disabled expected to draw 1,000 in county

BYLINE: CAROLINE DIPPING

BODY:

   In celebration of National Nursing Home Week, 1,000 elderly and disabled
residents from more than 80 nursing facilities in San Diego County will compete
in modified basketball, softball, soccer and volleyball. The XIV annual
Geriatric Games will be from 9:30 to 11:30 a.m. today at Kearny High School,
7625 Wellington St., San Diego. The Olympic Torch used to open the 1988 World
Olympics will be used to light and start the XIV Geriatric Games.

   The torch will be lit and carried around the track by a senior and a junior
Olympian. The games are hosted by the San Diego Health Care Association, the
Council of Long Term Nurses, the Activity Professionals Association and the
Associate Business Members Council. Classes, lectures [] "Keeping Everything In
Its Place: The Forgotten Muscles of the Pelvic Floor," a free UCSD Women's
Health Seminar on incontinence, 6 p.m. Tuesday, UCSD School of Medicine, Center
for Molecular Genetics, Seminar Room, La Jolla.

   Reservations and directions: (619) 623-0068. [] Sandy Keinz and Larry Hull
will provide demonstrations and information about massage and the relaxation
response, 1 to 3 p.m. Thursday, ElderHelp of San Diego, 4069 30th St., San
Diego.

   Information: (619) 284-9281. [] The Stein Institute for Research on Aging at
UC San Diego will present a free lecture, "Gene Therapy for Spinal Cord Injury,"
3 p.m. Wednesday, Veterans War Memorial Building, 3325 Zoo Drive, Balboa Park.
Information: (619) 534-6299. [] The San Diego Hospice offers a free seminar,
"When Illness and Death Come to the Workplace," 6:30 to 8 p.m. Thursday, 4311
Third Ave., Hillcrest.

   Registration: (619) 688-1600, Ext. 472. [] "Looking Great at Any Age," a free
workshop presented by image consultant Doris Gates, 9:30 to 11 a.m. Tuesday,
Sharp Chula Vista Medical Center, Nellie Barrington Room, 751 Medical Center
Court, Chula Vista. Registration: (800) 827-4277. [] Personal Physicians will
host a seminar on the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, 10 to 11:30 a.m.
Thursday, 1685 E. Main St., Suite 301, El Cajon.

   Reservations: (619) 579-8681. Trips and tours [] Full Circle Tours & Travel
offers a trip to see the musical "Chicago" at the Ahmanson Theatre in Los
Angeles June 6. Cost is $119. Full Circle also offers a trip to the Getty Center
Museum June 20. Cost is $35. Information: (619) 234-1724. [] Joni's Journeys is
planning a trip to the Peterson Car Museum and the Autry Western Museum June 21.
Cost is $39 per person.

   Information: (619) 579-2233. [] The La Mesa Senior Adult Center is offering a
trip to the Del Mar Fair on Senior Day, July 2. Cost is $7 for the bus; fair
admission is separate. Information: (619) 464-0505. Miscellaneous [] The La Mesa
City Council has appointed Helen Givens to the La Mesa Commission on Aging to
serve the remaining term of Commissioner Elsie Campbell, who no longer resides
in La Mesa. Givens is a native of Washington, D.C., and is involved in several
La Mesa organizations including Grossmont Hospital Auxiliary and La Mesa Village
Plaza Homeowners Association. [] The La Jolla Photo Travelers will meet at 7:30
p.m. Monday, Wesley Palms, 2404 Loring St., San Diego.

   The Danube and the Main rivers will be presented in a slide show.

   Information: (619) 226-0745. [] Behavioral and Medical Research directed by
Dr. Murray Rosenthal is conducting free studies in the areas of post-menopause,
panic, anxiety, depression, hypertension in African-Americans and opioid-induced
constipation.

   Information: (619) 571-1188, Ext. 9100. [] The La Jolla/Scripps Chapter of
AARP will meet at 10 a.m. next Saturday, Choices Restaurant, Shiley Sports &
Health Center, 10820 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla.

   Information: (619) 488-9203. Send items for publication to Senior Scene, The
San Diego Union-Tribune, P.O. Box 191, San Diego, CA 92112-4106. Receipt
deadline is Tuesday for the following Saturday's column.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1967 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     May 14, 1998, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Symposium to focus on cancer of ovaries;
Disease strikes 26,000 women annually

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Lee Davis will attend a Friday afternoon symposium at the University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center with a sense of the bittersweet.

   The symposium and the Sprint for Life run slated Saturday are designed to
increase awareness of ovarian cancer, a disease that strikes 26,000 women
annually and killed 14,200 in 1997.

   Lee Davis' wife, Sandra, fought ovarian cancer hard for four years and died
at the age of 49 on Feb. 29, 1996, despite receiving the most advanced
treatments available.

   He donated the seed money that set up the Sandra G. Davis Ovarian Cancer
Research Program at Anderson - a program designed to fight the disease that
killed his wife.

   Funds raised by the Sprint for Life run through the Texas Medical Center will
benefit research being carried out in the Anderson-based program.

   After his wife's death, Lee Davis served on Anderson's board of visitors.

   "At first, it was difficult to make that drive up Holcombe as we had in the
beginning," he said. "It was difficult to hear about some of the research coming
out and know that it was too late for her."

   But he is concerned about his two daughters - Wendy and Kimberly - and their
risk of developing ovarian cancer. And he, like Sandra Davis, wants to see the
disease finally conquered.

   "Sandra was the healthiest person I had ever known," he said. "She was an
avid exerciser. She rarely needed to go to the doctor and never met a vegetable
she didn't like. She did everything right. She was an incredibly serene and kind
person."

   Her sister, Houston psychotherapist Gail Goodman, agrees.

   "She made giving to other people look and seem effortless," Goodman said.
"She was not one to call attention to herself. She didn't seek the limelight."

   The battle Sandra Davis fought was hard - surgery, chemotherapy and even a
form of gene therapy designed to protect her bone marrow from high doses of
anti-cancer drugs.

   Her battle was similar to that of many women whose ovarian cancer is detected
at a late stage, when the disease is extremely difficult to treat.

   Seventy-five percent of ovarian cancers have spread by the time they are
diagnosed.

   The disease is the leading killer among cancers of the female reproductive
tract.

   More than 40 physicians and scientists are collaborating in the Sandra G.
Davis Ovarian Cancer Research Program.

   The Friday symposium, which is free to the public, begins at 1 p.m. in the
Hickey Auditorium on the 11th floor of the R. Lee Clark Clinic, 1515 Holcombe.

   Speakers will present new research and information about ovarian cancer.

   The Sprint for Life race starts at 7:30 a.m. Saturday.

   For more information, call Raana Burnazian, community relations coordinator
for the Sandra G. Davis Ovarian Cancer Research Program, at 713-792-2765.


GRAPHIC: Mugs: 1. Sandra Davis; 2. Lee Davis

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1998


                             1968 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 13, 1998 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: GRAPHICS; Pg. B13

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: ADVANCES IN CANCER TREATMENT AND RESEARCH

BODY:

   Wednesday, May 13, 1998 ADVANCES IN CANCER TREATMENT AND RESEARCH

   1913:

   The American Society for the Control of Cancer (now the American Cancer
Society) is organized in New York.

   1937:

   Congress establishes the National Cancer Institute.

   1941:

   George Papanicolaou successfully demonstrates a method for detecting early
cancer of the uterus and cervix, now known as the Pap test.

   1947:

   Sidney Farber causes the first remissions in patients with acute childhood
leukemia, using the drug aminopterin.

   1952:

   Cobalt 60, a radioactive isotope, is first used for radiation treatment of
cancer.

   1954:

   The American Medical Association publishes findings from a large-scale  study
that links smoking and lung cancer.

   1964:

   The U.S. surgeon general states unequivocally that smoking causes lung
cancer.

   1965:

   Congress orders health warnings on cigarette labels.

   1968:

   Doctors use chemotherapy to cure a rare form of uterine cancer.

   1969:

   Scientists isolate the gene, the basic chemical unit of heredity.

   1971:

   President Nixon signs the National Cancer Act, setting the stage for a
quadrupling of funds for the National Cancer Institute by 1977. All cigarette
advertising is banned from radio and television.

   1973:

   The National Cancer Institute establishes the nation's first eight
comprehensive cancer centers.

   1979:

   Research financed by the American Cancer Society leads to discovery of the
p53 protein, later shown to be a tumor suppressor gene that mutates in more
than half of all cancers.

   1980:

   Interferon, a group of proteins that fights tumors, is synthesized in the
laboratory.

   1986:

   Researchers discover a gene that blocks retinoblastoma, a rare and often
hereditary eye cancer.

   1988:

   Taxol, a drug made from the yew tree, is shown to have an impact on ovarian
cancer.

   1990:

   Government scientists try gene therapy for the first time by adding a gene
to the white blood cells of a patient with adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA
deficiency), a rare genetic disease causing severe weakening of the immune
system.

   The National Institutes of Health says that in treating breast cancer,
lumpectomy plus radiation is as effective as mastectomy.

   1991:

   National Cancer Institute scientists infuse two melanoma patients with
genetically altered cells. The cells contain an extra copy of a gene that
produces a tumor-fighting substance.

   1993:

   Researchers at Johns Hopkins University discover the gene for human
non-polyposis colon cancer.

   1994 and 1995:

   Government and academic scientists discover BRCA1 and BRCA2, genes for
inherited breast cancer.

   1995:

   Researchers isolate a gene that predisposes people to various cancers.
Unlike other cancer genes, the mutated form of the ataxia-telangiectasia (ATM)
gene is relatively common in the population, suggesting it might be a
significant cause of many cancers.

   1996:

   About a dozen cancer centers, some small biotechnology companies and the
National Cancer Institute are testing cancer vaccines.

   March 1998:

   According to a study in the journal Cancer, the incidence and death rates
for all cancers combined, and for the top 10 cancer sites, declined between
1990 and 1995, reversing an almost 20-year trend of increasing cases and
deaths.

   April 1998:

   Early results from the Breast Cancer Prevention Trial show that tamoxifen
decreased incidence of breast cancer 45 percent in a high-risk population.

   -- Sources: National Cancer Institute, American Cancer Society

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             1969 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         May 13, 1998 Wednesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: GENE-THERAPY PROGRAM WORTH STUDY, SENATE SAYS

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

DATELINE: BATON ROUGE

BODY:

   After hearing academic leaders predict that Louisiana could lead the nation
in a clean, job-rich industry that will fight an array of diseases, the state
Senate on Tuesday took the first step toward establishing a gene-therapy program
that would be based in New Orleans.

   The Senate unanimously authorized a study to determine the feasibility of
such a project, which would be led by the medical centers of Louisiana State and
Tulane universities but involve statewide research. That vote came minutes after
unanimous endorsement from the Senate Health and Welfare Committee.

   The study must be complete before next spring's regular legislative session.
The medical centers will pay for the study, which is expected to cost between
$500,000 and $1 million.

   By correcting defective genes, the medical centers' leaders said Wednesday,
this form of therapy could be used to correct inherited abnormalities such as
cystic fibrosis as well as cancer, heart disease and AIDS. They and committee
Chairman Donald Hines, D-Bunkie, a physician, took pains to point out that such
research would not involve cloning or correcting such features as eye color.

   "The application of (gene therapy) is brand new, and the implications are
striking to change the way we practice medicine in a big way," Hines said. "It
can make Louisiana No. 1 in the nation in a field that is going to be the new
frontier of medicine."

   But, he and Chancellors Mervin Trail of LSU and John LaRosa of Tulane said
Louisiana will have to move quickly to keep a competitive advantage.

   "We have the opportunity to get in on the ground floor," Hines said. "I don't
believe Louisiana can afford to pass it by."

   "Why Louisiana?" Trail said. "I guess the question should be, 'Why not?' . .
. There's no reason why we can't lead this parade in gene-therapy research and
gene-therapy implementation."

   Moving toward establishing a gene-therapy research program throughout the
state is "one of the most important initiatives that a state like ours can
undertake," LaRosa said.

   Besides hearing from doctors, lawmakers heard from a gene-therapy patient,
William Riedl of Chalmette, who is being treated for a rare form of lung cancer.

   Although his condition hasn't improved since he started gene therapy last
year, "it hasn't gotten any worse," Riedl said. "To me, that's a good sign."

   The program's headquarters will be in New Orleans because Tulane's primate
center, where such treatment will be tested, is located in nearby Covington and
because Tulane has a nationally recognized program that has been effective in
getting researchers' work to market, resulting in royalties for the university
and the scientists.

   But, Trail said, universities all over the state will be involved in its
work.

   "This is not a terribly exclusive club," he said. "It has to be all-inclusive
if it's going to succeed."

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1998


                             1970 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        May 12, 1998 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-01

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy no magic bullet Treatment fails to cure doctor's cancer

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:

   The snow had a hard, icy edge but it was the kind of January day that sings a
siren call to skiers.

   Heeding the call were Dennis Jahnigen, an elderly-care specialist at
University Hospital, and his family on a post-holiday ski vacation last year.

   Jahnigen stepped off the lift at the top of the world. He slipped and fell
hard.

   "We got all tangled up and I bonked my head," Jahnigen said. "In all the
years of skiing, I've never hit my head so hard."

   The next day, a Friday, the headache started. Then came the nausea. By
Monday, Jahnigen tried to lead a meeting at the University Hospital-based Center
on Aging, of which he is the director. He was slurring words. 'I couldn't talk'

   "I could understand what was said, but I couldn't talk," Jahnigen said.

   Colleagues, fearing a blood clot in his brain, insisted on having his skull
scanned at the adjacent hospital.

   The shadowy image on the film didn't hold good news: Jahnigen, 49 at the
time, had a tumor on the left front lobe of his brain.

   "If I hadn't hit my head, we probably wouldn't have found the tumor until
much later," Jahnigen said.

   In a heartbeat, Jahnigen - who always has led a robust, active life of
mountain climbing, running, skiing - was on the other side of the stethoscope.

   A needle biopsy was done immediately, confirming the tumor was malignant. On
Jan. 10, 1997, Jahnigen had surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible.
Between the biopsy and the surgery, however, Jahnigen was presented with an
option to undergo an experimental treatment called gene therapy.  Tumor had
'fingers'

   The experimental treatment involves inserting specific genes into the body -
and in this case into the tumor - to make the tumor cells susceptible to being
killed off without harming adjacent healthy cells.

   Since Jahnigen's tumor had "fingers" that crept into normal brain tissue, a
scalpel wasn't going to get it all. It's a situation faced by many of the
estimated 100,000 Americans diagnosed each year with cancerous brain tumors.

   The possible solutions of chemotherapy and radiation too frequently fall
short. Neurosurgeons and oncologists have been frustrated in finding new
effective therapies.

   "Brain tumor patients today generally survive 12 to 18 months after diagnosis
with the best available treatment," said Dr. Kevin Lillehei, a University of
Colorado neurosurgeon.

   Lillehei is the principal investigator of the clinical trial on brain tumor
gene therapy that has been conducted at sites around the world since 1996. Of
240 patients needed for the study, 125 have been enrolled.

   Eight of those have received the therapy at the CU Health Sciences Center.
Jahnigen decided to become the No. 3 brain cancer study participant at CU.

   As for many of the others in the study, the gene therapy failed for Jahnigen.
It also hasn't been successful in battling melanoma, the most lethal type of
skin cancer, or AIDS.

   Yet, he supports the approach.

   "Not me, and not now," Jahnigen said last fall shortly before undergoing a
fourth surgery to remove more of the growing tumor.

   Lillehei admitted that gene therapy for brain cancer "is not the magic
bullet" that researchers have sought.

   There is "only so much chemotherapy and so much radiation" that can be
administered so the brain is "ideal" for the gene therapy approach, Lillehei
said.

   The area near the tumor is injected with viral-producer cells that have been
engineered to produce viruses carrying thymidine kinase gene. According to the
approach, the engineered virus infects tumor cells with its DNA about two weeks
later.

   The tumor then becomes susceptible to the antibiotic gancioclovir , which is
intended to kill cancerous cells but doesn't harm normal brain cells.

   Lillehei said the antibiotic is given for two weeks, then the patient gets
radiation.

   No benefit can be seen for two to three months.

   A better delivery system and different viruses and genes need to be studied,
said Lillehei, whose brother died of brain cancer.

   Through a spring and summer of chemotherapy and radiation, Jahnigen pushed on
with his activities as normally as possible.

   He ran in the Pikes Peak Marathon with one of his daughters and continued to
see patients until he decided he might miss something.

   But even then, Jahnigen kept with his duties as director of the CU Center on
Aging, which he created in 1993. The idea is that older patients can receive
coordinated care in one place while providing teaching and research
opportunities.

   Last week , the American Geriatrics Society, of which Jahnigen is president,
honored him with the 1998 Milo D. Leavitt Award during its the group's annual
meeting in Seattle.

   The honor is given annually to a person with a distinguished, nationally
recognized career in geriatrics education.

   Until as recently as April, Jahnigen was working and writing at home.

   "He has more courage than I have," said his neurosurgeon, Glenn Kindt.

   Jahnigen said it wasn't hard to turn over his case to other doctors.

   He said it's important for sick people to trust their doctors as much as they
do an airplane crew when they fly.

   "When I fly, I don't try to get into the cockpit," Jahnigen said.

   "I let the experts take care of it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Denver Post/Brian Brainerd Dr. Dennis Jahnigen viewed an MRI
of his brain cancer last October. Experimental gene therapy was unsuccessful in
combating Jahnigen's tumor, but he favors the method for others.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1998


                             1971 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 12, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Amerisuites to get MBE units U.S. Office Products Co.'s Mail Boxes Etc. unit
and USA Technologies Inc. have agreed to install self-service business systems
in Prime Hospitality Corp.'s Amerisuites properties.

   Financial terms weren't disclosed.

   Mail Boxes Etc. and USA Technologies said the agreement calls for a 90-day
pilot program beginning with the immediate installment of MBE Business Express
centers at five Amerisuites properties.

   An additional 95 units will be installed over the next 12 months, pending
success at the pilot locations. MBE Business Express centers are 24-hour, credit
card-activated, self-service business systems featuring computer and office
equipment. Natural Alternatives earnings up Natural Alternatives International
said yesterday that net income for the third quarter ended March 31 was
$1,824,000, or 31 cents a share, up from $561,000, or 10 cents a share, in the
same period last year.

   The San Marcos-based firm tests, manufactures and markets customized
nutritional supplements and marketing services to a growing base of companies.
Play Co. sales increase Play Co. Toys & Entertainment Corp. said yesterday that
April sales in stores open at least a year rose 102 percent.

   A company spokesman said Play Co. does not release total sales.

   The San Marcos-based toy retailer attributed the increase in same-store sales
to its expansion into specialty and educational toys and the presence of Easter
in April. Matrigen, Prizm in merger Matrigen Inc. and Prizm Pharmaceuticals Inc.
said that they merged.

   The value of the combined company, to be called Selective Genetics Inc., was
not disclosed.

   Selective will use gene therapy to develop tissue repair and regeneration
treatments. Diamond to buy Micronics Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc. of San Jose
said it has agreed to buy Micronics Computers Inc. of Fremont for about $31.6
million.

   Diamond said Micronics' experience with computers' main circuit boards will
allow it to compete in the growing market for such boards with multimedia
capabilities.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1972 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                         MAY 11, 1998 Monday PM EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL OPINION; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: NEW STADIUMS OK IF NOT TAX-FUNDED

BODY:

   Efforts to get approval for publicly financed sports stadiums struck out with
voters last week in Toledo, Ohio, and Greensboro, N.C.

   Voters in Pittsburgh probably thought they had won a similar decision in
November when they turned down - by a 3-2 margin - a sales tax increase to
finance new football and baseball stadiums and to expand the city's convention
center.

   It turns out, though, that politicians in southwestern Pennsylvania are going
ahead anyway with something they call Plan B - $800 million worth.

   Plan B would do with public funds exactly what the voters said they didn't
want done with their money: provide new stadiums for the baseball Pirates and
the football Steelers.

   And Gov. Ridge - who won't budge on increased funding for public schools or
use the state surplus to provide jobs for poor people - is reported ready to
pick up a third of the cost.

   That must be what Phillies chairman Bill Giles is expecting will happen in
Philadelphia, too.

   Giles told Daily News staff writer Edward Moran last week he expected a deal
"kind of like Pittsburgh has done." The only issue, it appeared, was whether it
would be this spring or this fall.

   In other words, let's not even ask the voters for approval, since they're not
likely to give it.

   Besides, why should it be up to them? It's only their money and their right
to set priorities for it.

   Let's hope this is just another of Giles' flights of fancy. New so-called
"revenue rich" stadiums, with expensive skyboxes, may indeed make the Phillies
and Eagles more competitive and more profitable - but it ought not be at
taxpayer expense.

   No question that new stadiums played a role in revitalizing smaller cities
like Cleveland and Baltimore. But Philadelphia is different; the benefits to
Philadelphia's ordinary citizens of multimillion-dollar replacements for
Veterans Stadium are marginal at best.

   As San Francisco and the Washington Redskins have shown, private money can be
found to finance new stadiums.

   Given the desperate need for public investment in social infrastructure like
decent public education, private money is the only way to finance benefits for
privately held teams.

   Major league baseball and football franchises are wonderful rallying points
for a city, and this one is no different.

   But this is the fourth-largest market in the nation. Threats that we would
lose major league status permanently simply aren't credible.

   What would be truly bush league, though, is two luxurious sports stadiums
providing rich revenue streams for millionaires - in a city where the school
system faces bankruptcy.

   The keys don't fit - yet It is poignant testimony to the desperation of
fighting cancer, or loving someone who is.

   A story last week in the New York Times about two drugs that stop the growth
of cancer tumors in mice prompted a frenzy of inquiries. Stock in the company
that would manufacture the drug soared 700 percent.

   A few days later, reality re-emerged: The drugs are at least a year from
human trials, and that means at least five years from availability.

   Besides, the history of cancer research is one of promising cures in mice
that simply don't work in humans.

   So reports are troubling to cancer patients tempted to put off debilitating
chemotherapy and radiation treatments to wait for a cure that may never come.

   Hope for a breakthrough apparently is higher than in the past - especially
with the promise of gene therapy that targets only cancerous cells to disable
them. Side effects are fewer than current treatments that kill good cells as
well as bad.

   But the optimism should not keep people from following advice on cancer
prevention: Quit smoking, eat a proper diet, take precautions in the sun and
avail yourself of tests for early detection. In addition, support cancer
research.

   If a cure for cancer eventually is found, it will be as a result of untold
numbers of researchers trying keys in locks that don't fit . . .

   Until one does.

   Philadelphia Online Dr. Louis Weiner, chairman of medical oncology at Fox
Chase Cancer Center, will answer readers' questions about Judah Folkman's cancer
theory on Philadelphia Online, the Daily News' site on the Internet.
http://www.phillynews.com.

NOTES: In Our Opinion

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             1973 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 11, 1998 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Fund-raising walkers aim to take big strides against cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Ellen Derner-Kirk says her lungs are like "sponges that have been soaked in
rubber cement and then left overnight to dry." She is a cystic fibrosis patient,
one of about 250 in the county and 25,000 nationwide who live with a congenital
disease for which there is no cure, and which progressively ruins the lungs. To
help raise money to find that cure, and better ways to treat the disease,
hundreds of people will take part in the Great Strides fund-raising walk for
cystic fibrosis Saturday starting at 9 a.m. behind Scripps Ranch High School.

   Registration begins at 8 a.m. Dr. Michael Light, director of UCSD's Cystic
Fibrosis Center, said the challenge to researchers is to find better ways to
clear the infection that clogs and damages the lungs of people with cystic
fibrosis.

   Better antibiotics will keep infection at bay, but the long-term goal is to
find a gene therapy drug that will cure the disease for good. "For a cystic
fibrosis patient born today, there's a 50 percent chance of living to age 30 --
that is, if nothing else improves," said Light, a specialist in pediatric
pulmonology.

   "But with research, things have improved.

   When I went to medical school 30 years ago, the median survival age was 8."
Now 46, Derner-Kirk, a former bilingual education teacher, is one of San Diego's
oldest cystic fibrosis patients.

   She retired last year after painful coughing spells made even walking from
her car to the classroom too difficult. For now, treatments to clear clogged
lungs allow most patients to live normal lives.

   But over time, lung damage is often severe enough to require lung
transplants, and damage to the pancreas causes problems with digesting food. To
help research efforts, many of Derner-Kirk's family and friends are putting
together a team for the Great Strides event called "Team Ellen," collecting
dollar pledges that at last year's event amounted to about $60,000. This year's
goal is $70,000. About 1,000 walkers are expected. The event also will feature
food, music and other entertainment, and hundreds of dollars in prizes will be
awarded. For more information on how to join the walk around Miramar Lake, call
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation of Southern California, (619) 234-5880 or e-mail:
so-calif@cff.org "This is the 10th anniversary of this walk, and we hope to use
this money to someday soon find a cure for this devastating disease," said
Michele Mason, executive director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's San Diego
chapter, the sponsor of the event.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1974 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1998 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                              May 10, 1998, Sunday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: News; Pg. 004

LENGTH: 1942 words

HEADLINE: TOP CANCER DOCTORS IN NEW YORK

BODY:

   These are some of the top cancer doctors in the city. All have researched and
written extensively about the killer disease and various treatments.

   =============

   ONCOLOGISTS

   =============

   KAREN H. ANTMAN

   POSITION: Chief, Division of Medical Oncology, Columbia-Presbyterian.

   SPECIALTY: Breast cancer.

   Developed second-generation high-dose chemotherapy regimen for breast cancer
at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. An expert in marrow-transplant
treatments. Advocate of new treatments. Active writer and researcher.

   BACKGROUND: Harvard Medical School faculty; clinical director, Dana-Farber;
M.D., Columbia University.

   AFFILIATIONS: Columbia-Presbyterian.

   PHONE: (212) 305-8602

   MORTON COLEMAN

   POSITION: Attending physician, New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center;
associate editor, Cancer Investigation.

   SPECIALTY: Leukemia, lymphoma, soft-tissue cancer.

   Former famous patients include Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, deposed Shah of Iran.

   BACKGROUND: Resident, Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta and New York
Hospital-Cornell; hematology fellow, National Institutes of Health; M.D.,
Virginia School of Medicine.

   AFFILIATIONS: New York Hospital-Cornell, New Rochelle Hospital, Doctors
Hospital, Manhattan Eye, Ear, Nose & Throat.

   PHONE: (212) 517-5900

   JANICE GABRILOVE

   POSITION: Chief of Neoplastic Diseases and deputy director of clinical
affairs, Mt. Sinai.

   SPECIALTY: Hematology, oncology.

   Leading researcher in new therapies for cancer treatment. Prolific writer.

   BACKGROUND:Internship and residency, Columbia Presbyterian;
Hematology-oncology fellowship, Memorial Sloan-Kettering; M.D., Mt. Sinai.

   AFFILIATIONS:Mt. Sinai.

   PHONE:( (212) 241-9650

   EZRA M. GREENSPAN

   POSITION:Associate chief, Division of Neoplastic Diseases, and attending
physician, Mt. Sinai.

   SPECIALTY: Chemotherapy; breast and ovarian cancer.

   Pioneer in the use of chemotherapy. Prolific writer on cancers and their
treatment.

   BACKGROUND:(Resident, Mt. Sinai; former head of Mt. Sinai Cancer Detection
and Cancer Chemo clinics; M.D., NYU.

   AFFILIATIONS: Mt. Sinai.

   PHONE: (212) 289-1765

   (JAMES F. HOLLAND

   POSITION: Professor and chief of neoplastic diseases, Mt. Sinai.

   SPECIALTY: Oncology, research-drug development.

   Has won 18 major prizes for research into chemotherapy and immunology. Past
president of American Association for Cancer Research and American Society of
Clinical Oncology.

   BACKGROUND: Residencies at Columbia-Presbyterian and Francis Delafield
hospitals; M.D., Columbia.

   AFFILIATIONS:Mt. Sinai.

   PHONE: (212) 639-7051

   MARK G. KRIS

   POSITION:Chief, Thoracic Oncology Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering.

   SPECIALTY: Oncology, lung cancer.

   A clinical investigator in chemotherapy, his research includes new
anti-cancer agents, the development of drug-treatment programs for lung cancer
and ways to ease the side effects of cancer treatment. Has played key role in
new treatment for common lung cancer.

   BACKGROUND:( Oncology fellow, Memorial Sloan-Kettering; M.D., Cornell.

   AFFILIATIONS: Memorial Sloan-Kettering.

   PHONE: (212) 639-7590

   BERNARD KRUGER

   POSITION: Attending physician, Lenox Hill Hospital.

   SPECIALTY: Oncology, breast cancer.

   Patients include long list of prominent business executives and celebrities.

   BACKGROUND: Resident, Boston City Hospital; hematology resident, Georgetown
University Hospital; oncology fellow, University of California Medical Center,
San Francisco; oncology fellow associate, Mt. Sinai; M.D., University of
Colorado.

   ABFFILIATIONS:Lenox Hill Hospital, Beth Israel Medical Center, Mt. Sinai, New
York Hospital-Cornell.

   PHONE: (212) 772-9222

   )ANNE MOORE

   POSITION: Attending physician, New York Hospital-Cornell.

   SPECIALTY: Oncology, breast cancer.

   Named one of America's best doctors by American Health magazine. Researcher.
Has appeared as cancer expert on high-profile TV shows.

   BACKGROUND: Post-doctoral training, New York Hospital; fellow, Rockefeller
University; M.D., Columbia.

   AFFILIATIONS:New York Hospital-Cornell.

   PHONE: (212) 794-4900

   FRANCO M. MUGGIA

   POSITION: Director, NYU Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center; director,
Division of Medical Oncology and associate dean, NYU School of Medicine.

   SPECIALTY:Oncology.

   Renowned all-around cancer-treatment expert who formerly worked with National
Cancer Institute. Researcher. Author. Has sought ways to ease painful cancer
treatments.

   BACKGROUND:( Residencies, Hartford Hospital, Bellevue; former director of
clinical oncology at University of Southern California Medical School. M.D.,
Cornell.

   PHONES; (212) 263-7223

   (MD+BO)LARRY NORTON(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Head, Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Breast cancer.

   His mathematical models have been used to design anti-cancer therapies and to
formulate new approaches to chemo and hormonal therapy of breast cancer. Treated
Linda McCartney. Named one of America's best doctors by American Health
magazine.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Clinical oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering; M.D.,
Columbia.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Memorial Sloan-Kettering.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 639-6425

   (MD+BO)KANTI R. RAI(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Chief of Hematology/Oncology, Long Island Jewish
Medical Center; professor, Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Leukemia. Hematology. Oncology.

   Recognized worldwide for his expertise.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Pediatrics residencies, Lincoln Hospital and North
Shore Hospital; Leukemia Society fellow, Long Island Jewish.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Long Island Jewish.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 718-470-7135

   (MD+BO)RICHARD SILVER(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Attending physician and professor, New York
Hospital-Cornell.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Rheumatology, leukemia.

   Pioneered drug therapy for acute leukemia. President of state Society of
Medical Oncologists and Hematologists.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Clinical training in hematology and oncology, New
York Hospital; M.D., Cornell.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) New York Hospital, Beth Israel North.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 288-5040

   (MD+BO)LINDA T. VAHDAT(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Assistant attending physician, Columbia-Presbyterian;
Assistant professor of medicine, Columbia; director of Autologous Transplant
Program for Breast Cancer, Columbia-Presbyterian.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Breast cancer, gene therapy.

   Renowned specialist in new cancer therapies for breast cancer; active
lecturer, researcher and writer.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Resident, Mt. Sinai; clinical fellow, oncology and
hematology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering; M.D., Mt. Sinai.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Columbia Presbyterian; Autologous Transplant
Program for Breast Cancer.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 305-2486

   =====================

   (MD+BO)SURGEONS(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)=====================(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)MURRAY F. BRENNAN(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Chairman, Department of Surgery, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Gastric and mixed-tumor cancer.

   Renowned oncologist. Prolific writer, researcher.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Resident at various New Zealand university
hospitals; research fellow, Brigham Hospital and Harvard Medical; M.D.,
University of Otago, New Zealand.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Memorial Sloan-Kettering.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 639-8691

   (MD+BO)JOHN DALY(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Chief of surgery, New York Hospital-Cornell.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Colon cancer.

   On cutting edge of treatments, technology, and surgery for colorectal cancer
patients. Educator, researcher.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Post-graduate, University of Texas; M.D., Duke
University.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) New York Hospital-Cornell.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 746-5143

   (MD+BO)FRED J. EPSTEIN(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Chairman, Department of Neurosurgery and director of
Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Beth Israel.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Spinal tumors. Brain cancer.

   Renowned neurosurgeon and pediatric expert. Pioneered techniques to remove
brain-stem and spinal-cord tumors. Left NYU two years ago for Beth Israel to
inaugurate $25 million brain-cancer institute.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Residencies, Montefiore Hospital, Bellevue and NYU;
M.D., New York Medical College.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Beth Israel.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 870-9600

   (MD+BO)PATRICK J. KELLY(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Professor and chairman, NYU Department of
Neurosurgery.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Brain cancer.

   Prominent surgeon at NYU and world-renowned Mayo Clinic. Uses pioneering
computer-assisted technique that lets him build three-dimensional pictures of
tumors. Named one of top 100 Irish-Americans.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Resident, Northwestern University; M.D., SUNY
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) NYU.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 263-8002

   (MD+BO)DAVID KINNE(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Chief of Breast Service, Columbia-Presbyterian.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Breast cancer.

   One of the country's best-known breast-cancer surgeons and experts.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Intern, Columbia-Presbyterian; staff surgeon,
Minneapolis VA Hospital; transplantation fellow, University of Minnesota; M.D.,
SUNY/Downstate Medical Center.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Columbia-Presbyterian.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 326-8550

   (MD+BO)MICHAEL OSBORNE(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Director of Strang-Cornell Breast Center; chief of
Breast Service, New York Hospital-Cornell.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Breast cancer.

   Leading expert in latest breast-cancer treatments.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Surgical training, Charing Cross Hospital, and
resident, Brompton Hospital, in London; surgical-oncology fellow, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering; M.D., University of London.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) New York Hospital-Cornell.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 794-4900

   (MD+BO)PETER I. PRESSMAN(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Attending physician, Lenox Hill and Beth Israel;
clinical professor of surgery, Albert Einstein.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Breast cancer.

   Renowned surgeon who co-authored "Breast Cancer: The Complete Guide." Named
by Good Housekeeping, American Health, New York and Town and Country magazines
as one of the best cancer doctors in the United States.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Consultant, Guttman Breast Diagnostic Clinic;
Surgical Division, Bellevue; M.D., Columbia.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATIONS:(MD-BO) Beth Israel, Lenox Hill.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 249-8040

   (MD+BO)RACHE MICHELE SIMMONS(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Director of New York Hospital-Cornell Breast Center.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Breast cancer.

   Expert on early detection and prevention.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Post-graduate training, University of North
Carolina; M.D., Duke.

   (MD+BO)AFFILIATION:(MD-BO) New York Hospital-Cornell.

   (MD+BO)PHONE:(MD-BO) (212) 794-4900

   (MD+BO)ROBERT C. WALLACH(MD-BO)

   (MD+BO)POSITION:(MD-BO) Director of Gynecologic Oncology Division at NYU;
attending physician, Lenox Hill.

   (MD+BO)SPECIALTY:(MD-BO) Gynecologic oncology.

   Specializes in detecting and treating cancer in pregnant women. Expert in
cervical and ovarian cancer.

   (MD+BO)BACKGROUND:(MD-BO) Resident, obstetrics and gynecological surgery,
Beth Israel; gynecologic-oncology fellow, Downstate Medical Center; M.D., Yale.

   AFFILIATIONS: NYU, Lenox Hill.

   PHONE:( (212) 744-9333

   Compiled by William Sherman

CORRECTION-DATE: May 12, 1998, Tuesday

CORRECTION:
Dr. Bernard Kruger, who was among those featured in The Post's Sunday article on
the city's top cancer doctors, treats a wide range of patients and has a large
general medical practice, in addition to his work in oncology.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1998


                             1975 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1998 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          May 10, 1998, Metro Edition

SECTION: Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1475 words

HEADLINE: Researchers aren't ready to claim victory in the war on cancer;
 News of drugs that prevent cancer or kill tumors show that researchers have a
better understanding of how to attack the enemy.

BYLINE: Maura Lerner; Gordon Slovut; Staff Writers

BODY:

    Good news about cancer seems to be breaking out all over this spring. First
came the news that two pills already on the market may cut the risk of breast
cancer in high-risk women. Then came word last week from Boston of two
experimental drugs that have cured cancer in mice by shutting off the blood
supply to the tumors.

    The news generated excitement in part because even some usually cautious
scientists were quoted as saying we may be on the verge of conquering the
scourge of cancer.

    Are we really at a turning point in the 27-year War on Cancer? Probably yes,
cancer experts say. Does that mean that a cure is at hand? Probably not, they
say.

    Even if the new treatments turn out to be a bust, they show how two decades
of intensive research into how cancer works are finally paying off in brand-new,
if unproven, ideas of how to treat it.

    If successful, the treatments, which aim to sabotage the cancer cells
themselves, will be far more effective, and less toxic, than the current methods
that use surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.

    Researchers across the country are working on dozens of techniques involving
drugs that lower the risk of breast cancer or starve tumors, genetic therapies
that turn off cancer cells and techniques that turn the body's defense system
into overdrive.

    During the next five or 10 years, a new generation of drugs could
revolutionize cancer treatment. But few of the medications have been tried, much
less proven, in humans.

    "I think we need to be very cautious about being overly optimistic," said
Dr. Kathleen Ogle, a cancer specialist at Park Nicollet Clinic and president of
the Minnesota Oncology Society. "It sets up . . . the expectation that this [a
cure] is right around the corner, and in fact, it might turn out to be very
different."

    The lag between a breakthrough in the lab and a breakthrough in treatment
can be long. Even after years of animal experiments, it can take three to five
years of human testing before the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) gives its
blessing to a drug.

    Last week's excitement was triggered by a New York Times article about Dr.
Judah Folkman, a cancer researcher at Children's Hospital in Boston, and his
mouse experiments with two anticancer drugs that he calls angiostatin and
endostatin.

    The drugs, used in combination in mice, interfere with the blood supply that
tumors need to grow, making the cancer disappear and not return.

    Although many experts say Folkman's work is exciting - the National Cancer
Institute put it at the top of its priority list - cancer specialists in
Minnesota say they can't help being cautious. After all, mice are not men.

    The race to cure cancer has seemed painfully slow.  Since the War on Cancer
was declared in 1971, billions of dollars have been spent, without a great
number of treatments to show for it. It is revealing that the most effective
treatments today are just variations on old standbys: the scalpel, the radiation
machine and a variety of cell poisons. And there can be serious side effects
because the treatments often cannot discern between healthy tissue and cancerous
tissue.

    But researchers have made huge leaps in understanding how cancer cells
operate. That, they say, is what's given birth to the wave of experimental
treatments coming down the pike.

    "We're just at the stage now where some of this is coming to fruition," said
oncologist Charles Erlichman, who oversees first-stage testing of drugs at the
Mayo Clinic in Rochester.

    Drug companies are betting millions of dollars that one or more of the drugs
will prove their worth. "It's a real race," says Dr. B.J. Kennedy, a researcher
and oncology professor at the University of Minnesota.

    One breakthrough is that tamoxifen, a designer estrogen used to treat breast
cancer, was found to reduce the risk of breast cancer by 45 percent in healthy
women at high risk for the disease. The benefit seemed so dramatic that
researchers announced in April that they were cutting short patient trials, and
they released their results.

    Shortly after that, researchers reported that raloxifene, a synthetic
estrogen approved by the FDA in December as an osteoporosis drug, also could
prevent breast cancer without increasing the risk of uterine cancer.

    Details about that and other promising treatments are expected next week in
Los Angeles at a national conference of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology.


    Cracking cancer secrets

    The University of Minnesota is only one of dozens of research centers where
scientists are trying all kinds of ways to crack the secrets of cancer. A tour
through their laboratories provide insights into how a new understanding of
cancer is leading to potential treatments.

    S. Ramakrishnan, associate professor of the department of pharmacology, is
trying a method much like Folkman's - one that sabotages the way cancer cells
get nourishment.  Cancer cells secrete a hormone, vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), which, in effect, commands nearby blood cells to build vessels to
bring blood to the tumor so it can grow and multiply.

    It is precisely the same thing that healthy cells do when they are damaged.
Heart cells that aren't receiving enough blood and tissue with major wounds send
out VEGF to create more blood vessels.  It's one of the processes of healing.

    In his laboratory, Ramakrishnan attaches the VEGF to an inhibitor enzyme
that should stop blood vessels from forming bridges to the tumor. He injects the
combination into a laboratory animal implanted with a human cancer.

    The VEGF heads for a receptor - a docking station - on endothelial cells
near the tumor cells.  In the process, blood vessels taken over by the tumor are
destroyed and the tumor cells, deprived of blood, shrivel and die.

    He said the procedure has worked in a variety of human cancers transferred
to mice, including ovarian cancer cells, which are so hardy and difficult to
kill that no more than 20 percent of ovarian cancer patients are long-term
survivors, he said.

    It also worked on glioma cancers, a deadly form of brain cancer that is
usually inoperable and difficult to treat. Doctors often have trouble getting
anticancer agents into the brain because the molecules are too large to get
through the blood-brain filter.

    It will be at least two years before Ramakrishnan can even attempt
preliminary trials in patients. And he may combine his research with Folkman's
to determine whether the three drugs work better in combination.

    What does he think will happen if his therapy turns out to be safe and
effective?

    "This is not going to replace existing therapy," he said. "Surgery,
chemotherapy and radiation have proven to be useful."


    A three-step approach

    Another team of researchers - Dr. Jeffrey Miller, a university cancer
specialist and transplant physician, Dr. Linda Burns, a cancer specialist
interested in breast cancer, and Matt Mesher, an immunologist - has designed a
three-step procedure that could be especially beneficial for cancer patients not
otherwise likely to survive.

    In the first stage, the patients' faulty bone marrow is wiped out with
chemicals and radiation, then replaced with donor marrow or their own marrow
that has been purified of cancer cells. That step, so far, appears to assure
long-term survival for about 25 percent of women who have widespread breast
cancer.

    In the second stage, patients are given injections of Interleuken 2 (IL-2),
a protein that stimulates the body's immune system. The team is trying to
determine whether IL-2 revs up tumor-fighting white blood cells called
lymphocytes. It will be six months to a year before the researchers know whether
IL-2 stimulation is helping the patients.

    In the final stage, the researchers plan to immunize the women against their
own breast cancer by removing their lymphocytes and exposing them to the women's
own cancer cells in a test tube containing IL-2.  If all goes well, the IL-2
should make the lymphocytes extremely aggressive toward the tumor cells.  Then
the doctors will place the stirred-up lymphocytes back in the women, hoping the
blood cells will seek out and destroy any remnants of breast cancer.


    Hiding bombs in fat cells

    In another research project, Dr. Keith Skubitz, professor of medicine, is
developing a way to pack anticancer bombs in the center of globs of fat known as
liposomes and send them to areas in the body that are difficult to reach
otherwise.

    The technique of using genetically engineered liposomes could treat cancers
that are now considered difficult to treat, such as lung and brain cancers.

    To reach tumors hidden in the lungs, Skubitz has designed liposomes that can
be inhaled. To reach tiny tumors that have spread through the body, he would
inject the liposomes through a vein.


LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1998


                             1976 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              May 10, 1998 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1814 words

HEADLINE: Race against cancer offers tough choices

BYLINE: Kitta MacPherson, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   As if it were the most sparkling of jewels, Donald Cunningham of Dumont
tenderly stows a scrap of paper in the safest spot he can divine.

    The featherweight slip, bearing a string of hastily scrawled numbers, is his
lifeline, a strand stretching tenuously toward hope. "It's our case number,"
beams Audrey, his wife of 50 years.

    Cunningham, 72, is a retired furniture factory manager who has an aggressive
form of colon cancer. No matter how he tries to make it go away, it keeps coming
back.

    At the moment, within the universe of the American cancer establishment, he
is just a number, one of thousands of cancer patients who have contacted drug
companies in the last few weeks as word of potentially revolutionary therapies
has leaked out from the inner sanctum of some of the world's top pharmaceutical
laboratories.

   His hopes are not unfounded. At some of the world's leading pharmaceutical
companies, many of them based in New Jersey, legitimate, pathbreaking research
is taking place. It is founded on the notion that cancer is produced by a host
of genetic blunders that drive cells to grow out of control.

   Cancer researchers are more optimistic than ever because their approach is
rooted in decades of basic research on the genetic causes of cancer.

    "Within the course of my own professional career, cancer has gone from being
a problem of almost mythological complexity to what it is now, merely a
technical problem," said Dr. David Parkinson, an oncologist who is vice
president for clinical research at Novartis Pharmaceuticals in East Hanover.
"It's a daunting technical problem, but I think all of us have become
comfortable with the fact that we have the technologies to begin to solve it.

    "There probably won't be a single solution but many partial solutions. And
perhaps some of the approaches we think have great promise will actually be dead
ends. But we're going to solve the problem."

    Doris Langsdorf, 63, has heard the news about cancer, too. Battling
metastatic breast cancer, the Montclair resident has fought back hard over the
last three years, having surgery to remove her breast and undergoing
hormone-replacement therapy, radiation, and now chemotherapy. She is alert to
any breakthrough.

    Unlike Cunningham, however, Langsdorf won't be waiting to hear whether she
will be one of the patients eligible to participate in experimental trials being
set up by the drug firms to test whether the new forms of anti-cancer drugs are
safe and whether they work. After intense consultations with her physician and
some late-night sessions combing newspaper stories and online references,
Langsdorf decided to stay with chemotherapy. At the moment, she believes it to
be her best bet.

    Cunningham and Langsdorf represent the tug between hope and fear that cancer
patients will endure over the next few years during what scientists acknowledge
is an almost unprecedented era of discovery in cancer research.

    Rival drug firms are risking billions of dollars as they stake out competing
theories of how to knock out cancer. Some have already produced anti-cancer
therapies showing promising results in humans, and more of those tests are on
the way. Within a few years, there are going to be attacks on every significant
gene that is involved in cancer, Parkinson said.

    Billions of dollars of taxpayer funds have supported the basic biological
research of the last 25 years at government and university laboratories. The
knowledge has opened the door for the pharmaceutical companies to take that
fundamental research and hammer it into a pharmaceutical product.

    By knowing what molecular mechanisms go awry in cancer, drug company
researchers are designing molecules that either jam up defective genes or fix
them so they work properly.

    "What we have seen in the last decade or so is an exponential expansion of
the understanding of the biological processes that are involved in the group of
diseases known as cancer," said Dr. Joseph Aisner, chief of medical oncology at
The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, in New Brunswick. "That understanding has
made its way down to the subcellular level, to the gene. It has opened up new
vistas and new targets. And now, the vista has suddenly exploded because we've
gone from the test tube to the animal and now into humans. We can see the
potential." Specific approaches Some researchers, like those at Novartis, are
working on designing molecules that block the activity of certain receptors. The
receptors sit on the surface of mutant genes known as oncogenes and emit growth
signals to aberrant tumor cells.

    Meanwhile, researchers like those at Johnson & Johnson's Janssen Division
seek to block oncogenes that transmit growth signals inside cells, such as the
protein made by the "ras" oncogene. Other researchers, including some at the
Schering-Plough Research Institute in Kenilworth, are trying to make up for the
tumor-suppressor gene mutations that inhibit apoptosis - that is, the cells'
ability to commit suicide. And still others, including a group at Agouron
Pharmaceuticals, are attacking the ability of the tumor cell to grow more blood
vessels, cutting off its blood supply.

    Since these approaches are so much more specific than present chemotherapy
drugs, researchers reason, the chances are less that normal cells will be
harmed.

    Patients, assisted by their physicians, will have to wade their way through
reams of data to make the hardest choices of all - exactly what treatment should
they be pursuing in an age of discovery?

    "We're at the threshold of a new era in which whole new groups of drugs and
new types of medications will be available for cancer," said Dr. Robert Fein,
chief of medical oncology at St. Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick. "It's
exciting and everyone knows it."

    At the same time, news about research advances frequently creates anxiety in
patients, he said. They worry about whether they are receiving state-of-the-art
treatment and whether their physicians are plugged into this up-to-the-minute
research. "I need to calm them down and say that, yes, we are excited about it
and we'll keep our eyes open," Fein said. Expert conclave News about cancer
treatment breakthroughs will not diminish any time soon. Starting Saturday and
running through the next three days, the largest oncology meeting in the world
will take place in Los Angeles.

    Sponsored by the American Society of Clinical Oncologists, the gathering is
expected to attract 19,000 people, including physicians, scientists and members
of the press. Among the highlights expected at the meeting - to be detailed in
70 sessions and 2,400 research papers - are revelations of major advances in the
treatment of breast cancer, including results of an experimental treatment using
an antibody known as anti- HER2, and the conclusions of a large study of women
using hormone therapy like tamoxifen.

    In addition, firms like Johnson & Johnson's Janssen Division are likely to
make waves within the cancer research community. The company's early human
subject trials, in which patients have taken an experimental drug of a type
known as a esyl transferase inhibitor to determine its safety, have been deemed
successful.

    Within weeks, the company will move to the next step, starting human trials
in which a small group of patients, at hospital sites currently being determined
by the company, will help decide whether the substance actually works. If those
studies are successful, the company will move to the next stage, the last before
seeking government approval for the drug.

    The company also plans to start experimental trials on the drug for children
with cancer.

    The drug is currently being administered intravenously, but its main
ingredient is a small molecule that will be made into a pill if the trials are
ultimately successful.

    Though it is a process that could take years, the drug's discovery and
development have touched off a race among several major pharmaceutical
companies, including Schering-Plough, Merck & Co. and Bristol-Myers Squibb. At
the moment, the Janssen scientists are the furthest along.

    By the fall, public attention also may be drawn to some rallies to be staged
Sept. 26 in major cities across the country by cancer-patient advocacy groups.
Organizers of the event, calling for increases in research funding, are calling
it "The March . . . Coming Together to Conquer Cancer." When cells go awry
Cancer has baffled physicians for centuries. Today it is known as a group of
more than 100 different diseases. They occur when cells become abnormal and keep
dividing and forming more cells without control or order.

    All organs of the body are made of cells. Normally, cells divide to produce
more cells only when the body needs them. If cells divide when new ones are not
needed, they form a mass of excess tissue, called a tumor. Tumors can be benign,
meaning not cancerous, or malignant.

    The cells in malignant tumors can invade and damage nearby tissues and
organs. Cancer cells can also break away from a malignant tumor and travel
through the bloodstream or the lymphatic system to form new tumors in other
parts of the body.

    Cancer is currently treated with surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy,
hormone therapy or biological therapy. The treating physician may use one method
or a combination of methods. The choice of treatment depends on the type and
location of the cancer, whether the disease has spread, the patient's age and
general health, and other factors.

   Despite years of targeted research, cancer remains one of the leading causes
of death in the industrialized world.

    However, in recent decades, scientists have learned much more about the
biological basis of cancer. Malignancy can appear in any tissue in the body. The
cells that turn up violate two important aspects of normal cellular activity -
they no longer adhere to the internal clock that tells them to stop growing, and
they can migrate to and invade other body sites, affecting normal body
functions.

    Scientists have looked to the mechanisms found in all cancers, the
disruption of basic processes that result in normal cells becoming cancer cells.
For example, mutations in two general classes of genes within a cell -
proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes - are believed to play major roles in
triggering cancer.

    Recent information has emerged on the relationship of these genes and the
control of the "cell cycle clock," the interacting proteins in the nucleus of a
cell that regulate cell division. When they misbehave, they can lead to the
genesis of cancer. These discoveries of how cancer cells differ from normal
cells form the basis for the development of new anticancer therapies.

    "We're seeing completely new approaches to treating patients, and it is
moving quickly from test tubes to bedsides," said Dr. Lynn Schuchter, an
oncologist at the University of Pennsylvania. "It is really exciting."

GRAPHIC: The genetic approach to fighting cancer

 TYPES OF CANCER APPROACH DRUG TYPE COMPANIES INVOLVED STATUS

Brain, breast, colon, leukemia, lung, pancreatic Disable oncogenes, the mutant
genes that promote the unrestrained growth of cancer cells Farnesyl transferase
inhibitors Johnson & Johnson Janssen Div. Moving to human efficacy trials in
June

Schering-Plough Early human safety trials

Merck Early human safety trials

 Anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody Bristol-Myers Squibb Animal studies

 Tyrosine kinase inhibitors Genentech Last stages of human trials completed

Pfizer Early human safety trials

Zeneca Starting small-scale human efficacy trials

Sugen Human efficacy trials

Lung, ovarian, head& neck, liver, gastrointestinal, pancreatic Make tumor
suppressor genes work again to prevent the growth of tumors. Gene therapy and
anti-sense agents Canji/Schering-Plough Early human safety trials

Onyx Pharmaceuticals Early human safety trials

Novartis Early human safety trials

 Various tumors Stop blood flow to tumors by blocking tumor's ability to create
new blood vessels. Anti-angiogenesis agents Entremed Animal studies

Genentech Early human safety trials

Agouron Pharmaceuticals Early human safety trials

Novartis Early human safety trials

Cancer-causing genes

 Tumor growth is caused by changes, or mutations, in genes that control healthy
cell division, causing cells to divide uncontrollably. Two types of genes are
involved: proto-oncogenes and anti-oncogenes.

 The two perpetrators:

  Oncogenes

 Proto-oncogenes promote normal cell growth and division. A mutation in a
proto-oncogene can permanantly switch it on, turning it into an oncogene.
Oncogenes spur excessive cell division.

 Tumor suppressors

 Anti-oncogenes normally act to keep cell division in check. When a mutation
disables an anti-oncogene, it no longer can prevent runaway cell division.
Cancer results.

 1. Normal growth: Cells divide in a regulated and restrained way, only enough
to replace cells lost as a result of aging or injury.

 2. Mildly abnormal growth: Genetic changes in oncogenes or tumor suppressor
genes induce the cells to grow and divide.

 3. Malignant growth: Accelerated division of genetically damaged cells gains
momentum and leads to the formation of a malignant tumor, which can seed the
body with more cancer cells.

 The drug development and approval process

 1.   Early research and preclinical testing Laboratory and animal testing

 2.   Investigational New Drug Application is filed with the Food and Drug
Administration If the FDA does not disapprove within 30 days, the process will
continue.

 3.   Phase I clinical trials Uses 20 to 80 healthy volunteers to determine the
drug's safety.

 4.   Phase II clinical trials Controlled studies of 100 to 300 volunteer
patients (people with the disease) to assess the drug's effectiveness and look
for side effects.

 5.   Phase III clinical trials 1,000 to 3,000 volunteer patients in clinics and
hospitals to confirm drug effectiveness and monitor adverse reactions to
long-term use.

 6.   New Drug Application is filed with the FDA The application must contain
all the scientific data the company has collected. NDAs can run 100,000 pages or
more. By law the FDA is allowed six months to review, but it can take longer.

 7.   Approval Once the FDA approves the NDA, the new medicine becomes available
for doctors to prescribe. The company continues to submit reports to the FDA,
including cases of adverse reaction.

 8.   Phase IV For some medicines the FDA requires additional studies to
evaluate long-term effects.

 SOURCES: Star-Ledger staff, Food and Drug Administration; American Medical
Association; Scientific American; Knight-Ridder Tribune

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             1977 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 10, 1998, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: TV WEEK; Pg. Y06

LENGTH: 828 words

HEADLINE: Erich Segal's Classic Themes; A Young Doctor Gets a Second Chance at
Romance

BYLINE: Patricia Brennan, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Classics professor Erich Segal has had a certain success crafting romantic
tales for ordinary people.

   Back in 1970, when he was 33, Segal's novel "Love Story" became a hit movie
starring Ali MacGraw and Ryan O'Neal as Jenny and Oliver, Ivy League college
students so in love that they ignore their families' wishes -- he's a rich WASP,
she's from a more humble Italian-American background -- and marry. When she
dies, viewers, and readers, sobbed.

   Segal's book sold more than 21 million copies in 33 languages, and his
screenplay brought him a Golden Globe Award and one of the film's seven Oscar
nominations.

   ("Love Story" wasn't Segal's first screenplay; he also had written one for
The Beatles' movie "Yellow Submarine" in 1968.)

   Fast-forward three decades. Segal is a fellow at Oxford University's Wolfson
College. Over the years, he's written other bestsellers, including "The
Doctors," "Acts of Faith," "The Class" and "Prizes." Four of his books have been
filmed.

   Segal's latest tale, "Only Love," airs Sunday and Monday at 9 on CBS. It
combines some themes of "Love Story" and some of "The Doctors."

   Rob Morrow, who played a young physician on "Northern Exposure," is Matthew
Hiller, the son of a Detroit auto factory worker, an accomplished pianist and a
newly minted doctor who has applied to do a turn with Medicin Internationale, an
organization of idealistic physicians headquartered in Amsterdam. (Segal modeled
it on Doctors Without Borders.)

   Among the other doctors is the elegant Silvia Dalessandro, played by French
actress Mathilda May. Silvia is the British-educated only child of an Italian
automotive tycoon who provides a bodyguard to protect her. But the physicians
are scheduled to go to a dangerous war-torn area in Africa.

   Then there's his college friend Evie, a cellist, played by Oscar-winner
Marisa Tomei. When Evie gets married, he's happy for her. When she's pregnant,
he's happy for her. But the best friends become lovers in the second half of the
movie after Evie's divorce.

   Segal's romantic themes are those that appear in stories and plays both
classic and contemporary: the star-crossed lovers, love doomed or forbidden or
cut short, the perfection of young lovers who because they die will never grow
old. And, sometimes, a second chance at love.

   "The story is based on the idea of 'the girl that got away,' and the love you
wonder about the rest of your life because you lost her," said Segal. "In 'Only
Love,' she comes back and the guy gets the second chance nobody gets in life. I
called up the memory of someone who was the girl that got away in my life, and I
sort of idealized her the way I idealized Jenny [in 'Love Story']. Then I give
this doctor [in 'Only Love'] a chance to get back what he lost."

   Filmed in Amsterdam and rural South Africa, "Only Love" is directed by John
Erman, who did "Roots," "An Early Frost" and "Ellen Foster."

   Segal, his wife and daughters (ages "17 going on 30 and 8 going on 21") plan
to fly from their home in England to Boston to watch "Only Love" along with
millions of other viewers when it airs Sunday and Monday. He said he trusted
Emmy-winning scriptwriter William Hanley and director Erman. Except for
selecting the producer who had chosen Hanley, Segal said he preferred to keep
hands off the movie.

   Segal acknowledged that the character of Silvia was inspired by Giovanni
Alberto Agnelli, the handsome 33-year-old heir to the $ 50 billion Fiat
conglomerate fortune, who succumbed to cancer in December 1997. For his plot,
Segal used information from a June 11, 1994, account in the San Diego Union
Tribune about the use of gene therapy to combat brain tumors.

   "I took that from the Internet," he said. "It was tried on a woman who had
undergone chemotherapy and surgery and [who] petitioned the government to try
the thing. It succeeded in reducing the tumor," but the effort was too late to
save her.

   Segal said his friend W. French Anderson performed the world's first gene
therapy experiment at the National Institutes of Health in 1990. They were mates
on the Harvard track team. "We had lockers next to each other," Segal recalled.

   While building dual careers writing fiction and teaching, Segal also was a
network commentator for distance races at the 1972 and 1976 Olympics and won the
Washington, D.C., marathon in 1963.

   For Segal, a professor of classics who holds bachelor's, master's and
doctorate degrees from Harvard, the success of his popular fiction underwrites
his academic career and enables him to pursue more esoteric work. He has turned
out "Roman Laughter: The Comedy of Plautus" and "The Oxford Readings in Greek
Tragedy," as well as publications on ancient drama and Greek athletics.

   Yet he also takes care of business: Alongside his academic writing, Segal is
finishing another novel, "September Song," which he described as "a different
kind of love story, about real grown-ups, not puppy love."


GRAPHIC: Photo, monty brinton, Rob Morrow plays a doctor whose first love is
played by Mathilda May, left, and his second by Marisa Tomei.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1998


                             1978 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  May 9, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 15; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: TELEVISION REVIEW;
That Love Stuff Again, but More So

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

BODY:

   When people fall in love in Erich Segal novels, they get it bad. Chances are,
wherever the fictional Oliver Barrett 4th is today, he is still in therapy over
Jenny Cavilleri's death, which, as "Love Story" fans know, was in 1970 or so.

   So it should come as no surprise that halfway through the second night of
"Only Love," a four-hour mini-series based on Mr. Segal's new novel of the same
name, Dr. Matt Hiller (Rob Morrow) is still not dating, not playing the piano
anymore and generally withdrawing from life because of the tragic end of an
affair.

    "Don't tell me that woman -- the Italian -- is she still haunting you?" says
Marisa Tomei as Matt's platonic friend Evie Webster Josephson, who is always
turning up without her husband. "I've heard of lifelong obsessions, but this is
ridiculous."

   The Italian is Silvia Dalessandro (Mathilda May), an idealistic young doctor
with great cheekbones, the daughter of an automobile magnate who disapproves of
the romance between Matt and Silvia. The rich father finds a way to end the
affair too, after the couple spend 1982 in the fictional African nation Gomba,
where they live in tents and nobly treat poor people.

   Romantics looking for a tear-jerker hospital-bed scene will find it but will
have to sit through almost four hours of unrelieved cliche to get there. It's
not often that you see a movie with this many soft-focus lovemaking scenes and
those-were-the-happy-days flashbacks, and not one but two montages of carefree
lovers on picturesque daytime dates. (Matt falls in love with Evie, too.) The
Amsterdam montage -- bicycling across bridges, scooping up huge bouquets from
sidewalk vendors and beaming uncontrollably at street performers -- is better
than the one in Rome.

   Eventually Matt becomes famous for developing a kind of gene therapy to cure
brain tumors, which is good because one of the women he loves turns up in his
office in 1998 with an inoperable one. Will she live or die? Will she ever look
sicker than having circles under her eyes? And which woman does Matt really
love?

   Mr. Morrow, Ms. May and Ms. Tomei manage to be quite likable in their roles,
despite the trite dialogue and one character's apparent lack of character. At
one point, Matt explains that Silvia had to make the terrible sacrifice that her
father requested because they had made a bargain and he had kept his side.
"It's a matter of honor," Matt explains. Evie laughs, raises her eyebrows and
says, "Honor? Like in 'The Godfather'?" Apparently, love now means never having
to do what you said you'd do.

ONLY LOVE
CBS, tomorrow and Monday night at 9
(Channel 2 in New York)

Robert Halmi Sr., John Erman and Gerrit van der Meer, executive producers;
produced by Gerrit van der Meer; script by Gerald Christopher, based on the book
by Erich Segal; directed by John Erman; music by John Morris. A production of
Hallmark Entertainment in association with Octopus Productions.

WITH: Marisa Tomei (Evie Webster Josephson), Rob Morrow (Matthew Hiller),
Mathilda May (Silvia Dalessandro Rinaldi), Jeroen Krabbe (Francois Pelletier),
Georges Corraface (Nico Rinaldi), Natcha Lindinger (Denise LaGarde) and Paul
Freeman (Gian Battista Dalessandro).

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1998


                             1979 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         MAY 9, 1998 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1310 words

HEADLINE: SHARPENING THE ATTACK ON CANCER BIOLOGICAL ADVANCES BRIGHTEN THE
OUTLOOK. THE STRATEGIES VARY.

BYLINE: Robert S. Boyd, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A turning point may be nearing in the long, discouraging and often
heartbreaking war on cancer.

   Spectacular advances in biological science are about to make it possible to
attack the dread disease with an arsenal of precision tools instead of the blunt
instruments - chemotherapy, radiation and surgery - now used to poison, burn or
slash most malignancies.

   Cancer doctors are "definitely more excited than I've ever seen them," said
Daniel Von Hoff, president of the American Association for Cancer Research. "Our
chances of success are so much greater than they were five years ago."

   This week's headlines about a new drug combination that shrinks tumors in
mice by starving them of blood is only one of the novel anticancer weapons being
tested.

   Other promising new strategies include:

   * Vaccines to spur the immune system to attack sneaky cancer calls.

   * Gene therapy to repair, replace or remove defective genes that cause or
permit malignant tumors to grow.

   * Targeted drugs such as tiny protein molecules designed to jam a cell's
machinery and prevent it from dividing and growing out of control.

   Government and university laboratories, as well as dozens of biotechnology
companies, are racing to perfect these treatments. Several should be available
within the next few years.

   On Monday, for example, Genentech Inc., a biotechnology company in South San
Francisco, asked the Food and Drug Administration for fast-track approval of a
drug to treat women with aggressive breast cancer. The drug, Herceptin,
performed well in clinical tests and could be on the market by year's end.

   Unlike previous drugs that clobber normal as well as cancerous tissues,
producing nasty side effects, Herceptin is targeted against a specific gene,
known as HER2, that causes breast cells to proliferate wildly.

   Last month, the National Cancer Institute announced that a drug called
tamoxifen cut the risk of breast cancer almost in half among 13,388 women who
took part in a five-year trial.

   "This advance represents the results of a long-term investment in research,"
National Cancer Institute director Richard Klausner said at the time.

   And in March, the American Cancer Society reported that cancer cases and
deaths were going down, after rising steadily for 60 years. Society president
David Rosenthal said the United States "has turned the corner in the war on
cancer."

   Most of the improvement, to be sure, is due to healthier lifestyles - people
eating better and smoking less. The cancer battlefield is littered with the
corpses of miracle cures that weren't.

   "Everybody is waiting for the cure," said Donald Coffey, a prostate cancer
specialist at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore. "All sorts of
overhype and craziness are going on."

   Nevertheless, scientists' rapidly growing ability to manipulate genes and
molecules - working deep within a cell instead of at the level of whole organs -
is raising genuine hope that cancer can be prevented or cured, not just held at
bay for a few months or years.

   For the first time, researchers understand many details of how cancer cells
divide and grow uncontrollably - like a Xerox machine run amok. They are
learning to manipulate the chemical switches that turn cells on and off.

   "We have learned as much about cancer cells and advanced as far in the last
10 years as we have in computers," Coffey said. "We just can't believe the
progress - it's exploding on us."

   Here are some of the latest advances:

   VACCINES A vaccine against cancer is an old dream that may be nearing
reality. Researchers are learning to equip the body's natural immune system with
new tricks so it can destroy malignant cells. A preferred technique is a
personalized vaccine, made from cells taken from a patient's own tumor.

   Steven Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute, is
testing a vaccine he has developed against malignant melanoma, a rapidly
increasing cancer, usually beginning in the skin, that strikes 42,000 Americans
a year.

   Many melanoma patients suffer a recurrence after conventional surgery or
chemotherapy. But the vaccine, a protein that helps the immune system recognize
cancer cells, shrank tumors in almost half the people who took part in a pilot
test, Rosenberg reported in the March issue of the scientific journal Nature
Medicine.

   There is also great interest in vaccines made from "dendritic cells" - rare,
star-shaped white blood cells that alert the immune system to the presence of
cancer.

   "A host of clinical trials using dendritic cell vaccines is now under way,"
said John Timmerman, an oncologist at the Stanford Medical Center in Palo Alto,
Calif.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania reported in October that they
had developed a way to manufacture dendritic cancer vaccines. "We plan to
kick-start the immune system," said Brian Czerniecki, a professor at Penn's
School of Medicine.

   GENE THERAPY Since cancer is a genetic disease, researchers have been
struggling for ways to remove, repair or replace flawed or damaged genes - a
process known as gene therapy.

   More than 100 such experiments have been launched since the first one in
September 1990, but so far no clear victories have been achieved. Harold Varmus,
director of the National Institutes of Health, has warned against the
"overselling of gene therapy."

   Nevertheless, hopes for a flood of breakthroughs are rising. Some examples:

   Introgen Therapeutics Inc. of Austin, Texas, has completed animal tests and
is conducting human trials of a method to correct a flaw in a gene, known as
p53, that serves as a brake on uncontrolled cell growth. More than half of
people with cancer have a mutation in the p53 gene.

   Introgen's chief scientist, Jack Roth of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center at
the University of Texas, developed the technique, which uses a virus to carry
corrected copies of the gene into tumors of the head, neck or lung. Introgen
hopes to have a product on the market in 2000.

   At a cancer research conference in New Orleans last month, Targeted Genetics
Corp. of Seattle reported good results in preliminary tests of another tumor
suppressor gene, known as E1A, in women with cancer of the breast or ovaries.

   TARGETED DRUGS A major weakness of today's chemotherapy drugs is that they
cannot keep up with cancer cells' maddening ability to mutate, evolving fresh
strains that resist standard treatments.

   In recent years, however, scientists have learned how to mimic Darwinian
evolution - and speed it up enormously - creating a multitude of slightly
different molecules in a test tube.

   "Of the billions of variant molecules, at least one of them will hit" the
cancer, said Coffey, of Johns Hopkins.

   For example, the Janssen Research Foundation, a subsidiary of Johnson &
Johnson, the pharmaceutical company based in Titusville, N.J., is conducting
human trials of a drug called an FT inhibitor that blocks an enzyme necessary
for cell growth.

   Another biotech firm, Sugen of Redwood City, Calif., is testing a protein
that inhibits the spread of glioblastoma, a lethal brain cancer.

   For most of the 30 years since President Richard M. Nixon declared war on
cancer, the battle was a standoff. Scientists gained much more knowledge about
the enemy, but their efforts to apply it were frustrated. Until recently, the
death rate continued to climb.

   Before 1992, only one of every 14 promising new drugs administered to cancer
patients turned out to shrink their tumors, said Von Hoff, of the American
Association for Cancer Research. Now, one of every three or four works, and the
success rate is continuing to rise.

   "This is terribly important at the bedside," Von Hoff said. "When we look a
patient in the eye and say we're going to try this new agent, there's a much
better chance that we can do something for them."

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1980 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 May 9, 1998, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT, Pg. 41

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: WRING OUT THOSE HANKIES, FOLKS; ERICH SEGAL IS AT IT AGAIN

BYLINE: Patricia Brennan; Washington Post

BODY:


   Classics professor Erich Segal has had a certain success crafting romantic
tales for ordinary people.

   Back in 1970, when he was 33, Segal's novel "Love Story" became a hit movie
starring Ali MacGraw and Ryan O'Neal as Jenny and Oliver, Ivy League college
students so in love that they ignore their families' wishes - he's a rich WASP,
she's from a more-humble Italian-American background - and marry. When she dies,
viewers, and readers, sobbed.

   Segal's book sold more than 21 million copies in 33 languages, and his
screenplay brought him a Golden Globe Award and one of the film's seven Oscar
nominations.

   ("Love Story" wasn't Segal's first screenplay; he had written one for The
Beatles' movie "Yellow Submarine" in 1968.)

   Fast-forward three decades. Segal is a fellow at Oxford University's Wolfson
College. Over the years, he's written other best sellers, including "The
Doctors," "Acts of Faith," "The Class" and "Prizes." Four of his books have been
filmed.

   Segal's latest tale, "Only Love," airs Sunday and Monday on CBS. It combines
some themes of "Love Story" and some of "The Doctors."

   Rob Morrow, who played a young physician on "Northern Exposure," is Matthew
Hiller, the son of a Detroit autoworker, an accomplished pianist and a newly
minted doctor who has applied to do a turn with Medicin Internationale, an
organization of idealistic physicians headquartered in Amsterdam.

   Among the other doctors is the elegant Silvia Dalessandro, played by French
actress Mathilda May. Silvia is the British-educated only child of an Italian
automotive tycoon who provides a bodyguard to protect her. But the physicians
are scheduled to go to a dangerous war-torn area in Africa.

   Then there's his college friend Evie, a cellist, played by Oscar-winner
Marisa Tomei. When Evie gets married, he's happy for her. When she's pregnant,
he's happy for her. But the best friends become lovers in the second half of the
movie after Evie's divorce.

   Segal's romantic themes are both classic and contemporary: the star-crossed
lovers, love doomed or forbidden or cut short, the perfection of young lovers
who because they die will never grow old. And, sometimes, a second chance at
love.

   "The story is based on the idea of 'the girl that got away' and the love you
wonder about the rest of your life because you lost her," said Segal. "In 'Only
Love,' she comes back, and the guy gets the second chance nobody gets in life. I
called up the memory of someone who was the girl that got away in my life, and I
sort of idealized her the way I idealized Jenny (in 'Love Story'). Then I give
this doctor (in 'Only Love') a chance to get back what he lost."

   "Only Love" was filmed in Amsterdam and rural South Africa, and directed by
John Erman, who did "Roots," "An Early Frost" and "Ellen Foster."

   Segal, his wife and daughters (ages "17 going on 30 and 8 going on 21") plan
to fly from their home in England to Boston to watch "Only Love" Sunday and
Monday. He said he trusted Emmy-winning scriptwriter William Hanley and director
Erman. Except for selecting the producer who had chosen Hanley, Segal said he
preferred to keep hands off the movie.

   Segal acknowledged that the character of Silvia was inspired by Giovanni
Alberto Agnelli, the 33-year-old heir to the $ 50 billion Fiat conglomerate
fortune, who succumbed to cancer in December 1997. For his plot, Segal used
information from a June 11, 1994, account in the San Diego Union Tribune about
the use of gene therapy on brain tumors. "I took that from the Internet," he
said. "It was tried on a woman who had undergone chemotherapy and surgery and
(who) petitioned the government to try the thing. It succeeded in reducing the
tumor," but the effort was too late to save her.

   Segal said his friend W. French Anderson performed the world's first
gene-therapy experiment at the National Institutes of Health in 1990. They were
mates on the Harvard track team.

   For Segal, a professor of classics who holds bachelor's, master's and
doctorate degrees from Harvard, the success of his popular fiction underwr ites
his academic career and enables him to pursue more esoteric work. He has turned
out "Roman Laughter: The Comedy of Plautus" and "The Oxford Readings in Greek
Tragedy."

***

"Only Love"

When: 8 p.m. Sunday and Monday

Where: Channel 4

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photo - Marisa Tomei (left), Mathilda May and Rob Morrow star in
the miniseries about love regained.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1998


                             1981 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     May 09, 1998, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C01; DIGEST

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   Pfizer's Viagra had almost 600,000 prescriptions filled in April, its first
month on the market, unprecedented for first-month sales. Some analysts predict
sales of the impotence pill could rise as high as $ 2 billion in 1999. About
250,000 prescriptions were filled for Viagra in the week ended May 1, a 20
percent gain over the previous week, according to NDC Health Information
Services, which tracks sales at pharmacies.

   Changes in bankruptcy laws are being opposed by the Clinton administration,
which will not back a House Republican bill that would overhaul the laws and
give creditors more power to wrest payment from people who have filed for legal
protection. In a letter to Rep. Henry J. Hyde (R-Ill.), chairman of the
Judiciary Committee, Assistant Attorney General Ann M. Harkins said that while
some changes to the bankruptcy law are appropriate, "the administration has
reluctantly concluded" that it cannot support the House bill because it did not
include enough provisions for protecting debtors. The House judiciary committee
is scheduled to mark up the bill next week.

   Association of International Automobile Manufacturers President Philip A.
Hutchinson Jr. invited the American Automobile Manufacturers Association to
merge with his organization. Hutchinson said he is extending a similar
invitation to the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association. In the wake of
Chrysler's decision to merge with Germany's Daimler-Benz, "it simply does not
make any sense to have all of these different groups representing car
companies," he said.

   Aluminum Co. of America said its president, Alain J.P. Belda, will take over
as chairman in December 2000.

   Pharmacia & Upjohn plans to increase licensed products to 45 percent of its
research portfolio over the next five years and will submit its Pharmorubicin
cancer drug for U.S. approval later this year. Buying drugs under development
will improve the Swedish-American company's medium- to long-term portfolio,
analysts said.

   Credit Suisse First Boston broke ranks with more than 20 major Wall Street
firms, announcing it would pay $ 52.5 million to settle with Orange County over
the municipality's 1994 bankruptcy. The settlement concludes all claims by the
county against CS First Boston related to the bankruptcy, including those
concerning the firm's sale of structured notes and reverse repurchase agreements
with the county.

   COMPENSATION

   Dell Computer founder Michael Dell's fiscal 1998 compensation rose more than
sixfold to $ 69.8 million, as the computer maker's stock more than tripled and
sales and earnings grew at more than 50 percent. Dell, 33, received $ 788,462 in
salary, $ 2 million in annual bonus, $ 12,409 in other compensation, and 3.2
million in stock options that the company valued at $ 67 million on the day they
were granted, according to the company's annual proxy filed with the SEC.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   Human Genome Sciences of Rockville reported a loss of $ 9.7 million for the
quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $ 12 million for the same period
last year. The biotechnology company that specializes in gene therapy said that
agreements signed during the quarter will help speed the process of bringing
drugs to market.

   Hadron of Alexandria reported earnings of $ 232,400 for the third quarter
ended March 31, compared with a loss of $ 57,300 for the same period last year.
The information and technical services company credited strong performance at
two Hadron subsidiaries, Engineering & Information Services and SyCom Services,
for part of the turnaround.

   MCI was ordered by the State Corporation Commission to end a federal
surcharge on business customers' long-distance calls made within Virginia. The
surcharge should have been assessed only on interstate long-distance revenue,
the SCC said. The SCC also ordered District-based MCI to refund $ 250,000 to
businesses in Virginia because of another fee improperly collected from January
to March.

   A team lead by Science Applications International (SAIC), won a contract
worth about $ 400 million from the Immigration and Naturalization Service to
upgrade computer systems in 90 of the agency's U.S. and international offices.
SAIC, based in San Diego, has its federal operations in McLean.


GRAPHIC: Chart, Good Hunting Hunting is big business in the United States.
Hunters, by type of game, in millions: Big game (deer, elk, bear) 11.3 Small
game (rabbits, squirrels) 6.9 Fowl (geese, ducks) 3.0 Other (fox, raccoon) 1.5
SOURCES: Interior Department, Commerce Department

LOAD-DATE: May 09, 1998


                             1982 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 May 8, 1998, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; TELEVISION REVIEW; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Sorry to say, 'Love' has limited appeal

BYLINE: BY LON GRAHNKE

BODY:


   Only Love

   (STAR)(STAR)

   A miniseries on Channel 2, 8 to 10 p.m. Sunday and Monday. Content guideline:
TV-PG (violence, sexual situations).

   Only those who appreciated Erich Segal's Love Story novel or the 1970 film
can expect to enjoy two nights of romantic mush when "Only Love" begins Sunday.

   That means millions will sigh and sniffle through four hours of sex and
heartbreak with Rob Morrow from "Northern Exposure," Oscar winner Marisa Tomei
and French ingenue Mathilda May as an Italian heiress.

   The CBS miniseries, based on Segal's new fictional folderal, has been
elegantly packaged by Hallmark Entertainment. Executive producer John Erman, an
Emmy-winning director, filmed on location in Amsterdam and South Africa.

   Morrow overplays the lead role of Matthew Hiller, a sensitive pianist who
volunteers to spend a year as a medical missionary in Africa. During his 1982
orientation in Amsterdam, Matthew meets the smart and sexy Silvia Dalessandro
(May), the daughter of Gian Battista Dalessandro. The powerful millionaire owns
an international auto company. He wants Silvia to marry Nico Rinaldi (Georges
Corraface), the son of another Italian tycoon.

   Silvia attracts Matthew during their three weeks of training in the
Netherlands with team leader Francois Pelletier (Jeroen Krabbe), an experienced
surgeon who will have an affair with at least one of his female volunteers.

   Silvia's ruthless father will pay Pelletier $ 1 million if the doctor will
drop the tycoon's smitten daughter from the African expedition. Pelletier
rejects the bribe.

   Matthew and Silvia fall madly in love and plan to marry during their first
two months in a war-torn African region. A sudden crisis separates the couple,
forcing Silvia to take drastic action. Her decision will haunt her for 15 years.

   Matthew turns himself into a neurotic mess, blaming Silvia for his misery.
Emotional disorders block his ability to play classical piano music. He wallows
in masochistic self-pity.

   Pulling himself together, ever so slowly, Matthew resolves to become a
brilliant neurosurgeon. He develops a gene-therapy treatment for brain tumors.

   Matthew's life finally brightens when he reunites with longtime friend Evie
Webster Josephson (Tomei), a divorced cellist with two daughters. After 13 years
of casual couplings, Matthew is in love again. He marries Evie in 1995, and
they're very happy.

   Two years later, Silvia returns with an urgent request.

   Tomei gets top billing in "Only Love," but the Matthew-Silvia relationship
consumes most of the miniseries. Tomei disappears during most of Part 1.
Monday's conclusion finally establishes Evie as a vital force in the plodding
romance.

   Morrow never lets Matthew stop feeling sorry for himself, and May suffers
nobly as the mistreated and misunderstood Silvia.

GRAPHIC: Mathilda May (from left), Rob Morrow and Marisa Tomei star in the
melodramatic two-parter "Only Love," based on an Erich Segal novel.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1998


                             1983 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       May 7, 1998 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 003

LENGTH: 525 words

HEADLINE: Race to cure in high gear - War on cancer getting big boost

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   The war on cancer, which has languished since its launch by President Nixon
in 1971, is finally showing results.

   A few weeks ago, the medical world was abuzz over two drugs that may prevent
breast cancer. Now, the entire world seems to be talking about two new drugs
that have been shown to cure cancer in mice.

   "We're in a whole new age of research," gushed Dr. David Rosenthal, national
president of the American Cancer Society.

   But the drugs in question are only part of the story. Scientists say other
potential treatments are farther along in the pipeline and some, particularly
those based on genetic research, may offer the greatest hope down the line.

   "There has been an explosion of knowledge in basic cancer research," said Dr.
Waun K. Hung, a cancer specialist at the M.D. Anderson Cancer in Houston. "I
think we're going to make a huge impact by the year 2000."

   The new drugs being tested on mice by Dr. Judah Folkman at Children's
Hospital, angiostatin and endostatin, work to cut off the tumor's blood supply.

   But Folkman's angiogenesis inhibitors aren't due to be tested on humans until
next year, unless the National Cancer Institute bows to pressure.

   Several other treatments are already in human trials and more are on the way,
however.

   Some are angiogenesis inhibitors and work much like those that Folkman has
developed.

   Others are new types of chemotherapy that attack specific tumors or seek to
cause the tumor cells to kill themselves.

   Still others are genetic therapies that work to disable proteins made by
flawed genes - or tinker with the defective genes themselves.

   Hung said the idea will be to use all the weapons at once.

   He said Folkman's drugs "are very exciting, but we need something beyond
that. Ultimately, we have to figure out how to use all these things together,
all in combination."

   The first of the gene-based drugs, Herceptin, is expected to win federal
approval by year's end. The drug, which attacks a lethal form of breast cancer,
is nearing the end of its trials.

   Final results are due to be released May 17, but officials at Genentech say
some women on the drug remain alive and well several years after being told they
were terminal.

   Human testing has also begun on gene-based therapies that fight cancers of
the lung, colon and pancreas.

   Animal tests have shown the gene-based drugs have not only stalled the growth
of tumors but have killed them fully.

   A major target for several potential therapies is a gene called the EGF
receptor, a growth message relay switch that plays a central role in division
for all cells. Several companies are in various stages of human trials of
gene-based drugs that target the receptor.

   But Robert Weinberg, a cancer researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, said angiogenesis inhibitors, such as those developed by Folkman,
are the only ones that remain fundamentally different from all the others.

   "These drugs target the blood vessels that feed cancer cells and these
vessels come from normal tissue," he said. "All other kinds of cancer therapy
attack the cells that form the tumor. That's a big difference."


LOAD-DATE: May 07, 1998


                             1984 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 6, 1998, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 929 words

HEADLINE: Researcher tries to ease fervor on cancer;
Caution is urged over new drugs

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Hoping to calm runaway enthusiasm yesterday over a pair of experimental
cancer drugs from his laboratory, Dr. Judah Folkman canceled a public talk
planned for today and sought to emphasize both hope and caution about the drugs'
prospects.

   In his first public statements since a news report three days ago sent stock
prices soaring and desperate patients picking up the telephone, Folkman said the
drugs' dramatic eradication of tumors is "only in mice, and it's got a ways to
go to get into people, but there is hope to get there."

   Even if the drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, prove effective in humans,
they won't replace other treatments, said Folkman, a longtime researcher at
Harvard Medical School and Children's Hospital.

   The drugs, which won't be available for human trials for 12 to 18 months,
according to a company that has licensed development rights to them, have
eradicated large tumors in mice by destroying their blood supply. So far, they
also appear free of toxic side effects.

   Angiostatin and endostatin, discovered by Dr. Michael O'Reilly in Folkman's
lab, are naturally occurring proteins called angiogenesis inhibitors because
they block angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels that nourish tumors.
The delay before human trials can start is because the drugs cannot yet be made
in large quantities.

   "However they will be used, they will be added to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy and gene therapy and immunotherapy and vaccine therapy," said
Folkman. It is a misunderstanding to think they will emerge as stand-alone drugs
of unprecedented power, he said. "I don't see that at all."

   Folkman said he canceled a keynote talk he had agreed to give today at a
prostate cancer symposium in Boston, fearing a crush of photographers and TV
cameras.  He said he has refused to appear on television for some 30 years
because it focuses too much attention on a single individual and cuts short
scientific explanations.

   Although the dramatic preclinical results with angiostatin and endostatin
have been widely discussed for the past year and a half, a front-page feature
article about the research in The New York Times on Sunday spurred a media
maelstrom.  It appeared to many yesterday that the hottest spark was a quote
from Nobel laureate James Watson, the director of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
on Long Island, who predicted that Folkman's drugs "would cure cancer in two
years."

   The article launched a run on shares of EntreMed Inc., the Rockville, Md.,
biotech company that has licensed the rights to develop angiostatin and
endostatin. The stock, which had closed at $ 12 a share the previous Friday,
opened at $ 83 on Monday and closed at $ 51.81.  Yesterday it dropped more than
$ 8 to $ 43 1/8.

   EntreMed is partnering with Bristol Myers Squibb to develop angiostatin, and
is teaming up with the National Cancer Institute to produce endostatin.

   In interviews yesterday, cancer specialists bemoaned what is already being
viewed as the kind of public overreaction that has greeted past purported cancer
breakthroughs that failed to pan out.

   One scientist called Watson's prediction "crazy" and noted that the
co-discoverer of the structure of DNA has a history of intemperate statements.

   Another scientist, Dr.Bruce Chabner, a former NCI official who is chief
medical officer of Dana-Farber Partners Cancer Care in Boston, said, "Jim Watson
is not a person who takes care of patients. Unless you've treated patients with
cancer, it's hard to know what will work and even for those who do, it's hard to
predict what will work."

   Angiogenesis inhibitors like angiostatin and endostatin, Chabner said, "are a
great idea on paper" because they are so much more selective than current
chemotherapeutic drugs.

   Like other researchers, Chabner said cancer drugs that are effective and safe
in mice often fail in human treatment. "Animals tell you a lot, but they don't
predict infallibly what happens in man," said Chabner, who formerly headed the
cancer treatment division at the NCI.

   In one case, he said, an experimental cancer drug "looked totally benign in
mice, and the first patient who got it went aphasic lost speech and never talked
again."

   At the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine, senior staff scientist Robert
Evans said that despite the similarity of mice and humans in many genetic
traits, they are different in biochemical details. They metabolize drugs
differently, and a drug outcome in one strain of mouse may not be the same in
another, he said.  In addition, even when a drug at a given dosage appears safe
in a mouse, giving a proportionate but bigger dose to a human "immediately
changes things," he said.

   A notorious example is the drug interferon 2, which seemed to herald a new
era in treatment in the early 1980s. Though highly successful in mice, it causes
blood vessels to leak fluid in humans, with severe blood pressure drops and
other side effects.

   Angiostatin and endostatin are only two of the body's array of substances
that regulate new blood vessel growth - a process crucial to wound healing,
ovulation, menstruation and development of a fetus. Other angiogenesis
inhibitors are already in early human trials, but none that have the potency
exhibited by the angiostatin and endostatin.

   Chabner, the former NCI official, said that cancer patients should not pin
all their hopes on these drugs.  "There are a lot of other very good ideas out
there that are going into the clinic," he said. "If this one doesn't work, there
are other equally promising ones" under investigation.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE FILE PHOTO / Dr. Judah Folkman says two experimental
cancer drugs from his lab would supplement other treatments.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1998


                             1985 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                May 5, 1998, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1425 words

HEADLINE: Creating the 'perfect' human

BYLINE: By Jeremy Rifkin

BODY:


   NBC recently aired an adaptation of Aldous Huxley's classic dystopian novel
about a genetically engineered future society. When Huxley wrote Brave New World
in 1932, no one could have imagined that the scientific insights and
technological know-how would exist by the end of this century that could make
his vision real.

   Many leading molecular biologists and geneticists met a few weeks ago at the
University of California at Los Angeles to discuss the prospect of making
genetic changes in the human "germ line" -- sperm and eggs -- that would be
passed on to future generations. The ability to alter genes before conception
raises the possibility that we might be able to re-engineer our genetic
blueprints and redirect the course of our biological evolution.

   Curiously absent from the discussion was any mention of the word "eugenics."
That term -- conceived in the 19th century by Sir Francis Galton, Charles
Darwin's cousin -- generally is divided along two lines. Negative eugenics
involves the systematic elimination of so-called undesirable biological traits.
Positive eugenics is concerned with the use of selective breeding to "improve"
the characteristics of an organism or species.

   Because genetic-engineering technologies are by their nature eugenics tools,
no thoughtful discussion of this revolution can occur without raising eugenics
issues. Some might take offense at the idea that eugenics is built into the new
technology. They prefer to equate eugenics with the Nazi experience. But the new
eugenics bears little resemblance to the shrill cries of racial purity that
culminated in the Holocaust. The old eugenics was motivated by fear and hate;
the new eugenics is spurred by market forces and consumer desire. Genetic
engineering is coming to us not as a sinister plot, but rather as a social and
economic boon.

   The consequences of programming genetic changes into the human germ line are
largely unpredictable and unknowable. Nonetheless, a growing number of molecular
biologists, medical practitioners and pharmaceutical companies are eager to take
the gamble, convinced that controlling our evolutionary destiny is humankind's
next great social frontier. Their arguments are couched in terms of personal
health, individual choice and collective responsibility for future generations.

   Proponents of human genetic engineering argue that it would be cruel and
irresponsible not to use this powerful new technology to eliminate serious
"genetic disorders." Is it wrong, ask the molecular biologists, to want
healthier babies? The problem with this argument is that once we begin repairing
"defects" in the human germ line, there is no logical place to stop.

   If diabetes, sickle-cell anemia and cancer are to be prevented by altering
the genetic codes of individuals, why not proceed to other less serious
"disorders" such as color blindness, dyslexia, obesity and short stature? In the
end, why would we ever say no to any alteration that might enhance the
well-being of our offspring?

   According to a 1992 Harris poll, 43 percent of Americans "would approve using
gene therapy to improve babies' physical characteristics." With Americans
spending billions on cosmetic surgery to improve their looks and on psychotropic
drugs to alter their moods, the use of genetic therapies to enhance unborn
children hardly seems far-fetched.

   Many advocates of germ-line intervention already see the potential benefits.
They contend that the current debate over corrective measures to address serious
illnesses is too limited and urge a more expansive discussion to include the
advantage of enhancement therapy as well. The Economist magazine has suggested,
in an editorial, that society needs to move beyond moralistic hand-wringing and
embrace the new commercial eugenics opportunities that soon will become
available.

   The Economist editors asked, "What of genes that might make a good body
better, rather than make a bad one good? Should people be able to retrofit
themselves with extra neuro-transmitters, to enhance various mental powers? Or
to change the color of their skin? Or to help them run faster, or lift heavier
weights?"

   The Economist editorial board made clear that its own biases lay firmly with
the marketplace. The new commercial eugenics, it argued, is about ensuring
greater consumer freedom so that individuals can make of themselves and their
heirs whatever they choose. The editorial concluded with a ringing endorsement
of the idea.

   While the notion of consumer choice would appear benign, the very idea of
eliminating so-called genetic defects raises the troubling question of what is
meant by the term "defective." Ethicist Daniel Callahan, of the Hastings Center,
penetrates to the core of the issue when he observes that "behind the human
horror at genetic defectiveness lurks . . . an image of the perfect human being.
The very language of 'defect,' 'abnormality,' 'disease' and 'risk' presupposes
such an image, a kind of prototype of perfection."

   Do we then come to see ourselves as miswired from the get-go, riddled with
errors in our genetic code? If that is the case, against what ideal norm are we
to be measured? If every human being is made up of varying degrees of error,
then we search in vain for the norm. What makes the new language of molecular
biology so subtly chilling is that it risks creating a new archetype, a
flawless, errorless, perfect being to which to aspire -- a new man and woman
without the warts and wrinkles, vulnerabilities and frailties that have defined
us from the beginning of our existence. How tolerant is society likely to be of
those whose "errors" go uncorrected? Will we empathize with those who are less
than "perfect," or will we see them as "mistakes" that could have been avoided
with proper engineering?

   Some genetic engineers believe that a future genetocracy is all but
inevitable. Molecular biologist Lee Silver of Princeton University writes about
a not-too-distant future of two biological classes, which he refers to as the
"Gen Rich" and "Naturals." The Gen Rich -- perhaps 10 percent of the population
-- include businessmen, musicians, artists, athletes and intellectuals who are
society's elite. They have all been enhanced with specific synthetic genes that
allow them to succeed in their fields in ways not conceivable among those born
of nature's lottery.

   While Silver acknowledges that the increasing polarization of society into
Gen Rich and Natural classes might be unfair, he points out that wealthy parents
always have been able to provide advantages for their children. "Anyone who
accepts the right of affluent parents to provide their children with an
expensive private school education cannot use unfairness as a reason for
rejecting the use of reprogenetic technologies," argued Silver.

   Like many of his colleagues, Silver is quick to defend the new technologies:
"In a society that values human freedom above all else, it is hard to find any
legitimate basis for restricting the use of reprogenetics."

   The new genetic-engineering technologies raise one of the most troubling
political questions in human history: To whom would we entrust the authority to
decide what is a good gene and what is a bad gene? The federal government?
Corporations? The scientific community? Few of us, I suspect, could point
confidently to any institution or group of individuals. If, however, we were
asked whether we would sanction new bio-engineered products, many of us would
not hesitate to add our support.

   We appear caught between our instinctive distrust of these institutional
forces and our desire to increase our personal choices in the biological
marketplace. Many of us will be eager to take advantage of the new gene
therapies -- both for ourselves and our offspring -- if they deliver on their
promise to enhance our physical, emotional and mental health. Part of the
essence of being truly human is the desire to alleviate suffering and enhance
human potential.

   The problem is that biotechnology has a distinct beginning but no clear end.
In the decades to come, we might well barter ourselves away, a gene at a time,
in exchange for some measure of temporary well-being. In the long run, the
personal and collective security we have fought so hard to preserve may well be
irreversibly compromised in our pursuit of engineered perfection.

   Rifkin is the author of The Biotech Century: Harnessing the Gene and Remaking
the World (Tarcher/Putnam, 1998). This essay first appeared in the Washington
Post.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1998


                             1986 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         MAY 5, 1998 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: CANCER DRUGS PRESENT HOPE FOR INVESTORS AS WELL AS PATIENTS / ENTREMED
SHARES SKYROCKETED YESTERDAY. IT SEEKS TO TEST ON HUMANS.

BYLINE: Michael Klein, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER, The Associated Press contributed
to this article.

BODY:

   Two kinds of speculators came out yesterday:

   Cancer patients and their families, eager to bet on a shred of promising news
in the war against cancer.

   And stock-market players, itching to capitalize on the company that plans to
make two drugs that a respected researcher says eradicate all kinds of cancers
in lab mice and keep them from returning.

   In the short term, it was the stock-market players who emerged on top. Shares
of Entremed, a small Maryland pharmaceutical company that plans to make the
drugs, shot up more than fourfold yesterday on news of the research.

   Entremed said it planned to ask the Food and Drug Administration to begin
testing one of the drugs - endostatin - on humans in 12 to 18 months. If the FDA
agrees, researchers then will have to prove that the drug is safe and effective
- a process of careful testing that can take years. The second Entremed drug,
angiostatin, does not yet have a timetable for clinical trials.

   Drugs typically have a one-in-four to one-in-five chance of making it to
market.

   Oncologists, researchers and the American Cancer Society expressed optimism
about the new therapy, but urged caution. Mindful of the public's excitement
about so-called miracle drugs, the scientists said an effective treatment for
cancer was still years off. They also were loath to use the word cure in
describing the therapy, though some mentioned it in the same sentence as the
Salk polio vaccine and penicillin, two drugs that changed the course of
20th-century medicine.

   Cancer is the second-leading killer of Americans, behind heart disease,
leading to 169 of every 100,000 deaths in 1995.

   Researchers also pointed out that while angiostatin and endostatin shrank
tumors in mice by cutting off the tumors' blood supply, there was no guarantee
that the drug combination would work on humans.

   In the lab mice studied by researcher Judah Folkman of Children's Hospital in
Boston, angiostatin stopped the development of blood vessels that tumors need to
grow. Endostatin seems to inhibit new tumors from developing.

   "The data are very impressive and compelling," said James Pluda, an
oncologist at the National Cancer Institute in Maryland. "But it is still mouse
data. We need clinical data in humans before we can anoint them as miracle
drugs."

   The road to a cure for cancer is littered with broken dreams, he said.

   Meanwhile, the public had questions. Phones were ringing constantly yesterday
at the National Cancer Institute's Cancer Information Service, located
regionally at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Northeast Philadelphia.

   Forty-nine callers got through between 11 a.m. and 2 p.m. alone. For many,
the questions were matters of life or death. Could a loved one be placed on the
list when human testing began? If a cancer patient were involved in a trial,
could he or she be moved into the group testing the new drugs?

   "People are still looking for options, and they want to keep ahead of the
information out there," said Linda Fleisher, director of the regional service,
which handles 25,000 calls a year from the public in New Jersey, Delaware and
Eastern Pennsylvania.

   Robert J. Mayer of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston worried about
the effect of enthusiasm on cancer patients. They "are the losers when all of
this is dangled in front of them, and it turns out to be nothing," said Mayer,
who also is president of the American Society for Clinical Oncology.

   Louis Weiner, chairman of medical oncology at Fox Chase, recalled a list of
cancer drugs that have been hyped over the years, including gene therapy,
interleukin-2, interferon and monoclonal antibodies. "Almost invariably, the
helium balloon of expectations was deflated, but down the road for each of them,
we found ways to use these agents effectively," said Weiner. "Were they a home
run [initially]? No, but people were mighty happy they were available."

   Weiner called Folkman's concept of starving tumors "elegant. . . . The data
sound provocative, and it is certainly cause for enthusiasm. But the key word is
guarded, as it should be for any lab development."

   Critics wondered if the new drugs could be tolerated in humans.
Interleukin-2, for example, which mice could tolerate in large doses, turned out
to be toxic in people and has to be used sparingly. And some raised the idea
that the body's ability to heal wounds might be impaired by endostatin and
angiostatin, which stop new blood-vessel growth.

   Entremed's stock price yesterday finished more than four times higher than
Friday's close - a major boon to a company that had sales of $4.8 million last
year and hasn't shown a profit since it was founded in 1991. The stock, which
had traded at $12 on Friday, hit $85 at one point Monday and closed at $51.813.

   Wall Street analysts heard nothing new Monday, but smaller investors
apparently discovered the company in news reports, said Kurt Funderburg, an
analyst with Ferris Baker Watts in Baltimore.

   Funderburg, who suggests that long-term investors hold onto the stock but
advises short-term stockholders to collect now, said: "There's hype and there's
reality. The hype is: They've got a cure for cancer and it'll be on the market
soon. The reality is: We've got a very promising company that's not going to
make money for several years."

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1987 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                      May 04, 1998, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 216 words

HEADLINE: Fitness folk exercise their right to raise money to battle AIDS

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER

BODY:

   About 300 Houstonians perspired, jumped, stomped and hopped through eight
hours of exercises this weekend to raise money for HIV/AIDS research.

   On Saturday and Sunday, fitness-minded folk partook in everything from
aerobics to yoga at the Workout for Hope held during the Sports Health and
Fitness Expo '98.

   "This is an event that brings the whole Houston fitness community together,"
said Beryt Nisenson, one of the event's organizers.

   During the event, held at the George R. Brown Convention Center, various
aerobics instructors and athletes from around the city led exercisers in various
routines. It provided an opportunity for the instructors to "strut their stuff,"
Nisenson said.

   The event raised about $ 45,000 for the City of Hope National Medical Center
and Beckman Research Institute.

   The two research facilities are working to develop a gene therapy designed to
cure AIDS.

   One of the participants was Ernest Perez, who has AIDS. Perez first learned
he had been infected with HIV 12 years ago and said he began exercising then.

   A leading fund-raiser for the Workout for Hope event, Perez became an
aerobics instructor after contracting HIV and recently opened his own gym. To
him, the event means a chance for hope.

   "I believe this research can really work," he said.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Veronica Real and Maria Uribe work out at the George R. Brown
Convention Center; Steve Ueckert / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1998


                             1988 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                       May 3, 1998, Sunday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: READER; Pg. 01C

LENGTH: 1032 words

SERIES: Metro Final

HEADLINE: Now he's really Superman;
Today, Christopher Reeve proves his courage from a wheelchair. Vowing that
'nothing is impossible,' he intends to walk again

BYLINE: Carolyn Nizzi Warmbold

BODY:


   We think of him as Superman, the comic-book myth come to life on the big
screen, performing heroics to the fanfare of John Williams' music score. In the
1978 film, we cheered as he nabbed arch-villain Lex Luthor, saved the California
coast from extinction, and restored Lois Lane to life by turning the earth back
on its axis.

   But reality, as actor Christopher Reeve was cruelly reminded on Memorial Day
weekend 1995, is not a movie script in which events are subject to reversal. In
his literate, moving memoir "Still Me" (Random House), published this week,
Reeve recounts the devastation of the riding accident that left him a
ventilator-dependent quadriplegic. And he intends to walk by his 50th birthday,
five years away.

   On that fateful Saturday, Reeve (who once joked he had to be careful because
"I didn't want to read a headline in the New York Post like 'Superman Hit by
Bus'") had twice walked the cross-country course at Culpeper, Va., reviewing
every jump. He was concerned about how his horse, Buck, would take No. 16, the
water jump. "I certainly wasn't worried about the third fence on the course...It
was only about three feet three," he writes. Back at the stable, he told a
friend he was looking forward to a good ride. The friend wished him luck.

   Reeve remembers nothing after that, not the first two successful jumps, and
not the third, when Buck stopped short. Reeve flipped "head first, six feet,
four inches and 215 pounds of me straight down on the rail." If he had landed a
fraction to the left, a radiologist told him, he might have been killed; a
fraction to the right, he might have walked within weeks. Instead, with his
first and second vetebrae broken, Reeve was paralyzed, unable to breathe on his
own. He awoke days later in intensive care at the University of Virginia Medical
Center, needing surgery to reattach his skull to his body.

   His mother, learning he was immobile with only a slim chance of survival,
urged doctors to pull the plug. Reeve himself wondered, "Why not die and save
everyone a lot of trouble?" His wife, Dana, told him it was his decision, but
that she was with him for the long haul: "You're still you. And I love you."
Those words, he writes, saved his life.

   Most poignant is Reeve's detailed chronicling of the psychological shock of
suddenly losing the ability to walk, act, sail, fly a plane or feed himself.
Even after successful surgery, he was haunted by the thought that he had not
only ruined his life, but would burden Dana and their son, Will, and his two
other children by Gae Exton, Matthew and Alexandra.  Why can't there be an
appeal? he wondered. "Why isn't there a higher authority you can go to and say,
'Wait a minute, you didn't mean for this to happen to me.'"

   Over the course of his book, Reeve struggles mightily to come to terms with
his condition, beginning at the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation in West
Orange, N.J.  Gradually, he learned to breathe 90 minutes on his own and to use
a special wheel chair. He began to appear in public, most memorably at the 1996
Academy Awards: "It dawned on me that I had just agreed to appear live in front
of two billion people, in a wheelchair, breathing on a ventilator, and with no
way of knowing whether my body would remain still during my five to seven
minutes onstage."

   Not only did the appearance go off without a spasm, not only did he receive a
standing ovation, but in entering Hollywood hotels by the back way he met cooks,
waiters, maids, and maintenance crews. Some said they prayed for him; others
looked him "right in the eye and said, 'We love you, Superman. You're our
hero.'"

   Reeve is doing superheroic work to bring visibility to the needs of people
with spinal cord injuries. He fights insurance battles, is part of a political
effort to raise the lifetime insurance cap from $ 1 million to $ 10 million,
serves on the board of the American Paralysis Association, and has formed the
Christopher Reeve Foundation, which raises funds for research leading to the
treatment and cure of spinal cord injury paralysis. He travels more than most
high-level quadriplegics (although his Atlanta Paralympic visit is not
mentioned). His marriage to Dana is blossoming, he writes, and he is proud to
have directed the Emmy-nominated cable film "In the Gloaming" from his wheel
chair.

   But merely getting through an ordinary day is demanding: It can take three
hours for aides to get him going in the morning, two hours to prepare him for
bed at night. He has been hospitalized 11 times for quadriplegic-related
illnesses, some life-threatening.

   And he is not at peace with his paralysis. "It's still very difficult to
accept the turn my life has taken, simply because of one unlucky moment," he
writes. The book is a looking-back, too, at his growing up, at his mostly
successful career. "How do you survive in the moment when it's bleak or painful
and the past seems so seductive?"

   So Reeve looks ahead. He has studied spinal cord research --- the
regeneration of nerves within the spinal cord, gene therapy, fetal cell
transplants and remylenation --- being done by scientists at the Miami Project
to Cure Paralysis, Wise Young at Rutgers, Lars Olson in Sweden and Martin Schwab
in Zurich. He is convinced that the push for a cure is "based on reality and not
on unfounded optimism" and that an all-out, international attack would produce
dramatic results. At a dinner two years ago, he publicly "declared my intention
to walk by my fiftieth birthday," and then went to work to raise money for
research for all spinal cord injured.

   Just as Superman believed in the American Way, so does Reeve cite historic
support for his confidence. Didn't Lindbergh fly the Atlantic? Didn't America
fulfill JFK's promise that a man would land on the moon? In his speech to the
Democratic National Convention in 1996, Reeve described a poster in his rehab
room: A picture of the space shuttle blasting off, autographed by NASA
astronauts. At the top, it says: "We've found nothing is impossible." That, and
Chris Craft's famous line from "Apollo 13" --- "Failure is not an option" ---
are the new tenets by which Christopher Reeve lives.

GRAPHIC: Photo :
 Christopher Reeve in a wheelchair looking over a green countryside.
 Photo :
 Christopher Reeve at the 1996 Oscars.
 Photo :
 Christopher Reeve as "Superman."
 Graphic :
 The Man of Steel remembers
 "At an especially bleak moment, the door flew open and in hurried a
 squat fellow with a blue scrub hat and a yellow surgical gown and
 glasses, speaking in a Russian accent. He announced that he was my
 proctologist, and that he had to examine me immediately. My first
 reaction was that either I was on way too many drugs or I was in fact
 brain-damaged. But it was Robin Williams. . . . And for the first time
 since the accident, I laughed."
 About auditioning for a play starring Katharine Hepburn in 1975:
 "Before I began, I called out into the darkness (of the theater where
 Hepburn was seated), 'Miss Hepburn, I would like to bring you greetings
 from my grandmother Beatrice Lamb; I believe you were classmates at Bryn
 Mawr.' There was a long pause. Then out of the darkness came the reply,
 'Oh, Bea. I never could stand her.' "
 On Superman: "The role is larger than any particular actor and should
 be reinterpreted from generation to generation. As Kirk Alyn was right
 for the '40s and George Reeves was right for the '50s, I was the
 temporary custodian of this icon of American pop culture in the '70s and
 '80s. Now rumor has it that Nicolas Cage will be the Superman of the
 late '90s."

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1998


                             1989 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                   May 3, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2185 words

HEADLINE: HOPE IN THE LAB: A special report.;
A Cautious Awe Greets Drugs That Eradicate Tumors in Mice

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Within a year, if all goes well, the first cancer patient will be injected
with two new drugs that can eradicate any type of cancer, with no obvious side
effects and no drug resistance -- in mice.

   Some cancer researchers say the drugs are the most exciting treatment that
they have ever seen. But then they temper their enthusiasm with caution, noting
that the history of cancer treatments is full of high expectations followed by
dashed hopes when drugs with remarkable effects in animals are tested in people.

    Still, the National Cancer Institute has made the drugs its top priority,
said Dr. Richard D. Klausner, the director. Dr. Klausner called them "the single
most exciting thing on the horizon" for the treatment of cancer.

   "I am putting nothing on higher priority than getting this into clinical
trials," Dr. Klausner said. The mouse studies are "remarkable and wonderful," he
said, and "very compelling." But he pointed out that the studies were in mice
and so, when it comes to humans, he said he wanted to emphasize "the if's."

   The new drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, work by interfering with the blood
supply tumors need. Given together, they make tumors disappear and not return.

   Dr. James M. Pluda, who is directing the cancer institute's planned tests of
the drugs in patients, said he and others at the institute were "electrified"
when they heard the drug's discoverer deliver a lecture about the newest
results. "People were almost overwhelmed," Dr. Pluda said. "The data were
remarkable."

   Although the discovery of the drugs, and some of their effects, have been
reported over the past few years, Dr. Pluda said that "if people understood how
many steps ahead" the research was compared to what had been published, "they'd
be even more in awe."

   But Dr. Jerome Groopman, a cancer researcher at the Harvard Medical School,
was wary. "We are all driven by hope," Dr. Groopman said. "But a sober scientist
waits for the data." And until the drugs are given to humans, he said, the
crucial data simply do not exist.

   So far, the drugs are the only ones ever tested that can seemingly eradicate
all tumors in mice, even gigantic ones, equivalent to a two-pound growth in a
person. The best that other cancer drugs have done is slow the growth of these
large tumors.  Mice are the traditional test animals in cancer research.

   But even the drugs' discoverer, Dr. Judah Folkman, a cancer researcher at
Children's Hospital in Boston, is cautious about the drugs' promise. Until
patients take them, he said, it is dangerous to make predictions. All he knows,
Dr. Folkman said, is that "if you have cancer and you are a mouse, we can take
good care of you."

   Other scientists are not so restrained. "Judah is going to cure cancer in two
years," said Dr. James D. Watson, a Nobel laureate who directs the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, a cancer research center on Long Island. Dr. Watson said Dr.
Folkman would be remembered along with scientists like Charles Darwin as someone
who permanently altered civilization.

   The long trail to the discovery of the new drugs began more than 30 years ago
when Dr. Folkman became obsessed by what many saw as a quixotic notion: that
cancers cannot grow beyond the size of a pinhead unless they have their own
blood supply. If he could block a tumor's blood supply, he reasoned, the tumor
should shrink to a minuscule size.

   The first major break in the efforts came a decade ago when Dr. Folkman and
his collaborators found drugs that did what he envisioned. He called them
anti-angiogenesis drugs because they stopped the process of developing new blood
vessels, or angiogenesis. They slow tumor growth in animals but do not eradicate
the tumors. Early results in patients indicate that the drugs may slow human
cancers. Dozens of companies are developing such drugs.

   The results with these weaker drugs were "a proof of principle," said Dr.
Bart Chernow, a professor of medicine and dean for research and technology at
the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Dr. Chernow is a founder of
Entremed, a company in Rockville, Md., that was formed to make and market
angiostatin, endostatin and other weaker drugs that can slow cancer growth.

   But the real breakthrough -- and the two new drugs -- came from Dr. Folkman's
efforts to understand a peculiar phenomenon that has been known to cancer
surgeons for 100 years: sometimes a patient will have a single tumor, with no
evidence whatsoever of metastases, the satellite cancers that can pepper a
patient's body. A doctor will remove the tumor and all will seem fine. But then,
a few months later, a whole series of metastases will appear, grow, and kill the
patient.

   In 1989, Dr. Folkman proposed a reason for the effect, which he wrote on a
large white board in a room where his laboratory group had its weekly seminars.
Is it possible, he asked, that a tumor could be making both stimulators and
inhibitors of blood vessel growth? If so, the inhibitors might travel through
the bloodstream, squelching metastases. When the large tumor was removed, it
would no longer be a source of inhibitors, allowing the tiny metastases to
proliferate.

   Dr. Folkman tried to get one of his doctoral or post-doctoral students to
work on that idea. "Each Friday, at our meeting," he said "I would say, 'Here's
a great experiment.' But no one wanted to work on it." It seemed too wild, Dr.
Folkman said, too unlikely to result in findings that would end up in a
scientific journal, a major goal of young scientists.

Undertaking The Big Challenge

   Then, in 1991, a post-doctoral student, Dr. Michael O'Reilly, decided to take
on the challenge. Dr. O'Reilly focused on a particularly deadly mouse cancer
that grows to the equivalent of a two-pound tumor in a person.

   As long as mice had the large tumor, they had no signs of metastases. But
five days after the tumors were surgically removed, metastases invariably sprang
up in the animals' lungs. Within 15 days, the animals would be dead, their lungs
packed with large red tumors, like grapes.

   Eventually, after arduous work in collaboration with chemists, Dr. O'Reilly
discovered that the large tumors made a substance that stymied the growth of
other tumors. This substance showed up in the animals' urine, but was present in
such minute quantities that Dr. O'Reilly had to collect 10 quarts of mouse urine
to obtain 30-thousandth of an ounce of the mysterious substance. It turned out
to be a piece of a larger and very common protein, plasminogen, that the body
uses in blood clotting. Dr. Folkman named the new substance angiostatin.

   Apparently, cells can use the plasminogen gene for two purposes: they can use
it at its full length to make plasminogen, or they can use just a piece of it
and make angiostatin.  Plasminogen does nothing to stop tumor growth. The
question was, would angiostatin?

   Dr. Folkman and Dr. O'Reilly discovered that angiostatin also appears, in
minute quantities, in human blood. Using outdated human blood discarded by the
Red Cross, they extracted enough angiostatin to treat mice. Then they began
their experiment.

   They had 20 mice with large tumors on their backs. The investigators removed
the tumors and then injected half of the mice with angiostatin each day and the
others with salt water, as a comparison.

   After 15 days, the researchers killed the mice and cut them open. As more
than a dozen scientists gathered around a table in the laboratory, Dr. O'Reilly
opened the first mouse. It had huge tumors filling its lungs.  Then Dr. Folkman
checked a notebook to see what the animal had received: salt water. They looked
at the next mouse. No tumors. Dr. Folkman checked to see the treatment:
angiostatin. And so it went. All 10 of the mice that had been injected with
angiostatin were free of cancer. All 10 of those that had been received salt
water had huge new tumors.

A Jubilant Celebration And a Second Discovery

   The room was buzzing, the scientists were grinning. Dr. Folkman said.
Everyone in the room knew what the results meant, and they were elated. They
responded, he said, like men at a football game. "Everyone clapped O'Reilly on
the back," Dr. Folkman said.

   Then the researchers found a second protein fragment, secreted by tumors,
that also squelches metastases, Dr. Folkman said. It was a piece of a different
protein, collagen 18, that is in all blood vessels but by itself has no effect
on cancer. They named the collagen fragment endostatin.

   "It was even more potent than angiostatin," Dr. Folkman said. If he gave it
to a mouse with a huge tumor, he said, the equivalent of one weighing a pound
and a half in a human, endostatin would shrink the cancer down to a microscopic
size.

   Moreover, tumors never became resistant to endostatin, said Dr. Folkman, who
added that he had given the drug to mice with large tumors and they had shrunk
to almost nothing. He stopped the drug, he said, and the tumors grew back. Then
he gave the drug continuously for the rest of the animals' lives. The tumors
remained small and harmless and the animals remained healthy.

   Dr. Robert S. Kerbel, a cancer researcher at Sunnybrook Health Science Center
in Toronto, said he was not surprised that the cancers never became resistant to
endostatin. Tumors become resistant to chemotherapy drugs, Dr. Kerbel said,
because cancer cells constantly reshuffle their genetic information. The result,
he said, is that the tumors spin off mutant cells that resist the drugs and,
ultimately, the tumors grow back, invulnerable.

   But, Dr. Kerbel said, angiostatin and endostatin do not act on tumors.
Instead, they act on normal blood vessels that feed tumors. And normal cells, he
said, do not reshuffle their genes and so do not develop drug resistance. That
is why chemotherapy drugs continue to devastate normal cells -- causing bone
marrow suppression, loss of hair, nausea and vomiting -- even when the cancer
cells have grown impervious to their effects, Dr. Kerbel said.

Drug Combination Knocks Out Tumors

   Then Dr. Folkman discovered that he could actually obliterate tumors in mice
with his new drugs. He gave endostatin and angiostatin together, treating mice
for 25 days. To his surprise, Dr. Folkman said, "there was no tumor left -- we
couldn't even find it with a microscope." The tumors, he said, "were
eradicated."

   And the drugs seem to have no side effects at any stage of life, at least in
mice, something that Dr. Folkman said is hard for researchers to believe. But,
he said, he had given mice up to four times the doses needed to eliminate cancer
and could not find any adverse effects. These two human proteins may be, he
said, "exquisitely aimed -- we do not know why -- at cancer."

   In contrast, Dr. Folkman said, mice become very ill when they receive
commonly used chemotherapy -- their hair falls out, they bleed, they refuse to
eat.

   For the past four years, Dr. Folkman said, he and his colleagues have found
that all tumors responded to the drugs in the same way. Even leukemia, a blood
tumor, responds, he said, because it turns out that leukemia needs to form new
blood vessels in the bone marrow to grow.  Leukemia tumors grow on these blood
vessels, "like berries on a bush," Dr. Folkman said, shedding cancer cells into
the blood.

   But Dr. Folkman is the first to urge caution in leaping to conclusions about
what might happen when patients try the drugs. "Going from mice to people is a
big jump, with lots of failures," he said.

   Hopes were high for chemotherapy drugs that worked well in mice but turned
out to be less successful in people. Therapies that used the immune system to
rid the body of cancer also worked in mice but were disappointing when they were
tried in people. Gene therapy treats mouse cancer, but has had limited success
in people.

   From bitter experience, most cancer researchers have learned to be leery of
what one called "that four letter word" -- cure.

   Meanwhile, Entremed is working as fast as it can to produce angiostatin and
endostatin for studies in humans. Dr. John Holaday, Entremed's president and
chief executive, said his company was working with the Bristol-Myers Squibb
Company to develop angiostatin and had not yet decided on a corporate partner to
develop endostatin. The drugs are being made in genetically engineered yeast
growing in 20-gallon vats.

   Dr. Pluda, of the cancer institute, said the first patients to get the drugs
would have cancers that were growing quickly and were essentially untreatable.
The institute will start by giving the drugs separately by the end of the year,
he said, then hopes to combine them.

   Already, Dr. Folkman said, he gets hundreds of calls a day from cancer
patients, pleading for the drugs.

   Dr. Folkman, in an interview on Friday, said one call had come from an old
friend from medical school with prostate cancer that had spread to his bones.

   "He's terrified," Dr. Folkman said. But there were no strings Dr. Folkman
could pull. He said he had to tell his friend what he told all the other
callers: "You can't get it because it isn't being made."

CORRECTION-DATE: May 8, 1998, Friday

CORRECTION:

   A front-page article on Sunday about two promising new anti-cancer drugs
included an imprecise paraphrase of a comment by Dr. Richard D. Klausner,
director of the National Cancer Institute. As noted in the next paragraph, he
said he was "putting nothing on a higher priority" than clinical trials of the
new drugs with patients. He did not say the drugs were his highest priority.

   The article also misstated the title of Dr. James D. Watson at the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory. He is its president, not its director.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Judah Folkman is cautious about his cancer-drug discovery.
(Children's World)(pg. 34)

Diagram: "IN THE WORKS: Hope for a Breakthrough"
Drugs called angiostatin and endostatin occur naturally in small quantities in
the human body and work by interfering with the blood vessels that tumors need
to survive and grow. When tested together in mice, the drugs made tumors
disappear and not return.

Mice are injected with cancer
Cancer grows into large tumors on the back.

Mice injected with salt water -- In this group, cancer continues to grow.

Mice injected with either endostatin or angiostatin -- Cancer shrinks to almost
nothing, but when treatment stops, the cancer may return.

Mice injected with both endostatin and angiostatin -- After several weeks of
injections, the cancer shrinks to nothing and does not recur.

(Sources: Dr. Michael O'Reilly, Dr. Judah Folkman, Dr. Thomas Boehm and Dr.
Timothy Browder)(pg. 34)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1998


                             1990 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           May 3, 1998 Sunday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1917 words

HEADLINE: CANCER DRUGS: A MIX OF HOPE AND DOUBT;
MICE ARE 'CURED'; HUMAN TESTS NEXT

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA 1998, N.Y. Times News Service

BODY:

   Within a year, if all goes well, the first cancer patient will be injected
with two new drugs that can eradicate any type of cancer, with no obvious side
effects and no drug resistance - in mice.

   Some cancer researchers say the drugs are the most exciting treatment they
have ever seen. But then they temper their enthusiasm with caution, noting that
the history of cancer treatments is full of high expectations followed by dashed
hopes when drugs with remarkable effects in animals are tested in people.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute has made the drugs their top priority,
said Dr. Richard Klausner, the director. Klausner called them "the single most
exciting thing on the horizon" for cancer treatment.

   "I am putting nothing on higher priority than getting this into clinical
trials," Klausner said. The mouse studies are "remarkable and wonderful," he
said, and "very compelling." But he pointed out that the studies were in mice
and so he wants to emphasize "the if's" in humans.

   The new drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, work by interfering with the blood
supply tumors need. Given together, they make tumors disappear and not return.

   Dr. James Pluda, who will direct tests of the drugs in patients, said he and
others at the institute were electrified when they heard the drug's discoverer
deliver a lecture about the newest results. "People were almost overwhelmed,"
Pluda said. "The data were remarkable."

   Although the discovery of the drugs and some of their effects have been
reported over the past few years, Pluda said that "if people understood how many
steps ahead" the research was compared to what had been published, "they'd be
even more in awe."

   But Dr. Jerome Groopman, a cancer researcher at the Harvard Medical School,
was wary. "We are all driven by hope," Groopman said. "But a sober scientist
waits for the data." And until the drugs are given to humans, he said, the
crucial data simply do not exist.

   So far, the drugs are the only ones ever tested that can seemingly eradicate
all tumors in mice, even gigantic ones, equivalent to a two-pound growth in a
person. The best that other cancer drugs have done is slow the growth of these
large tumors. Mice are the traditional test animals in cancer research.

   But even the drugs' discoverer, Dr. Judah Folkman, a cancer researcher at
Children's Hospital in Boston, is cautious about the drugs' promise. Until
patients take them, he said, it is dangerous to make predictions. All he knows
for sure, Folkman said, is that "if you have cancer and you are a mouse, we can
take good care of you."

   Other scientists are not so restrained. "Judah is going to cure cancer in two
years," said Dr. James Watson, a Nobel laureate who directs the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, a cancer research center on Long Island. Watson said Folkman
would be remembered along with scientists such as Darwin as someone who altered
civilization.

   The long trail to the discovery of the new drugs began more than 30 years ago
when Folkman became obsessed by what many saw as a quixotic notion: that cancers
cannot grow beyond the size of a pinhead unless they have their own blood
supply. If he could block a tumor's blood supply, he reasoned, the tumor should
shrink to a minuscule size.

   The first major break in the efforts came a decade ago when Folkman and his
collaborators found drugs that did what he envisioned. He called them
anti-angiogenesis drugs because they stopped the development of blood vessels,
or angiogenesis. They slow tumor growth in animals but do not eradicate the
tumors. Early results in patients indicate that the drugs may slow human
cancers, too. Dozens of companies are now developing such drugs.

   The results with these weaker drugs were "a proof of principle," said Dr.
Bart Chernow, a professor of medicine and dean for research and technology at
the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Chernow is a founder of
Entremed, a company in Rockville, Md., that was formed to make and market
angiostatin and endostatin as well as some of the weaker drugs that can slow
cancer growth.

   But the real breakthrough, and the two new drugs, came from Folkman's efforts
to understand a peculiar phenomenon that has been known to cancer surgeons for
100 years: sometimes a patient will have a single tumor, with no evidence
whatsoever of metastases - the satellite cancers that can pepper a patient's
body. A doctor will remove the tumor and all will seem fine. But then, a few
months later, a whole series of metastases will appear, grow and kill the
patient.

   In 1989, Folkman proposed a reason for the effect, which he wrote on a large
white board in a room where his laboratory group had its weekly seminars. Is it
possible, he asked, that a tumor could be making both stimulators and inhibitors
of blood vessel growth? If so, the inhibitors might travel through the
bloodstream, squelching metastases. When the large tumor was removed, it would
no longer be a source of inhibitors, allowing the tiny metastases to
proliferate.

   Folkman tried to get one of his doctoral or post-doctoral students to work on
that idea. "Each Friday, at our meeting," he said "I would say, 'Here's a great
experiment.' But no one wanted to work on it." It seemed too wild, Folkman said,
too unlikely to result in findings that would end up in a scientific journal, a
major goal of young scientists.

   Then, in 1991, a post-doctoral student, Michael O'Reilly, decided to take on
the challenge. O'Reilly focused on a particularly deadly mouse cancer that grows
to the equivalent of a two-pound tumor in a person.

   As long as mice had the large tumor, they had no signs of metastases. But
five days after the tumors were removed, metastases invariably sprang up in the
animals' lungs. Within 15 days, the animals would be dead, their lungs packed
with large red tumors, like grapes.

   Eventually, after arduous work in collaboration with chemists, O'Reilly
discovered that the large tumors made a substance that stymied the growth of
other tumors. This substance showed up in the animals' urine but was present in
such minute quantities that O'Reilly had to collect 10 quarts of mouse urine to
obtain 30-thousandth of an ounce of the mysterious substance. It turned out to
be a piece of a larger and very common protein, plasminogen, that the body uses
in blood clotting. Folkman named it angiostatin.

   Apparently, cells can use the plasminogen gene for two purposes: they can use
it at its full length to make plasminogen or they can use just a piece of it and
make angiostatin. Plasminogen does nothing to stop tumor growth. The question
was, would angiostatin?

   Folkman and O'Reilly discovered that angiostatin also appears, in minute
quantities, in human blood. Using outdated human blood discarded by the Red
Cross, they extracted enough angiostatin to treat mice. Then they began their
experiment.

   They had 20 mice with large tumors on their backs. The investigators removed
the tumors and then injected half of the mice with angiostatin each day and the
others with salt water, as a comparison.

   After 15 days, the researchers killed the mice and cut them open. As more
than a dozen scientists gathered around a table in the laboratory, O'Reilly
opened the first mouse. It had huge tumors filling its lungs. Then Folkman
checked a notebook to see what the animal had received: salt water. They looked
at the next mouse. No tumors. Folkman checked to see the treatment: angiostatin.
And so it went. All 10 of the mice that had been injected with angiostatin were
free of cancer. All 10 of those that had been received salt water had huge new
tumors.

   The room was buzzing, the scientists were grinning, Folkman said. Everyone in
the room knew what the results meant, and they were elated. They responded, he
said, like men at a football game. "Everyone clapped O'Reilly on the back,"
Folkman said.

   Then the researchers found a second protein fragment, secreted by tumors,
that also squelches metastases, Folkman said. It was a piece of a different
protein, collagen 18, that is in all blood vessels but by itself has no effect
on cancer. They named the collagen fragment endostatin.

   "It was even more potent than angiostatin," Folkman said. If he gave it to a
mouse with a huge tumor, he said, the equivalent of one weighing a pound and a
half in a human, endostatin would shrink the cancer down to a microscopic size.

   Moreover, tumors never became resistant to endostatin, said Folkman, who
added that he had given the drug to mice with large tumors and they had shrunk
to almost nothing. He stopped the drug, he said, and the tumors grew back. Then
he gave the drug continuously for the rest of the animals' lives. The tumors
remained small and harmless and the animals remained healthy.

   Dr. Robert Kerbel, a cancer researcher at Sunnybrook Health Science Center in
Toronto, said he was not surprised that the cancers never became resistant to
endostatin. Tumors become resistant to chemotherapy drugs, Kerbel said, because
cancer cells constantly reshuffle their genetic information. The result, he
said, is that the tumors spin off mutant cells that resist the drugs and,
ultimately, the tumors grow back, invulnerable.

   But, Kerbel said, angiostatin and endostatin do not act on tumors. Instead,
they act on normal blood vessels that feed tumors. And normal cells, he said, do
not reshuffle their genes and so do not develop drug resistance. That is why
chemotherapy drugs continue to devastate normal cells - causing bone marrow
suppression, loss of hair, nausea and vomiting - even when the cancer cells have
grown impervious to their effects, Kerbel said.

   Then Folkman discovered that he could obliterate tumors in mice with his new
drugs. He gave endostatin and angiostatin together, treating mice for 25 days.
To his surprise, Folkman said, "there was no tumor left - we couldn't even find
it with a microscope." The tumors, he said, were eradicated.

   And the drugs seem to have no side effects, at least in mice, something that
Folkman acknowledges is hard for researchers to believe. But, he said, he had
given mice up to four times the doses needed to eliminate cancer and could not
find any adverse effects. These two human proteins may be, he said, "exquisitely
aimed - we do not know why - at cancer."

   In contrast, Folkman said, mice become very ill when they receive commonly
used chemotherapy - their hair falls out, they bleed, they refuse to eat.

   For the past four years, Folkman said, he and his colleagues have found that
all tumors responded to the drugs in the same way. Even leukemia, a blood tumor,
responds, he said, because it turns out that leukemia needs to form new blood
vessels in the bone marrow to grow. Leukemia tumors grow on these blood vessels,
"like berries on a bush," Folkman said, shedding cancer cells into the blood.

   But Folkman is the first to urge caution in leaping to conclusions about what
might happen when patients try the drugs. "Going from mice to people is a big
jump, with lots of failures," he said.

   Hopes were high for chemotherapy drugs that worked well in mice but turned
out to be less successful in people. Therapies that used the immune system to
rid the body of cancer also worked in mice but were disappointing when they were
tried in people. Gene therapy treats mouse cancer but has had limited success in
people. From bitter experience, most cancer researchers have learned to be leery
of what one called "that four letter word:" Cure.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1998


                             1991 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      May 2, 1998, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 13C, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: Sinai at Home is merged into VNA of Maryland

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   Sinai Hospital's home health unit, Sinai at Home, has been merged into the
Visiting Nurse Association of Maryland, the hospital said yesterday.

   VNA, founded in 1895 as a private, nonprofit organization, became a limited
liability company in 1994. Sinai owns about 15 percent of it.

GP plans to acquire Learning Technologies

   GP Strategies Corp., the New York-based parent company of General Physics
Corp., said yesterday that it intends to acquire Learning Technologies, the
information technology training division of SHL Systemhouse Co. of Ottawa,
Canada.

   General Physics is a Columbia-based training and consulting firm. It plans to
enter into a preferred provider agreement with SHL that would make General
Physics the Canadian company's exclusive provider of educational training
products and services.

   Learning Technologies is a computer technology training and consulting
organization with offices in Columbia. It had revenue of $ 50 million in 1997.

GenVec files to make 2.5 million share IPO

   GenVec Inc. of Rockville filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange
Commission for permission to sell 2.5 million common shares of stock in an
initial public offering aimed at raising about $ 30 million to finance
development of its gene therapy treatments for vascular disease, cancer and
neurological disorders.

   The company said it expects the shares to sell for $ 11 to $ 13 each. No date
for the offering has been set.

Earnings rise 28% at Patapsco Bancorp

   Patapsco Bancorp Inc.'s net income rose 28 percent to $ 179,000, or 53 cents
a share, in the fiscal third quarter ended March 31, the Dundalk-based banking
company said yesterday.

   Net income was $ 498,000, or $ 1.47 a share, for the nine months ended March
31, compared with $ 731,000, or $ 2.17 a share, in the year-earlier period.

   The nine-month net-income figure for fiscal 1997 was affected by a one-time $
600,000 gain and a one-time $ 415,000 expense. Without those adjustments, the
company would have earned $ 386,000, or $ 1.15 a share, in the nine months ended
March 31, 1997.

Gaithersburg to get Manugistics headquarters

   Manugistics Group Inc., an inventory-management software and services firm,
is relocating its headquarters from Rockville to a 28-acre site in Gaithersburg.

   The company, which employs 570, considered 20 other sites in Maryland and
Virginia before settling on remaining in Montgomery County, officials said.

Avis franchise to pay $ 2.1 million to settle rights allegations

   New Hanover Rent-A-Car, an Avis franchise in the Carolinas, has agreed to pay
$ 2.1 million to settle allegations that it refused to rent cars to blacks,
provide sensitivity training for employees and allow a civil rights monitor to
observe its activities for five years.

   In a 1996 class-action lawsuit, black customers claimed that they were
repeatedly denied rentals at New Hanover locations in Wilmington, Greenville,
New Bern and Jacksonville, N.C., and in Florence, S.C.

   Pub Date: 5/02/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1998


                             1992 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      May 2, 1998, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 10; National Desk

LENGTH: 281 words

HEADLINE: JAPAN TEAM TOUTS BENEFITS OF ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOME

BYLINE: From Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Japanese scientists said Friday they had built an artificial chromosome,
which might aid efforts to use gene therapy to treat diseases such as muscular
dystrophy and cystic fibrosis.

   Hiroshi Masumoto of Nagoya University in Japan and colleagues said they hope
their chromosome might be used to deliver some form of gene therapy.

   Every human cell contains 46 chromosomes. These, in turn, carry the genes.
Everyone has some "defective" genes, but some defects have more serious effects
than others.

   One inherited defect causes cystic fibrosis, for example, a disease that
causes the overproduction of mucus, leading to breathing and digestive problems
and eventual death.

   Sometimes replacing just a single gene would cure a disease, but getting the
gene to "take" permanently has been impossible so far. Some scientists think
that an extra miniature chromosome, carrying the therapeutic gene or genes,
could do the trick.

   Writing in the journal Nature Biotechnology, Masumoto's team said they had
engineered a miniature chromosome and said it was stable in human cells.

   Also, it did not take on DNA from other chromosomes.

   For a chromosome to work, it must have the end part, known as a telomere, and
a middle part, known as a centromere.

   In previous experiments, scientists have been able to throw the centromeres
and telomeres into a cell and let it rearrange them into chromosomes.

   But in the past, the cell always threw in random bits of DNA, making it
impossible to predict what the resulting chromosome would look like.

   Masumoto said his chromosomes do not have this problem.

   The next step would be to try to add a therapeutic gene and see if it works.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1998


                             1993 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



              April 29, 1998, WEDNESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: NU to expand research with $ 25 million grant

BYLINE: BY SUSAN DODGE

BODY:


   A $ 25 million gift to Northwestern University from the Chicago Community
Trust will help the school expand its research into life and disease processes,
covering everything from the aging process to AIDS.

   Northwestern plans to use the money to hire more teachers, purchase
equipment, create interdisciplinary programs and build labs and research
facilities.

   The money will broaden research in fields such as genetics, developmental
biology, molecular medicine, gene therapy, neuroscience and structural biology.

   "This research is central to the future of life sciences and medical practice
and the resources they need to improve the lives of area residents," said NU
Provost Lawrence B. Dumas, former chairman of biochemistry, molecular biology
and cell biology at Northwestern.

   The grant is the Chicago Community Trust's largest gift to an institution and
follows two other donations from the trust to NU: a $ 10 million grant in 1980
and a $ 12 million grant in 1990. Those donations helped NU recruit leading life
sciences researchers to the university, officials said.

   The $ 25 million gift comes one week after the university announced it was
joining forces with Northwestern Memorial Hospital to build a $ 180 million
medical research center downtown where researchers would study genetics, the
aging process, biomedical engineering and neuroscience.

   Although the research topics for the trust gift and the medical research
center are similar, there is no connection between the gift and the hospital
research center, a university spokesman said.

   The trust gift will be used for basic life sciences research on the Evanston
campus, the spokesman said.

   The grant was made from the Chicago Community Trust's Searle fund. The Searle
family has long-standing ties to Northwestern, and two Searle family members
serve as NU trustees.

   The Chicago Community Trust is a nonprofit organization that makes grants to
agencies and institutions throughout the Chicago area. It gives more than $ 35
million in grants annually.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1998


                             1994 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      APRIL 29, 1998 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3078 words

HEADLINE: JEFFERSON AIDS RESEARCH PROBED / THE WORK WAS HERALDED AS A WAY TO
DISABLE HIV. THEN A RESEARCHER RAISED QUESTIONS.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Marian Uhlman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists at Thomas Jefferson University began four years ago to tout a hot
new approach to AIDS - a way to stymie the virus using a sophisticated genetic
technique. They were publishing papers, getting national press, and preparing to
test it on people.

   But an investigation by a Jefferson committee has concluded that the
federally funded gene therapy research was marred by "extraordinarily careless
science," including some experiments that may never have been conducted.

   Federal officials are reviewing the conclusions of Jefferson's investigation,
which was triggered after a researcher in the AIDS laboratory made a discovery
that he said cast doubt on the fundamental premise on which the research was
based.

   The allegations go to the heart of integrity in medical research - the
rigorous process that scientists use to prove that a new therapy works.

   The allegations call into question whether the novel gene therapy was what
the Jefferson researchers purported it to be: Specifically, could it have worked
as reported since it was missing a piece of DNA that might have been critical to
its success?

   Gene therapy is in its infancy and still unproven. But if it pans out, it
might allow AIDS patients to get treated just once and avoid having to take
complicated and expensive medicines. Jefferson's therapy never got as far as
human testing.

   In its report, the Jefferson committee said "the total evidence does not
sufficiently support a finding of willful fabrication of data and scientific
misconduct." It said "no misconduct in research appeared to have been
committed," but it identified "significant problems."

   The committee ordered the scientists to send extensive correction notices to
the medical journals that had published the data. The first correction was
published this month in the Journal of Virology.

   The committee also recommended the dismissal of the scientist, Lingxun Duan,
who had the day-to-day oversight of the research project at Jefferson's Center
for Human Virology. He took a leave of absence during the investigation and said
he later agreed not to seek renewal of his contract.

   Copies of official documents provided to the federal government and obtained
by The Inquirer describe numerous allegations: missing data, a nonfunctioning
gene, genetic material of an enzyme unrelated to the research that mysteriously
turned up in the lab, threats against a whistle-blower, and finger-pointing
among scientists on the far frontier of modern molecular medicine.

   All this allegedly happened in a premier research laboratory, which has won
significant funding from the National Institutes of Health and whose work has
passed muster in scientific journals.

   Dr. Roger J. Pomerantz, a nationally recognized AIDS researcher who is chief
of the division of infectious diseases at Jefferson and director of the research
center, acknowledged in an interview that he had failed to fully appreciate the
problem flagged by the lab worker.

   "The buck stops here," he said. "I have to take responsibility."

   Nevertheless, Pomerantz said the gene therapy, which was supported by more
than $800,000 in federal funds, worked in lab experiments to stop the AIDS virus
from reproducing. He said a scientist unconnected with the original studies had
recently repeated the experiment from scratch and found that "it works."

   Pomerantz, who was criticized by the committee for poor management of the
research, praised the thoroughness of the university's probe.

   "We abided by the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and got this huge
report, taller than I am," said Pomerantz, 41, who stands 5 feet 9 inches. "You
couldn't do anymore."

   The final report was completed in September and fills more than a dozen
volumes. It has been forwarded to the Office of Research Integrity, a branch of
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

   Under ORI procedures, allegations of possible scientific misconduct in
federally sponsored research are usually first investigated by the institution
where they reportedly occurred. The institution's findings are then sent to ORI
for review.

   Negative findings by ORI can lead to a loss of federal grants.

   ORI officials declined to confirm or deny that they were reviewing the case.
The agency's procedures require that unless proven correct, charges of
scientific misconduct remain confidential.

   THE FINDING BY POMERANTZ'S lab of a new way to attack the AIDS virus was
welcome news when it hit the medical journals in 1994.

   Back then, traditional medicine was losing the battle against AIDS. While
chemical compounds such as AZT worked for a while, their effects soon wore off.

   The Pomerantz team turned to an approach called intracellular immunization.
Normally, antibodies do their disease-fighting work outside cells, but this
method would get antibodies inside the cells where HIV - the AIDS virus - lives.

   Lingxun Duan, now 36, a rising star in the lab, headed the project.

   Duan constructed a gene that, when inserted into cells, would order up the
production of an antibody that would bind to a key HIV protein, called Rev. The
hope was that the antibodies would disable HIV, making it impossible to
reproduce.

   If the technique worked, it had far-reaching - and potentially lucrative -
applications. It could be used not just to combat AIDS but possibly for other
infectious diseases.

   Beginning in 1994, the Jefferson team reported success in lab experiments.
The next step was to check its safety in a small number of people. The NIH
cleared the way, and the Jefferson team submitted an application to the FDA to
test the therapy in six AIDS patients.

   With a handful of other scientific groups at other medical centers working on
similar approaches, the Jefferson team was eager to shepherd its invention
through successful human tests. The team already had a collaborator in private
industry - a Seattle-area firm, now known as Intracel Co., which was supplying
raw material from which Duan constructed his gene. The company also helped fund
the project.

   As the Jefferson scientists were moving forward, a researcher in Pomerantz's
lab, Yong Wu, found something unusual: A chunk of DNA was missing from the gene
that Duan had constructed.

   Wu, 41, was a virologist from China who had done research at the University
of Alabama at Birmingham. He joined the Pomerantz lab in December 1994 as a
post-doctoral fellow.

   Wu declined to discuss the case for this story. His account of events is
taken from correspondence to Jefferson officials and testimony before the
investigative committee and a preliminary inquiry group.

   Not long after he arrived, Wu began comparing the chemical code - known as
the sequence - of Duan's gene with the sequences of genes for other antibodies,
he later testified.

   At first, he said, he had trouble because the published sequence of Duan's
gene had an error: Two segments of DNA were transposed.

   Once he straightened out that confusion, Wu said, he found that the gene was
missing a small but critical piece of DNA. It was a chunk that helped direct the
antibody to bind to Rev, the HIV protein.

   Since antibodies work by binding to an infectious agent, Wu said the missing
sequence made Duan's gene a "pseudogene," meaning it could not function. He took
his discovery to Duan, his superior. Duan, a graduate of the Shanghai Second
Military University, had come to Philadelphia in 1989 to work on cancer
research, first at Fox Chase Cancer Center and then at Jefferson.

   "When I told Dr. Duan that this was a pseudogene, Dr. Duan admitted it, but
said not to say anything," Wu testified.

   Duan, in an interview, said he did not tell Wu to keep quiet. Duan said the
research team was aware the gene had an unusual structure. But no one thought
much about it because the gene therapy worked to stop HIV in lab experiments, he
said.

   Wu testified that he did not go directly to Pomerantz because "for me it
doesn't make sense because he cannot trust me, but he trusts Duan. So it scary
for me to talk truth with him."

   Over the next year, Wu went about his work in the lab. In July 1996 Pomerantz
told Wu that he would be terminated as of Sept. 1. Pomerantz said Wu "has a
talent in research," but noted that because of personal problems, "he has not
done well on his own as an independent researcher," according to a Pomerantz
memo in the committee report.

   Soon after, Wu went to a senior researcher in the lab, Dr. Omar Bagasra, who
oversaw the molecular testing involved in the gene therapy work.

   "So he called me one weekend, he came over, and explained to me, 'Look at
this sequence, something is wrong with this sequence. There's no way it can
bind,' " Bagasra later testified.

   He said that he told Pomerantz of Wu's claims. Pomerantz decided it wasn't
necessary to redo the experiments, but he agreed to have Duan's gene sequenced
again to see if the coding was correct, according to testimony.

   That check confirmed Wu's discovery that the published sequence of the gene
was incorrect. Pomerantz submitted the correct information to Human Gene Therapy
, a medical journal.

   Left unaddressed, though, was Wu's major concern - that the missing chunk of
DNA made it unlikely that the gene produced antibodies that would bind to Rev.
So how could it work?

   In December 1996, after leaving Jefferson, Wu took his concerns to the top.

   In a letter to George F. Kalf, Jefferson's assistant dean for scientific
affairs, Wu filed a complaint of scientific misconduct against Duan and pointed
out what he considered to be irregularities in the gene therapy work.

   He said there were "several gross mistakes" in papers published by the
Jefferson team.

   Wu also alleged that Duan was using the Jefferson lab "for his own personal
cloning factory" and was possibly preparing to sell genetically engineered
products to China.

   He wrote that Duan hired scientists from the same military school that Duan
had attended so "they can follow his orders and keep his secrets."

   Wu said that after filing the complaint, he got a threatening phone call from
Duan.

   "Dr. Duan told me that since, in the letter, I had said things that attacked
the Chinese government, or the People's Liberation Army, he would send the
letter to the Chinese government to punish me when I returned to China," Wu
testified.

   He was so fearful, he said, "it has been necessary for me to move from my
residence and to make myself very scarce."

   Duan said in an interview that while he did call Wu in anger, he never
threatened him. Duan said his ties to the Chinese military were remote and ended
when he graduated from the military medical school in Shanghai. He said Wu's
allegations of suspect business dealings were groundless.

   Three days after Wu made his charges to Kalf, Pomerantz sent a letter to
Kalf. "Nothing that I have seen has given me any reason to question Dr. Duan's
integrity or his scientific excellence," he wrote.

   WU'S LETTER SET IN MOTION Jefferson's system for dealing with allegations of
scientific misconduct. The first step was to set up an inquiry committee to
determine whether a full investigation was warranted.

   Meanwhile, Bagasra was checking out Wu's contentions by conducting his own
experiments. His name was among the researchers listed on many of the papers
published by the Jefferson team.

   A Pakistani who had come to the United States in 1972, Bagasra joined
Pomerantz's lab in 1991. He had developed a way to measure even the smallest
amount of the genetic material of HIV inside cells.

   Bagasra's account of events is taken from his testimony and documents in
Jefferson's reports.

   Drawing from a test tube labeled as containing Duan's gene, Bagasra, 49,
inserted the gene into cells growing in the laboratory. The cells turned yellow
and looked sickly, as if they were dying, he later testified.

   To see what might be making the cells sick, Bagasra and a graduate student
sequenced the gene they had inserted into the cells. They found it wasn't Duan's
gene at all, but a portion of the gene for asparaginase, an enzyme used to kill
cancer cells in some leukemia patients. Asparaginase had never been part of the
experiments at Jefferson, or described in the team's published papers or
applications for testing in people.

   Then came another surprise. When a lab worker checked the published sequence
of Duan's gene using an international gene database, she found it was remarkably
similar to the published sequence of a gene for an antibody to asparaginase.
Both were missing the same chunk of DNA, according to a report given to the
inquiry committee.

   For Bagasra, the finding couldn't be explained by chance, he later testified.

   Putting it all together, Bagasra came up with a theory that he shared with
the inquiry committee: It wasn't Duan's gene that was stemming the growth of HIV
in lab experiments. Instead, asparaginase, combined with an antibody for
asparaginase, was making it work.

   He speculated to the committee that this wasn't an accident, but a
well-thought-out plan to make the research appear successful. He alleged that
the doctored gene therapy, had it ever reached AIDS patients, could have been
"toxic."

   On April 18, 1997, following a three-month probe, the Jefferson inquiry
committee concluded that "one or more acts of scientific misconduct may have
been committed," and that it was possible asparaginase, not Duan's gene, was
responsible for inhibiting HIV in the team's experiments. But the committee said
there was no evidence to substantiate Wu's allegation of possible business
dealings with China.

   The scientific concerns were enough to trigger a full-blown investigation.

   TWENTY-ONE TIMES between May and September 1997, a three-member investigation
committee, along with assorted advisers and staff, met in a Jefferson conference
room. The sessions started around dinnertime and sometimes went late into the
night.

   They heard from 14 witnesses, looked over documents and scientists' notebooks
and ordered lab tests to sort out the tangled web of accusations.

   In a report delivered on Sept. 29, the committee concluded that the research
was fraught with "careless" and "sloppy" science and that Duan's gene had "an
extraordinary number of problems."

   It confirmed Wu's allegation that Duan's gene contained "a large deletion" in
an area that governed the ability of the antibody to bind to the HIV protein,
Rev. The deletion probably occurred by accident in the engineering of the gene,
the committee said.

   But given the missing DNA, it was "very questionable" whether the gene could
work as reported, the report said.

   The committee concluded that the binding data presented by the Pomerantz lab
in medical journals was "grossly inadequate." In some experiments, no original
data were kept, making the committee question whether the work was ever done.

   While the committee acknowledged that Jefferson's experiments found that the
therapy had anti-HIV activity in cell culture, all of those experiments were, to
some extent, dependent on Duan, the committee noted.

   The committee confirmed the presence of genetic material for asparaginase in
one vial.

   However, it knocked down Bagasra's theory that asparaginase was responsible
for the reported success of the experiments. It said the asparaginase gene found
in the lab was incomplete and therefore unlikely to do anything, much less kill
cells.

   The committee criticized Bagasra for making unsubstantiated claims, including
"very speculative" assertions that the asparaginase would have been harmful had
it gotten into AIDS patients.

   Still, the committee found no answer to a big mystery: How did a gene for
asparaginase get into a test tube labeled as containing Duan's gene - a gene
that, with its missing segment, was a close relative to the gene for an
asparaginase antibody?

   The committee called this a "striking coincidence" and said the probability
that it happened by chance was "exceedingly low."

   Overall, the committee found Wu "more credible" than Duan. It concluded that
"Dr. Duan probably did threaten [Wu] with retaliation when Wu returned to
China.'

   While the committee recommended that Duan be fired for careless science and
misleading testimony, it cleared him of misconduct in research because it found
no "direct evidence" that he had willfully "altered [gene] constructs to include
toxins" or otherwise intentionally falsified data.

   Pomerantz, the committee said, did not appropriately supervise Duan and did
not pay enough attention to the possibility there was a problem in his lab. It
told him to draw up a corrective-action plan to prevent future problems.

   "In our opinion, most scientists would have quickly done carefully controlled
experiments to determine the validity of the [gene] construct and the validity
of previously published experiments," the committee said. At the same time, the
committee said Pomerantz's actions were "on the whole appropriate."

   The committee said Bagasra not only had lost his scientific objectivity
during the investigation, but also broke the committee's confidentiality rules.

   Bagasra since then has told federal officials that the committee failed to
fully explore the evidence, according to Bagasra's lawyer, Alan Epstein.

   Last month Bagasra was placed on administrative leave by Jefferson, pending a
hearing on his dismissal, Epstein said. He said Bagasra was "being punished for
making allegations regarding various instances of scientific misconduct."

   Jefferson officials declined to comment, saying they could not discuss
personnel matters unless they got approval from Bagasra.

   "The university actively attempted to get permission from Dr. Bagasra to
speak with . . . The Inquirer with as much detail as possible, but Dr. Bagasra
refused through his lawyer," said Phyllis Fisher, a university spokeswoman.

   AS THE FEDERAL OFFICE of Research Integrity reviews what went on at
Jefferson, Pomerantz said the controversy has not set back his research. While
the experiment under scrutiny has been set aside, he is now using the same
genetic technique to target a different HIV protein.

   "We are moving forward," he said.

   Duan is also looking ahead. He said he was fed up with academia and was
exploring his research options in private industry. He said he was convinced
that the federal review would vindicate him because the data are on his side.

   "Science is science," he said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO
Lingxun Duan headed the project.
Roger J. Pomerantz heads Jefferson's Center for Human Virology, where the gene
therapy research was conducted. He said AIDS research at the center was
continuing.
Dr. Omar Bagasra conducted his own experiments after learning of potential
problems with the gene therapy research. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, WILLIAM F.
STEINMETZ)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1995 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 27, 1998, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 4293 words

HEADLINE: THE CHRONICLE 500;
WHERE THEY ARE

BODY:

   CHART:

   Companies listed by counties and cities, ranked by Bay Area employees.

   -----------------------------------------------

    ALAMEDA COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

    Alameda

   Ascend Comm Inc. Networking Solutions 706 1,820

   Wind River Sys Inc. Computer Software 277 475

   Netopia Inc. Internet Hardware/Software 200 244

   TCSI Corp. Communications Software 175 220

   Geoworks Corp. Telecommunications Software 150 220

   Microprose Inc. Gaming Software 146 390

   Avigen Inc. Gene Therapy 60 60

   Insite Vision Inc. Pharmaceuticals/Drug Delivery 45 45

   .

   Berkeley

   Barra Inc. Financial Services 300 700

   Xoma Corp. Biotechnology 140 165

   Calypte Biomed Corp. Diagnostic Kits 38 38

   HealthDesk Corp. Internet Content/Health Care 24 24

   BioTime Inc. Biotechnology 12 14

   .

   Emeryville

   Sybase Inc. Computer Software 2,000 5,200

   Chiron Corp. Biopharmaceuticals 1,868 6,500

   Scopus Techn Inc. Computer Software/Services 300 435

   IA Corp. I Financial Software 130 130

   Lecg Inc. Economic Consulting 120 200

   Meadowbrook Rehab Health Management Services 7 248

   .

   Fremont

   Lam Research Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 3,000 4,100

   HMT Techn Corp. Disk Drive Products 1,600 2,500

   Network Equip. Techns Networking Products 850 1,367

   Cirrus Logic Inc. Integrated Circuitry 800 1,800

   Avant! Corp. Computer Software 600 800

   SMART Mod Techns Computer Memory Devices 582 990

   ESS Technology Inc. Semiconductors 341 447

   Exar Corp. Semiconductors 325 350

   Mattson Techn Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 320 373

   Mylex Corp. Storage Products 300 354

   Logitech Intl Inc. Computer Peripherals 300 2,995

   Syquest Techn Inc. Computer Memory Devices 293 1,107

   Scientific Techn Inc. Electronic Equipment 243 253

   Premisys Comm Inc. Telecommunications 240 315

   Credence Sys Corp. Automated Testing Equip 239 621

   Natural Wonders Inc. Science/Nature Gifts 200 2,600

   Asyst Techn Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 114 674

   Keravision Inc. Optical Supplies 100 106

   Matrix Pharm Inc. Drug Development 97 120

   Versant Object Techn Computer Software/Services 97 186

   Zitel Corp. Computer Storage Sytems 95 190

   Cardima Inc. Medical Devices 93 104

   Visioneer Inc. Computer Hardware/Software 90 90

   Aureal Semiconductor Semiconductor Equipment 90 98

   VidaMed Inc. Medical Devices 74 83

   Seeq Technology Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 70 73

   Gatefield Corp. Semiconductors 70 182

   DSP Technology Inc. Measurement Instrumentation 69 142

   Interlink Comp Scienc Computer Software 66 165

   Sigma Designs Inc. DVD/Semiconductors 66 71

   Fiberstars Inc. Electrical Equipment 65 65

   Digital Power Corp. Power Conversion Products 50 400

   Sterigenics Intl Inc. Commercial Sterilization Svcs 32 275

   Sunrise Techns Intl Medical Devices 29 30

   .

   Hayward

   Etec Systems Inc. Semiconductors 700 1,000

   Cholestech Corp. Medical Devices 131 142

   Aradigm Corp. Drug Delivery 100 100

   Amer Champion Ent Entertainment 20 20

   .

    Livermore

   McGrath RentCorp Electronic Equip Rentals 158 359

   .

   Newark

   Ross Stores Inc. Off-Price Apparel Retailer 2,400 17,000

   Invision Techns Inc. Explosives Detection Sys 205 309

   .

   Oakland

   Clorox Co. Consumer Goods 1,660 5,500

   Dreyer's Gr Ice Cream Ice Cream 450 2,800

   Cost Plus Inc. Home Furnishings/Gifts 375 1,647

   Forte Software Inc. Computer Network Software 200 445

   Health Sys Des Corp. Medical Information Systems 120 150

   Civic Bank Commerce Retail Banking 112 112

   DNAP Holding Corp. Agricultural Biotechnology 60 582

   Crown Vantage Inc. Paper Products 40 3,995

   Golden West Fin Corp. Savings/Loans N/A 4,854

   .

   Pleasanton

   Safeway Inc. Supermarkets 16,500 147,000

   PeopleSoft Inc. Applications Software 2,000 4,452

   Vanstar Corp. Networking Svcs/Products 603 6,600

   ProBusiness Svcs Inc. Human Resources Services 400 500

   Documentum Inc. Document Mgmt Software 230 400

   Simpson Manu Co. Building/Constr Materials 225 1,300

   Ultradata Corp. Computer Software 180 187

   Invivo Corp. Medical Instruments 100 250

   Thoratec Labs Corp. Medical Devices 90 110

   Cooper Cos. Inc Specialty Health Care 20 2,100

   .

   San Leandro

   North Face Inc. Outdoors Apparel/Equip 300 713

   -----------------------------------------------

   CONTRA COSTA COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Concord

   Cerus Corp. Biotechnology 76 76

   .

   Hercules

   Bio-Rad Laboratories Diagnostic Products 1,050 2,535

   .

   Lafayette

   Central Garden & Pet Consumer Products 200 3,000

   Bedford Prop Investors Real Estate Investment Trust 38 47

   .

   Richmond

   Pixar Animation Computer Animation 400 400

   Shoe Pavilion Inc. Off-Price Footwear Retailer 200 400

   Quickresponse Svcs Computer Services 200 230

   Onyx Pharms Inc. Cancer Research 120 120

   LXR Biotech Inc. Pharmaceuticals 63 63

   .

   San Ramon

   Giga-Tronics Inc. Electronics Equipment 225 225

   Mecon Inc. Consulting 65 93

   SBE Inc. Network Comm Products 62 75

   US Wireless Corp. Wireless Communication 50 350

   Supergen Inc. Pharmaceuticals 40 50

   Robertson Ceco Corp. Engineering/Construction 10 1,400

   .

   Walnut Creek

   Longs Drug Stores Inc. Retail Drug Stores 4,490 16,500

   Western Staff Svcs Inc. Staffing Services 300 1,200

   Finet Holdings Corp. Internet Real Estate Services 136 169

   BWC Financial Corp. Regional Banking 93 93

   Tier Techns Inc. Info Tech Consulting/Svcs 60 350

   -----------------------------------------------

   MARIN COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Corte Madera

   Il Fornaio Amer Corp. Restaurants 1,000 1,900

   .

   Greenbrae

   Oacis Healthcare Hldg Medical Info Systems 135 176

   .

   Larkspur

   Headlands Mortgage Mortgage Banking 468 781

   Quadramed Corp. Health Care Mgmt Software 125 774

   .

   Mill Valley

   Redwood Trust Inc. Real Estate Investment Trust 21 21

   Lamaur Corp. Hair Care Products 6 317

   .

   Novato

   Harding Lawson Assoc Env/Infrastructure Eng 210 950

   Sonic Solutions Computer Software 70 80

   Inference Corp. Computer Software 70 174

   Broderbund Software Interactive Software N/A 1,129

   .

   San Rafael

   Autodesk Inc. Computer Software 1,250 2,470

   Fair, Isaac & Co. Inc. Data Processing Systems 800 1,300

   Childrens Discov Ctrs Education 471 4,733

   Intl Microcomp Softw Computer Software 225 350

   Valley Forge Corp. Holding Company 170 725

   .

   Sausalito

   Willis Lease Fin Corp. Financial Services 42 50

   .

   -----------------------------------------------

   NAPA COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   Napa

   Chalone Wine Grp Ltd. Wine 66 118

   .

   Oakville

   Robert Mondavi Corp. Wine 497 909

   .

   St. Helena

   Beringer Wine Est Hldg Wine 560 650

   -----------------------------------------------

   SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   SAN FRANCISCO

   BankAmerica Corp. Banking 34,291 90,500

   PG&E Corp. Energy Services 13,270 23,500

   Wells Fargo & Co. Banking 10,700 33,100

   Chevron Corp. Energy 8,398 34,186

   ABM Industries Inc. Building Maintenance 5,800 52,000

   Providian Fin Corp. Consumer Credit 3,700 4,100

   Schwab Corp. Brokerage Services 3,200 13,000

   Indus Intl Inc. Business Software 3,000 1,000

   Gap Inc. Speciality Apparel 2,609 81,000

   UnionBanCal Corp. Banking 1,500 9,753

   Williams-Sonoma Inc. Culinary Products 1,339 10,265

   AirTouch Comm Inc. Cellular/Wireless Telecom 900 8,800

   McKesson Corp. Wholesale Pharmaceuticals 900 13,300

   Sumitomo Bank of Ca. Banking 746 1,567

   Cnet Internet Content 550 600

   Walker Interactive Sys Computer Software 550 550

   Hambrecht & Quist LLC Invest Banking/Brokerage 547 829

   Fritz Companies Inc. Transport Logistic Services 433 10,000

   Macromedia Inc. Internet/Multimedia Software 415 485

   URS Corp. Eng/Architectural Svcs 400 6,300

   BA Merchant Svcs Inc. Banking 400 806

   PMI Group Inc. Mortgage Guarantee Ins 400 900

   Transamerica Corp. Financial Services 380 8,679

   Sharper Image Corp. Specialty Gifts 300 1,300

   Genesys Telecom Labs Applications Software 300 50

   Advent Software Inc. Investment Mgmt Software 300 380

   Cotelligent Group Inc. Computer Consulting Svcs 271 2,700

   Pacific Bank N.A. Commercial Banking 250 280

   BRE Properties Inc. Real Estate Investment Trust 250 1,000

   BEI Technologies Industrial Products 250 977

   Preview Travel Inc. Internet Travel Service 190 207

   Circle Intl Group Inc. Transportation/Logistics 183 3,910

   Calif Culinary Acad Culinary Education 147 153

   First Republic Bank Banking/Real Estate Lending 142 181

   Catellus Dev Corp. Real Estate Development 125 385

   AMB Property Corp. Real Estate Investment Trust 120 120

   Digital Generation Sys Digital Delivery Systems 120 330

   PLM Intl Inc. Equipment Leasing 90 181

   Homestake Mining Co. Gold Mining 73 1,585

   TriNet Corp Rlty Trust Real Estate Investment Trust 50 78

   Western Inv RE Trust Real Estate Investment Trust 49 49

   Micromuse Inc. Network Mgmt Software 30 147

   Meridian Indust Trust Real Estate Investment Trust 28 36

   HS Resources Inc. Oil/Gas Exploration, Prod 27 298

   Point West Cap Corp. Financial Services 15 15

   Pac Gateway Props Inc. Real Estate Investment Trust 14 14

   TIS Mortgage Invest Real Estate Investment Trust 10 10

   BF Enterprises Inc. Real Estate 6 7

   US Home & Garden Home/Garden Supplies 5 220

   Dover Invest Corp. Land Development 5 5

   -----------------------------------------------

   SAN MATEO COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Brisbane

   Good Guys Inc. Retail Electronics 1,750 4,700

   .

   Burlingame

   Gymboree Corp. Children's Apparel 800 6,500

   Megabios Corp. Drug Delivery Systems 75 75

   Pac Gateway Exchg Telecommunications 56 97

   Xiox Corp. Telecommunications 25 72

   .

   Foster City

   Gilead Sciences Inc. Pharmaceuticals 262 287

   Cell Genesys Inc. Gene Therapy 155 155

   Penederm Inc. Pharmaceuticals 52 81

   Cellegy Pharms Inc. Biopharmaceuticals 19 19

   DepoMed Inc. Pharmaceuticals 12 12

   .

   Half Moon Bay

   Odwalla Inc. Juices 130 430

   .

   Menlo Park

   Raychem Corp. Electronic Equipment 3,000 9,000

   Informix Corp. Database Software 1,049 3,500

   Sola Intl Inc. Optical Products 1,000 7,800

   Cons Freightways Corp. Freight Transport 945 21,600

   Robert Half Intl Inc. Staffing Services 630 4,600

   Exponent Inc. Engineering Services 400 800

   Pharmchem Labs Inc. Drug-Testing Products 300 350

   Sequus Pharms Inc. Pharmaceuticals 225 275

   Spieker Props Inc. Real Estate Investment Trust 213 480

   Perclose Inc. Medical Devices 200 250

   CBT Group PLC Corporate Education/Training 150 700

   OnSale Inc. Electronics 135 137

   SangStat Med Corp. Biotechnology 124 131

   Neurex Corp. Biomedical/Gene Therapy 100 100

   Geron Corp. Biotechnology 89 89

   JetFax Inc. Fax Machines/Printers 80 120

   Landec Corp. Plastics 65 162

   Progenitor Inc. Biotechnology 59 60

   .

   Redwood City

   Adecco S A Staffing Services 450 10,000

   At Home Corp. Internet Service Provider 400 400

   Heartport Inc. Medical Devices 317 386

   Ampex Corp. Digital Recording/Imaging 275 500

   Resound Corp. Hearing Devices 275 900

   Excite Inc. Internet Search Engine 253 340

   Sugen Inc. Biomedical 201 210

   BroadVision Inc. Internet Software Commerce 180 225

   Cygnus Inc. Healthcare/Drugs 180 180

   3DO Co. Game/Entertainment Software 170 220

   Genelabs Techns Inc. Biotechnology 80 150

   Adv Polymer Systems Polymer-Based Delivery Sys 45 90

   Bay Area Bancshares Banking 42 42

   Penn Octane Corp. Gas Pipelines 2 41

   .

   Redwood Shores

   Oracle Corp. Database Software 15,000 34,000

   .

   San Carlos

   CellNet Data Sys Inc. Wireless Data Comm 600 708

   Inhale Therapeutic Sys Drug Delivery 160 160

   Conceptus Inc. Medical Devices 55 62

   .

   San Mateo

   Franklin Resources Inc. Real Estate Invest Trust 2,800 7,000

   Electronic Arts Inc. Entertainment Software 754 2,093

   Electron For Imaging Printing Products 400 556

   Siebel Systems Inc. Computer Software 235 550

   Qualix Group Inc. Computer Software 170 170

   Bay View Cap Corp. Savings & Loan 125 800

   Emcon Environmental Consulting 100 1,000

   Glenborough Rlty Trust Real Estate Investment Trust 100 560

   Borel Bank. & Trust Co. Commercial Banking 70 70

   ENlighten Sftw Solutions Business Computer Software 30 30

   SciClone Pharms Inc. Biopharmaceuticals 30 36

   Raytel Medical Corp. Health Care/Heart Centers 20 800

   Franklin Select Rlty Tr Real Estate Investment Trust 0 0

   .

   South San Francisco

   Genentech Inc. Biotechnology 3,200 3,225

   Natl Insurance Grp Property/Casualty Insurance 425 643

   Ocular Sciences Inc. Contact Lenses 300 1,300

   Axys Pharms Inc. Pharmaceuticals 195 195

   Imatron Inc. Medical Imaging Equipment 181 212

   COR Therapeutics Inc. Biopharmaceutical 177 185

   Shaman Pharms Inc. Pharmaceuticals 111 111

   Galoob Toys Inc. Toy Manufacturing/Sales 108 216

   Titan Pharms Inc. Biopharmaceuticals 35 35

   -----------------------------------------------

   SANTA CLARA COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Campbell

   P-Com Inc. Wireless Telecom Equip 600 900

   Videonics Inc. Video Equipment 123 144

   Savoir Tech Grp Inc. Computer Systems/Service 85 395

   .

   Cupertino

   Apple Computer Inc. Computer Hardware 3,000 9,049

   Symantec Corp. Computer Software 714 2,731

   Rational Softw Corp. Computer Software 512 1,839

   Netmanage Inc. Networking Software 400 632

   Concentric Netw Corp. Network Service Provider 250 500

   CKS Group Inc. Marketing/Advertising 212 641

   Hall Kinion High-Tech Staffing Services 200 425

   Ikos Systems Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 150 225

   CardioThoracic Sys Inc. Medical Devices 100 130

   Hybrid Networks Inc. Internet Access Products 80 90

   Gen Surg Innovations Surgical Devices 65 75

   DSP Comm Inc. Wireless Equipment 15 180

   .

   Los Gatos

   Caere Corp. Scanning Software 230 293

   Metricom Inc. Wireless Comm Products 175 235

   Red Brick Syst Inc. Computer Software 160 285

   SCM Microsys Inc. Computer Security Products 20 81

   .

   Milpitas

   Solectron Corp. Electronic Components 6,112 20,000

   Quantum Corp. Computer Peripherals 2,300 6,214

   LSI Logic Corp. Semiconductors 2,100 4,400

   Read-Rite Corp. Disk/Tape Drive Equip 2,000 23,000

   Adaptec Inc. Semiconductors/Peripherals 1,400 3,500

   Linear Techn Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 975 1,800

   C-Cube Microsys Inc. Digital Video Compression 726 796

   Xicor Inc. Semiconductors 700 750

   Adac Laboratories Medical Imaging Equipment 400 900

   Larscom Inc. Networking Equipment 224 336

   Calif Micro Devices Electronic Components 150 300

   OPTi Inc. Semiconductors 115 125

   Netw Peripherals Inc. Networking Products 53 158

   Elantec Semi Inc. Semiconductors 8 195

   .

   Morgan Hill

   CIDCO Inc. Telecommunications 500 500

   Global Motorsport Grp Motorcycle Parts/Sales 180 363

   Organic Food Prod Inc. Organic Foods Production 45 45

   Purus Inc. Pollution Control Systems 2 2

   .

   Mountain View

   Silicon Graphics Inc. Computing Systems 7,700 10,500

   Netscape Comm Corp. Computer/Internet Softw 2,100 2,900

   Acuson Corp. Medical Ultrasound Equip 1,100 1,800

   Synopsys Inc. Computer Software 800 2,400

   Intuit Inc. Computer Software 800 3,200

   Remedy Corp. Computer Software 532 650

   Spectra-Physics Lasers Lasers 350 900

   Trident Microsys Inc. Semiconductors 280 350

   Veritas Software Co. Computer Software 260 650

   Scios Inc. Biopharmaceuticals 260 350

   Netw Computing Dev Networking Hardware/Softw 250 350

   Aspect Developmt Inc. Computer Software 200 536

   TelCom Semi Inc. Semiconductors 195 360

   Protein Design Labs Inc. Biomedicine 180 217

   Proxim Inc. Wireless Networks 170 177

   Microcide Pharms Inc. Pharmaceuticals 161 161

   Aehr Test Systems Semiconductor Equipment 155 120

   VeriSign Inc. Internet Security 150 200

   Pinnacle Systems Inc. Computer Peripherals 150 312

   Rambus Inc. Chip Communications 136 140

   Aviron Biomedicine 120 120

   Consilium Inc. Manufacturing Softw/Svcs 100 300

   Catalytica Inc. Specialty Chemicals 100 1,400

   SoftNet Systems Inc. Data/Communications Sys 100 200

   Award Software Intl Inc. Computer Software 85 170

   Vivus Inc. Pharmaceuticals 85 215

   Intellicorp Inc. Computer Software 75 100

   Drexler Techn Corp. Computers Storage Devices 75 75

   Yieldup Intl Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 74 75

   Iridex Corp. Medical Devices 67 75

   Metra Biosyst Inc. Medical Diagnostic Products 60 70

   Fusion Med Techns Inc. Surgical Sealants 46 47

   .

   Palo Alto

   Hewlett-Packard Co. Computer Systems 16,800 121,900

   Sun Micro Inc. Computer Hardware 13,000 25,000

   CNF Transport. Inc. Freight Transportation 2,500 30,000

   Varian Associates Inc. Hlth Care Instr/Semicon Equip 1,525 6,500

   Watkins-Johnson Semiconductors/Telecom 1,273 1,420

   Alza Corp. Pharmaceuticals/Drug Deliv 1,000 1,550

   E Trade Group Inc. Internet Brokerage Services 571 499

   Incyte Pharms Inc. Bioinformatics 550 680

   Legato Systems Inc. Storage Software 290 460

   Greater Bay Bancorp Regional Banking 250 250

   Collagen Corp. Medical Devices 200 389

   Southwall Technology Industrial Glass Coatings 200 236

   Tab Products Co. Office Equipment 150 1,100

   Silicon Gaming Inc. Gaming 130 200

   Corsair Comm Inc. Telecommuications Equip 120 145

   Essex Prop Trust Inc. Real Estate Investment Trust 115 400

   Coulter Pharm Inc. Pharmaceuticals 70 75

   Mysoftware Co. Small-Business Software 67 71

   C ATS Software Inc. Institutional Financial Softw 60 110

   Connetics Corp. Biotechnology 53 72

   CV Therapeutics Inc. Biopharmaceuticals 50 50

   Pete's Brewing Co. Beer 45 115

   .

   San Jose

   Cisco Systems Inc. Networking Products 6,853 12,898

   KLA-Tencor Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 3,700 4,800

   Atmel Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 2,500 6,000

   Cypress Semi Corp. Integrated Circuits 2,011 2,700

   Cadence Design Sys Inc. Electronic Design Automation 2,000 3,750

   Sanmina Corp. Electronics Manufacturer 1,800 4,300

   Komag Inc. Disk Drive Products 1,800 4,700

   Adobe Systems Inc. Computer Software 1,500 2,500

   Xilinx Inc. Semiconductors 1,000 1,400

   VLSI Technology Inc. Semiconductors 920 2,500

   Silicon Valley Grp Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 900 3,600

   Novellus Systems Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 900 1,776

   Altera Corp. Programmable Integ Circuits 861 1,086

   Aspect Telecomm Telecomm Equipment 700 1,600

   Calif Water Svc Grp Water Utilities 600 600

   Micrel Inc. Semiconductors 560 575

   SDL Inc. Semiconductors 525 625

   Digital Microwave Corp. Wireless Comm Equipment 500 1,000

   Bell Microproducts Inc. Semiconductor Distribution 500 650

   Symmetricom Inc. Communication Equipment 435 708

   Ultratech Stepper Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 425 576

   Bay Apt Communities Real Estate Investment Trust 405 663

   Clarify Inc. Software/Enterprise Apps 400 500

   Diamond Multimed Sys Computer Products 400 841

   TMCI Electronics Inc. Electronic Components 400 450

   Rockshox Inc. Bicycle Suspension Products 380 380

   On Command Corp. Interactive Entertainment 350 773

   Boole & Babbage Inc. Software Retail/Services 320 904

   GaSonics Intl Corp. Semiconductors 305 475

   Centigram Comm Corp. Telecommunications Equip 300 418

   SJW Corp. Water Utility 285 285

   Media Arts Group Inc. Collectibles 277 420

   Quickturn Design Sys Semiconductor Equipment 269 391

   Uniphase Corp. Lasers 260 750

   Ag Associates Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 253 300

   Adept Techn Inc. Robotics/Vision Systems 250 410

   Micro Linear Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 237 251

   Verilink Corp. Networking Products 235 250

   Phoenix Techns Ltd. Computer Software 230 580

   Hello Direct Inc. Telephony Catalog Sales 210 210

   Info Storage Devices Semiconductors 195 190

   Business Resource Grp Workspace Products/Svcs 195 260

   Laserscope Medical Laser Systems 180 295

   Intl Manu Svcs Inc. Electronics Components 175 2,800

   Cornerstone Imaging Inc. Opt. Rec. Hardware/Software 175 200

   Calpine Corp. Power Producers 160 380

   Alliance Semi Corp. Imbedded Memory Products 160 170

   3Dfx Interactive Inc. Media/Ent Software 158 166

   Bell Sports Corp. Lesiure Products 150 1,900

   Polycom Inc. Teleconferencing Products 150 225

   Pericom Semi Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 150 155

   Raster Graphics Inc. Digital Printing Equipment 143 185

   Asante Techns Inc. Networking Solutions 140 182

   SJNB Financial Corp. Regional Banking 98 98

   Photon Dynamics Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 97 112

   Leasing Solutions Inc. Leasing Services 87 168

   Puma Technology Inc. Mobile Computing Software 80 148

   Coast Distrib System Automobile/Boat Accessories 55 300

   Symphonix Devices Inc. Implantable Hearing Devices 45 51

   Integ Process Equip Semiconductor Equipment 25 970

   Notify Corp. Communication Products 15 15

   Thermatrix Inc. Air Pollution Control Equip 13 6,156

   Unify Corp. Computer Software 5 161

   .

   Santa Clara

   Intel Corp. Semiconductors 6,000 64,000

   Applied Materials Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 6,000 15,000

   Natl Semi Corp. Semiconductors 4,000 12,400

   3Com Corp. Computer Networking Sys 3,000 13,500

   Bay Networks Inc. Networking 1,976 6,549

   Integrated Device Techn Semiconductors 1,800 5,000

   Fresh Choice Inc. Restaurants 1,734 2,449

   Stormedia Inc. Computer Peripherals 1,000 2,000

   Coherent Inc. Lasers 850 2,300

   Vishay Siliconix Inc. Semiconductors 820 1,266

   Network Assoc Inc. Network/Security Software 800 1,600

   Electroglas Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 500 765

   Sigma Circuits Inc. Circuit Boards 480 800

   S3 Inc. Multimedia Accelerators 475 550

   Auspex Systems Inc. Comp Hardware/Software 450 650

   Celeritek Inc. Satellite Telecomm 400 400

   Yahoo Inc. Internet Search Engine 340 470

   Intevac Inc. Disk Drive Components 320 333

   Network Appliance Inc. Network File Servers 317 317

   CMC Industries Inc. Electronic Manu Svcs 300 800

   Silicon Vly Bancshares Commercial Banking 300 454

   Vantive Corp. Front-Office Automation Softw 280 517

   Edify Corp. Internet Software 275 350

   USWeb Corp. Internet Services 260 650

   Affymetrix Inc. Biotechnology 242 242

   Integ Silicon Solution Semiconductor Equipment 225 450

   Neomagic Corp. Multimedia Products 170 192

   VISX Inc. Refractive Lasers 150 170

   8X8 Inc. Chips, Videoconferencing 130 140

   Truevision Inc. Computer Peripherals 100 150

   Zoran Corp. Integrated Circuits/Software 85 151

   Quality Semi Inc. Semiconductors 80 220

   Celtrix Pharms Biopharmaceuticals 80 80

   Castelle Networking Products 75 95

   Worldtalk Corp. Internet Security 60 85

   Applied Imaging Corp. Medical Devices 50 107

   Accelgraphics Inc. Computer Peripherals 50 60

   DSP Group Inc. Telephony Products 25 110

   .

   Sunnyvale

   Adv Micro Devices Semiconductors 2,988 12,759

   Maxim Integ Products Semiconductor Equipment 1,998 2,500

   Trimble Navigation Ltd. Global Positioning Systems 836 1,292

   Spectrian Corp. Wireless Comm Products 600 600

   Applied Signal Techn Digital Signal Process Equip 575 615

   SanDisk Corp. Computer Peripherals 550 600

   Stanford Telecom Inc. Telecommunication Equip 500 1,000

   Supertex Inc. Semiconductors 400 400

   Dionex Corp. Chemical Analytical Instr 375 685

   Actel Corp. Semiconductors 350 400

   Integrated Systems Inc. Computer Software 325 600

   Cylink Corp. Networking Products 323 432

   Oak Technology Inc. Optical Storage Devices 280 460

   BEA Systems Inc. Computer Software 275 900

   Digital Link Corp. Digital Access Products 210 250

   Arbor Software Corp. Computer Software 210 415

   Harmonic Lightwaves Broadband Telecom Equip 205 250

   Molec Dynamics Inc. Scientific Instruments 205 238

   Verity Inc. Computer Software 200 311

   Infoseek Corp. Internet Search Engine 200 200

   Signal Techn Corp. Electronic Components 200 800

   Silicon Storage Techn Computer Memory Devices 190 193

   Hyseq Inc. Therapeutics 173 173

   TCI International Inc. Telecommunications Equip 170 175

   Prism Solutions Inc. Data Management Software 150 381

   Molecular Devices Biomedical Systems 134 146

   Power Integrations Inc. Integrated Circuits 133 145

   General Magic Inc. Networking Services 128 128

   Arthrocare Corp. Medical Devices 125 774

   Mercury Interactive Software Testing Solutions 120 440

   Cardiac Pathways Corp. Medical Devices 115 125

   Eclipse Surg Techns Medical Laser Systems 110 120

   Genus Inc. Semiconductors 95 301

   Nanometrics Inc. Semiconductor Equipment 95 134

   Conductus Inc. Superconductor Products 90 90

   Identix Inc. Fingerprint ID Systems 90 361

   MMC Networks Inc. Networking Equipment 85 93

   Calif Microwave Inc. Satellite Telecommunications 81 1,560

   CardioGenesis Corp. Medical Devices 79 83

   Somnus Med Techns Medical Devices 76 76

   Artisan Components Inc. Semiconductors 70 70

   Macrovision Corp. Copy Protection Products 70 79

   Faroudja Inc. Video Processing 70 75

   Splash Techn Hldgs Computer Peripherals 65 165

   Lumisys Inc. Medical Imaging Equipment 65 140

   Envirotest Sys Corp. Vehicle Emissions Testing 60 2,993

   Pharmacyclics Inc. Pharmaceuticals 57 57

   Logic Devices Inc. Semiconductors 50 58

   Radius Inc. Computer Peripherals 50 60

   Mobinetix Sys Inc. Software/Hardware 49 55

   Innerdyne Inc. Surgical Instruments 25 125

   Intl Network Services Network Eng/Consulting N/A 1,008

   -----------------------------------------------

   SANTA CRUZ COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Santa Cruz

   SCO Inc. Unix Software 465 1,082

   Plantronics Inc. Communication Equipment 358 1,817

   .

   Scotts Valley

   Seagate Technology Computer Peripehrals 3,000 90,000

   Borland International Computer Software 580 925

   Meridian Data Inc. Networking/Storage Equip 85 98

   .

   Watsonville

   Granite Const Inc. Contracting 800 4,000

   West Marine Inc. Commercial Boating Supplies 600 1,830

   Monterey Bay Bancorp Banking 0 102

   -----------------------------------------------

   SOLANO COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Benicia

   Copart Inc. Salvage 147 1,050

   .

   Dixon

   1st North. Bank of Dixon Commercial Banking 177 177

   .

   Fairfield

   Westamerica Bancorp Banking 700 1,200

   -----------------------------------------------

   SONOMA COUNTY

    Bay Area Total

   Company Name Business Type Empl. Empl.

   .

   Petaluma

   Adv Fibre Comm Inc. Telecommunications 750 800

   Tegal Corp. Semiconductor Equipment 186 263

   Healthy Planet Products Greeting Cards 25 25

   .

   Santa Rosa

   Optical Coating Lab Speciality Chemicals 1,240 1,490

   Arterial Vascular Eng Medical Products/Supplies 1,146 1,322

   Redwood Emp Bancorp Bank Holding Company N/A 321

   .

   Sebastopol

   Vacu-dry Co. Dried Fruit 250 250


GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE TEXT

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1998


                             1996 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 27, 1998, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D17

LENGTH: 3176 words

HEADLINE: CHRONICLE 500 PROFILES;
M-Q

BODY:

    Macromedia Inc.

    Internet/Multimedia Software

    600 Townsend St., Suite 310 W

    San Francisco CA 94103

    415-252-2000

   -- WEB SITE: www.macromedia.com

    -- CEO: John Colligan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 485 ; Bay Area, 415

    .

   Macrovision Corp.

    Copy Protection Products

    1341 Orleans Drive

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-743-8600

   -- WEB SITE: www.macrovision.com

    -- CEO: John Ryan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 79 ; Bay Area, 70

    .

   Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc.

    Drug Development

    34700 Campus Drive

    Fremont CA 94555

    510-742-9900

   -- WEB SITE: www.matx.com

    -- CEO: Michael D. Casey

    -- EMPLOYEES: 120 ; Bay Area, 97

    .

   Mattson Technology Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    3550 W. Warren Ave.

    Fremont CA 94538

    510-657-5900

   -- WEB SITE: www.mattson.com

    -- CEO: Brad Mattson

    -- EMPLOYEES: 373 ; Bay Area, 320

    .

   Maxim Integrated Products Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    120 San Gabriel Drive

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-737-7600

   -- WEB SITE: www.maxim-ic.com

    -- CEO: John Gifford

    -- EMPLOYEES: 2,500 ; Bay Area, 1,998

    .

   McGrath RentCorp

    Electronic Equipment Rentals

    5700 Las Positas Road

    Livermore CA 94550

    510-606-9200

   -- WEB SITE: www.mgrc.com

    -- CEO: Robert McGrath

    -- EMPLOYEES: 359 ; Bay Area, 158

    .

   McKesson Corp.

    Wholesale Pharmaceuticals

    McKesson Plaza, 1 Post St.

    San Francisco CA 94104

    415-983-8300

   -- WEB SITE: www.mckesson.com

    -- CEO: Mark A. Pulido

    -- EMPLOYEES: 13,300 ; Bay Area, 900

    .

   Meadowbrook Rehab

    Health Management Services

    2200 Powell St., Suite 800

    Emeryville CA 94608

    510-420-0900

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Harvey William Glasser

    -- EMPLOYEES: 248 ; Bay Area, 7

    .

   Mecon Inc.

    Health Care Consulting

    200 Porter Drive, Suite 100

    San Ramon CA 94583

    510-838-1700

   -- WEB SITE: www.mecon.com

    -- CEO: Vasu Devan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 93 ; Bay Area, 65

    .

   Media Arts Group Inc.

    Collectibles

    521 Charcot Ave.

    San Jose CA 95113

    408-324-2020

   -- WEB SITE: www.mediarts.com

    -- CEO: Craig Fleming

    -- EMPLOYEES: 420 ; Bay Area, 277

    .

   Megabios Corp.

    Drug Delivery Systems

    863A Mitten Road

    Burlingame CA 94010

    650-697-1900

   -- WEB SITE: www.megabios.com

    -- CEO: Benjamin McGraw

    -- EMPLOYEES: 75 ; Bay Area, 75

    .

   Mercury Interactive Corp.

    Software-Testing Products

    1325 Borregas Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-822-5200

   -- WEB SITE: www.merc-int.com

    -- CEO: Amnon Landan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 440 ; Bay Area, 120

    .

   Meridian Data Inc.

    Networking/Storage Equipment

    5615 Scotts Valley Drive

    Scotts Valley CA 95066

    408-438-3100

   -- WEB SITE: www.meridian-data.com

    -- CEO: Gianluca Rattazzi

    -- EMPLOYEES: 98 ; Bay Area, 85

    .

   Meridian Industrial Trust Inc.

    Real Estate Investment Trust

    455 Market St., 17th Floor

    San Francisco CA 94105

    415-281-3900

   -- WEB SITE: www.mit-reit.com

    -- CEO: Allen Anderson

    -- EMPLOYEES: 36 ; Bay Area, 28

    .

   Metra Biosystems Inc.

    Medical Diagnostic Products

    265 N. Whisman Road

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-903-9100

   -- WEB SITE: www.metrabio.com

    -- CEO: George Dunbar

    -- EMPLOYEES: 70 ; Bay Area, 60

    .

   Metricom Inc.

    Wireless Communication Products

    980 University Ave.

    Los Gatos CA 95030-2375

    408-399-8200

   -- WEB SITE: www.metricom.com

    -- CEO: Robert Dilworth

    -- EMPLOYEES: 235 ; Bay Area, 175

    .

   Micrel Inc.

    Semiconductors

    1849 Fortune Drive

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-944-0800

   -- WEB SITE: www.micrel.com

    -- CEO: Raymond Zinn

    -- EMPLOYEES: 575 ; Bay Area, 560

    .

   Micro Linear Corp.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    2092 Concourse Drive

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-433-5200

   -- WEB SITE: www.microlinear.com

    -- CEO: Arthur Stabenow

    -- EMPLOYEES: 251 ; Bay Area, 237

    .

   Microcide Pharmaceuticals Inc.

    Pharmaceuticals

    850 Maude Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-428-1550

   -- WEB SITE: www.microcide.com

    -- CEO: James Rurka

    -- EMPLOYEES: 161 ; Bay Area, 161

    .

   Micromuse Inc.

    Network Management Software

    139 Townsend St.

    San Francisco CA 94107

    415-538-9090

   -- WEB SITE: www.micromuse.com

    -- CEO: Christopher Dawes

    -- EMPLOYEES: 147 ; Bay Area, 30

    .

   Microprose Inc.

    Gaming Software

    2490 Mariner Square Loop

    Alameda CA 94501

    510-522-3584

   -- WEB SITE: www.microprose.com

    -- CEO: Stephen Race

    -- EMPLOYEES: 390 ; Bay Area, 146

    Type for Georgie Dennison 4-25-98 Page 4 .

   MMC Networks Inc.

    Networking Equipment

    1134 E. Arques Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-731-1600

   -- WEB SITE: www.mmcnet.com

    -- CEO: Prabhat Dubey

    -- EMPLOYEES: 93 ; Bay Area, 85

    .

   Mobinetix Systems Inc.

    Software/Hardware

    500 Oakmead Parkway

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-524-4200

   -- WEB SITE: www.penware.com

    -- CEO: Aziz Valliani

    -- EMPLOYEES: 55 ; Bay Area, 49

    .

   Molecular Devices Corp.

    Biomedical Systems

    1311 Orleans Drive

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-747-1700

   -- WEB SITE: www.moldev.com

    -- CEO: Joseph Keegan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 146 ; Bay Area, 134

    .

   Molecular Dynamics Inc.

    Scientific Instruments

    928 E. Arques Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-773-1222

   -- WEB SITE: www.mdyn.com

    -- CEO: Jay Flatley

    -- EMPLOYEES: 238 ; Bay Area, 205

    .

   Monterey Bay Bancorp Inc.

    Banking

    36 Brennan St.

    Watsonville CA 95076

    408-722-3885

   -- WEB SITE: www.montereybaybank.com

    -- CEO: Eugene Friend

    -- EMPLOYEES: 102 ; Bay Area, 0

    .

   Mylex Corp.

    Storage Products

    34551 Ardenwood Blvd.

    Fremont CA 94555

    510-796-6100

   -- WEB SITE: www.mylex.com

    -- CEO: Al Montross

    -- EMPLOYEES: 354 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Mysoftware Company

    Small-Business Software

    2197 E. Bayshore Road

    Palo Alto CA 94303

    650-473-3600

   -- WEB SITE: www.mysoftware.com

    -- CEO: Gregory W. Slayton

    -- EMPLOYEES: 71 ; Bay Area, 67

    .

   Nanometrics Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    310 Deguigne Drive

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-746-1600

   -- WEB SITE: www.nanometrics.com

    -- CEO: Vincent Coates

    -- EMPLOYEES: 134 ; Bay Area, 95

    .

   National Insurance Group

    Property/Casualty Insurance

    395 Oyster Point Blvd., Suite 500

    South San Francisco CA 94080

    650-872-6772

   -- WEB SITE: www.naig.com

    -- CEO: Mark Speizer

    -- EMPLOYEES: 643 ; Bay Area, 425


   National Semiconductor Corp.

    Semiconductors

    2900 Semiconductor Drive

    Santa Clara CA 95052-8090

    408-721-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.national.com

    -- CEO: Brian L. Halla

    -- EMPLOYEES: 12,400 ; Bay Area, 4,000

    .

   Natural Wonders Inc.

    Science/Nature Gifts

    4209 Technology Drive

    Fremont CA 94538

    510-252-9600

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Kathleen Chatfield

    -- EMPLOYEES: 2,600 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Neomagic Corp.

    Multimedia Memory Devices

    3260 Jay St.

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-988-7020

   -- WEB SITE: www.neomagic.com

    -- CEO: Prakash Agarwal

    -- EMPLOYEES: 192 ; Bay Area, 170

    .

   Netmanage Inc.

    Networking Software

    10725 N. De Anza Blvd.

    Cupertino CA 95014

    408-973-7171

   -- WEB SITE: www.netmanage.com

    -- CEO: Zvi Alon

    -- EMPLOYEES: 632 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Netopia Inc.

    Internet Hardware/Software

    2470 Mariner Square Loop

    Alameda CA 94501

    510-814-5100

   -- WEB SITE: www.netopia.com

    -- CEO: Alan Lefkof

    -- EMPLOYEES: 244 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Netscape Communications Corp.

    Internet Software

    501 E. Middlefield Road

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-254-1900

   -- WEB SITE: www.netscape.com

    -- CEO: James Barksdale

    -- EMPLOYEES: 2,900 ; Bay Area, 2,100

    .

   Network Appliance Inc.

    Network File Servers

    2770 San Tomas Expressway

    Santa Clara CA 95051

    408-367-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.netapp.com

    -- CEO: Daniel Warmenhoven

    -- EMPLOYEES: 317 ; Bay Area, 317

    .

   Network Associates Inc.

    Network/Security Software

    3965 Freedom Circle

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-988-3832

   -- WEB SITE: www.nai.com

    -- CEO: William Larson

    -- EMPLOYEES: 1,600 ; Bay Area, 800

    .

   Network Computing Devices Inc.

    Networking Hardware/Software

    350 N. Bernardo Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-694-0650

   -- WEB SITE: www.ncd.com

    -- CEO: Robert Gilbertson

    -- EMPLOYEES: 350 ; Bay Area, 250

    .

   Network Equipment Technologies Inc.

    Networking Products

    6500 Paseo Padre Parkway

    Fremont CA 94555

    510-713-7300

   -- WEB SITE: www.net.com

    -- CEO: Joseph J. Francesconi

    -- EMPLOYEES: 1,367 ; Bay Area, 850

    .

   Network Peripherals Inc.

    Networking Products

    1371 McCarthy Blvd.

    Milpitas CA 95035

    408-321-7300

   -- WEB SITE: www.npix.com

    -- CEO: Pauline Lo Alker

    -- EMPLOYEES: 158 ; Bay Area, 53

    .

   Neurex Corp.

    Biomedical/Gene Therapy

    3760 Haven Ave.

    Menlo Park CA 94025-1012

    650-853-1500

   -- WEB SITE: www.neurex.com

    -- CEO: Paul Goddard

    -- EMPLOYEES: 100 ; Bay Area, 100

    .

   North Face Inc.

    Outdoors Apparel/Equipment

    2013 Farallon Drive

    San Leandro CA 94577

    510-618-3500

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: William N. Simon

    -- EMPLOYEES: 713 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Notify Corp.

    Communication Products

    1054 S. De Anza Blvd., Suite 105

    San Jose CA 95129

    408-777-7920

   -- WEB SITE: www.notifycorp.com

    -- CEO: Paul DePond

    -- EMPLOYEES: 15 ; Bay Area, 15

    .

   Novellus Systems Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    3970 N. First St.

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-943-9700

   -- WEB SITE: www.novellus.com

    -- CEO: Richard Hill

    -- EMPLOYEES: 1,776 ; Bay Area, 900

    .

   Oacis Healthcare Systems Inc.

    Medical Information Systems

    100 Drakes Landing Road, Suite 100

    Greenbrae CA 94904

    415-925-0121

   -- WEB SITE: www.oacis.com

    -- CEO: Jim McCord

    -- EMPLOYEES: 176 ; Bay Area, 135

    .

   Oak Technology Inc.

    Multimedia Semiconductors

    139 Kifer Court

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-737-0888

   -- WEB SITE: www.oaktech.com

    -- CEO: David Tsang

    -- EMPLOYEES: 460 ; Bay Area, 280

    .

   Ocular Sciences Inc.

    Contact Lenses

    475 Eccles Ave.

    South San Francisco CA 94080

    650-583-1400

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: John Fruth

    -- EMPLOYEES: 1,300 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Odwalla Inc.

    Juices

    120 Stone Pine Road

    Half Moon Bay CA 94019

    650-726-1888

   -- WEB SITE: www.odwalla.com

    -- CEO: Stephen Williamson

    -- EMPLOYEES: 430 ; Bay Area, 130

    .

   On Command Corp.

    Interactive Entertainment

    6331 San Ignacio Ave.

    San Jose CA 95119

    408-360-4500

   -- WEB SITE: www.oncommand.com

    -- CEO: Robert Kavner

    -- EMPLOYEES: 773 ; Bay Area, 350

    .

   OnSale Inc.

    Electronics

    1350 Willow Road

    Menlo Park CA 94025

    650-470-2400

   -- WEB SITE: www.onsale.com

    -- CEO: Jerrold Kaplan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 135 ; Bay Area,135

    Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc.

    Cancer Research 3031 Research Drive Richmond CA 94806 510-222-9700
www.onyx-pharm.com Hollings Renton 120 120 .

   OPTi Inc.

    Semiconductors

    888 Tasman Drive

    Milpitas CA 95035

    408-486-8000

   -- WEB SITE: www.opti.com

    -- CEO: Jerry Chang

    -- EMPLOYEES: 125 ; Bay Area, 115

    .

   Optical Coating Laboratory Inc.

    Specialty Chemicals

    2789 Northpoint Parkway

    Santa Rosa CA 95407-7397

    707-545-6440

   -- WEB SITE: www.ocli.com

    -- CEO: Charles Abbe

    -- EMPLOYEES: 1,490 ; Bay Area, 1,240

    .

   Oracle Corp.

    Database Software

    500 Oracle Parkway

    Redwood Shores CA 94065

    650-506-7000

   -- WEB SITE: www.oracle.com

    -- CEO: Lawrence Ellison

    -- EMPLOYEES: 34,000 ; Bay Area, 15,000

    .

   Organic Food Products Inc.

    Organic Foods Production

    550 Monterey Road

    Morgan Hill CA 95037

    408-782-1133

   -- WEB SITE: www.ofpi.com

    -- CEO: Floyd Hill

    -- EMPLOYEES: 45 ; Bay Area, 45

    .

   P-Com Inc.

    Wireless Telecommunications Equipment

    3175 S. Winchester Blvd.

    Campbell CA 95008

    408-866-3666

   -- WEB SITE: www.p-com.com

    -- CEO: George P. Roberts

    -- EMPLOYEES: 900 ; Bay Area, 600

    .

   Pacific Bank N.A., The

    Commercial Banking

    351 California St.

    San Francisco CA 94104

    415-576-2700

   -- WEB SITE: www.pacificbank.com

    -- CEO: Michael Tun Zan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 280 ; Bay Area, 250

    .

   Pacific Gateway Exchange Inc.

    Telecommunications

    533 Airport Blvd., Suite 505

    Burlingame CA 94010

    650-375-6700

   -- WEB SITE: www.pgexchange.com

    -- CEO: Howard Neckowitz

    -- EMPLOYEES: 97 ; Bay Area, 56

    .

   Pacific Gateway Properties Inc.

    Real Estate Investment Trust

    930 Montgomery St., Suite 400

    San Francisco CA 94133

    415-398-4800

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Raymond Marino

    -- EMPLOYEES: 14 ; Bay Area, 14

    .

   Penederm Inc.

    Drug Delivery Systems

    320 Lakeside Drive

    Foster City CA 94404

    650-358-0100

   -- WEB SITE: www.penederm.com

    -- CEO: Lloyd H. Malchow

    -- EMPLOYEES: 81 ; Bay Area, 52

    .

   Penn Octane Corp.

    Gas Pipelines

    900 Veterans Blvd., Suite 240

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-368-1501

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Jerome Richter

    -- EMPLOYEES: 41 ; Bay Area, 2

    .

   PeopleSoft Inc.

    Applications Software

    4440 Rosewood Drive

    Pleasanton CA 94588

    925-225-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.peoplesoft.com

    -- CEO: David Duffield

    -- EMPLOYEES: 4,452 ; Bay Area, 2,000

    .

   Perclose Inc.

    Medical Devices

    199 Jefferson Drive

    Menlo Park CA 94025

    650-473-3100

   -- WEB SITE: www.perclose.com

    -- CEO: Henry Plain

    -- EMPLOYEES: 250 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Pericom Semiconductor Corp.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    2380 Bering Drive

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-435-0800

   -- WEB SITE: www.pericom.com

    -- CEO: Alex Chi-Ming Hui

    -- EMPLOYEES: 155 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   Pete's Brewing Co.

    Beer

    514 High St.

    Palo Alto CA 94301

    650-328-7383

   -- WEB SITE: www.peteswicked.com

    -- CEO: Jeffrey Atkins

    -- EMPLOYEES: 115 ; Bay Area, 45

    .

   PG&E Corp.

    Energy Services Holding Co.

    1 Market St., Suite 2400

    San Francisco CA 94105

    415-973-7000

   -- WEB SITE: www.pgecorp.com

    -- CEO: Robert Glynn, Jr.

    -- EMPLOYEES: 23,500 ; Bay Area, 13,270

    .

   Pharmacyclics Inc.

    Pharmaceuticals

    995 E. Arques Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-774-0330

   -- WEB SITE: www.pcyc.com

    -- CEO: Richard Miller

    -- EMPLOYEES: 57 ; Bay Area, 57

    .

   Pharmchem Laboratories Inc.

    Drug-Testing Products

    1505-A O'Brien Drive

    Menlo Park CA 94025

    650-328-6200

   -- WEB SITE: www.pharmchem.com

    -- CEO: Joseph Halligan

    -- EMPLOYEES: 350 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Phoenix Technologies Ltd.

    Computer Software

    411 E. Plumeria Drive

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-570-1000

   -- WEB SITE: www.phoenix.com

    -- CEO: Jack Kay

    -- EMPLOYEES: 580 ; Bay Area, 230

    .

   Photon Dynamics Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    6325 San Ignacio

    San Jose CA 95119

    408-226-9900

   -- WEB SITE: www.photondynamics.com

    -- CEO: Vincent Sollitto

    -- EMPLOYEES: 112 ; Bay Area, 97

    .

   Pinnacle Systems Inc.

    Video Manipulation Technology

    280 N. Bernardo Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-526-1600

   -- WEB SITE: www.pinnaclesys.com

    -- CEO: Mark Sanders

    -- EMPLOYEES: 312 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   Pixar Animation Studios

    Computer Animation

    1001 W. Cutting Blvd.

    Richmond CA 94804

    510-236-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.pixar.com

    -- CEO: Steven Jobs

    -- EMPLOYEES: 400 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Plantronics Inc.

    Communication Equipment

    345 Encinal St.

    Santa Cruz CA 95060-1802

    408-426-6060

   -- WEB SITE: www.plantronics.com

    -- CEO: Robert Cecil

    -- EMPLOYEES: 1,817 ; Bay Area, 358

    .

   PLM International Inc.

    Equipment Leasing

    1 Market Plaza, Steuart Tower, Suite 800

    San Francisco CA 94105-1301

    1-800-227-0830

   -- WEB SITE: www.plm.com

    -- CEO: Robert Tidball

    -- EMPLOYEES: 181 ; Bay Area, 90

    .

   PMI Group Inc., The

    Mortgage Guarantee Insurance

    601 Montgomery St.

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-788-7878

   -- WEB SITE: www.pmigroup.com

    -- CEO: W. Roger Haughton

    -- EMPLOYEES: 900 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Point West Capital Corp.

    Financial Services

    1700 Montgomery St., Suite 250

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-394-9469

   -- WEB SITE: www.pointwestcapital.com

    -- CEO: Bradley Rotter

    -- EMPLOYEES: 14.999,997 ; Bay Area, 15

    .

   Polycom Inc.

    Teleconferencing Products

    2584 Junction Ave.

    San Jose CA 95134-1902

    408-526-9000

   -- WEB SITE: www.polycom.com

    -- CEO: Brian Hinman

    -- EMPLOYEES: 225 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   Power Integrations Inc.

    Integrated Circuits

    477 N. Mathilda Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-523-9200

   -- WEB SITE: www.powerint.com

    -- CEO: Howard Earhart

    -- EMPLOYEES: 145 ; Bay Area, 133

    .

   Premisys Communications Inc.

    Telecommunications

    48664 Milmont Drive

    Fremont CA 94538

    925-353-7600

   -- WEB SITE: www.premisys.com

    -- CEO: Raymond Lin

    -- EMPLOYEES: 315 ; Bay Area, 240

    .

   Preview Travel Inc.

    Internet Travel Service

    747 Front St.

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-439-1200

   -- WEB SITE: www.previewtravel.com

    -- CEO: Kenneth Orton

    -- EMPLOYEES: 207 ; Bay Area, 190

    .

   Prism Solutions Inc.

    Data Management Software

    1000 Hamlin Court

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-752-1888

   -- WEB SITE: www.prismsolutions.com

    -- CEO: Warren Weiss

    -- EMPLOYEES: 381 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   ProBusiness Services Inc.

    Human Resources Services

    4125 Hopyard Road

    Pleasanton CA 94588

    925-737-3500

   -- WEB SITE: www.probusiness.comThomas Sinto

    -- CEO: 500

    -- EMPLOYEES: 400 ; Bay Area,

    Progenitor Inc.

    Biotechnology 4040 Campbell Ave. Menlo Park CA 94025 650-617-0880
www.progenitor.com Douglass Given 60 59 .

   Protein Design Labs Inc.

    Biomedicine

    2375 Garcia Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-903-3700

   -- WEB SITE: www.pdl.com

    -- CEO: Laurence Jay Korn

    -- EMPLOYEES: 217 ; Bay Area, 180

    .

   Providian Financial Corp.

    Consumer Credit

    201 Mission St.

    San Francisco CA 94105

    415-543-0404

   -- WEB SITE: www.providian.com

    -- CEO: Shailesh J. Mehta

    -- EMPLOYEES: 4,100 ; Bay Area, 3,700

    .

   Proxim Inc.

    Wireless Networks

    295 N. Bernardo Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-960-1630

   -- WEB SITE: www.proxim.com

    -- CEO: David King

    -- EMPLOYEES: 177 ; Bay Area, 170

    .

   Puma Technology Inc.

    Mobile Computing Software

    2550 N. First St., Suite 500

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-321-7650

   -- WEB SITE: www.pumatech.com

    -- CEO: Bradley Rowe

    -- EMPLOYEES: 148 ; Bay Area, 80

    .

   Purus Inc.

    Pollution Control Systems

    605 Tennant Ave., Suite B

    Morgan Hill CA 95037

    408-778-3465

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Russell K. Burbank

    -- EMPLOYEES: 2 ; Bay Area, 2

    .

   Quadramed Corp.

    Health Care Management Software

    80 E. Sir Francis Drake Blvd., Suite 2A

    Larkspur CA 94939

    415-461-7725

   -- WEB SITE: www.quadramed.com

    -- CEO: James Durham

    -- EMPLOYEES: 774 ; Bay Area, 125

    .

   Quality Semiconductor Inc.

    Semiconductors

    851 Martin Ave.

    Santa Clara CA 95050-2903

    408-450-8000

   -- WEB SITE: www.qualitysemi.com

    -- CEO: R. Paul Gupta

    -- EMPLOYEES: 220 ; Bay Area, 80

    .

   Qualix Group Inc.

    Computer Software

    1900 S. Norfolk, Suite 224

    San Mateo CA 94403-1151

    650-572-0200

   -- WEB SITE: www.qualix.com

    -- CEO: Richard G. Thau

    -- EMPLOYEES: 170 ; Bay Area, 170

    .

   Quantum Corp.

    Computer Peripherals

    500 McCarthy Blvd.

    Milpitas CA 95035

    408-894-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.quantum.com

    -- CEO: Michael A. Brown

    -- EMPLOYEES: 6,214 ; Bay Area, 2,300

    .

   Quickresponse Services Inc.

    Computer Services

    1400 Marina Way South

    Richmond CA 94804

    510-215-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.qrsi.com

    -- CEO: Lynn Hazlett

    -- EMPLOYEES: 230 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Quickturn Design Systems Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    55 W. Trimble Road

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-914-6000

   -- WEB SITE: www.quickturn.com

    -- CEO: Keith R. Lobo

    -- EMPLOYEES: 391 ; Bay Area, 269



LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1998


                             1997 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 27, 1998, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D17

LENGTH: 5206 words

HEADLINE: CHRONICLE 500 PROFILES;

A-C

BODY:



   3Com Corp.

    Computer Networking Systems

    5400 Bayfront Plaza

    Santa Clara CA 95052

    408-764-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.3com.com

    -- CEO: Eric Benhamou

    -- EMPLOYEES13,500 ; Bay Area, 3,000

    .

   3Dfx Interactive Inc.

    Media/Entertainment Software

    4435 Fortran Drive

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-935-4400

   -- WEB SITE: www.3dfx.com

    -- CEO: Gordon Campbell

    -- EMPLOYEES166 ; Bay Area, 158

    .

   3DO Co.

    Game/Entertainment Software

    600 Galveston Drive

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-261-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.3do.com

    -- CEO: Trip Hawkins

    -- EMPLOYEES220 ; Bay Area, 170

    .

   8X8 Inc.

    Chips, Video-conferencing

    2445 Mission College Blvd.

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-727-1885

   -- WEB SITE: www.8x8.com

    -- CEO: Paul Voois

    -- EMPLOYEES140 ; Bay Area, 130

    .

   ABM Industries Inc.

    Building Maintenance

    160 Pacific Ave., Suite 222

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-733-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.abm.com

    -- CEO: William W. Steele

    -- EMPLOYEES52,000 ; Bay Area, 5,800

    .

   Accelgraphics Inc.

    Graphics Software

    1873 Barber Lane

    Santa Clara CA 95035

    408-546-2100

   -- WEB SITE: www.accelgraphics.com

    -- CEO: Jeffrey Dunn

    -- EMPLOYEES60 ; Bay Area, 50

    .

   Actel Corp.

    Semiconductors

    955 E. Arques Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086-4533

    408-739-1010

   -- WEB SITE: www.actel.com

    -- CEO: John East

    -- EMPLOYEES400 ; Bay Area, 350

    .

   Acuson Corp.

    Medical Ultrasound Equipment

    1220 Charleston Road

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-969-9112

   -- WEB SITE: www.acuson.com

    -- CEO: Samuel H. Maslak

    -- EMPLOYEES1,800 ; Bay Area, 1,100

    .

   Adac Laboratories

    Medical Imaging Equipment

    540 Alder Drive

    Milpitas CA 95035

    408-321-9100

   -- WEB SITE: www.adaclabs.com

    -- CEO: Andrew Eckert

    -- EMPLOYEES900 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Adaptec Inc.

    Networking Products

    691 S. Milpitas Blvd.

    Milpitas CA 95035

    408-945-8600

   -- WEB SITE: www.adaptec.com

    -- CEO: F. Grant Saviers

    -- EMPLOYEES3,500 ; Bay Area, 1,400

    .

   Adecco

    Staffing Services

    100 Redwood Shores Parkway

    Redwood City CA 94065

    415-610-1000

   -- WEB SITE: www.adecco.com

    -- CEO: John Bowmer

    -- EMPLOYEES15,000 ; Bay Area, 450

    .

   Adept Technology Inc.

    Robotics/Vision Systems

    150 Rose Orchard Way

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-432-0888

   -- WEB SITE: www.adept.com

    -- CEO: Brian Carlisle

    -- EMPLOYEES410 ; Bay Area, 250

    .

   Adobe Systems Inc.

    Computer Software

    345 Park Ave.

    San Jose CA 95110-2704

    408-536-6000

   -- WEB SITE: www.adobe.com

    -- CEO: John Warnock

    -- EMPLOYEES2,500 ; Bay Area, 1,500

    .

   Advanced Fibre Communications Inc.

    Telecommunications

    1 Willow Brook Court

    Petaluma CA 94954

    707-794-7700

   -- WEB SITE: www.fibre.com

    -- CEO: Carl Grivner

    -- EMPLOYEES800 ; Bay Area, 750

    .

   Advanced Micro Devices

    Semiconductors

    1 AMD Place

    Sunnyvale CA 94088-3453

    408-732-2400

   -- WEB SITE: www.amd.com

    -- CEO: W. J. Sanders III

    -- EMPLOYEES12,759 ; Bay Area, 2,988

    .

   Advanced Polymer Systems

    Polymer-Based Delivery Systems

    123 Saginaw Drive

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-366-2626

   -- WEB SITE: www.advancedpolymer.com

    -- CEO: John Meakem

    -- EMPLOYEES90 ; Bay Area, 45

    .

   Advent Software Inc.

    Investment Management Software

    301 Brannan St.

    San Francisco CA 94107

    415-543-7696

   -- WEB SITE: www.advent.com

    -- CEO: Stephanie Di Marco

    -- EMPLOYEES380 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Aehr Test Systems

    Semiconductor Equipment

    1667 Plymouth St.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-691-9400

   -- WEB SITE: www.aehr.com

    -- CEO: Rhea Posedel

    -- EMPLOYEES120 ; Bay Area, 155

    .

   Affymetrix Inc.

    Biotechnology

    3380 Central Expressway

    Santa Clara CA 95051

    408-731-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.affymetrix.com

    -- CEO: Stephen Fodor

    -- EMPLOYEES242 ; Bay Area, 242

    .

   Ag Associates Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    4425 Fortran Drive

    San Jose CA 95134-2300

    408-935-2000

   -- WEB SITE: www.agassociates.com

    -- CEO: Arnon Gat

    -- EMPLOYEES300 ; Bay Area, 253

    .

   AirTouch Communications Inc.

    Cellular/Wireless Telecommunications

   010Cqlifornia St.

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-658-2000

   -- WEB SITE: www.airtouch.com

    -- CEO: Sam Ginn

    -- EMPLOYEES8,800 ; Bay Area, 900

    .

   Alliance Semiconductor Corp.

    Imbedded Memory Products

    3099 N. First St.

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-383-4900

   -- WEB SITE: www.alsc.com

    -- CEO: N. Damodar Reddy

    -- EMPLOYEES170 ; Bay Area, 160

    .

   Altera Corp.

    Programmable Integrated Circuits

    101 Innovation Drive

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-544-7000

   -- WEB SITE: www.altera.com

    -- CEO: Rodney Smith

    -- EMPLOYEES1,086 ; Bay Area, 861

    .

   Alza Corp.

    Drug Delivery

    950 Page Mill Road

    Palo Alto CA 94303-0802

    650-494-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.alza.com

    -- CEO: Alejandro Zaffaroni

    -- EMPLOYEES1,550 ; Bay Area, 1,000

    .

   AMB Property Corp.

    Real Estate Investment Trust

    505 Montgomery St.

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-394-9000

   -- WEB SITE: www.amb.com

    -- CEO: Hamid Moghadam

    -- EMPLOYEES120 ; Bay Area, 120

    .

   American Champion Entertainment Inc.

    Entertainment

    26203 Production Ave., Suite 5

    Hayward CA 94545

    510-782-8168

   -- WEB SITE: www.hi-yah.com

    -- CEO: George Chung

    -- EMPLOYEES20 ; Bay Area, 20

    .

   Ampex Corp.

    Digital Recording/Imaging

    500 Broadway

    Redwood City CA 94063-3199

    650-367-2011

   -- WEB SITE: www.ampex.com

    -- CEO: Edward J. Bramson

    -- EMPLOYEES500 ; Bay Area, 275

    .

   Apple Computer Inc.

    Computer Hardware

    1 Infinite Loop

    Cupertino CA 95014

    408-996-1010

   -- WEB SITE: www.apple.com

    -- CEO: Fred Anderson

    -- EMPLOYEES9,049 ; Bay Area, 3,000

    .

   Applied Imaging Corp.

    Medical Devices

    2380 Walsh Ave., Building B

    Santa Clara CA 95051

    408-562-0250

   -- WEB SITE: www.aicorp.com

    -- CEO: Jack Goldstein

    -- EMPLOYEES107 ; Bay Area, 50

    .

   Applied Materials Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    3050 Bowers Ave.

    Santa Clara CA 95054-3299

    408-727-5555

   -- WEB SITE: www.appliedmaterials.com

    -- CEO: James C. Morgan

    -- EMPLOYEES15,500 ; Bay Area, 6,000

    .

   Applied Signal Technology

    Digital Signal Processing Equipment

    400 W. California Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-749-1888

   -- WEB SITE: www.app.com

    -- CEO: Gary L. Yancey

    -- EMPLOYEES615 ; Bay Area, 575

    .

   Aradigm Corp.

    Drug Delivery

    26219 Eden Landing Road

    Hayward CA 94545

    510-783-0100

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Richard P. Thompson

    -- EMPLOYEES100 ; Bay Area, 100

    .

   Arbor Software Corp.

    Computer Software

    1344 Crossman Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-744-9500

   -- WEB SITE: www.arborsoft.com

    -- CEO: John Dillon

    -- EMPLOYEES415 ; Bay Area, 210

    .

   Arterial Vascular Engineering Inc.

    Medical Products/Supplies

    3576 Unocal Place

    Santa Rosa CA 95403

    707-525-0111

   -- WEB SITE: www.avei.com

    -- CEO: Scott Solano

    -- EMPLOYEES1,322 ; Bay Area, 1,146

    .

   Arthrocare Corp.

    Medical Devices

    595 N. Pastoria Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-736-0224

   -- WEB SITE: www.arthrocare.com

    -- CEO: Michael A. Baker

    -- EMPLOYEES774 ; Bay Area, 125

    .

   Artisan Components Inc.

    Semiconductors

    1195 Bordeaux Dr.

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-734-5600

   -- WEB SITE: www.artisan.com

    -- CEO: Mark Templeton

    -- EMPLOYEES70 ; Bay Area, 70

    .

   Asante Technologies Inc.

    Networking Solutions

    821 Fox Lane

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-435-8388

   -- WEB SITE: www.asante.com

    -- CEO: Jeff Yuan-Kai Lin

    -- EMPLOYEES182 ; Bay Area, 140

    .

   Ascend Communications Inc.

    Networking Solutions

    1701 Harbor Bay Parkway

    Alameda CA 94502

    510-769-6001

   -- WEB SITE: www.ascend.com

    -- CEO: Mory Ejabat

    -- EMPLOYEES1,820 ; Bay Area, 706

    .

   Aspect Development Inc.

    Computer Software

    1300 Charleston Road

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-428-2700

   -- WEB SITE: www.aspectdv.com

    -- CEO: Romesh Wadhwani

    -- EMPLOYEES536 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Aspect Telecommunications

    Telecommunication Equipment

    1730 Fox Drive

    San Jose CA 95131-2312

    408-325-2200

   -- WEB SITE: www.aspect.com

    -- CEO: James Carreker

    -- EMPLOYEES1,600 ; Bay Area, 700

    .

   Asyst Technologies Inc.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    48761 Kato Road

    Fremont CA 94538

    510-661-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.asyst.com

    -- CEO: Mihir Parikh

    -- EMPLOYEES674 ; Bay Area, 114

    .

   At Home Corp.

    Internet Service Provider

    425 Broadway St.

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-569-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.home.net

    -- CEO: Thomas Jermoluk

    -- EMPLOYEES400 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Atmel Corp.

    Semiconductor Equipment

    2325 Orchard Parkway

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-441-0311

   -- WEB SITE: www.atmel.com

    -- CEO: George Perlegos

    -- EMPLOYEES6,000 ; Bay Area, 2,500

    .

   Aureal Semiconductor

    Semiconductor Equipment

    4245 Technology Drive

    Fremont CA 94538

    510-252-4245

   -- WEB SITE: www.aureal.com

    -- CEO: Kenneth Kokinakis

    -- EMPLOYEES98 ; Bay Area, 90

    .

   Auspex Systems Inc.

    Computer Hardware and software

    2300 Central Expressway

    Santa Clara CA 95050

    408-566-2000

   -- WEB SITE: www.auspex.com

    -- CEO: Bruce Moore

    -- EMPLOYEES650 ; Bay Area, 450

    .

   Autodesk Inc.

    Computer Software

    111 McInnis Parkway

    San Rafael CA 94903

    415-507-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.autodesk.com

    -- CEO: Carol Bartz

    -- EMPLOYEES2,470 ; Bay Area, 1,250

    .

   Avant! Corp.

    Computer Software

    46871 Bayside Parkway

    Fremont CA 94053

    510-413-8000

   -- WEB SITE: www.avanticorp.com

    -- CEO: Gerald Hsu

    -- EMPLOYEES800 ; Bay Area, 600

    .

   Avigen Inc.

    Gene Therapy

    1201 Harbor Bay Parkway, Suite 1000

    Alameda CA 94502

    510-748-7150

   -- WEB SITE: www.avigen.com

    -- CEO: Philip Whitcome

    -- EMPLOYEES60 ; Bay Area, 60

    .

   Aviron

    Genetically Engineered Vaccines

    297 N. Bernardo Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-919-6500

   -- WEB SITE: www.aviron.com

    -- CEO: J. Leighton Read

    -- EMPLOYEES120 ; Bay Area, 120

    .

   Award Software International Inc.

    Computer Software

    777 E. Middlefield Road

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-237-6800

   -- WEB SITE: www.award.com

    -- CEO: George C. Huang

    -- EMPLOYEES170 ; Bay Area, 85

    .

   Axys Pharmaceuticals Inc.

    Pharmaceuticals

    180 Kimball Way

    South San Francisco CA 94080

    650-829-1000

   -- WEB SITE: www.axyspharm.com

    -- CEO: John Walker

    -- EMPLOYEES195 ; Bay Area, 195

    .

   BA Merchant Services Inc.

    Banking

    1 S. Van Ness Ave.

    San Francisco CA 94103

    415-241-3390

   -- WEB SITE: www.bankamerica.comSharif Bayyari

    -- CEO: 806

    -- EMPLOYEES400 ; Bay Area,


    BankAmerica Corp.

    Banking 555 California St. San Francisco CA 94104
415-622-3456 www.bankamerica.com David Coulter 90,500 34,291 .

   Barra Inc.

    Financial Software/Services

    2100 Milvia St.

    Berkeley CA 94704

    510-548-5442

   -- WEB SITE: www.barra.com

    -- CEO: Andrew Rudd

    -- EMPLOYEES700 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Bay Apartment Communities Inc.

    Real Estate Investment Trust

    4340 Stevens Creek Blvd., Suite 275

    San Jose CA 95129

    408-983-1500

   -- WEB SITE: www.bay-apartments.com

    -- CEO: Max Gardner

    -- EMPLOYEES663 ; Bay Area, 405

    .

   Bay Area Bancshares

    Banking

    900 Veterans Blvd.

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-367-1600

   -- WEB SITE: www.bayareabank.com

    -- CEO: Robert Haight

    -- EMPLOYEES42 ; Bay Area, 42

    .

   Bay Networks Inc.

    Networking

    4401 Great America Parkway

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-988-2400

   -- WEB SITE: www.baynetworks.com

    -- CEO: David House

    -- EMPLOYEES6,549 ; Bay Area, 1,976

    .

   Bay View Capital Corp.

    Savings & Loan

    1840 Gateway Drive

    San Mateo CA 94404

    650-573-7300

   -- WEB SITE: www.bvcc.com

    -- CEO: Edward Sondker

    -- EMPLOYEES800 ; Bay Area, 125

    .

   BEA Systems Inc.

    Computer Software

    385 Moffett Park Drive, Suite 105

    Sunnyvale CA 94089-1208

    408-743-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.beasys.com

    -- CEO: William Coleman

    -- EMPLOYEES900 ; Bay Area, 275

    .

   Bedford Property Investors Inc.

    Real Estate Investment Trust

    270 Lafayette Circle

    Lafayette CA 94549

    510-283-8910

   -- WEB SITE: www.befordproperty.com

    -- CEO: Peter Bedford

    -- EMPLOYEES47 ; Bay Area, 38

    .

   BEI Technologies

    Industrial Products

    1 Post St., Suite 2500

    San Francisco CA 94104

    415-956-4477

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Charles Crocker

    -- EMPLOYEES977 ; Bay Area, 250

    .

   Bell Microproducts Inc.

    Semiconductor Distribution

    1941 Ringwood Ave.

    San Jose CA 95131-1721

    408-451-9400

   -- WEB SITE: www.bellmicro.com

    -- CEO: W. Donald Bell

    -- EMPLOYEES650 ; Bay Area, 500

    .

   Bell Sports Corp.

    Leisure Products

    6350 San Ignacio Ave.

    San Jose CA 95119

    408-574-3400

   -- WEB SITE: www.bellsports.com

    -- CEO: Terry Lee

    -- EMPLOYEES1,900 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   Beringer Wine Estate Holding Inc.

    Wine

    1000 Pratt Ave.

    St. Helena CA 94574

    707-963-7115

   -- WEB SITE: www.beringer.com

    -- CEO: Walter Klenz

    -- EMPLOYEES650 ; Bay Area, 560

    .

   BF Enterprises Inc.

    Real Estate

    100 Bush St., Suite 1250

    San Francisco CA 94104

    415-989-6580

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Brian Burns

    -- EMPLOYEES7 ; Bay Area, 6

    .

   Bio-Rad Laboratories

    Diagnostic Products

    1000 Alfred Nobel Drive

    Hercules CA 94547

    510-724-7000

   -- WEB SITE: www.bio-rad.com

    -- CEO: David Schwartz

    -- EMPLOYEES2,535 ; Bay Area, 1,050

    .

   BioTime Inc.

    Biotechnology

    935 Pardee St.

    Berkeley CA 94710

    510-845-9535

   -- WEB SITE: www.biotimeinc.com

    -- CEO: Paul Segall

    -- EMPLOYEES14 ; Bay Area, 12

    .

   Boole & Babbage Inc.

    Software Retail/Services

    3131 Zanker Road

    San Jose CA 95134-1933

    408-526-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.boole.com

    -- CEO: Paul Newton

    -- EMPLOYEES904 ; Bay Area, 320

    .

   Borel Banking & Trust Co. San Mateo

    Commercial Banking

    160 Bovet Road

    San Mateo CA 94402

    650-378-3700

   -- WEB SITE: www.borel.com

    -- CEO: Harold Fick

    -- EMPLOYEES70 ; Bay Area, 70

    .

   Borland International

    Computer Software

    100 Borland Way

    Scotts Valley CA 95066-3249

    408-431-1000

   -- WEB SITE: www.borland.com

    -- CEO: Delbert Yocam

    -- EMPLOYEES925 ; Bay Area, 580

    .

   BRE Properties Inc.

    Real Estate Investment Trust

    44 Montgomery St., 36th Floor

    San Francisco CA 94104-5525

    415-445-6530

   -- WEB SITE: www.breproperties.com

    -- CEO: Frank McDowell

    -- EMPLOYEES1,000 ; Bay Area, 250

    .

   BroadVision Inc.

    Internet Software Commerce

    585 Broadway

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-261-5100

   -- WEB SITE: www.broadvision.com

    -- CEO: Pehong Chen

    -- EMPLOYEES225 ; Bay Area, 180

    .

   Broderbund Software Inc.

    Interactive Software

    500 Redwood Blvd.

    Novato CA 94948-6121

    415-382-4400

   -- WEB SITE: www.broderbund.com

    -- CEO: Joseph Durrett

    -- EMPLOYEES1,129 ; Bay Area, NA

    .

   Business Resource Group

    Workspace Products/Services

    2150 N. First St., Suite 101

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-325-3200

   -- WEB SITE: www.brg.com

    -- CEO: John Peth

    -- EMPLOYEES260 ; Bay Area, 195

    .

   BWC Financial Corp.

    Regional Banking

    1400 Civic Drive

    Walnut Creek CA 94596

    925-932-5353

   -- WEB SITE: www.bowc.com

    -- CEO: James Ryan

    -- EMPLOYEES93 ; Bay Area, 93

    .

   C ATS Software Inc.

    Institutional Financial Software

    1870 Embarcadero Road

    Palo Alto CA 94303

    650-321-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.cats.com

    -- CEO: Rod Beckstrom

    -- EMPLOYEES110 ; Bay Area, 60

    .

   C-Cube Microsystems Inc.

    Digital Video Circuits

    1778 McCarthy Blvd.

    Milpitas CA 95035

    408-944-6300

   -- WEB SITE: www.c-cube.com

    -- CEO: Alexandre Balkanski

    -- EMPLOYEES796 ; Bay Area, 726

    .

   Cadence Design Systems Inc.

    Electronic Design Automation

    555 River Oaks Parkway

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-943-1234

   -- WEB SITE: www.cadence.com

    -- CEO: Jack Harding

    -- EMPLOYEES3,750 ; Bay Area, 2,000

    .

   Caere Corp.

    Scanning Software

    100 Cooper Court

    Los Gatos CA 95032

    408-395-7000

   -- WEB SITE: www.caere.com

    -- CEO: Robert Teresi

    -- EMPLOYEES293 ; Bay Area, 230

    .

   California Culinary Academy

    Culinary Education

    625 Polk St.

    San Francisco CA 94102

    415-771-3536

   -- WEB SITE: www.baychef.com

    -- CEO: Keith Keogh

    -- EMPLOYEES153 ; Bay Area, 147

    .

   California Micro Devices

    Electronic Components

    215 Topaz St.

    Milpitas CA 95035-5430

    408-263-3214

   -- WEB SITE: www.camd.com

    -- CEO: Jeffery Kalb

    -- EMPLOYEES300 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   California Microwave Inc.

    Satellite Telecommunications

    1143 Borregas Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94089

    408-732-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.calmike.com

    -- CEO: Frederick Lawrence

    -- EMPLOYEES1,560 ; Bay Area, 81

    .

   California Water Service Group

    Water Utilities

    1720 N. First St.

    San Jose CA 95112

    408-367-8200

   -- WEB SITE: www.calwater.com

    -- CEO: Peter Nelson

    -- EMPLOYEES600 ; Bay Area, 600

    .

   Calpine Corp.

    Power Producers

    50 W. San Fernando St.

    San Jose CA 95113

    408-995-5115

   -- WEB SITE: www.calpine.com

    -- CEO: Peter Cartwright

    -- EMPLOYEES380 ; Bay Area, 160

    .

   Calypte Biomedical Corp.

    Diagnostic Kits

    1440 Fourth St.

    Berkeley CA 94710

    510-526-2541

   -- WEB SITE: www.calypte.com

    -- CEO: William A. Boeger

    -- EMPLOYEES38 ; Bay Area, 38

    .

   Cardiac Pathways Corp.

    Medical Devices

    995 Benecia Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-737-0505

   -- WEB SITE: www.cardiac.com

    -- CEO: William Starling

    -- EMPLOYEES125 ; Bay Area, 115

    .

   Cardima Inc.

    Medical Devices

    47266 Benicia St.

    Fremont CA 94538

    510-354-0300

   -- WEB SITE: www.cardima.com

    -- CEO: Phillip Radlick

    -- EMPLOYEES104 ; Bay Area, 93

    .

   CardioGenesis Corp.

    Medical Devices

    540 Oakmead Parkway

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-328-8500

   -- WEB SITE: www.cardiogenesis.com

    -- CEO: Allen Hill

    -- EMPLOYEES83 ; Bay Area, 79

    .

   CardioThoracic Systems Inc.

    Medical Devices

    10600 N. Tantau Ave.

    Cupertino CA 95014

    408-342-1700

   -- WEB SITE: www.cardioth.com

    -- CEO: Richard Ferrari

    -- EMPLOYEES130 ; Bay Area, 100

    .

   Castelle

    Networking Products

    3255-3 Scott Blvd.

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-496-0474

   -- WEB SITE: www.castelle.com

    -- CEO: Arthur Bruno

    -- EMPLOYEES95 ; Bay Area, 75

    .

   Catalytica Inc.

    Specialty Chemicals

    430 Ferguson Drive

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-960-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.catalytica-inc.com

    -- CEO: Ricardo Levy

    -- EMPLOYEES1,400 ; Bay Area, 100

    .

   Catellus Development Corp.

    Land Development

    201 Mission St.

    San Francisco CA 94105

    415-974-4500

   -- WEB SITE: www.catellus.com

    -- CEO: Nelson Rising

    -- EMPLOYEES385 ; Bay Area, 125

    .

   CBT Group PLC

    Interactive Training Software

    1005 Hamilton Court

    Menlo Park CA 94025

    650-614-5900

   -- WEB SITE: www.cbtsys.com

    -- CEO: James Buckley

    -- EMPLOYEES700 ; Bay Area, 150

    .

   Celeritek Inc.

    Satellite Telecommunications

    3236 Scott Blvd.

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-986-5060

   -- WEB SITE: www.celeritek.com

    -- CEO: Tamer Husseini

    -- EMPLOYEES400 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Cell Genesys Inc.

    Gene Therapy

    342 Lakeside Drive

    Foster City CA 94404

    650-425-4400

   -- WEB SITE: www.cellgenesys.com

    -- CEO: Stephen A. Sherwin

    -- EMPLOYEES155 ; Bay Area, 155

    .

   Cellegy Pharmaceuticals Inc.

    Biopharmaceuticals

    1065 E. Hillside Blvd., Suite 418

    Foster City CA 94404

    650-524-1600

   -- WEB SITE: www.cellegy.com

    -- CEO: K. Michael Forrest

    -- EMPLOYEES19 ; Bay Area, 19

    .

   CellNet Data Systems Inc.

    Wireless Data Communications

    125 Shoreway Road

    San Carlos CA 94070

    650-508-6000

   -- WEB SITE: www.cellnet.com

    -- CEO: John Seidl

    -- EMPLOYEES708 ; Bay Area, 600

    Type for Georgie Dennison 4-25-98 Page 2
.

   Celtrix Pharmaceuticals

    Biopharmaceuticals

    3055 Patrick Henry Drive

    Santa Clara CA 95054-1815

    650-988-2500

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Andreas Sommer

    -- EMPLOYEES80 ; Bay Area, 80

    .

   Centigram Communications Corp.

    Telecommunications Equipment

    91 E. Tasman Drive

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-944-0250

   -- WEB SITE: www.centigram.com

    -- CEO: Robert Puette

    -- EMPLOYEES418 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Central Garden & Pet Co.

    Consumer Products

    3697 Mt. Diablo Blvd.

    Lafayette CA 94549

    510-283-4573

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: William Brown

    -- EMPLOYEES3,000 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Cerus Corp.

    Biotechnology/Medical Products

    2525 Stanwell Drive, Suite 300

    Concord CA 94520

    510-603-9071

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Stephen Isaacs

    -- EMPLOYEES76 ; Bay Area, 76

    .

   Chalone Wine Group Ltd.

    Wine

    621 Airpark Road

    Napa CA 94558

    707-254-4200

   -- WEB SITE: www.chalonewinegroup.com

    -- CEO: W. Philip Woodward

    -- EMPLOYEES118 ; Bay Area, 66

    .

   Chevron Corp.

    Energy

    575 Market St.

    San Francisco CA 94105-2856

    415-894-7700

   -- WEB SITE: www.chevron.com

    -- CEO: Kenneth Derr

    -- EMPLOYEES34,186 ; Bay Area, 8,398

    .

   Childrens Discovery Centers of America Inc.

    Education

    851 Irwin St., Suite 200

    San Rafael CA 94901

    415-257-4200

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Elanna Yalow

    -- EMPLOYEES4,733 ; Bay Area, 471

    .

   Chiron Corp.

    Biopharmaceuticals

    4560 Horton St.

    Emeryville CA 94608

    510-655-8730

   -- WEB SITE: www.chiron.com

    -- CEO: Edward Penhoet

    -- EMPLOYEES6,500 ; Bay Area, 1,868

    .

   Cholestech Corp.

    Medical Devices

    3347 Investment Blvd.

    Hayward CA 94545

    510-732-7200

   -- WEB SITE: www.cholestech.com

    -- CEO: Warren E. Pinckert

    -- EMPLOYEES142 ; Bay Area, 131

    .

   CIDCO Inc.

    Telecommunications

    220 Cochrane Circle

    Morgan Hill CA 95037

    408-779-1162

   -- WEB SITE: www.cidco.com

    -- CEO: Daniel Eilers

    -- EMPLOYEES500 ; Bay Area, 500

    .

   Circle International Group Inc.

    Transportation/Logistics

    260 Townsend St.

    San Francisco CA 94107-0933

    415-978-0600

   -- WEB SITE: www.circleintl.com

    -- CEO: Peter Gibert

    -- EMPLOYEES3,910 ; Bay Area, 183

    .

   Cirrus Logic Inc.

    Integrated Circuitry

    3100 W. Warren Ave.

    Fremont CA 94538

    510-623-8300

   -- WEB SITE: www.cirrus.com

    -- CEO: Michael Hackworth

    -- EMPLOYEES1,800 ; Bay Area, 800

    .

   Cisco Systems Inc.

    Networking Products

    170 W. Tasman Drive

    San Jose CA 95134

    408-526-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.cisco.com

    -- CEO: John Chambers

    -- EMPLOYEES12,898 ; Bay Area, 6,853

    .

   Civic Bank of Commerce

    Retail Banking

    2101 Webster St., 14th Floor

    Oakland CA 94612

    510-836-6500

   -- WEB SITE: www.civicbank.com

    -- CEO: Herbert Foster

    -- EMPLOYEES112 ; Bay Area, 112

    .

   CKS Group Inc.

    Marketing/Advertising

    10441 Bandley Drive

    Cupertino CA 95014

    408-366-5100

   -- WEB SITE: www.cks.com

    -- CEO: Mark Kvamme

    -- EMPLOYEES641 ; Bay Area, 212

    .

   Clarify Inc.

    Software/Enterprise Applications

    2125 Onel Drive

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-573-3000

   -- WEB SITE: www.clarify.com

    -- CEO: Tony Zingale

    -- EMPLOYEES500 ; Bay Area, 400

    .

   Clorox Co., The

    Consumer Goods

    1221 Broadway

    Oakland CA 94612-1888

    510-271-7000

   -- WEB SITE: www.clorox.com

    -- CEO: G. Craig Sullivan

    -- EMPLOYEES5,500 ; Bay Area, 1,660

    .

   CMC Industries Inc.

    Electronic Manufacturing Services

    4950 Patrick Henry Drive

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-982-9999

   -- WEB SITE: www.cmcindustries.com

    -- CEO: Matthew Landa

    -- EMPLOYEES800 ; Bay Area, 300

    .

   Cnet

    Internet Content

    150 Chestnut St.

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-395-7800

   -- WEB SITE: www.cnet.com

    -- CEO: Halsey Minor

    -- EMPLOYEES600 ; Bay Area, 550

    .

   CNF Transportation Inc.

    Freight Transportation

    3240 Hillview Ave.

    Palo Alto CA 94304

    650-494-2900

   -- WEB SITE: www.cnf.com

    -- CEO: Donald Moffitt

    -- EMPLOYEES30,000 ; Bay Area, 2,500

    .

   Coast Distribution System, The

    Automobile/Boat Accessories

    1982 Zanker Road

    San Jose CA 95112

    408-436-8611

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Thomas McGuire

    -- EMPLOYEES300 ; Bay Area, 55

    .

   Coherent Inc.

    Laser Instruments

    5100 Patrick Henry Drive

    Santa Clara CA 95054

    408-764-4000

   -- WEB SITE: www.cohr.com

    -- CEO: Bernard Couillaud

    -- EMPLOYEES2,300 ; Bay Area, 850

    .

   Collagen Corp.

    Medical Devices

    1850 Embarcadero Road

    Palo Alto CA 94303

    650-856-0200

   -- WEB SITE: www.collagen.com

    -- CEO: Gary Petersmeyer

    -- EMPLOYEES389 ; Bay Area, 200

    .

   Concentric Network Corp.

    Network Service Provider

    10590 N. Tantau Ave.

    Cupertino CA 95014

    408-342-2800

   -- WEB SITE: www.concentric.net

    -- CEO: Henry Nothhaft

    -- EMPLOYEES500 ; Bay Area, 250

    .

   Conceptus Inc.

    Medical Devices

    1021 Howard Ave.

    San Carlos CA 94070

    65002-7240

   -- WEB SITE: www.conceptus.com

    -- CEO: Kathryn Tunstall

    -- EMPLOYEES62 ; Bay Area, 55

    .

   Conductus Inc.

    Superconductor Products

    969 W. Maude Ave.

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-523-9950

   -- WEB SITE: www.conductus.com

    -- CEO: Charles Shalvoy

    -- EMPLOYEES90 ; Bay Area, 90

    .

   Connetics Corp.

    Biotechnology

    3400 W. Bayshore Road

    Palo Alto CA 94303

    650-843-2800

   -- WEB SITE: www.connetics.com

    -- CEO: Thomas Wiggans

    -- EMPLOYEES72 ; Bay Area, 53

    .

   Consilium Inc.

    Manufacturing Software/Services

    485 Clyde Ave.

    Mountain View CA 94043

    650-691-6100

   -- WEB SITE: www.consilium.com

    -- CEO: Laurence Hootnick

    -- EMPLOYEES300 ; Bay Area, 100

    .

   Consolidated Freightways Corp.

    Freight Transport

    175 Linfield Drive

    Menlo Park CA 94025

    650-326-1700

   -- WEB SITE: www.cfwy.com

    -- CEO: W. Roger Curry

    -- EMPLOYEES21,600 ; Bay Area, 945

    .

   Cooper Companies Inc., The

    Specialty Health Care

    6140 Stoneridge Mall Road, Suite 590

    Pleasanton CA 94588

    925-460-3600

   -- WEB SITE: www.coopercos.com

    -- CEO: A. Thomas Bender

    -- EMPLOYEES2,100 ; Bay Area, 20

    .

   Copart Inc.

    Salvage

    5500 E. Second St.

    Benicia CA 94510

    707-748-5000

   -- WEB SITE: www.copart.com

    -- CEO: Willis Johnson

    -- EMPLOYEES1,050 ; Bay Area, 147

    .

   COR Therapeutics Inc.

    Biopharmaceutical

    256 E. Grand Ave.

    South San Francisco CA 94080

    650-244-6800

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Vaughn M. Kailian

    -- EMPLOYEES185 ; Bay Area, 177

    .

   Cornerstone Imaging Inc.

    Optical Recognition Hardware/Software

    1710 Fortune Drive

    San Jose CA 95131

    408-435-8900

   -- WEB SITE: www.corimage.com

    -- CEO: John Finegan

    -- EMPLOYEES200 ; Bay Area, 175

    .

   Corsair Communications Inc.

    Telecommunications Equipment

    3408 Hillview Ave.

    Palo Alto CA 94304

    650-842-3300

   -- WEB SITE: www.corsair.com

    -- CEO: Mary Ann Byrnes

    -- EMPLOYEES145 ; Bay Area, 120

    .

   Cost Plus Inc.

    Home Furnishings/Gifts

    201 Clay St.

    Oakland CA 94607

    510-893-7300

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Murray Dashe

    -- EMPLOYEES1,647 ; Bay Area, 375

    .

   Cotelligent Group Inc.

    Computer Consulting Services

    101 California St., Suite 2050

    San Francisco CA 94111

    415-439-6400

   -- WEB SITE: www.cotl.com

    -- CEO: James Lavelle

    -- EMPLOYEES2,700 ; Bay Area, 271

    .

   Coulter Pharmaceutical Inc.

    Pharmaceuticals

    550 California Ave., Suite 200

    Palo Alto CA 94306

    650-842-7300

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Michael Bigham

    -- EMPLOYEES75 ; Bay Area, 70

    .

   Credence Systems Corp.

    Automated Testing Equipment

    215 Fourier Ave.

    Fremont CA 94539

    510-657-7400

   -- WEB SITE: www.credence.com

    -- CEO: Wilmer Bottoms

    -- EMPLOYEES621 ; Bay Area, 239

    .

   Crown Vantage Inc.

    Paper Products

    300 Lakeside Drive, Suite 1400

    Oakland CA 94612-3592

    510-874-3400

   -- WEB SITE: www.crownvantage.com

    -- CEO: Ernest Leopold

    -- EMPLOYEES3,995 ; Bay Area, 40

    .

   CV Therapeutics Inc.

    Biopharmaceuticals

    3172 Porter Drive

    Palo Alto CA 94304

    650-812-0585

   -- WEB SITE: NA

    -- CEO: Louis Lange

    -- EMPLOYEES50 ; Bay Area, 50

    .

   Cygnus Inc.

    Drug Delivery

    400 Penobscot Drive

    Redwood City CA 94063

    650-369-4300

   -- WEB SITE: www.cygnus.com

    -- CEO: Gregory Lawless

    -- EMPLOYEES180 ; Bay Area, 180

    .

   Cylink Corp.

    Networking Products

    910 Hermosa Court

    Sunnyvale CA 94086

    408-735-5800

   -- WEB SITE: www.cylink.com

    -- CEO: Fernand B. Sarrat

    -- EMPLOYEES432 ; Bay Area, 323

    .

   Cypress Semiconductor Corp.

    Integrated Circuits

    3901 N. First St.

    San Jose CA 95134-1599

    408-943-2600

   -- WEB SITE: www.cypress.com

    -- CEO: T.J. Rodgers

    -- EMPLOYEES2,700 ; Bay Area, 2,011




LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1998


                             1998 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 26, 1998, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 4296 words

HEADLINE: Fishing for genes;
It looks like a pet fish. But to MIT's Nancy Hopkins, the zebra fish may hold
the answer to fundamental questions about how cells grow.

BYLINE: By Scott Allen, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Five champagne bottles stand out among the books huddled on Nancy Hopkins's
shelves at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, bubbly rejoinders to the
administrator who predicted that Hopkins would wash out of science if she
continued to waste her time on pet-store fish. Eight years ago, against his
advice, Hopkins left a safe, successful career studying viruses to seek out the
secret of life in a 49-cent zebra fish. "It was like jumping off the top of a
building," Hopkins, an elegant woman of 54, says with a laugh as she recalls her
midlife career change.

    The five bottles, marked with unexciting notations such as "38M," celebrate
Hopkins's success in finding the cause of fatal birth defects in zebra fish,
tiny blue-and-gold fish that swim by the thousand in shoebox-sized tanks along
the walls of her laboratory. To date, Hopkins has found five killer defects in
the genes of her fish, including a damaged form of gene 38M that leaves its
victims with a shrunken head and a fatally deformed jaw.

    But Hopkins is no veterinarian; she has little interest in saving the lives
of her fish. In fact, she injects a red virus into thousands of tiny zebra-fish
embryos in a deliberate attempt to disrupt their genes. While the injected
embryos develop normally, reproduction becomes a game of Russian roulette for
their descendants. Offspring that inherit the genetic defects will suffer
mutations ranging from polka dots instead of stripes to deformities and death.

    "These fish have a lethal gene," says Hopkins, peering at dozens of
seemingly ordinary fish from a single family. Because these fish have been
injected with a virus, "Twenty-five percent of their offspring are doomed."

    Making deformed fish, though, is simple science these days. Hopkins's work
at MIT's Center for Cancer Research is attracting attention because she is able
to pinpoint the disrupted genes amid the 1.5 billion bits of genetic information
in each fish's cells. The virus that Hopkins injects into the embryos leaves a
distinctive mark on the fish's genes that is easily found later, a technique
that MIT biology department chairman Phillip Sharp calls a "gene-finding
machine." Other researchers often spend years trying to figure out why a single
mutation occurs; Hopkins can find the cause in a few weeks or even days.

   "Seldom in a scientist's career do you find yourself in a time and place for
a great experiment. Nancy is in the time and place for this experiment. It is
the next step in what is likely to be a whole field," says Sharp, who won a
Nobel Prize in 1993 for his work in genetics. Nobel laureate James Watson,
perhaps the most important biologist of the century, calls Hopkins's work a
"heroic project." Hopkins's friends believe she, too, could be in the running
for the top prize in science if her experiment succeeds.

   Scientists increasingly believe that fish and man follow a similar blueprint
during embryo development to create key organs such as nerves, blood vessels,
and bones. By discovering what can go wrong in making a zebra fish, Hopkins may
soon shed unprecedented light on the genetic steps that must go right to make a
healthy human baby.

    Hopkins's work, along with research involving zebra fish in competing
laboratories, may ultimately result in new approaches to treating human diseases
ranging from birth defects to cancer. Already, researchers at Massachusetts
General Hospital and Children's Hospital in Boston say mutant zebra fish in
their laboratories have genetic defects that cause dysfunctions mimicking human
diseases such as arterial blockage or leukemia. If the scientists can find the
defective genes causing the mutations in zebra fish, they will have a powerful
tool to help create new drugs or gene therapies for humans. The big
biotechnology firms have taken note; California-based Amgen Corp. will pump
several million dollars into Hopkins's research in exchange for a first look at
any discoveries that could lead to new medicines.

    "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we could take a seriously damaged heart and
make it work again?" asks Dr. Mark Fishman, director of Massachusetts General
Hospital's Cardiovascular Research Center, in Charlestown. "There may be some
key genes that, when activated in a non-heart cell, turn them down the road to
making a heart cell." Zebra-fish research, Fishman says, marks "the start of a
new era in biology." Lying in a petri dish, the speck-sized zebra-fish eggs
appear deceptively simple: colorless lumps of cells sitting on the round yolks
that will nourish them as they grow. Somehow, the genes inside these plain
vanilla cells will direct a construction project that human ingenuity has
neither equaled nor fully understood, creating an animal that can see, swim,
and, three months after its birth, produce the next generation of fish. What's
more, unlike a human fetus hidden in the uterus, zebra-fish embryos can develop
before the researchers' eyes, right down to the first drop of blood pumped from
the heart.

    "The first time I looked at the embryo under the microscope, that was it. It
was so beautiful," says Hopkins, in the precise diction she acquired from her
English grandmother.

   Despite the explosion of genetic research that has made "DNA fingerprinting"
a common police practice and made a celebrity out of Dolly the cloned sheep,
scientists still know remarkably little about the intricate genetic steps that
take place in a woman's womb during pregnancy. Because of the immense complexity
of the creation of life, researchers concentrate on simpler organisms that are
easier to understand. Most significant, Hopkins's friend and mentor Christiane
Nusslein-Volhard, a German scientist, won a Nobel Prize in 1995 for her
pioneering work on the genetic sequence that creates a fruit fly. Seeking a
research subject that might shed more light on human development,
Nusslein-Volhard turned her attention to zebra fish. It was Nusslein-Volhard who
taught Hopkins about zebra-fish husbandry.

   Hopkins's laboratory is full of genetic time bombs, zebra fish whose
offspring are small-headed or blind or, more often, lumps of cells that don't
develop. But this little shop of horrors is instructive, teaching researchers
which genes are indispensable for the zebra fish's development. Over the next
three years, Hopkins hopes that fatal mutations will lead her team to at least a
third of the roughly 2,400 genes that are indispensable to making a zebra fish.
That would be an extraordinary windfall in a field where all other laboratories
put together have identified and cloned only a handful of zebra-fish genes so
far.

   If she succeeds, Hopkins would be the first to identify the genes that are
needed to make a vertebrate. But she doesn't have the field to herself; in
December 1996, Nusslein-Volhard and a team at Massachusetts General Hospital
jointly produced a groundbreaking 481-page compendium of thousands of fish
mutants, giving researchers a window on the assembly line of life. For instance,
they learned that the fish's heart is assembled piece by piece, like a modular
home. But Hopkins, with her "gene-finding machine," is catching up fast.

   "The race is on," says Hopkins, the look in her blue eyes somewhere between
levity and sincerity. Though she wishes success to friends such as
Nusslein-Volhard, scientific glory is at stake. "I'd like to be the first to get
all the development genes," Hopkins says.

   However, success comes only to those who are willing to work hard enough. The
kind of genetics research that Nusslein-Volhard pioneered and that Hopkins has
taken up is grueling, turning scientists into virtual fish farmers and driving
some of them from the field altogether. Hopkins toiled for 364 days in 1991, the
first year she worked with zebra fish, and she returned to those work habits in
recent months after water contamination began killing baby fish.

   "I don't have family. I don't have children," says Hopkins, who has devoted
herself to science since her divorce, in 1973. "There were many nights when I
tore myself away to go home for dinner, but obviously not enough nights." With
her coiffed graying hair, her color-coordinated scarves and skirts, and her
polite inquiries about the well-being of others, Nancy Hopkins sometimes seems
more like a favorite aunt than a tough competitor in the rough-and-tumble world
of research at MIT. But Hopkins's single-minded pursuit of her zebra-fish dream
has made her a formidable adversary.

   Hopkins was furious at MIT officials last fall when a change in her
building's water supply apparently introduced a fungus that killed her baby fish
- and delayed her experiment for four months. Hopkins doggedly assembled proof
that the water was responsible for the fungus beards forming on the fish, and
then insisted that building administrators disinfect pipes on all six floors.
"Nancy was pretty hard on the building director," says Hopkins's laboratory
manager, Sarah Farrington, with smiling admiration.

    Likewise, Hopkins won out over fellow researchers in the cancer center last
summer when a colleague's departure opened up some of the most coveted research
space in science. Appearing before a group of journalists at MIT last fall,
Hopkins held up a floor plan that showed her hard-won turf. "I am the proud
winner of the summer space wars," she announced, beaming.

    Hopkins had to learn to be tough to survive at the top level of science. If,
earlier in her career, she had encountered the challenges she faces today, she
says she would have "gone home and cried for a week." After all, she was raised
to be a lady.

    The daughter of a librarian and a schoolteacher in Manhattan, Hopkins was
sent to the exclusive Spence School for girls, on East 91st Street, where
students learned to curtsy in case they ever met the queen of England or other
royalty. No debutante herself - her family circumstances were far more modest
than those of most of her schoolmates - Hopkins nonetheless learned the ways of
an upper-class young woman in the 1950s, where both white gloves and exaggerated
modesty were highly valued.

    "Spence girls were taught not to talk loudly, particularly in public places,
to always be excessively polite, not to ever be boastful or talk too much about
oneself," recalls Hopkins, who remains modest and courteous, though not always
quiet, to this day. "The style that works well at MIT is really pretty close to
opposite."

    Indeed, MIT is uncommonly competitive, a place where the limit on a
researcher's empire depends on his or her ability to raise money. While other
schools often act as though they are above the profit-driven world of business,
MIT revels in it, seeking alliances with industries and spinning off companies
from campus research projects. A study last year found that MIT graduates have
founded or co-founded 4,000 firms or companies, which, in 1994, collectively
employed 1.1 million people.

    Over the years, relatively few women have succeeded in this masculine and
aggressive environment. Hopkins is one of only two women to receive tenure at
the Center for Cancer Research; there are only 16 tenured women in the School of
Science, compared with 184 tenured men. Members of a faculty committee that
studied the disparity three years ago suggested that MIT's atmosphere
discourages women from applying for jobs in the first place.

    "If one were to describe the MIT faculty type, I guess you would say it's a
rough, men's club person," says Hopkins, who was the chairwoman of the faculty
study of womas a senior, Hopkins was working in Watson's Harvard laboratory, and
he urged her to become a scientist.

   Watson was the first of several high-ranking scientists to befriend Hopkins
and help her career along. After Hopkins earned her doctorate in biology at
Harvard, she worked for Watson at his Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, in New York
state, which in turn paved the way for her current job at MIT's Center for
Cancer Research. The two remain close friends.

   "It's sometimes hard and lonely for women researchers, because you have to be
somewhat aggressive to get space and to get money and all of that, and women
haven't been trained to be bitches, while the men have been trained to be
bastards," says Watson. "Nancy was trained to be a lady. I very much treasure
her, because she has made the transition while remaining civilized."

    By the late 1980s, Hopkins was enjoying a civilized career in virology,
capped by her work as an editor of Watson's influential book The Molecular
Biology of the Gene. Then, she met Christiane Nusslein-Volhard, "the Queen of
the Flies." Developmental biology was stuck in an intellectual rut when
Nusslein-Volhard came along in the late 1970s. Despite evidence that the
creation of a complex organ such as the eye may require scores - or even
hundreds - of genes working together, biologists continued to focus on one gene
at a time, rather than taking on the harder task of understanding how whole
organisms work.

   "To understand development, you can't do it with two or three genes,"
explains Watson. "It's almost like saying you are going to understand a 747
jetliner from two or three parts." Instead, he says, researchers must consider
complex pathways where genes affect one another.

    Nusslein-Volhard and her partner, Eric Wieschaus, agreed. They set up shop
in the basement of the Max Planck Institute, in Tubingen, Germany, in 1978,
creating flies with legs where their antennae should have been and heads where
their rear ends should have been. For two years, they dipped thousands of fly
larvae in a chemical bath that altered their genetic makeup and then watched for
"interesting" mutations in the flies' offspring.

   Their exhaustive survey revealed that only about one-quarter of the flies'
20,000 genes are necessary for embryo development, and of those, only about 150
are truly "interesting." Nusslein-Volhard's and Wieschaus's work suggested that,
if researchers worked hard enough, they could find the key genes responsible for
fruit-fly development.

   But what does a fruit fly have to do with a human? A lot.

   All genes, whether in a person or a fly, are composed of the same handful of
chemical signals that direct cells to make amino acids, the building blocks of
life.  While different creatures assemble these building blocks very
differently, plants and animals share far more genes than most people realize:
Fruit flies and humans, separated by 600 million years of evolution, use the
same genetic signals to divide their bodies into front and back.

   Humans and zebra fish, both vertebrates that evolved from a common ancestor
420 million years ago, share even more genetic similarities. John Postlethwait,
a biologist at the University of Oregon, so far has tracked 11 genes on the
second human chromosome to a small section of a zebra-fish chromosome,
suggesting that, through all the changes distinguishing fish and man, clusters
of identical genes have stayed together.

   Convinced that she needed a more sophisticated organism to study human
development, Nusslein-Volhard became a zebra-fish pioneer. Ignoring other
scientists who saw the aquarium staple as a diversion from more conventional
mouse studies ("This is a terrible thing for science," carped one),
Nusslein-Volhard began designing aquariums and feeding systems for tens of
thousands of the inch-long fish in the late 1980s.

    Nancy Hopkins was underwhelmed when she visited Nusslein-Volhard's
laboratory for the first time, in 1989, as Nusslein-Volhard was gearing up for
her experiments. "It wasn't at all what I expected," Hopkins recalls. "They had
pots of green gunk on the window sills. They were trying to grow food for baby
fish. This did not look promising."

    But then Hopkins looked through the microscope at a fish embryo - and felt
as though she were looking at the future of developmental biology. Despite
Nusslein-Volhard's reputation for brusqueness, Hopkins immediately hit it off
with the scientist, who was the same age as Hopkins and had similar intellectual
interests. Hopkins took a sabbatical from MIT in 1989, moving to Max Planck, in
Germany, to learn the ways of the zebra fish.

    Hopkins became fascinated with the biggest problem of the new field: finding
defective genes. Conventional gene-hunting requires the researcher to
laboriously comb the 1.5 billion pieces of genetic information in the zebra
fish's genes, one short stretch at a time. Dr. Leonard Zon, of Boston's
Children's Hospital, who directs a team using zebra fish to study blood
diseases, compares the search for defective genes to traveling with a poorly
marked road map. "If you have markers at New York and Los Angeles, but your
mutation is at Indianapolis, you've got a long walk."

    Hopkins thought she could develop a more efficient technique based on her
work with retroviruses, which are unusual microbes such as the AIDS virus that
insert themselves into the genes of their hosts, leaving easily identifiable
marks. If researchers used a retrovirus to create fish mutations, she reasoned,
its signature would lead them to the exact site of the mutation.

    However, when Hopkins proposed leaving virology to devote herself to zebra
fish, some superiors feared that, at 47, she was changing too late in her
career. "One of my administrators said, 'In three years, you'll be out of
science,' " Hopkins remembers. He told her she would be giving up her seniority
in virology for a new field in which younger rivals would have the fund-raising
advantage.

    Hopkins went ahead with her career change, but, for several years, she hired
almost no one to help her. "I wouldn't take anyone in the lab, because I was
afraid it would ruin their careers," she says. Instead, she incessantly nursed
her fish, bred from 23 "founders" given to her by Nusslein-Volhard, taking only
one day off in 1 and three days in 1992. "I watched the fish every minute," she
says, "so nothing bad happened to them." Hopkins had reason to worry: Unlike the
needs of more established laboratory animals, those of zebra fish were not well
understood when Hopkins started out. Researchers were plagued with sudden
outbreaks of disease and unhappy fish that refused to mate.

    Nancy Hopkins's luck changed in 1996, when she and a graduate student, Adam
Amsterdam, hit upon a mouse leukemia virus that would infect about one out of 70
zebra-fish embryos with an easy-to-trace genetic signature. A test of the virus
turned out exactly as Hopkins had hoped: Her laboratory created seven mutant
fish and identified the genes responsible for six of the mutations, five of
which were considered significant. Suddenly, it appeared that Hopkins was years
ahead of the field; Nusslein-Volhard asked Hopkins to go into business with her.

    Nusslein-Volhard and Hopkins ultimately realized that two laboratories so
far apart couldn't work together on such an involved project, but their joint
fund-raising helped Hopkins's project immeasurably.  "We created a kind of
bidding war" among biotechnology firms, Hopkins says. "Suddenly, companies were
calling me," she says, still astonished at her popularity.

   In 1996, a California firm offered Hopkins up to $ 3.6 million over three
years, only to be outbid by Amgen, which offered similar (though undisclosed)
money and the possibility of new laboratory space in a proposed Amgen facility
in Cambridge's Kendall Square. In return, Hopkins agreed to tell Amgen first
about any new genes she identified and cloned and, if Amgen requested it, to
delay publication of her results for several months.

    Hopkins, a science purist whose life centers on her Harvard Square home and
the Center for Cancer Research, is not entirely comfortable with the growing
corporate role in research. Unlike an increasing number of colleagues, she has
not set up a company to profit from her work, and she worries that business
concerns can distort scientific judgment. While deeply grateful for Amgen's
money, she admits that she leaped into the obscure field of zebra-fish research
"to get away from biotechnology." But, she realizes, "You can't escape it."

    So, with Amgen's backing, Hopkins has hired more than a dozen researchers
and technicians over the last six months, doubled her laboratory space, and
brought in truckloads of new equipment for tracking down fish genes. For her
employees, many of them fresh out of graduate school, Hopkins's mercurial rise
has been an exciting ride. "There's a sense of being part of something big,"
says Sarah Farrington, the laboratory manager. In the summer of 1986, Kyle
McGaw, a 29-year-old Connecticut minister, was strong enough to shovel tons of
crushed stone onto the driveway at his church and excited about the imminent
birth of his first child. By Christmas, he lay in a New Jersey hospital bed,
diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia that, 11 years later, would leave
him thankful simply to sit in a wheelchair at his daughter's soccer games.

   Victims of chronic myelogenous leukemia carry an extra chromosome that
weakens the immune system and reduces the bloodstream's ability to carry oxygen.
At worst, this genetic malfunction robs the patient of strength and results in
tumors around the body, leading to death.

   While researchers try to understand the zebra fish for its own sake, people
like Kyle McGaw are waiting eagerly for the benefits of the research.  Leonard
Zon, the Children's Hospital researcher who treated McGaw, is especially excited
about some of the strangest zebra fish in his laboratory, fish that lack the
genes to make any blood at all. Their hearts pump useless clear fluid,
condemning them to a short life absorbing life-giving oxygen through their skin.
If Zon could clone the key genes that are missing in the fish, he might be able
to use them to induce proper blood formation in leukemia patients.

   McGaw, now 40 and off leukemia medication after two debilitating bone marrow
transplants and agonizing complications, is enthusiastic about Zon's fish
research and the prospects for new treatments. "The first transplant was like
getting hit by a truck," he says. "The second one was like getting hit by a
train. It would be nice if we thought we were only getting hit by a car."

   At Mass. General's Cardiovascular Research Center, Mark Fishman also believes
that zebra fish can help researchers understand the genetic causes behind heart
and blood diseases. One mutant in his laboratory has a blocked main artery, much
like a human condition called coarctation of the aorta. The fish compensate by
using smaller vessels to circulate the blood, just like some of Fishman's
patients whose backs vibrate from arteries working overtime to overcome the
blockage.  "They are beautiful models of human diseases," says Fishman of the
defective zebra fish in his laboratory.

   But these intriguing developments are a long way from a commercially
available treatment for a disease. Even if researchers discover a gene that
induces the production of a medically valuable protein - which they haven't - it
would still take seven to 10 years to win US Food and Drug Administration
approval to market the treatment. Outside the growing group of believers, some
skeptics still think the zebra fish could be a passing fad.

   "It is not yet clear that the zebra fish is going to take off as a model
system," argues University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, biologist Greg Gibson, in an
on-line magazine called the HMS Beagle. "We will have to wait and see whether
the power of gene hunting in the mouse is sufficient to prevent the rise of the
fish."

    But the biotechnology business is beginning to vote for zebra-fish research
with its wallet, most recently when a San Francisco drug company invested in
Nusslein-Volhard's company, Artemis Pharmaceuticals, of Germany. Her firm will
specialize in identifying genes from zebra fish and other organisms that may
have medical uses for the pharmaceutical industry, which increasingly is
overwhelmed by genetic information generated by massive research efforts such as
the government-sponsored Human Genome Project, which seeks to make a map of all
50,000 human genes.

   The company underwriting Hopkins, Amgen, spent $ 528.3 million on research
and development in 1996, much of it on long-shot projects with no immediate
prospects of yielding new drugs or treatments. "We make the analogy to the oil
industry. You have to drill a lot of holes," says Amgen spokesman David Kaye.
But just one hit product, like his company's Epogen blood-generation drug, can
pay for all the other experiments that don't pan out.

   Hopkins and the researchers working in her laboratory believe that they could
be on the verge of a scientific breakthrough that would justify Amgen's faith,
but they know that they could also fail. There's no telling beforehand which
fish genes will be valuable and no way of knowing what breakthroughs may be
announced soon in other zebra-fish laboratories.

    "We could be a footnote. That's a definite possibility," says Shawn Burgess,
a postdoctoral fellow whose prospects for a professorship depend on the outcome
of Hopkins's experiment. "I'm sort of banking my career on that not happening."

    Still, Hopkins's friends say it is a mistake to underestimate her will to
succeed. Even on vacation, Hopkins drives herself, sweating off 12 pounds last
summer at a health spa in Western Massachusetts. With her sights set on finding
zebra-fish genes, friends are betting that Hopkins will get the best of the
fish. "She is an extremely serious, honest, straightforward person," says Terri
Grodzicker, a longtime friend and the editor of the journal Genes and
Development. Competitive, too, she adds. "You have to be competitive to be doing
this."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. A 5-day-old zebra fish preserved for study. Zebra fish and
humans, both vertebrates that evolved from a common ancestor, share many genetic
similarities. Facing page: Nancy Hopkins in her MIT lab. / PHOTOGRAPH BY LANE
TURNER / THE BOSTON GLOBE 2. Five-day-old zebra fish on a penny. When she saw a
zebra embryo under a microscope, Hopkins says, "that was it. It was so
beautiful." 3. Postdoctoral fellows Adam Amsterdam and Karen Townsend at
Hopkins's MIT lab. / Lane Turner / The Boston Globe

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1998


                             1999 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 26, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7396 words

HEADLINE: The Clues Are in the Blood

BYLINE: By Lisa Belkin;  Lisa Belkin is a contributing writer to The Times
Magazine. Her last article was about a mother who gave up her baby for adoption.

BODY:

   A menacing spider creeps across the floor of the h. w. miller memorial
Sanitarium and Hospital on the Philippine island of Cebu, but Ronald Munger
appears not to notice. Dozens of gecko lizards, all the same grayish color as
the dingy, peeling paint, skitter along the walls, but Munger seems not to see
them either. Making his way down a sweltering hallway, he passes countless
children, their faces marred since birth, with raw, gaping holes where their
lips and noses should be. The children stare at Munger -- his red beard and pale
skin are oddities here -- but he does not stare back. Though they may never have
seen a face like his, he has seen hundreds of faces like theirs. The sight has
lost its power to shock, but not to sadden, so he keeps his gaze straight ahead
and walks on.

   A hand-lettered sign taped to a rickety partition identifies his corner of
one room:Genetics.Inside a makeshift cubicle sits a woman, Editha Bensi, her
eyes clamped tight and her malformed mouth quivering while her blood flows out
of a needle in her arm and into a vial. Next it is her children's turn. Nurses
restrain Matthias, 5, and Maria Ana, 2, then prick their fingers, squeezing out
10 crimson drops onto an absorbent white card. Editha's vial, still warm to the
touch, is labeled and placed in a box with dozens of others. The children's
cards, the spots not yet dry, are clipped to a piece of twine that hangs along
one wall. With every tepid blast from the air-conditioner, the cards jump and
dance, like blood-splattered laundry in a breeze.

    Ron Munger has come to Cebu for this blood. He knows that somewhere in these
vials, on these cards, in this room, lie the reasons for the deformed faces.
Cleft lip and palate has its origins long before birth, when something
interrupts the normal function of the gene or genes that control the migration
and differentiation of the cells in the craniofacial region. The results are
unmistakable -- upper lips that are split on one or both sides, with the
fissures sometimes extending as high as the eye sockets; palates that fail to
fuse, too, creating a mouth that looks like the epicenter of an oral earthquake.
The causes, however, are less than clear. Which among the estimated 80,000 genes
misfire to such consequence? And what in the limitless universe of triggers
causes them to do so?

   The answers are buried, coiled and encrypted in the blood. They have been
there through the ages, but not until the past decade has the technology existed
to begin unearthing and deciphering them. Only a few genes linked to diseases
were discovered in all of the 1980's; by the end of last year, thanks to the
increasingly detailed road maps created by the Human Genome Project, nearly 800
disease genes had been discovered, 100 last year alone.

   There are thought to be 4,000 diseases that are directly inherited and
countless others in which genetics plays an indirect role. The scramble to find
all the pertinent genes will consume scientists well into the next century. Each
search will end in a high-cost, high-tech lab, but none of them will begin
there. Each will begin, instead, where the blood is.

   The best way to locate a disease gene is usually to screen the DNA of
affected relatives who have stayed in one place for generations, passing the
mutant gene along. One such family is that of 35-year-old Editha Bensi, who has
five children in all, four of whom have cleft lip. At the same time, the most
common environmental triggers for genetic mutation include poor nutrition and
other side effects of poverty. Such is the life of the Bensis, whose only source
of income is the $2 a day Editha's husband, Matthias Sr., earns selling used
sacks and boxes door to door. The search for impoverished, isolated families who
suffer from rare disorders means that gene hunters, the cutting-edge technocrats
of modern science, spend a lot of time in the most remote and least developed
places in the world.

   The need for blood is why scientists from the Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston regularly trek to the desert in Saudi Arabia, searching for the cause of
primary congenital glaucoma. It is why Howard University, near Washington, sends
researchers to study diabetes in Nigeria and Ghana. The University of Iowa
finances trips to track down nomadic Bedouin tribes in the Middle East.
Scientists from the Medical College of Virginia make yearly trips to Mongolia to
find the causes of a rare form of deafness. And others, from the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., study families in Patras, Greece, to find
the cause of Parkinson's disease.

   A particularly hardy group from the University of Toronto has searched for
the asthma gene on the island of Tristan da Cunha. There are but 300 people on
the island, which is located halfway between Cape Town and Buenos Aires. The
only way to reach it is to spend a week on a barge, passing through some of the
world's roughest seas.

   The same need for blood is what has taken Ron Munger to the Philippines,
17,668 frequent-flier miles away from his lab at Utah State University. The rate
of cleft lip and palate is twice as high there as it is in the United States.
This is why an American-based group called Operation Smile finances yearly
missions to the Philippines, flying in nearly 200 surgeons and medical support
staffers and reconstructing more than 1,000 cleft lips and palates over a
two-week period.

   Munger's work has nothing to do with Operation Smile, except for this: When
the patients travel from remote villages to a Philippine hospital for the
surgery, they bring their families and set up camp around the hospital. This
mass of people, all of whom were either born with the disorder or are related to
someone who was, is a geneticist's dream. Munger is one of a team of scientists
who have recently begun to piggyback on the efforts of Op Smile, collecting
blood that will reshape the future as certainly as these surgeons are reshaping
the the faces distorted by cleft lip and palate.

   Munger's team has made nine such trips to the Philippines. Each of these,
like each trek to Saudi Arabia, Ghana, Mongolia and Tristan da Cunha, bring
science that much closer to knowing the cause of a particular disease. When the
research hits its mark, and a disease gene is finally found, it adds a single,
small piece to a profound puzzle. One day that picture will be complete, and the
result will be no less than an operating schematic for mankind -- a picture of
who we are and how we work.

   Physicians and pharmaceutical companies are already gearing up for the
miracles that genetics might make possible: drugs targeted to remedy the cause,
not just the effects, of a disorder, by correcting or replacing the mutated
gene. Ethicists and lawyers, critics and skeptics, are gearing up, too: Once a
person can be reduced to a series of genes, will insurers and employers identify
and weed out people whose DNA makes them a higher health risk? Once traits can
be swapped and altered in a laboratory, will society give in to the temptation
to re-engineer individual weakness and imperfection? And what of the populations
whose blood is being mined for this genetic gold? Does some of the profit from
potential drugs or patents belong to them?

   Here on Cebu, however, where the hospital X-ray machine is 30 years old and
measles regularly kills, those questions seem very far away. Here, Munger's
problems are less lofty and more immediate: what to do about the local health
officer who may or may not be hinting at a bribe? How to find the only factory
on the island that can supply dry ice to keep the blood samples cold? (Answer:
You have to drive for two hours, then make a left behind the cockfighting
arena.) How to persuade Editha Bensi, whose blood is a potential treasure trove
of information, to return another day, and bring the rest of her children for
testing? What to do when she does not show?

   Every trip by every gene-hunting scientist is made up of endless dramas like
these; technology may have made it easier to get to the jungle, and to decode
the blood that comes back from the jungle, but it is not of much help while
you're actually in the jungle. Yet if researchers cannot negotiate the cultural
and political challenges facing them at the ends of the earth, where the blood
must be gotten, then they will never have the stuff with which to ponder the
more purely scientific questions surrounding genes, their role in disease and
their potential to yield cures. Looked at in this way, Ron Munger has as much in
common with explorers of centuries past as he does with the genetics-steeped
medical professionals of the century to come.

   The laboratory suite is the most up-to-date part of the Miller Hospital, two
rooms where the rotary telephones may work but the clock is stopped at 20
minutes past 10. The space is Munger's to borrow during his 12 days in Cebu, and
he has brought along four large crates, filled with 375 pounds of everything he
might need in this most makeshift of labs. One thousand needles, 1,400
vacutainer tubes, 7,000 subzero cryovials, a large chest to hold 50 kilograms of
dry ice, 1,200 latex gloves, 100 rubber tourniquets, 1,400 microscope slides,
2,000 consent forms and questionnaires. Alcohol. Cotton balls. Marking pens.
Pencils. Batteries. Distilled water. A bathroom scale. A pair of scissors, a set
of pliers, a Swiss Army knife.

   Munger, 44, is a meticulous man, the type who somehow manages to wear an
Oxford shirt and black denim jeans in the heat of the tropics while staying
perfectly creased. He is also whip smart and tenacious, driven and efficient,
typical of the breed so often attracted to academic medical research. The
challenge, on a trip like this one, is to turn some of those qualities off. You
can't pack up efficiency and transport it like a piece of lab equipment. Nothing
about Cebu is neat.

   From the look of his resume, Munger would seem well suited for the culture
shock. Trained as an anthropologist, Munger spent his early years searching for
the cause of sudden cardiac death among Hmongs in Thai-border refugee camps. He
has learned, he explains, that you have to be patient. "You can't just drop in,
snap your fingers, get a blood sample and leave. He says such things a lot, but
not always as if he means them.

   On this, Munger's third day in Cebu, nothing is going according to plan. More
precisely, Jeffrey C. Murray's plan. Murray, 48, of the University of Iowa, is
one of the pre-eminent geneticists in the United States, and he is Munger's
chief collaborator on this project. Like nearly all working relationships,
theirs has a division of labor, and Murray -- who did not come along on this
trip because he had a grant application to complete -- is the one who is
actually searching for the genes. Munger has no genetic training. He is here as
an epidemiologist with a focus on nutrition, and the fact that he is here at all
is an example of the next wave of thinking in the field.

   In the olden days -- about a decade ago -- the genetic part of genetic
research effectively meant directly inherited. Diseases like cystic fibrosis,
Tay-Sachs and Huntington's fit this pattern -- parents pass along a gene for a
disease and the child necessarily develops the disease. Find Gene A, therefore,
and you have found the direct and inevitable cause of Disease B. Those were the
easiest puzzles to solve and the ones that researchers tackled first.

   As knowledge and technology improved, however, the work moved on to more
complex genetic questions. Sometimes what is passed down between generations is
not a disease but a propensity to develop a disease. Or perhaps the gene
received at birth is normal, but malfunctions later in life as a result of
environmental factors -- diet, for instance, or behavior. Most cancers fit into
these categories, as do diabetes, Alzheimer's, osteoporosis and many forms of
heart disease. A wide range of birth defects do, too, like spina bifida and
cleft lip and palate.

   The intersection of genetics and nutrition, two disciplines, separate but
intertwined, is the reason there are two methods of blood collection under way
in the genetics cubicle down the hall. The cards are for Murray. When they dry
they can be mailed back to Iowa, where he will take a hole puncher to each one.
The tiny cardboard dots of dried blood will be immersed in chemicals, which will
suck out the DNA. Small fragments will then be amplified -- duplicated several
millionfold so they are visible -- and examined by Murray and his lab team. When
they find a statistically significant link between the inheritance of a
particular DNA fragment and the inheritance of the cleft in these Filipino
families, they will have identified the location of a cleft-palate disease gene.
Having found the right haystack, they will then pull out all the needles (genes,
really) and then look for the one that is bent (or mutated.)

   Murray has been doing this for 10 years already, and he says he is
agonizingly close to finding one gene for one directly inherited form of cleft
lip and palate, known as Van der Woude Syndrome. There are 300 recognized causes
of cleft lip and palate in humans, so locating one gene will not come close to
completing the entire equation; but it may well provide a clue to the types of
genes to look for in the future.

   The vials of blood, in turn, are for Munger. Here in the makeshift lab, he
will process the blood samples in a variety of ways, then freeze them in a chest
filled with dry ice until he can get them home. There he will test them for the
level of suspect nutrients. He has theories about what vitamin deficiencies are
triggers for cleft, and he hopes this blood will help him transform theory into
fact.

   Munger knows firsthand the fragility of theory. He spent a year testing one
nutritional hypothesis but saw it fall apart because he had assembled an
unrepresentative control group. His most recent hypothesis is that the
nutritional triggers of cleft lip and palate include deficiencies in both folate
and vitamin B6; to test it, however, he will need a proper control group. This
trip, therefore, must yield more than the hundreds of blood samples his team is
drawing inside the genetics cubicle. He must also trek out to some villages and
test women whose children were born healthy and normal. At the moment, it does
not look as if he will find a control group, for reasons that have little to do
with science and everything to do with local bureaucracy.

   This is Munger's first year of research on the island of Cebu. Before that,
he and Murray had confined their visits to the nearby island of Negros. They had
friends in the local government there, and they had a support team of local
nurses who tracked down affected families year-round and sent the blood samples
stateside. But Operation Smile opted not to include Negros in its schedule this
year, so Munger is on Cebu, starting from scratch.

   He thought he had planned ahead. The smallest sociopolitical subdivisions in
the Philippines are called barangays, and months before this trip, Munger
instructed the nurses of his Negros team to come to Cebu and help pave the way
with the barangay leaders. But he failed to account for the fact that each
barangay has a captain. The individual captain will not participate in anything
not approved by the city's health officer, and apparently, Munger was not
properly solicitous of him. Not until he arrived in Cebu did Munger learn that
the health officer was threatening to keep his research team out of the
villages.

   Munger's hope for unraveling the mess is Dr. Florentino Solon, a former mayor
of Cebu who is himself a physician specializing in nutrition-related diseases
and who has taken an interest in the cleft lip and palate research. More
important, Solon trained the city's health officer when he was still a medical
resident. Munger, trying not to seem pushy, has left a series of messages for
Solon, asking the senior doctor to come along on a visit to his former pupil.

   This is what makes it work, he says, as the hours pass and Solon doesn't call
back. Connections.

   Finally, near dinnertime, word comes from Solon's office that the health
officer will meet with Munger the next morning. But Solon will not be present.
He has left for Manila, 300 miles to the north.

   At about the same time, Munger learns that he will not be getting more blood
from the Bensi family. Editha Bensi did return to the hospital as she promised,
but she brought the wrong children. She knew the doctors wanted to see Isidro,
Maria Rosa and Maria Nina, but they were in school, so she brought back Matthias
Jr. and Maria Ana, who have already given blood -- figuring maybe a second
sample of their blood would do just as well.

   It would not, and Munger sat amid his 21st- century lab equipment, trying not
to care. We're surfing on chaos here, he said. The reality is when you do this
kind of field work, things never work out. You have to get into that mindset.

   It was unclear whether the pep talk was to convince his visitor, or to
convince himself.

   It is so hot inside the air-conditioned van that a chocolate bar, brought
along for breakfast, is melting. Outside, a woman at a bus stop takes a spare
wooden door, leans it against a pile of bricks, then crawls under it for the
shade. The van continues to crawl through the traffic, along streets where the
buildings are no more than a collage of construction scraps. The air is a rancid
brown mist.

   When the van finally stops in front of the Cebu City Health Department, Ron
Munger grabs his bulging briefcase and walks nervously to the office of Dr.
Tomas L. Fernandez, the city health officer. Fernandez, looking cool and
confident behind a huge black leather desk, offers a hot cup of coffee. Munger
politely declines, but the coffee appears anyway.

   After a few more pleasantries, Fernandez fires his first volley. Leaning back
in his chair, and pressing his fingertips together, he asks: Why can't our
surgeons do it? He is referring specifically to the presence of Operation Smile
in Cebu, but the question is also a more general one: Why do we need you?

   Munger smiles wanly. I'm happy to discuss your concerns, he says, but I'm not
a spokesman for Operation Smile. My expertise is in nutrition and epidemiology.

   Yes, let's discuss your research, Fernandez says, and Munger is momentarily
relieved. This here, Fernandez says, waving one of the many documents that
Munger has strewn across the desk. Does this mean you're going to get informed
consent?

   Munger nods. That is a requirement of the review boards at both Utah State
University and the University of Iowa, he says. Ever since the 1940's, when the
Nuremberg trials made clear that atrocities were committed in the name of
science, and the 1970's, when the Tuskegee syphilis-experiment scandal drove
home the point that Nazis were not the only ones who crossed ethical lines,
informed consent has become a part of international law and scientific practice.
Broadly defined, it means that a patient must understand what will be done to
him, how the resulting information will be used and the nature of the risks
involved.

   It is one thing to require that information be given. It is another thing to
insure that the information is understood, and the challenge increases in the
face of more complicated science (like genetics) and cultural differences (like
research halfway around the world). In the genetics cubicle at Miller Hospital,
for instance, patients are read a two-page consent form, translated into
Cebuano, the local language. The purpose of the study, the form says, is to find
out if there are genetic (inherited) differences between individuals with and
without cleft lip and/or palate. This study involves a special examination done
on DNA, your genetic material. It goes on to say that participation is
voluntary.

   But are patients signing the form because they want to be part of DNA
research, or because someone wearing a name tag and surgical scrubs asked them
to? And is their consent truly voluntary if it is requested just a few yards
away from the surgeons who choose who is eligible for surgery? Munger does not
know the answer; no one does. And ethicists generally agree that mind reading is
not a requirement of the informed consent process. You don't have to educate
potential research subjects to the point where they understand the structure of
DNA, says Hank Greely, a Stanford law professor and chairman of an ethics
subcommittee of the Human Genome Diversity Project. You can't insure that
someone understands, you just have to do your best.

   There is even greater murkiness on the subject of the risks of the test. On
the simplest level, this has meant telling patients, according to the team's
consent form, that the blood-drawing procedures may cause some discomfort, and
there is the possibility of bruising or infection at the site from which the
blood is taken. In genetic research, however, the universe of risk is harder to
define. Does the risk include the fact that the information, despite guarantees
of confidentiality, can fall into the wrong hands? In the English version of the
document, used in the United States, Munger and Murray's subjects are cautioned
that there have been anecdotal reports of patients who were denied insurance
(medical or life) after they received genetic testing to diagnose a disorder. In
the Philippines, where that clause would have no meaning, it has been deleted.
Should it have been replaced by a warning that you could be diagnosed as having
a genetic condition and word of this could leak out in your neighborhood and no
one will want to marry you? Greely asks. Such was the fate of several Greek
villagers who took part in a study of sickle-cell anemia, he says.

   When Fernandez raises the subject of informed consent, Munger is prepared for
all these questions. Fernandez asks none of them. Instead, he darts in a
different direction altogether, and Munger is unsure where the conversation is
heading.

   In our experience, the health officer says archly, we meet great resistance
from mothers to drawing blood, particularly from children. Munger understands
there are two questions being asked here, and he answers them in reverse order
of importance to Fernandez.

   No blood would be required from the children for the control group study, he
says. As for the mothers, he continues, we try to make the experience a
worthwhile one for them.

   Paying cash for blood samples is almost never done by scientists, and not
only because the costs would be prohibitive. No payment for participation in
this research will be made, the Murray-Munger consent form says in language
typical of these documents. The stated reason is that money is a means of
coercion, and compliance cannot be truly informed and voluntary if it is
purchased. The unstated reason is more sweeping. There's an undercurrent of
moralism, puritanicalism, Greely says. A feeling that research should be done
for the love of science." He pauses, then says sarcastically, "And for their
CV's. And for the prestige. And for the tenure. And for the appointments to
scientific advisory boards.. . .

   Munger does not try to explain to Fernandez why the subjects will not be
paid. Instead he describes what will be done for them in lieu of money.

   Dr. Solon's suggestion, he says, was to give the mother something in return
for her participation. He is hoping that the mention of the name of the health
officer's teacher will have some effect, but Fernandez does not react at all.

   The mothers are very interested in learning their own blood type, Munger
continues, so we test the blood and tell them. We also measure hematocrit and
hemoglobin, and give iron pills to those who are anemic. That was Dr. Solon's
suggestion, too.

   In addition, Munger says, the team does its best to give the blood-drawing
session a party-like atmosphere. They bring a fast-food lunch for the crowd,
with candy and cookies for the children. There are raffles, too, of large
eye-catching items, like plastic washtubs and beach balls and thermoses.
Everyone who gives blood gets a chance to win.

   Eventually, Munger says, there may be something else to give back to these
women, albeit indirectly -- the results of the research. If, for instance, his
hypothesis proves correct and increased folate and vitamin B6 are what is needed
to reduce the risk of cleft lip and palate, then they will have information for
use in their own lives. Fernandez laughs aloud at the suggestion that much of
what is being discovered in American laboratories will make it back to Cebu any
time soon.

   Iodine, he says, removing his glasses and leaning back in his chair. Another
simple solution. When they started iodizing salt it upped the price by three
times so those who need it couldn't afford it and those who didn't need it are
the only ones who could afford it. As for gene therapy, he says, We do not have
the plastic surgeons to operate on our deformed children. Until we can do that..
. .

   An awkward silence follows. Munger sips his cooling coffee. Fernandez
replaces his glasses then presses his palms on the desk top.

   Who will own the data? he asks abruptly. There is money to be made in genetic
research, because pharmaceutical companies are eager to buy the patent rights
for cloned genes that could be used to create new families of drugs. For
example, the gene that regulates the production of leptin, which, in turn,
regulates the metabolism of fat, was purchased by the pharmaceutical company
Amgen from Rockefeller University for $20 million. The search for the asthma
gene on Tristan de Cunha is being financed by Axys Pharmaceuticals.

   Some ethicists argue that when there is profit from a genetic discovery, a
portion belongs to the patients who provided the raw materials. A group called
Rural Advancement Foundation International believes that not paying those like
the blood donors on Cebu constitutes biopiracy.  In all likelihood, the group's
Web page says, the people who are giving DNA samples do so with a general
understanding that the . . .science may someday improve the human condition.
They are not informed that their DNA, or information gleaned from it, will be
patented and commercialized.

   True, researchers say, but for good reason. First, the odds of any given
research project resulting in a huge payoff is extremely small. There are no
pharmaceutical companies, for instance (at least none that Munger or Murray
knows of), lining up to grab the gene for something as uncommon as cleft lip and
palate. This is a rare disorder, Murray says. The odds for commercialization are
extremely small. In addition, not promising future benefits, financial or
medical, has deep roots. If subjects in drug trials are promised access to the
medications that result from those trials, are you gaining participation by the
promise of a future cure? You can't imply that you will cure people and you
can't imply that you will make them rich, Greely says.

   All of this is why the team's consent decree warns: There is no direct
benefit to you or your child from participating in this study. Society may
benefit from the identification of molecular genetics of cleft lip and/or palate
in patients suffering from these disorders. This is a research project and not a
form of treatment or diagnosis for you or you child or any condition you might
have.

   Munger is not in any position to make promises to the women of Cebu,
therefore, and he does not. There is something he can promise to Fernandez,
however -- a piece of the prestige, a part of the research, a slot in the list
of names at the start of all published research papers. But he does not offer
that either -- not yet.

   So, what do you want to do in Cebu City? Fernandez asks.

   Visit two or three barangays, collect our samples --. Munger begins.
Fernandez interrupts.

   There are 18 barangays in Cebu. Which do you want to visit?

   Munger gives him the names of the places chosen randomly by his team of
nurses. We contacted the barangay captains, he said, but we put the brakes on
everything when we realized we would be well advised to come and talk to you.

   What's the role of this office? Fernandez asks.

   To give your blessing.

   Fernandez sits, stone-faced.

   We're also looking for collaborators, Munger adds, quickly. If there are any
public-health scientists, perhaps yourself, who might be interested in getting
involved in this.

   Fernandez nods, acknowledging the offer. He then recites an exhaustive list
of things he would need to see before he could even consider giving his
approval. When and if he says yes, he continues, your institution should enter
into a formal letter of agreement with the government of Cebu. You must also
write a letter to the Mayor and specify what you really want to do in Cebu. If
the Mayor says you can do it, then you can do it. Once you get the approval of
the Mayor it will be easy.

   Munger slumps, deflated, and begins to collect his mountain of paper. He is
thinking of the theories that will not be proven on this trip, the journal
articles that will not be written, the advances he will not be able to make.

   It sounds like this will take more time, he says. Dr. Solon, he adds, giving
it one last try, Dr. Solon and I had hoped to make real progress soon.

   Fernandez smiles, but there is no warmth in his face. I consider Solon as a
surrogate father, he says, chuckling softly. Then he gives a final jab. I like
to tell him that. But only to stretch his age.

   Walter Nance, the chairman of the department of human genetics at the Medical
College of Virginia, has spent the past few years studying a rare form of
genetic deafness in the children of Ulaan Baatar in Mongolia, a place he
describes as beyond the end of the world. During his most recent visit, last
October, he found himself in a cluster of shacks where 30 or 40 street children
were living.

   I was all pumped up, he remembers, about how successful we had been bringing
this advanced technology to Ulaan Baatar. Then we get to this place and there's
this little girl, crying with pain. She was pressing her hand to her ear the way
children across the globe do when they have an inner ear infection, he
remembers, and pus from that infection was oozing down the side of her face. She
had no access to antibiotics, the simple, common medication that could quickly
end her agony.

   Whatever pride Nance had been feeling turned instantly to chagrin. Why in
God's name, he wondered, do we have a system that grants money to me to come
over to Mongolia to study something esoteric like congenital deafness? What good
is that going to do this little girl?

   Every gene-hunting journey has moments like these, where the clash between
technology and subsistence, between those who are suffering in the present and
those who live in the future, is thrown into sharp relief. On this trip the
moments come during a visit to Editha Bensi, who lives in a neighborhood
crisscrossed by paths instead of roads, a place where the homes have no
addresses. If Munger's vials and consent forms seemed incongruous back at Miller
Hospital, they are all the more jarring and otherworldly here.

   When Munger's nurses find Editha outside her two-room wooden shack, she does
not invite them in. The group would not fit inside, and even if they did their
combined weight would likely be too much for the floor, which is made of narrow,
sagging strips of bamboo. Instead they all crowd in a patch of shade near the
front door. Chickens wander about. Across the way, a neighbor sits in a sudsy
metal washing tub while his wife scrubs his back. Flies crawl along Editha's
face and arms as she answers the questions from these strangers.

   Because Editha did not bring her children back to the hospital, Munger sent
his nurses out to find them. It was, he thought, a chance to accomplish
something on this trip. That is why Sallie Onggada, who has been tracking
families for Munger and Murray for two years, is spending this Saturday morning
here, reading the consent form aloud to Editha yet again. Onggada also takes a
family history, learning that Editha's brother died of dysentery when he was 23,
and her oldest daughter died shortly after birth from dehydration.

   While Onggada gets Editha's signature, her assistant distracts the children
with the candy and cookies she always brings on these trips. The happy snacking
is soon interrupted, however, by the business at hand. First it is 6-year-old
Isidro's turn. His father seats him on a large rock next to the house, but as
soon as the boy sees the tiny lancet he jumps up and runs away. The chickens
scatter. Matthias Sr. catches him and drags him back, throwing his own weight
over the child's legs to keep them still. Editha, in turn, grabs her son's
shoulders, pinning him to the ground.

   Mama, Mama, Mama, the terrified boy sobs and screams, still trying to wriggle
free. Onggada's assistant, remarkably unshaken by all this, holds tight to
Isidro's hand, damming the blood in his tiny fingertips just long enough to
prick one of them. She squeezes out 10 drops onto a white card. Look, she says,
trying to be heard over the crying. It's like painting.

   Maria Nina, 7, is next. She has watched these strangers attack her brother,
so she wraps her fists tightly inside her shirt. This means she cannot use her
hands against her parents when they come for her, but she makes good use of her
elbows and feet until finally she, too, is held down.

   By this time the nurses, the parents, even the neighbors who have gathered to
watch are exhausted. There is a collective sigh of relief when Maria Rosa, only
5, sits herself on the rock and nervously offers up her hand, as if in
sacrifice. She bites her lower lip with her malformed upper one, but she does
not cry.

   When it is over, Editha leans in the doorway, drained. Her children are
fighters, she says through an interpreter, because they have to be. The slang
insult for cleft lip in Cebuano is boongy, and it is hurled often at her family.
I tell them to fight back, bust them, she says. They get teased a lot, that's
why they are so tough.

   Was she teased as a child? She shakes her head -- not to deny the statement,
but to broaden it. Now, too, she says. When she was pregnant, her husband called
her boongy, and that, she believes, not some gene she has never heard of and
does not understand, is the reason why her children suffer. God must have heard
it, she says of her husband's taunts, and so he made the children this way.

   She took the children to the surgeons of Operation Smile, she says, so that
the teasing will end. Why did she bring only two children? Because she did not
want to seem greedy. Did she fear it seemed greedy to be scheduled for surgery
herself? That was the doctors' idea, she says, and she does not really want the
operation. One senses that she fears her children will not be allowed to have
surgery if she doesn't have it, too.

   And why did she agree to give blood to the geneticists? For the good of
medical science? For the future of her grandchildren? For the benefit to society
that she was told about each time (three so far) that she signed the informed
consent form?

   Because they wanted it, she says. Because they asked.

   During her intake interview Onggada learned that Editha's mother, who lives
close by, also has the disorder, and Editha agrees to accompany the team to her
mother's house. Eleuteria, 62, is nearly as terrified of giving blood as was
Isidro. She sits, childlike, in Editha's lap, while Editha holds her own hands
over her mother's eyes. As the blood is squeezed onto a card, Eleuteria's
curiosity overcomes her fear. She peeks out, wide-eyed with fascination.

   Editha was supposed to have reconstructive surgery as a child, Eleuteria
says, but when the required blood tests were done, Editha fainted. Her mother
thought she was dead, and refused to allow her back in a hospital again.

   Editha looks surprised, as if she is hearing this for the first time. Then
she confronts her mother. If her mouth had been repaired, she says, her husband
could not have called her boongy and her children would not have been cursed.

   The interpreter, who is a nutrition student, begins to explain to both women
that Editha's surgery could not have helped her children because the disorder is
not from words but from the blood. She points to the consent form, to the part
that describes cleft in genetic terms.

   Eleuteria will have none of it. Neither epitaphs nor ancestry is at work
here, she says. The reason her children and grandchildren are defective is what
their fathers ate.

   The husbands like to eat the anus of the chicken, she says, painting on the
air with her finger to show that this particular poultry part is shaped much
like a cleft lip. Her tone makes it clear that no needle-wielding visitor from
another realm will convince her otherwise.

   That is the reason, she says. It has nothing to do with my blood.

   Monette Alino is a force of nature. The wealthy, well-connected woman is the
executive director of the Mariquita Salimbangon-Yeung Charitable Foundation,
which is paying all the expenses of the 38 Operation Smile volunteers in Cebu.
Munger's airline tickets, hotel room ($15 a night at the minimalist Diplomat)
and lab space are all supplied by the foundation, and he is grateful.

   Largesse always entails some obligation, however, and Alino has arranged
elaborate and lengthy dinners for the Op Smile volunteers nearly every night of
the two-week trip. After a long, hot day processing blood or sparring with
health officers, a party is not always what Munger has in mind. But Alino is the
type of woman who posts a sign warning All Volunteers are EXPECTED to attend the
farewell party and takes attendance at dinner. The few times Munger has ducked
out, she has asked him about it as he arrived at the hospital the next morning.

   Alino was the first person Munger saw when he returned from his meeting with
Tomas Fernandez, and when she heard that something was thwarting one of her
volunteers, she took action. She was able to hand Munger a letter from the
provincial health officer of Cebu -- Fernandez's boss -- that was also signed by
the provincial governor. Dated 10 days before the day Munger met with Fernandez,
and addressed to Municipal Health Officers, Others Concerned, it described the
research project and said: In view of the laudable purpose, the vital
information obtained and the possible benefits derived from the study, you are
hereby requested to facilitate and provide assistance in the conduct of the
research activity. Your usual cooperation is hereby enjoined.

   Munger has a copy of that letter with him as he arrives at Alino's next
dinner, at a mountainside country club -- Cebu has its pockets of privilege. The
Op Smile volunteers dine outside, by torchlight, near a pool that overlooks the
entire island. As a troupe of students dressed in native garb entertain, Alino
takes Munger by the elbow and walks him toward a heavyset man on the other side
of the patio. Mr. Mayor, she says, I would like you to meet Dr. Munger.

   The Mayor seems unsteady on his feet, and there is the scent of alcohol on
his breath as he shakes Munger's hand. Munger explains his research and his
needs for a control group, then he hands the Mayor the letter from the Governor.

   Have you met with Fernandez? the Mayor asks.

   Yes, Munger answers. The results were a little disappointing.

   I would have thought it would have been easy, the Mayor says. I'll tell him
that I am supporting the project.

   The Mayor excuses himself to give a short speech. He stumbles slightly on the
step up to the stage, and his words sound slurred. Then he walks among the
tables, shaking hands. When his mingling takes him next to Munger, he introduces
himself, giving no indication that he remembers their meeting of 10 minutes
earlier.

   Several days later Munger decides to go to the barangays as originally
scheduled. He packs up all his equipment, so that he might recreate his lab in
the open-air health center and the home for street children where the barangay
captains will assemble up to 60 women each. As he leaves for the first of those
sites, he arranges to have Alino fax a note to Fernandez telling him that he has
received the Mayor's permission. Fernandez does not respond, and certainly does
not try to stop him, so Munger assumes he has the health officer's blessing.

   The Bensi family sleeps at the hospital the night before surgery that
Operation Smile has arranged. Because they are patients, Editha, Matthias Jr.
and Maria Ana are each given a narrow cot on the operating floor, one of a dozen
crammed into a small, stifling room. The other children are home with Eleuteria.
Matthias Sr. sleeps up on the hospital's roof.

   On the morning of surgery, the most senior nurse of the Murray- Munger team,
who has just arrived from another Operation Smile site on another island,
notices something unusual about Editha's lips. They are dimpled. On closer
examination it is discovered that the skin between Editha's hands is slightly
webbed. Both are signs of Van der Woude syndrome, one of the few pure genetic
syndromes that cause cleft lip and palate, and the one for which Murray is so
close to finding the gene.

   The children are operated on first, and when they emerge from the anesthesia
they are screaming. The recovery-room nurses look for Editha, but she cannot be
found. She is downstairs, on the other side of the hospital, having a panic
attack. My stomach hurts, my heart hurts, she says, terrified about facing her
children when they are in pain. A visiting Mormon missionary finally persuades
her to come upstairs, where Matthias, his upper lip bloody and swollen but
unmistakably whole, is thrashing so violently he requires more sedation. Maria
Ana, similarly repaired, lies near him, sobbing. Editha tells the doctors she
will not undergo her own surgery after all.

   The next few hours are tense ones in Patient Room 11, as a parade of doctors
try to persuade her to have the procedure and the nurses quietly say they will
understand if she does not. Her husband, standing in a corner, holding his
daughter's IV bag aloft for better flow, tells Editha to go to surgery, he will
take care of the children. Squeezing small amounts of hospital-issue Tang into
Maria Ana's mouth with a syringe, she snaps at him. You said it didn't matter
how I look, she says, fighting tears.

   In the middle of all this, Munger arrives, with the Nikon N90S he uses for
photos of interesting cases. This is the first chance he has had to see Editha
since she was found to have Van der Woude syndrome. As he enters the room he
realizes this is not an ideal time, but he also realizes it will probably be his
only chance. So he asks permission to examine her, then looks at her lips and
hands. Borrowing a flashlight from a nurse, he peers in her mouth, then takes a
few quick pictures.

   More doctors come to see her. More nurses. Munger backs toward the door and
watches the drama from a distance, studiously uninvolved. He is the only one in
the room who knows what is wrong with Editha. Even the surgeons who resurrected
the children's lips, he would bet, do not know what Van der Woude's syndrome is.
And yet he is the only one in the room with nothing to offer. All he can do, for
the moment, is take.

   Murray had spoken to me about such moments. That's the frustration of this
work, he said, that you can't change things now. But I always tell my students
that the reason you're in this isn't to make the planet perfect, it's to make it
5 percent better for the next generation.

   Munger leaves the emotions to swirl in Editha's room, and returns to the
quiet of his temporary lab. What advice, I ask him, did he give Editha about
surgery?

   He seems taken aback by the question, and by its implication that he has the
right to give advice at all. The sciences that have shaped his life --
anthropology, epidemiology, genetics -- are all the study of populations, not
people, he explains. To lose track of that is to lose sight of the entire
purpose. No, he did not say anything to Editha, who in the end did not have
surgery. All I can do, he says, is take her blood.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maria Nina Bensi, 7, in her father's arms, just after a nurse's
assistant drew 10 drops of blood from one of her fingers. The blood of the Bensi
children, who live on Cebu Island in the Philippines, is a geneticist's dream,
because cleft lip and palate has run in the family of Maria's mother, Editha
(second from left), for generations.; Four of Editha and Matthias Bensi's
children (including two not pictured) inherited her cleft lip and palate. (Only
Isidro, center, was spared.) Editha was eager for her children to have
corrective surgery and avoid the taunts she faced while she was growing up, but
would send only two to the hospital because she didn't want to appear "greedy.";
Cards that tell the future, and the past: Somewhere in these blood samples,
taken from Cebu Island residents who suffer from cleft lip and palate, lie the
reason or reasons for the deformed faces, and the paths to gene and nutritional
therapy.; Just the facts: Ron Munger, left, tends not to get involved in the
lives of the people whom he studies. He cannot make promises or give advice. He
is there to collect information on a population, not on individual people. He
and a local assistant visit Diana Sudaria (with baby) to discuss her family's
eating habits.; A surgeon with Operation Smile, an American-based organization,
prepares Maria Ana Bensi for surgery to correct her cleft lip and palate. The
Bensis can afford the surgery only because it's free. Matthias Bensi earns the
equivalent of $2 a day.; Top: Maria Ana Bensi on her way to surgery. Middle:
Matthias Bensi Jr. during his operation. Bottom: Maria Ana, after surgery, with
Editha, who was also scheduled for the procedure but chose to be with her
children instead. When her husband encouraged her to have it, she snapped, You
said it didn't matter how I looked.; The recovery room at the H.W. Miller
Memorial Sanitarium and Hospital. Families of patients frequently camp in and
around the hospital during tests and operations, providing geneticists and other
scientists with an ideal population for their research into cleft lip and
palate. (Photographsy by Lauren Greenfield)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1998


                             2000 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 25, 1998, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: Genes forum raises medical, moral issues;
With caution, specialists weigh possibilities

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE

BODY:

   With scientists rapidly discovering genes that influence health, longevity,
and even personality, society's great challenge will be to "conserve human
dignity and reaffirm that we are morally responsible for our behavior," a
medical-legal specialist declared yesterday.

   Dr. Philip R. Reilly, co-organizer of a two-day conference on genes and
society, held at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, called on the
audience to fight "genetic determinism" - the belief that genes are destiny.

   "Genetic determinism is not embraced by scientists, physicians, or patients,"
said Reilly, who is executive director of the Shriver Center for Mental
Retardation in Waltham.

   "But it is widespread in our land," he added, displaying the cover of a
recent issue of Life magazine that said, "Personality, temperament, even life
choices. New studies show it's mostly in your genes."

   "Where are those studies?" asked Reilly. "I reject that."

   Reilly and other speakers have emphasized that despite growing evidence of
genetic contributions to most diseases and to some behavioral traits,
environmental factors are equally important.

   The comments came in a concluding talk at the conference, which brought
together more than 800 scientists, judges, biotech executives, students,
physicians, and others concerned about the impact of genetic technology on
society.

   Sponsors were George Washington University School of Medicine, the Whitehead
Institute in Cambridge, and the American Society of Law, Medicine and Ethics in
Boston. The meeting highlighted trends such as the increasing storage of DNA
samples of felons in databanks; growing concern about discrimination against
people with disease-associated genes; and progress in human gene therapy.

   As scientists rapidly decipher the human genome - the set of all 70,000 human
genes - such conferences are part of an effort to educate decision-makers and
others about the promises and perils raised by DNA research.

   One discussion yesterday centered on the growing use of screening tests to
identify couples who carry genes that could cause serious disease in their
offspring, as well as testing of fetuses for such genes.

   Dr. Christine Eng, a geneticist at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York
City, said that couples may be offered a lengthening list of gene tests forcing
them to make difficult decisions about what to do if the tests revealed harmful
genes.

   A study carried out among Ashkenazy Jews, who are at risk for carrying a
number of altered genes that can result in babies born with severe diseases,
showed that couples generally accepted multiple tests, said Eng. How they would
act on news of a gene defect threatening their offspring depended on how grave
the disease was predicted to be.

   Included were fetal tests for Tay-Sachs disease, which is usually lethal
within two to three years; cystic fibrosis, which has no specific treatment but
may allow children to live for a number of years; and Gaucher's disease, which
is treatable with an expensive drug.  According to Eng, 84 percent of couples
said they would abort a fetus with Tay-Sachs; 72 percent said they would
terminate a pregnancy affected by cystic fibrosis; and 36 percent said they
would choose abortion in the case of Gaucher's disease.

   Although testing of couples for presence of a Tay-Sachs gene has led to a
sharp decrease in the birth of infants with the disease, genetics specialists at
the conference said that such testing is unlikely to eliminate inherited
diseases and won't significantly alter the human gene pool.

   That question is central to the century-old, discredited practice of
"eugenics" - efforts to prevent people carrying certain genes from reproducing
with the aim of "improving" the genetic quality of the population. Before it
ended after World War II, the US eugenics movement led to the forced
sterilization of at least 60,000 people, most of whom were retarded or mentally
ill.

   Sheldon Krimsky, a Tufts University professor of environmental policy, said,
"It seems highly unlikely that voluntary actions by individuals could eliminate
a given gene from the gene pool." Krimsky and others said that recessive
diseases such as Tay-Sachs, which occur only in individuals who inherit a
defective gene from both father and mother, will never be eliminated because it
is virtually impossible to identify all the healthy carriers of Tay-Sachs genes.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1998
