
                             2401 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                      May 18, 1997, Sunday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 15

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: U.S. panel seeks ban on human clones

SOURCE: A Los Angeles Times report

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A presidential commission is preparing to call for a federal law banning
cloning of a human being.

   The National Bioethics Advisory Commission, which met Saturday, wants to
extend to private corporate and medical laboratories the same kind of
prohibition against cloning now imposed on researchers using federal dollars.

   Commission members voiced strong sentiments against creation of a human
clone, a baby with just one biological and genetic parent.

   The commission's final report will be delivered to President Clinton May 27.
He had imposed a moratorium on federal funding while awaiting the report.

   Although the commission did not complete final language for the report,
members expressed strong support for tough, restrictive federal legislation.
Rather than rely on voluntary cooperation by researchers and fertility clinics,
the commission would make it illegal for anyone to make a human clone.

   "It's a safety concern" because babies created by cloning would have a high
risk of "developmental defects and other physical abnormalities," said David
Cox, professor of genetics and pediatrics at Stanford Medical School who also is
a commission member.

   "We're all agreed it shouldn't be done. We need to make it a firm
prohibition," Eric Cassell, clinical professor of public health at Cornell
Medical College, told fellow panel members.

   Commission members support research in the cloning of animals, however, and
of further work to develop medical treatments linked to gene therapy. But they
want to draw a clear line between these activities and the attempt to create a
human baby that is a genetic carbon copy of just one parent.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1997


                             2402 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 16, 1997 Friday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-5:1,6,7,8; B-9:2,3,4,5

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Please be reasonable, animal rights activists

BYLINE: Joseph Perkins, THE SAN DIEGO UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:

   When animal rights groups from around the country descend on the nation's
capital next month for the so-called Animal Rights `97 National Convention,
organizers ought to consider whether extremists within the "movement" are
hurting their cause. Indeed, just a few weeks ago, 32 animal rights activists,
representing several of the organizations participating in the convention in
D.C., were arrested on trespassing and vandalism charges after they stormed the
California Regional Primate Research Center, on the UC Davis campus. The
activists, carrying placards decrying "science gone mad," sought to "liberate"
3,500 monkeys from the research center laboratories, where scientists have been
studying birth defects and gene therapy. Apparently, it did not occur to any of
the overzealous protesters that, at some point or another, one of their very own
friends or family members probably has benefited from medical research using
animals.

   In fact, every major medical breakthrough of this century is attributable to
animal testing. The polio vaccine, for instance, was developed by use of monkeys
and rabbits in the laboratory.

   Chemotherapy was refined with tests on mice and rats.

   Heart-bypass surgery was achieved through experimentation on dogs. And the
discovery of insulin resulted from research on dogs, pigs and cows. Obviously,
none of this matters to blindly zealous animal rights activists. Indeed, a month
before the protest at the UC Davis primate research center, another medical
research facility on the campus was the target of an arson attack by an outfit
called the Animal Liberation Front.

   ALF has been identified by the Justice Department as a domestic terrorist
group. Of course, whenever animal rights activists engage in acts of "civil
disobedience," they argue that their end justifies their means.

   "We are here today not because we are hell-bent on breaking the law," said
Josh Harper, one of the provocateurs of the near-riot at UC Davis.

   "We are here to defend the animals." But there is an appropriate way to
defend animals, just as there are appropriate ways to protest abortion and
support AIDS patients.

   And just as Operation Rescue turns off reasonable-minded people when it
harasses women at abortion clinics, just as ACT UP engenders much ill will when
its members throw AIDS-tainted blood at foes, animal rights activists lose
support from folks who might otherwise support them because of their
often-extremist tactics. This confrontational approach can be blamed on leaders
of the animal rights movement, like Ingrid Newkirk, co-founder of People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals, a group claiming a quarter-million members
throughout the country, including a number of misguided Hollywood celebrity
types. Newkirk, who is slated to be a featured "presenter" at next month's
animal rights convention, once declared that "a rat is a pig is a dog is a boy."
In other words, there is no difference between a rodent, a swine, a canine and a
human child.

   And anyone who thinks differently, she has stated, suffers from a
"supremacist perversion." It is this kind of thinking that undergirds the animal
rights movement in this country.

   Newkirk and her ilk are not merely concerned with the humane treatment of
animals (which most reasonable Americans advocate). They would ban all human use
of animals. If they had their way, there would be no primate or any other animal
research centers.

   No steak houses or fish markets.

   No zoos, no aquariums, no pet stores.

   No dog shows, no horse races.

   No "101 Dalmatians," no "Babe," no "Toto" (unless they were animated
features). No leather shoes and certainly no fur coats. Animal rights activists
want to impose their views on all Americans.

   And when gentle persuasion does not work, they are only too willing to resort
to drastic measures.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; CAPTIONS: (Man and baboon); PHOTOBY: BARRIE MAGUIRE

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2403 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 16, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: 'X-Files' creator may stay on an extra year

BYLINE: Alan Bash

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- A week ago he was at the Knicks-Heat basketball game
with Hollywood's hottest newlyweds, David Duchovny and Tea Leoni.

   Monday, he was on a podium accepting the Peabody Award from the
University of Georgia for excellence in broadcasting.

   And by the time you read this, X-Files and Millennium
creator Chris Carter will be back in Los Angeles finishing
a script for an X-Files feature film with Duchovny (Mulder)
and Gillian Anderson (Scully), due out next summer.

   "It's been like this for the past five years," Carter says of
his whirlwind schedule.

   Despite his battle fatigue, Carter, 40, is softening his stance
about leaving Files after the upcoming fifth season.

   "I'm not ruling out" staying for Year 6, he says. Files itself,
the cult sci-fi hit that is Fox's highest-rated show, "could
definitely go seven years strong."

   This year's episodes, including Sunday's season-ending shocker
(Fox, 9 ET/PT), have seen Mulder and Scully reel from illness
and doubt.

   "There have been some tragic elements this season," Carter says,
"but that's a good thing, because it has drawn Scully and Mulder
together."

   With Scully's inoperable nasal tumor, has the show written itself
into a corner?

   "I've read about miracle cures such as gene therapy and viruses."
And yet a friend who has breast cancer told Carter, " 'Don't
trivialize this. You can't just cure this magically,' and I've
taken that to heart."

   Millennium, whose finale airs tonight at 9 ET/PT on Fox,
has had a bumpy first year. Next season, Carter wants to broaden
the stories "to talk about important things like violence in
society, psychology, behavior, weakness and strength."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Ken Staniforth, Fox

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1997


                             2404 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         May 15, 1997 Thursday, SLIDELL

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 21H2

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: WALKERS HIT STREETS TO AID CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE LYNAM St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   Tracy Stewart, afflicted with cystic fibrosis since she was 3, knows only too
well that a cure has not been found. Still, she believes it is on the horizon.
What is needed is money for research.

   An English teacher at Northshore High School, Stewart has spread the word,
and three busloads of students and faculty plan to participate Saturday in the
ninth annual Great Strides Walk to Cure Cystic Fibrosis.

   Sponsored by the Louisiana chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the 5-
and 10-K walks will take place at City Park in New Orleans. Registration starts
at 8 a.m., and the walks begin at 9 a.m.

   "They've been doing so much research to find a cure. The more money we make,
the closer we'll be to a cure," Stewart said.

   Progress has been made, particularly in the area of gene therapy, although
this research still is in the first stage; and medications have improved. The
disease affects mainly the lungs and digestive system. Though Stewart's case is
relatively mild, she has suffered some lung damage.

   "I have to deal with it on a daily basis," she said.

   She has participated in the walk for most of the past nine years, and
describes the route as scenic. Participants can run, walk, skate, push baby
strollers, or use any other means they wish, Stewart said. Following the walk,
lunch will be served while a band plays and awards are distributed.

   Participants in the walk ask for donations from sponsors, with the money
going to the Louisiana chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Participants should go to Shelter No. 6 at the City Park entrance on Marconi
Boulevard and Zachary Taylor Drive.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1997


                             2405 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         MAY 12, 1997 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1331 words

HEADLINE: TARGETING TREATMENT TO SPOTS THAT NEED IT

BYLINE: Janet Rae-Dupree, KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   Fighting disease, particularly cancer, is a hit-or-miss proposition.

   Drugs don't go exactly where doctors want them to. They maraud through the
bloodstream, attacking a patient's healthy cells at the same time they destroy
foreign or cancerous ones. It's the medical equivalent of destroying the village
in order to save it.

   Doctors believe it doesn't have to be that way.

   Using two well-known technologies - focused ultrasound and magnetic resonance
imaging, or MRI - they hope to target drugs and, perhaps, gene therapies
directly at diseased sites instead of firing them scattershot at the whole body.

   "We're still looking for answers to so many unknowns, but focused ultrasound
does have a lot of potential," said King C.P. Li, a Stanford University
radiologist. "Tumors are just one thing. There are many different drugs or gene
therapies that you want to deliver to a specific site in the body. This might
make it possible."

   Researchers have known for 50 years that they could crank up and focus the
energy from ultrasound, high-frequency sound waves most commonly used today to
paint internal pictures of the body. Today's diagnostic ultrasound machines -
those used routinely on pregnant women, for instance - are carefully regulated
to ensure they can't generate even a fraction of the power required to cause any
tissue damage.

   Specially designed ultrasound machines, though, can kick out intense energy
and focus it into a point as tiny as the head of a pin. That pinhead of energy
can burn hot enough to destroy targeted tissue without touching anything nearby.
It also can be toned down to jiggle cells without burning them, loosening their
contact with each other or making their membranes more permeable to drugs.

   "I think of it as the shake-and-bake range," said Stanford researcher Mark
Bednarski.

   But until recently there was no practical way to target such a minuscule
sound bomb. Striking tissue a few millimeters too deeply in the body could be a
lethal slip-up.

   Doctors needed an accurate, real-time targeting system.

   Enter magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, a scanning technique that uses a
powerful magnetic field and radio signals to create detailed, three-dimensional
medical images without exposing the patient to harmful radiation.

   In its infancy two decades ago, medical MRI couldn't compute images fast
enough, nor were they accurate enough, to provide the detail needed for focused
ultrasound surgery. MRI machines themselves added to the problem: Their
claustrophobic tubes of magnetic energy kept surgeons from getting at patients
during a scan.

   But 10 years ago, MRI's speed and quality began to improve dramatically.
Designers learned to create open doughnut-shaped machines that don't completely
enclose patients, allowing surgeons access. The improvements prompted
researchers to give MRI another look, at first only as a system to pinpoint a
precise location for the probes used during internal laser surgery.

   During those laser surgery experiments, however, researchers discovered an
interesting side benefit to MRI: It can see subtle changes in internal body
heat.

   The ability to measure such changes is crucial to ensuring that focused
ultrasonic energy is going where doctors want it to go.

   "The old methods were firing blind," said Kirby G. Vosburgh, manager of
General Electric's electronic systems laboratory, which developed the first
prototype MRI/focused ultrasound machine.

   It has been a long learning curve for researchers working with GE's prototype
machines. Initial tests at Stanford were conducted on chicken parts and slabs of
meat purchased at a local grocery store, said Stanford medical student James
Lee, who conducted many of them.

   Researchers didn't anticipate what a difference working on a living creature
would make in ultrasonic intensity. The first test on an anesthetized rabbit was
halted when the ultrasonic energy accidentally cooked the animal's leg. The
rabbit was euthanized without being revived from anesthesia.

   "That was very upsetting to everyone involved," Bednarski said. "It showed
just how much we have left to learn about this."

   Once researchers figured out how to mete out the proper dose of focused
ultrasound, Bednarski and Li concocted liposomes - microscopic sacs used to
deliver drugs and gene therapies - that contained gadolinium, a contrast agent
easily detectable with MRI.

   The liposomes were injected into a rabbit's bloodstream and then a
five-minute burst of focused ultrasound was pointed at a tumor in the rabbit's
thigh. Within two hours, most of the gadolinium in the bloodstream had pooled
inside the tumor, Bednarski said. The rabbit suffered no permanent tissue
damage.

   "We think the ultrasound disrupts the junction between the cells in blood
vessels without causing damage," he said.

   Imagine a brick wall of cells forming the tube of a microscopically small
vein running through a tumor. The waves of ultrasound jiggle that wall of cells,
loosening the biological mortar between them. Fluid from the bloodstream leaks
between the loosened cells, depositing Bednarski's liposomes inside the tumor.
Within a few hours of the ultrasound treatment, the cells of the vein are linked
again, but the liposomes remain inside the tumor.

   "I don't ever want to raise false hopes for people who are sick," Bednarski
said. "But this does have incredible potential in so many areas."

   Researchers believe that different intensities of focused ultrasound can be
used to change the permeability of a cell's membrane. If they can perfect such
techniques, they may be able to deposit specially engineered genes directly into
diseased tissue to persuade it to repair itself. Genetic instructions could be
sent to clogged arteries telling them to grow new blood vessels. Pancreatic
cells could be genetically instructed how to make insulin for diabetics.

   But that's tomorrow's hope. MRI-guided focused ultrasound already is being
used at Brigham & Women's Hospital in Massachusetts to zap benign breast tumors.
Doctors there have had trouble recruiting women for their studies because benign
tumors generally don't require surgery. But once they have worked on enough
benign tumors to perfect their technique, doctors hope to graduate to cancerous
tumors.

   "Right now it is done for cosmetic reasons, but we have done seven patients
with 10 tumors and all were successful," said Ferenc Jolesz, a neurosurgeon and
focused ultrasound specialist. "This has been an excellent way to demonstrate
the feasibility of the therapy."

   Eventually, researchers hope to find ways to use ultrasound to destroy tumors
currently believed to be inoperable - those buried deep in delicate internal
organs, such as the brain, or lying within or alongside crucial arteries.

   Brigham researchers also are experimenting to see whether the combined
technologies can be used to cauterize and seal weakened blood vessels in the
brain and elsewhere. Such research could eventually lead to better treatments
for aneurysms.

   Researchers at the same time have been dropping tantalizing hints about
focused ultrasound's potential for breaking through the blood-brain barrier, one
of medicine's most difficult conundrums.

   Researchers believe that biological barrier is an evolutionary defense
mechanism; most poisons that get into the blood can be screened out before they
get to the brain. But when doctors find a drug or gene therapy that could do the
diseased brain some good, that defense mechanism prevents them from getting the
medicine where it belongs.

   Stanford researchers have yet to decide whether they will conduct experiments
aimed at getting around that barrier, Bednarski said. Jolesz declined to discuss
whether Brigham researchers have begun such work.

   "There are many things I am not authorized to tell you, but some of what we
are doing is revolutionary," he said.

   Initial tests were done on chicken parts. Work with a live animal was far
different.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2406 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                       May 11, 1997, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: CITY WEEKLY; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: Couple gives $ 10m to MGH Cancer Center;
CITY WEEKLY

BYLINE: By Jenifer B. McKim, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The elegant older couple - he in a dark suit, she adorned with gold jewelry
and a stylish black hat - posed for a camera last week outside the cancer center
that will bear their name.

   They then quickly turned around and headed into the building where
72-year-old Barbara Nessel waited in line for the blood tests and treatment she
gets every three months to battle the cancer in her own body.

   Barbara and Melvin Nessel, formerly of Boston, are donating $ 10 million to
the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, one of the largest financial
gifts ever made to the hospital. The couple also travels to the hospital every
three months from their retirement home in Palm Beach, Fla., so that Barbara,
who was diagnosed with cancer seven years ago, can get treatments.

   Melvin Nessel, 77, who earned his riches with Fenton Shoe Corp. and Atlas
Importing Corp., which he founded in Cambridge almost 50 years ago, said he and
his wife are donating the money because of their familiarity with, and respect
for, the hospital's cancer facilities. While they realize their donation most
likely will not lead to a cure for Barbara, they said they hope the money will
help future patients.

   "We felt that this is something we very much wanted to do and see while we
were still alive," said Nessel, while waiting in the hospital for his wife. "It
is so self-rewarding and wonderful that we can think that all the good things
this cancer center will be able to do to so many people."

   The couple has long given generously to the hospital. This last donation is
the largest of several they have made over the last 30 years, including a $
500,000 gift that launched the Barbara and Melvin Nessel Gene Therapy Center in
1994. The recent gift, announced this month and to be dispersed over several
years, has founded a new center comprising all the clinical areas and disease
centers in the hospital's Cox Building.

   The Nessels were not always millionaires. In 1947, Melvin Nessel, an Air
Force officer and son of an Atlanta clothing manager, fell in love with Barbara,
of Brookline, at her family's vacation home in Florida. The couple was married
three months later and returned to Boston, where Melvin launched a career as a
salesman in a Boston shoe factory.

   "He was handsome, he was skinny and a littler taller, with the most gorgeous
blue eyes," said Barbara, adding he is still handsome and still has gorgeous
blue eyes. "It was love at first sight."

   In 1952, Nessel opened his own shoe business in Cambridge with help from his
in-laws. He transformed the business from a single factory with 50 employees
into an international manufacturing and importing powerhouse in the footwear
industry. But money cannot necessarily buy good health. Barbara was diagnosed
with cancer seven years ago, three years after they retired to Florida. So every
three months, the couple returns to Boston for treatment at the hospital.
Barbara said it is emotional for her to be both aiding and using the services at
the cancer center. Just last week, she said, women from the center found out
about the donation.

   "When I went into the admitting office, the girls were so excited," Nessel
said.

   She said she didn't mind waiting in line: "I don't want to be special. There
is no reason. I had to wait my turn."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1997


                             2407 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                              May 11, 1997, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: $ 1 MILLION NATIONWIDE GIFT TO AID CHILDREN'S;
CHILD ABUSE PREVENTION

BODY:


   The Nationwide Insurance Enterprise Foundation has pledged $ 1 million to
Children's Hospital to help prevent child abuse.

   ''There are few causes that are more important than protecting our
community's children,'' Dimon R. McFerson, chairman and chief executive officer
of Nationwide, said in a statement.

   The pledge to the hospital's For Our Children fund-raising campaign will
support the Center for Child Abuse Prevention. The center also houses the Ohio
Chapter of the National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse.

   Such services as parenting skills training, crisis intervention and
counseling for victims and offenders are offered at the center.

   Research also is conducted in such areas as the causes of abuse.

   ''It is appropriate to announce this gift, which is indicative of
Nationwide's sincere interest in the well-being of children, having just
commemorated National Child Abuse Prevention Month,'' said Ann I. Wolfe,
campaign chairwoman.

   ''Nationwide has long been a supporter of child abuse prevention programs at
Children's and this pledge signifies a tangible commitment to eliminating this
devastating trauma to children.''

   In recognition of the pledge, the hospital's patient tower lobby will be
dedicated to Nationwide.

   Nationwide is one of the hospital's largest corporate donors, supporting such
areas as the expansion of the Wexner Institute for Pediatric Research, cystic
fibrosis gene therapy research and the HIV/AIDS program, the hospital said.

   The hospital launched a five-year, $ 85 million campaign last October. Money
raised will be spent on research, patient care services and education programs.

   The campaign is the largest ever by the hospital and considered one of the
largest in the nation by a children's hospital.

   Yesterday, the Pleasure Guild of Children's Hospital, a women's auxiliary,
presented the hospital a $ 187,000 check. It was the largest check in the
guild's 40-year history.

   The donation has been earmarked for the hospital's pediatric oncology
research and camp programs and poison control hot line, said Dr. Thomas N.
Hansen, acting chief executive officer and medical director of the hospital.

   ''We are absolutely thrilled with this donation,'' Hansen said.

   The guild raises money through volunteer work. Its largest volunteer effort
is an annual children's play.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1997


                             2408 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      May 8, 1997, Thursday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 14A; Pg. 07A

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: Hearing to review research ethics;
Informed consent is the top concern

BYLINE: Carrie Teegardin; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Research controversies ranging from the secret testing of an experimental
drug on Gulf War troops to revelations about human radiation experiments during
the Cold War years have prompted a congressional hearing set for today on ethics
and research.

   Researchers, ethicists and advocacy groups will testify before the U.S. House
Human Resources Subcommittee about the need to improve federal requirements,
which may not adequately protect human guinea pigs.

   "Cloning, gene therapies and other scientific discoveries present new
opportunities and new ethical dilemmas," said Rep. Christopher Shays (R-Conn.) ,
subcommittee chairman. "We want to be sure federal research is also finding new
and better ways to protect the dignity and safety of human research
participants."

   The hearing will focus on "informed consent,"or how research risks are
communicated to human subjects, particularly subjects who are children or people
with mental illnesses.

   The issue of "informed consent" was raised in an article in Tuesday's Atlanta
Journal-Constitution about the mistreatment of patients with Alzheimer's disease
and schizophrenia in studies conducted by two professors at the Medical College
of Georgia (MCG). Study coordinators, workers with no medical training, told the
AJC that they supervised the care of many patients. These coordinators also said
they advised the patients about the risks inherent in the studies. MCG
regulations specify that medical doctors should be the ones informing patients
of the risks.

   The researchers, Dr. Richard Borison and Bruce Diamond, have been indicted
for stealing $ 11 million in research grants from MCG.

   In Congress today, experts will also say whether the nation's estimated 4,
000 to 6,000 Institutional Review Boards are doing an adequate job. These are
local committees that must review and monitor all research involving human
subjects.

   Borison and Diamond, for example, bypassed the MCG's Institutional Review
Board, or in some cases did not report negative side effects as required,
according to MCG officials.

   "I don't think there is widespread abuse of human subjects, but any abuse is
too much," said Laurie Flynn, director of the National Alliance for the Mentally
Ill.

   "We are at an important new threshold of examination of whether or not we do
have adequate protections for vulnerable subects," Flynn said, "and what is very
heartening is that this dialogue is taking place in a way that includes for the
first time family members and patients themselves."

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1997


                             2409 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                         May 5, 1997 Monday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1200 words

HEADLINE: LAWS WOULD BAN DISCRIMINATION

BYLINE: LIZ HALLORAN; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   With a drop of blood or a single strand of hair, a doctor can predict whether
you are at risk of developing breast cancer, or Alzheimer's disease, or
alcoholism.

   Or whether your unborn children could be predisposed to Down syndrome,
muscular dystrophy or cystic fibrosis.

   Genetic testing is a potent and increasingly affordable tool -- one that
researchers say can help predict some terrible conditions and diseases, and that
ultimately may help prevent them.

   But what if that information ends up being used to deny you health insurance?
What if it's used to prevent you from getting a job?

   Such questions have roiled the booming genetics and ethics communities in the
decade since scientists began mapping human genes.  Although reports of such
abuses are scarce in Connecticut, fear of discrimination exists, geneticists and
counselors say.

   "They're afraid," said Ellen T.  Matloff, director of the Cancer Genetic
Counseling Program at the Yale Cancer Center. "They're afraid that if their
insurance company finds out that they carry a gene, their children will be
dropped.

   "They're afraid if they change jobs, they won't be able to get coverage," she
said. "These are some pretty reasonable fears."

   State legislators are looking at ways to protect residents from job or
insurance discrimination based on tests that reveal a predisposition to a
condition or disease.

   "I just don't think we should be able to discriminate based on the fact that,
sometime in the future, someone has the propensity to have a disease," said Rep.
Richard D.  Tulisano, D-Rocky Hill.

   Tulisano is among supporters of at least two genetic testing bills being
considered by legislators. One would bar insurance companies from denying
coverage based on the results of a genetic test; another would forbid employers
from rejecting job applicants or denying promotions for the same reason.

   "The time to put this into legislation is now, and not wait for people to be
abused," said Sen. Edith G.  Prague, D-Columbia, a co-sponsor of the
insurance-related bill. "This whole genetic issue is prime for being abused."

   Insurers contend that access to the information will allow them to more
accurately assess the risk of insuring individuals, and groups of people with
similar genetic predispositions. That, they say, ultimately will help them make
better decisions on setting premiums.

   "We oppose any prohibition that would not allow us to underwrite based on
this information," said Ginny Bueno of the American Council of Life Insurance.

   There is no federal law barring discrimination based on genetic test results,
although federal officials say that the Americans with Disabilities Act could
protect those facing on-the-job discrimination based on genetic information. No
complaints of genetic discrimination have been filed under this law.

   Congress is considering a bill, co- sponsored by Sen. Christopher J.  Dodd,
D-Conn., that would ban discrimination based on a genetic test and protect the
confidentiality of test results.

   The availability of genetic test results could "allow the exploitation of the
human frailty to which one might be genetically predisposed," Dodd said in a
speech to his Senate colleagues.

   In the absence of a federal law, states have been establishing their own
rules since the early 1990s.  That was when the work of the Human Genome
Project, a 15-year, $3 billion national scientific effort to map the genes of
the human body, began to accelerate.

   The project has announced breakthrough after breakthrough -- identifying
genes that indicate a person is susceptible to developing a disease or condition
such as cancer or hemophilia. In the future, scientists hope that discoveries
will lead to gene therapy, but for now, there's little one can do about a
genetic predisposition beyond counseling and lifestyle changes.

   "Right now, it costs about $1,000 to do a genetic test," said Gary Phelan, a
New Haven lawyer who specializes in employment issues and who has written about
genetic discrimination. "But within about five years, it will be no more than a
simple drug test."

   Connecticut is rather late to the legislation game: Twenty states already
have statutes that, to varying degrees, protect the confidentiality of genetic
test results and protect residents from employment or insurance discrimination.

   The powerful insurance industry has influenced Connecticut's response,
Tulisano said. Similar efforts died last session.

   Insurers who oppose the restrictions say that genetic information ultimately
will be treated as a routine medical record.

   "In most cases, it's not even an issue because most people who get coverage
get it through a group and no medical underwriting is necessary," said Richard
Coorsh of the Health Insurance Association of America. "There is no need for
such a thing as health histories."

   "Down the road, scientists are going to be able to identify all the human
genes," said Bueno, of the American Council of Life Insurance. "Along with that,
there is not going to be any distinction between genetic information and other
medical information."

   "This is the future," she said.

   Dr. Robert Greenstein, director of the University of Connecticut's Center for
Genetics Research, tends to agree with Bueno -- and that makes him unusual among
his colleagues.

   Greenstein supports the proposed state legislation because it sets up a
safeguard against discrimination. But he agrees that the more information
insurance companies have, "the better able they will be to know what they have
to do" by selling more appropriate coverage and participating in the management
or care of a particular disease.

   "I'm saying, 'Give it to them,' " Greenstein said. "In the long run, it will
be better for us."

   Greenstein and many others in the medical community are already skeptical of
the notion that medical records -- which exist in computers and in national
databanks -- are actually private.

   So is Joseph Grabarz of the Connecticut Civil Liberties Union.

   "Regardless of what the law says, this stuff gets passed around," Grabarz
said. "It's very difficult to trace -- it's like anyone who's ever tried to
erase a mistake on their financial record."

   For Grabarz, that underscores the need to provide special protection for the
results of genetic testing.

   Yale's Matloff agrees.

   "There is no such thing [as privacy], and we don't want to give people false
reassurance," she said.

   Her center advises people concerned about how their test results will be used
to consider paying for the tests out of their own pockets -- rather than
submitting the bill to their insurance company.

   "They might not want those results in their general medical file.  They might
want to keep it in a lockbox," Matloff said.

   Much of the information about discrimination -- either on the job or by
insurance companies -- is only anecdotal at this point, Tulisano said. And he
expects just one piece of genetic testing legislation to make it this year.

   "I think it will be a limited bill saying that you can't discriminate in
providing health insurance based on genetic testing," he said. "I think it will
be the only one passed, but it will be a base."

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1997


                             2410 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  May 5, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 07B, COMMENTARY COLUMN

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: MONET AND A MATTER OF MEDICAL ETHICS

BYLINE: Amy E. Schwartz; Copyright The Washington Post

BODY:


   A decade ago someone sent me a squashed-looking photocopy of a poem called,
"Monet Refuses the Operation." It was a gentle monologue in which the
Impressionist painter, advanced in age, explains to his doctor that no, he
doesn't want to undergo cataract removal; he's spent his whole life learning to
see things blurry. The poet's name was Lisel Mueller, and I knew exactly nothing
about her until early in April, when it was announced she had won the 1997
Pulitzer Prize in poetry.

   The poem itself contained considerably more information, though not about
Mueller. With every rereading it seemed to bear more sharply on medical wonders
and public conundrums from genetic engineering to cosmetic surgery - puzzles
that, in the years since I first read it, have risen in visibility to make a
fair bid for the status of Great Question of our age.

   What if we can, in fact, fix the body - as it seems more plausible every year
that we can? Lifesaving surgery, elective cosmetic surgery, Prozac, the lure of
perfect children and the gene therapies and diagnostics done in the womb - does
their magic open a promised land where we all function perfectly or all function
alike?

Says Mueller's Monet:

Doctor, you say there are no haloes

around the streetlights in Paris

and what I see is an aberration

caused by old age, an affliction.

I tell you it has taken me all my life

to arrive at the vision of gas lamps as angels . . .

Fifty-four years before I could see

Rouen cathedral is built

of parallel shafts of sun,

and now you want to restore

my youthful errors . . ."

   This is fanciful, but only slightly. If Monet could have gotten his eyes
fixed, should he have? And if Monet really just painted his canvases foggy and
blurry because of a simple eye problem, does art go away?

   With a cloning story every week, and the definition of "essential" medical
care gone political beyond recovery, such questions are now so omnipresent as to
approach cliche.

   They cloak the big shift we are only just beginning to glimpse: Unlike all
those past generations that wrestled with their inability to curb pain and
suffering in an uncaring universe, ours struggles with the implications of our
rising ability to do just that. If citizens with mood problems can fix them with
Prozac, is every citizen entitled, or even maybe obligated, to have the
treatment? And so on, and so forth.

   Poets tend to see things ahead. It doesn't always matter exactly why, or how
they happened to see, and in some ways it's helpful not to know too much: You
can't tell, from the poem, whether Mueller really thinks Monet has the answer or
whether he is just in a fine frenzy of artistic passion.

   There are two equally good ways to get intimately close to a poet or novelist
or musician, to nourish the feeling of connection with and affection for the
thoughts in her head. The more usual one in an era of plentiful biographical
material is to look for more - research your artist, read up on anything by her
or about her, purchase a 700-page biography, join an Internet chat site and
practice fandom.

   The other way is to keep reading the one poem you like over and over and
over.

   "Monet Refuses the Operation" kept getting blurrier and more intriguing the
more times I read it; the photocopy got squashier-looking each time I dug it out
to pass it along.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1997


                             2411 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                   May 4, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 13WC;Page 25;Column 1;Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Testing Gives Glimpse Into Future

BODY:

   FORTUNETELLERS would have us believe that our fate is revealed in the milky
reflection of their crystal balls. What lies ahead? Something thrilling?
Something devastating? Now geneticists and molecular biologists are making it
scientifically possible for us to glimpse into our futures through an analysis
of our genes. There are those in the field who regard this genetic information
as sacred.

   Geneticists are deep into the exploration of genetic mutations (a change in a
normal gene) related to a variety of cancers. As these genetic secrets unfold,
information becomes available to the patient, which doctors have never had to
deal with before. How does knowing whether one carries a gene that predisposes
the person to cancer affect one's emotional life? Does one's siblings or
children carry the gene? If a person has the gene should she have children? How
will insurance companies and employers use this information?

    Dr. Arthur Lerner is medical director of the Cancer Program at White Plains
Hospital Center and part of the newly opened Cancer Genetic Counseling Program
here which, in collaboration with the Yale Cancer Center in New Haven, offers
counseling, treatment options and, when appropriate, genetic testing to people
with a family history of cancer. "When I was in medical school," Dr. Lerner
said, "the geneticists were the guys buried in their microscopes," Dr. Lerner
said. " 'I'll never use this stuff in my clinical practice,' I thought. Now
genetics and molecular biology have come to the forefront of treatment of
malignant diseases. This is not science fiction anymore." While geneticists are
describing genes to explain malignancies, genetic therapies to prevent and treat
those malignancies are about to emerge from the laboratory, Dr. Lerner said.
"Can we identify someone with a gene which predisposes them to cancer and alter
that gene?" he asked. "This work is going important places very quickly. It's
one of the most significant components of care in oncology in the next decade."

   Genetic tests are now available for some types of familial colon, breast,
thyroid, melanoma and ovarian cancers. If a person carries either the BRCA-1 or
BRCA-2 gene, for example, the lifetime risk for breast cancer may be as great as
85 or 80 percent, respectively, and for ovarian cancer from 40 to 60 percent.
The same mutation that causes breast cancer has been linked to ovarian cancer
and perhaps to colon cancer as well.

   "While only 5 to 10 percent of cancers are hereditary," said Ellen Matloff, a
cancer genetic counselor with the Cancer Genetic Counseling Program with an
expertise in cancer, genetics and psychology, "if you are predisposed or carry
the gene you may want to know all of your options." Other cancers can be traced
to the environment or bad luck. A cell may mutate into a cancer cell for reasons
not yet understood.

   Not everyone is a candidate for genetic testing, and a doctor's referral is
necessary to be seen at the Cancer Genetic Counseling Program. "People with
family histories of cancer, including those occurring at unusually young ages,
more than once in the same individual or seen with other cancers in the family
are particularly appropriate candidates," said Kathy Duffy, a registered nurse
and the cancer program director.

   The process begins with an initial meeting with the genetic counselor, who
takes a detailed family history including male family members who can also carry
the gene for breast cancer as well as other cancers. Pathology reports are
obtained from family members with malignancies. The program's team of doctors
and genetic counselors then calculates the patient's risk for developing cancer.
"One of the options for the patient at this stage is genetic testing.  Others
are increased surveillance, or nothing," Ms. Matloff said. Fifty percent of the
patients who have come this far choose genetic testing. They are the ones for
whom uncertainty is the worst thing. Fifty percent of the time patients don't
have the gene, even with family histories.

   "The patients who decide against testing either simply don't want to know (as
one patient said, 'If the test were negative I would love to know; if it were
positive it would be overwhelming,') or their risk factors were not as great as
they thought," Ms. Matloff said. The cost is also a consideration: from $300 to
$3,000 a person depending on the complexity of the DNA analysis. Two sisters
whose mother, aunt and grandmother had died of breast cancer decided to be
tested. One sister was concerned about the fate of her 5-year-old daughter. Both
sisters tested positive. "With this information come thoughts, perhaps in the
shower, like, 'Is this the day I'm going to find a lump?' or 'My mother didn't
make it to my graduation.  Will I make it to my daughter's?' " Ms. Matloff said.
"You can't 'unknow' this information. This is forever. Your whole life changes
in 10 minutes." But for those patients who test positive options become
available based on their genetic risks. One sister decided on a prophylactic
mastectomy, the other on more frequent surveillance. "How can you not be excited
about these discoveries?" Dr. Lerner said. "But if you think it all out, you can
make a sound medical decision, and it could ruin a person emotionally."

   A genetic counselor, Nancie Petrocelli, who works with Ms. Matloff, said:
"Genetics is a family affair and goes far beyond the person who is affected.
These are decisions that will affect entire generations of people. They are so
glad to have someone to finally talk to. Many have carried this around with them
since childhood."

   People may not anticipate what kinds of social difficulties this information
can bring, Ms. Matloff said. A patient asked, "When do I tell the person I am
dating that I carry the gene?" Who wants to hire someone who will get cancer?
They may get passed up for promotions. People have reported losing their jobs,
or they can't adopt children. Insurance companies may deem them bad risks and
drop them or raise fees based on their genetic profile. "We go to such lengths
to protect the patient," Ms. Matloff said. Among the concerns are the for-profit
genetic testing centers which are cropping up. "They are exploitative, often do
testing without counseling and sometimes inaccurately interpret results," she
added. "Patients may think they are at a higher or lower risk than they really
are and do something drastic in either direction."

   Dr. Lerner said: "You can put a lot of adjectives on this information. It's
important, tough stuff. And we have to resist asking, 'Is this cost-effective?'
It sure is emotionally cost-effective."


GRAPHIC: Photos: Ellen Matloff, left, with Kathy Duffy, a nurse, and Dr. Arthur
Lerner, studying blood samples at White Plains Hospital Center. (Photographs by
Richard Harbus for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1997


                             2412 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        May 4, 1997 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: HIGH-POTENTIAL, HIGH-TECH FIRMS GET HELP TO GROW

BYLINE: By ZACH SCHILLER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Robert F. Butz, president of Cleveland's Copernicus Gene Systems Inc., thinks
big.

   "We intend to be the premier company in the world allowing DNA to be used as
drugs," he said.

   It is such out-sized goals that unite Cleveland's technology-based companies
even when, like Copernicus, they have yet to book their first sale.

   From Athersys Inc., which has come up with artificial chromosomes, to
NeuroControl Corp., which develops implantable devices to help people with
paralyzed muscles and limbs, these high-potential companies weren't built
overnight.

   In 1995, Copernicus sought financing from 40 venture capital groups without
any luck. They thought it was too early, said Dr. James Kovach, then an employee
at the Edison BioTechnology Center and now director of technology management at
Case Western Reserve University's medical school.

   But in June 1995, recalled Vince Kazmer, the former U.S. Biochemical
executive who then was trying to get the company off the ground, a publicly
traded company agreed to pay $3.5 million in stock to buy out Copernicus.

   For a partnership formed only months earlier with a $100 investment, it would
have been a stupendous return, but three months later, the deal was called off.
Copernicus was unable at the time to duplicate its research results.

   Copernicus originated out of work at CWRU. Different researchers there were
working on issues connected to gene therapy, the insertion of genes into human
cells to treat disease. It was Kovach, then at Edison BioTechnology Center, who
got the researchers together.

   One group, including Richard W. Hanson, biochemistry department chairman; Dr.
Jose Perales; and Dr. Thomas Ferkol, came up with a way to compact DNA so it
could be used in drugs. Meanwhile, Dr. Marc J. Cooper was developing a way to
insert the DNA into cells in great numbers and keep it there for months rather
than days.

   "It dawned on Jim [Kovach] you could put together peanut butter and chocolate
and make a Reese's cup," said Cooper. "Together, you could use the two
technologies to put DNA where you wanted it and then control it."

   The hope first is to treat hemophilia, elevated cholesterol and some cancers.

   After the buyout fell through, the company spent almost a year trying to
figure out why the experiments had failed, said Kovach. Meanwhile, its research
advanced. Then, Kovach met Butz, who later became chief executive officer.

   Butz, a 47-year-old Midwesterner who attended Kenyon College, has spent his
career in technology hubs doing research on drugs and overseeing their clinical
development.

   He was impressed by Copernicus' technology. Under Butz, the company has
enlisted other management and scientific expertise, and last month, it obtained
about $1 million from investors.

   Now its challenge is to advance its science and win more financial support.

   Butz wants to set up relationships with companies to use Copernicus'
technology: to license it, pay Copernicus to investigate it further or
collaborate on showing its usefulness.

   The aim is to make it an industry standard, even as Copernicus relies on
others to do much of the routine work. The company could go public in 1999.

   Mehran Mehregany, an associate professor of electrical engineering at CWRU,
is taking a different path. He has built one of the top U.S. centers working on
microelectromechanical systems.

   MEMS technology one day might allow tiny motors to travel through the body to
repair damaged blood vessels or allow sensors to tell the pressure inside of
tires.

   Mehregany founded Advanced MicroMachines Inc. as "the missinglink" between
reseachers at CWRU creating MEMS technology and big companies that see a use for
it in their products.

   AMMI runs on the contracts it gets from such companies. Mehregany's vision is
that they can enhance their systems, and the area could grow as a MEMS research
center.

   Mehregany doesn't want to bring in outside investors.

   "If I get involved with venture capital, they may decide AMMI may be better
off in Massachusetts or Silicon Valley," he said.

   Clearly, AMMI is a different animal than Copernicus.

   Yet Mehregany's goal fits with Cleveland's tradition as a user of technology.
"We didn't invent the electric light. We invented the first stoplight," noted
Geon Co. Chairman William F. Patient.

   It is up to Mehregany to make that tradition work again.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY ROADELL HICKMAN / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; Robert F. Butz is
moving to Cleveland from California to become chief executive of Copernicus Gene
Systems Inc.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1997


                             2413 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1997 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                               May 4, 1997 Sunday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: NORTHWEST LIVING; Pg. L03

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: REFERENCE BOOK OFFERS LOWDOWN ON CANCER

BYLINE: BETTIJANE LEVINE, LA Times - Washington Post Servi

BODY:

   Sunday, May 4, 1997 REFERENCE BOOK OFFERS LOWDOWN ON CANCER

   So, you're in pain. The doctor says ``describe it,'' and you're stuck for
words.

   See Page 269 of the big, friendly new encyclopedia called Informed
Decisions: The Complete Book of Cancer Diagnosis (Viking), edited by Dr.  Gerald
P. Murphy, Lois B. Morris and Dianne Lange and put out by the American  Cancer
Society.

   You'll find a word list that runs the pain gamut, from ``flickering'' and
``throbbing'' to ``radiating'' and ``piercing.'' Starting at the top of your
head and ending at your soles, Informed Decisions spells out and diagrams
symptoms to look for, what to do if you find them and where to go from there.
Also covered are treatment options and how to select the best one for you,  cure
rates and survival statistics.

   The most important and optimistic thing to know about cancer, says Murphy,
former chief medical officer of the cancer society, is that ``we are entering
an era of new therapies never available before.''

   Immunotherapy, or cancer-vaccine therapy, has been introduced in the past  12
months in lymphoma, melanoma and prostate cancer, he says. ``With new  delivery
systems now available, we are able to stimulate the immune system to  respond to
these antigens to destroy the tumor,'' he says.

   And the same can be said for gene therapy, he adds. ``Gene therapy will  work
when the proper mechanism is found to place a particular gene at a  particular
spot, to regulate the system it is designed to regulate.''

   Even today, he says, there are many more treatment options than there were
just a few years ago.

   And patients have a new attitude.

   ``A few years back, everybody sat and waited for the doctor to tell them
what to do. . . . Nowadays, people are more informed. They are more able to
discuss cancer and more willing to ask the doctor to tell them all the
treatment options that exist.

   ``So get into that discussion,'' he says. ``Ask, `What are my other  options?
What else might I be able to do?' Most physicians are used to  handling that
sort of discussion.''

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = LA Times - Washington Post
Service <

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2414 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           May 4, 1997 Sunday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1575 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC SCIENCE CHANGING SOCIETY;
ETHICS QUESTIONS ARE BEING RAISED

BYLINE: By ROBERT LEE HOTZ and THOMAS H. MAUGH II Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   These are the unlikely incarnations of biology's new age: a set of test tube
twins in London, a cotton boll in Alabama, a spider mite in Florida, a bull
named Hermann, a boy named Andrew and a white-faced sheep named Dolly.

   As milestones in the evolving technology of life, they are tokens of a
scientific upheaval that is transforming society as rapidly as it is reshaping
medicine, agriculture and the pursuit of science itself.

   Each is a creation born of a revolution in biology.

   A lab technician screened the twins, Hannah and Danielle, for genetic defects
when they were laboratory embryos outside their mother's womb. Farmers
cultivated the cotton, engineered to kill insects, from seeds created by
combining plant and bacteria genes. The bug in Florida, designed to eat insects
that plague strawberries and other crops, has a new gene to help researchers
track it in the wild. Los Angeles doctors performed gene therapy on Andrew to
strengthen his immune system. Dutch researchers engineered the bull so it would
sire cows whose cream contains an important medicinal compound normally found in
human breast milk.

   In creating Dolly from a single adult ewe cell, researchers at Scotland's
Roslin Institute crafted the latest living invention to mark the crossroads of
science and human values.

   These experimental creations are more than laboratory curiosities. Indeed,
the seeds of the new biology are being sown across millions of farm acres this
year, and its fruits are appearing on supermarket shelves and in medicine
cabinets in hundreds of thousands of homes. The biological revolution is
altering, in ways that we have yet to recognize, our image of ourselves.

   Researchers now are poised to push the technology of life into even more
challenging areas, some of them long forbidden by federal regulation or by
ethical and religious constraints.

   For many scientists, cloning offers an unprecedented opportunity to engineer
new life forms more efficiently, to revive endangered species and to explore
treatments for a host of human diseases. However, critics in the United States
and around the world have argued that cloning oversteps the bounds of morality,
offering humanity too much power to manipulate living things. And the prospect
of cloning human beings, they say, is repugnant.

   While most scientists publicly reject the idea of cloning complete human
beings, many molecular biologists are eager to clone human cells using the
techniques developed by the team behind Dolly.

   To carry out those experiments, geneticists will be creating for research
purposes what many will consider human embryos. Such endeavors have been
forbidden to federally funded researchers for almost 25 years.

   Indeed, some respected medical experts have begun to quietly debate whether
they should attempt to cure hereditary diseases by making genetic changes in
human embryos that can be inherited by succeeding generations. Many biomedical
ethics experts, religious leaders and researchers have long contended that such
"germ-line" genetic changes are too technically uncertain and morally perilous
to be allowed.

   At the same time, researchers at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center
are preparing to conduct the first genetic engineering experiment on healthy
human volunteers. Scientists investigating treatments for cancer and other
diseases want to inject harmless engineered genes into normal people to see how
their immune systems respond.

   Some experts worry the research may pave the way for other experiments in
healthy people seeking to enhance themselves genetically.

   "I am wondering if it is not time to set some limits on science," said Lori
Andrews of Chicago-Kent College of Law at the Illinois Institute of Technology,
an authority on genetic engineering and reproductive technologies.

   The international furor provoked by cloning comes at a time when the medical
and agricultural products of genetic engineering are becoming pervasive.

   Tens of millions of people have used genetically engineered medicine to
control heart disease and diabetes, treat cancer or offset the effects of
stroke, according to the Biotechnology Industry Association.

   Tens of thousands more routinely undergo genetic testing, either to judge the
health of their unborn children or to tell if they themselves are susceptible to
chronic diseases or cancer. Thousands of children owe their existence to the
innovations of assisted reproduction technology such as in vitro fertilization.

   But sociologists and anthropologists who study the impact of the new
biotechnology say its most far-reaching effects may be on how people think of
themselves. Fundamental concepts of what it means to be human have been colored
by the notion that the blueprints of all living things are drawn from the same
genetic code.

   "These ideas are a major consequence of the last 20 years, entering people's
consciousness piece by piece," said Alexander Capron, an authority on biomedical
ethics at the University of Southern California and a member of the federal
bioethics commission asked by President Clinton to consider the implications of
cloning.

   "The advances in biology have made a huge difference (in how we think) and it
is only going to get more so," he said.

   As a breakthrough in cell biology, cloning joins the new technology of
reproduction to genetic engineering.

   The techniques discovered by Ian Wilmut at the Roslin Institute offer the
unprecedented opportunity to reawaken all of the genes inside an adult cell,
rewind the clock that governs cell development and, perhaps, unlock the secrets
of aging, experts say.

   Cloning holds the promise of bypassing conventional breeding techniques to
allow creation of thousands of precise duplicates of genetically engineered
mammals in a single generation, Wilmut explained.

   Breeders could create a viable embryo by the cloning technique of nuclear
transfer, which Wilmut employed. In that process, the nucleus from any cell of a
genetically altered animal is transferred into a specially prepared,
unfertilized egg, then grows a perfect genetic copy.

   Until the advent of cloning, the ability to create new species of transgenic
animals by inserting new genes into an embryo was hit or miss. Less than
one-tenth of 1 percent of genetically engineered embryos properly incorporated a
new gene, researchers said.

   Those who are wary of the new technique warn that equally controversial
advances in the technology of animal husbandry have virtually always presaged
similar developments in human reproduction, from artificial insemination, in
vitro fertilization and the use of fertility drugs to frozen embryos and the
micromanipulation of human eggs, embryos and sperm. Such a progression seems
inevitable for cloning.

   But even those who object to the idea of human cloning can see its potential
usefulness in certain situations, such as cases of infertility.

   Barely a week after National Institutes of Health Director Harold Varmus
declared human cloning repugnant, he testified to Congress that he could imagine
a scenario in which an infertile couple used a cloning procedure for family
planning.

   But if the original fears about manipulating life have not materialized, the
benefits also have not developed quite as its boosters predicted:

   Many genetically engineered foodstuffs cleared technical and regulatory
hurdles only to run afoul of consumer distaste, labeling disputes and
international trade boycotts. The Flavr-Savr tomato, touted for its ability to
stay fresh longer, was withdrawn for further development. Milk produced by
treating cows with bovine growth hormone has been widely boycotted for fear of
bacterial contamination caused by the drug.

   Now evidence suggests new genes in some crops can trigger allergies in
sensitive people. Other studies indicate that by sharing pollen, some weeds can
pick up new genes for herbicide resistance or other engineered traits from
nearby crops. In addition, crops designed to contain their own pesticide may
actually promote resistance to common organic pesticides.

   Scientists have created dozens of genetically engineered animals as models of
human diseases, but efforts to create livestock tailored to the demands of
modern factory farming, from self-shearing sheep and faster-growing pigs to
featherless fowl, have resulted in creatures that were crippled by arthritislike
conditions, diabetes or ulcers, subject to heatstroke and often infertile.

   Human gene therapy, which attempts to cure inherited diseases by altering the
genes in human cells, as in the case of Andrew in Los Angeles, has been
disappointing, experts convened by the National Institutes of Health concluded.
Doctors conducted 106 clinical trials of experimental gene therapies involving
more than 597 patients in the past five years, but "clinical efficacy has not
been definitively demonstrated at this time in any gene therapy protocol,
despite anecdotal claims of successful therapy," the NIH group said.

   Discovery of genes that predispose people to diseases, including breast,
ovarian and colon cancers, generated new diagnostic tests, but some experts warn
the tests are misused or given without adequate counseling. Doctors who test
patients for a gene that causes colon cancer often fail to perform the test
properly and commonly give inadequate or misleading information about the
results, researchers at Johns Hopkins University recently found.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1997


                             2415 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                  May 3, 1997 Saturday, 7 HARTFORD NORTH FINAL

SECTION: METRO HARTFORD; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: PEOPLE TO WALK IN WINDSOR; 9-YEAR-OLD IS IN THEIR HEARTS

BYLINE: MARIE K. SHANAHAN; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: WINDSOR --

BODY:

   Caryn Silliman is a smiling, freckled 9-year-old who collects gemstones and
reads poetry, rides her bike with friends and goes to Brownie troop meetings.

   The only obvious indication there is anything wrong with Caryn is that
sometimes she coughs -- a lot.

   Caryn has cystic fibrosis, the No.  1 genetic killer of children and young
adults in the United States.

   The disease causes the body to produce an abnormally thick, sticky mucus,
which clogs the lungs and leads to fatal infections. The thick mucus also
obstructs the pancreas, preventing enzymes from reaching the intestines to
digest food.

   About 30,000 children and young adults in this country have the disease. Most
won't live past age 30.

   Sunday, Caryn's family, friends and Brownie troop will walk as "Caryn's Pink
Panther Team" in the annual "Great Strides Walk to Cure Cystic Fibrosis" in
Wethersfield.  The 6-mile walk-athon begins at 9 a.m. at the Hanmer School on
Rosedale Street. Proceeds support the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, to raise money
for research to find a cure for the disease.

   Caryn, a student at Poquonock School, was diagnosed with the disease at age
4. She had been showing symptoms since she was 6 months old, said Dianne
Silliman, Caryn's mother.

   Cystic fibrosis symptoms include salty-tasting skin, persistent coughing,
wheezing or pneumonia and poor weight gain.

   Although sad to learn their daughter has a fatal disease, Silliman said she
was relieved when doctors made the diagnosis.

   "We knew we weren't crazy," she said. "I kept seeing the same signs."

   Since then, the Sillimans have done their best to make sure Caryn leads a
normal life.

   She takes eight types of medication each day and consumes enzyme pills before
every meal. She does breathing exercises with a tool called a "flutter," which
helps her strengthen and clear her lungs.

   She also has chest physical therapy twice a day, in which someone claps on
her back or chest to dislodge the mucus from her lungs.

   She's been hospitalized twice in the past two years for serious lung
infections and Caryn, on Thursday, will receive a feeding tube, inserted into
her stomach, to help her retain important nutrients for growth.  Cystic fibrosis
prevents the body from absorbing all the nutrition it needs.

   When classmates at school ask Caryn why she's always taking those pills, she
simply explains.

   "You have an enzyme in your pancreas that I don't. So I need this," Caryn
said.

   Foundation-supported researchers are conducting gene therapy studies
involving individuals with cystic fibrosis, and the new gene transfer technology
may ultimately lead to a cure.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1997


                             2416 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 3, 1997 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2:1,6,7; B-3:3,5

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: 3 inducted by Academy of Sciences

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

DATELINE: LA JOLLA

BODY:

   LA JOLLA -- Three San Diego scientists have been inducted into the National
Academy of Sciences, a body of distinguished researchers who advise the federal
government on matters of science and public policy. They are: [] Roger Beachy,
53, a plant biologist at The Scripps Research Institute, where he is director of
the Division of Plant Biology. [] Inder Verma, 49, a molecular biologist at the
Salk Institute and co-director of its Laboratory of Genetics.

   He studies the development of cancer and gene therapy and is chairman of the
institute's faculty. [] Webster K. Cavenee, 45, a UCSD molecular biologist who
studies the development of human cancers at the university's Center for
Molecular Genetics. The academy is made up of some 2,000 scientists from a range
of disciplines.

   It was created in the 19th century at the behest of Congress. Members are
elected for life.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2417 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  May 1, 1997, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1961 words

HEADLINE: Hope Near the End Of the Pipeline;
A New Generation of Treatments For Cancer Will Soon Reach Market

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   The biotechnology industry is poised to deliver a host of cancer drugs in the
next two to three years. Some of them promise to extend lives -- or at least
make treatment more bearable than chemotherapy and radiation.

   More than 30 such drugs are in the third and final phase of clinical trials
typically required for Food and Drug Administration approval, more than ever
before. By the end of the year, oncologists could have in their arsenals a new
nontoxic drug for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the
immune system. Next year, a therapeutic vaccine for malignant melanoma that is
as effective as chemotherapy but with none of the side effects could reach the
market. So could safe and effective drugs for metastatic breast cancer and
inoperable brain cancers.

    If the biotechnology companies are as successful as they expect to be, the
end of the decade should see many more new therapies for cancers of the breast,
prostate, lung, colon, liver, ovary, pancreas and kidney, among others.

   Perhaps the biggest gain in the new therapies is that unlike chemotherapy
drugs they have few and very mild side effects. Because they are so well
tolerated, the drugs can be prescribed in large doses that are more likely to
have an effect, and they can be taken for many years.

   As with new drugs called protease inhibitors that suppress the virus that
causes AIDS, people are not so much talking about a cure -- though some cancers
may be curable -- but about lengthening lives. People will still die with
cancer, but they will die less often of cancer.

   Unlike chemotherapies, which are chemical based, these new drugs are
biological, based on naturally occurring proteins or genetic material. And where
chemotherapies kill a broad range of fast-multiplying cells, including some
necessary for good health, the new drugs are much more specific in their
attacks.

   Biotechnology industry executives say they are reaping the benefits of a
greater understanding of the genetic and molecular pathways of cancer; advances
in the production of novel therapeutic agents, and a liberalization of
regulatory policy at the F.D.A. that permits the approval of new drugs for
life-threatening diseases with fewer, smaller and less conclusive clinical
trials.

   The fast-track approval process at the F.D.A. has been a particular boon to
small biotechnology companies that had felt they could not afford the
multihospital, multiyear clinical trials intended to prove that new cancer
therapies prolong life.

   To be sure, approving drugs based on fewer clinical trials raises the risk
that some drugs of questionable value will reach the market. But some cancer
patients call that a risk they are willing to take, and oncologists and industry
executives say they believe that post-approval trials will weed out those drugs
whose potential harm outweighs their benefit.

   The companies acknowledge that many of these treatments will fail; nine out
of ten experimental drugs do. But the sheer numbers -- hundreds in clinical
trials -- raise the odds that some will succeed.

   Like all new biotechnology products, these drugs will be expensive, typically
thousands of dollars for an annual supply. But if they work they will in many
cases cost less than the cocktails of multiple chemotherapy drugs they replace,
and will also result in savings from shorter hospital stays, fewer repeat
surgeries and increased productivity.

   Following the example of the AIDS community, some cancer patients are
becoming treatment advocates. They are seeking, and getting, seats on the
advisory panels that review cancer drugs for the F.D.A. They are pressing for
approval of drugs whose benefit might seem small to someone who has not had the
disease, and they are demanding access to these drugs even before F.D.A.
approval.

   The biotechnology industry began investing in cancer research from its
inception 21 years ago, but met initially with just mixed results. Early
biotechnology drugs like alpha interferon and interleukin-2 are effective
against some cancers, but only in doses as toxic as the most potent chemotherapy
drugs.

   The problem is that chemotherapy drugs, interferons and interleukins kill not
only cancer cells but also cells essential to life. Reducing dosage to tolerable
levels limits their effectiveness, so cancers return. By contrast, the new
"biotherapies" draw on the growing knowledge of the process of cancer to focus
on specific molecules or genes known to play a role in the specific disease.

   While the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company has essentially owned the chemotherapy
market for 20 years, the biotherapy market is wide open.

   Among the drugs likely to reach the market soonest is rituximab, co-developed
by Genentech Inc., the pioneering biotechnology company in South San Francisco
that is now controlled by Roche Holding of Switzerland, and Idec Pharmaceuticals
Inc., which is based in San Diego.

   In clinical trials against non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the immune
system, the drug showed tumor shrinkage of at least 50 percent in about half the
patients. Most importantly, it worked in patients with the slow-growth form of
the disease, which resists chemotherapy and its emphasis on fast-growth cells;
about two-thirds of the 240,000 Americans who have non-Hodgkin's lymphoma have
the slow-growth form. And side effects of the drug were minimal -- mostly mild
to moderate flulike symptoms.

   Genentech and Idec filed for F.D.A. approval of rituximab on March 3 and
expect a response by the end of the year; if approved, rituximab will be the
first monoclonal antibody for cancer. Monoclonal antibodies are genetically
engineered copies of proteins that are the immune system's front-line defenses.
Other companies, including Coulter Pharmaceuticals Inc., Immunogen and Protein
Design Labs Inc., have monoclonals in clinical trials for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
that offer the prospect of greater potency than, or at least competition for,
Genentech's drug.

   Genentech has another monoclonal antibody in clinical trials for advanced
metastatic breast cancer, a disease that kills 40,000 women in the United States
each year. The drug, known as Anti-HER2, focuses on a cancer-promoting protein
on the surface of cells that is overproduced in 25 percent to 30 percent of
breast-cancer patients, typically those in the most untreatable stages.

   An initial study of 43 patients for whom chemotherapy had failed produced the
first statistically significant response to a monoclonal antibody drug for
breast cancer: the disease was found to have stabilized in 14 patients, while 5
patients experienced a complete or partial remission and 2 had minor remissions.
Side effects were limited to temporary fever and chills. Genentech said that the
drug could be submitted for F.D.A. approval as soon as next year.

   Genentech has also begun a major effort in using monoclonal antibodies to
halt the formation of essential blood vessels in tumors. If the breast-cancer
drug works, "we're ready to pull the trigger on a very broad antibody program,"
said Arthur Levinson, Genentech's president and chief executive. "My guess is if
you work hard enough you can find points of vulnerability on all solid tumors."

   Like monoclonal antibodies, therapeutic vaccines for cancer are, after years
of equivocal results, beginning to pay off. Ribi Immunochem Research Inc. of
Hamilton, Mont., will seek F.D.A. approval later this year for Melacine, which
consists of fractured pieces of two kinds of human melanoma tumor cells,
combined with a powerful immune-system stimulant. In trials, Melacine has showed
survival times equivalent to those seen with an aggressive regimen of four
chemotherapy drugs -- but without the debilitating side effects. About 38,300
new melanoma cases were diagnosed last year in the United States, and about
7,300 people died of the disease.

   Monoclonal antibodies focus on proteins implicated in the cause or
maintenance of cancer. As such, they can be more specific than a chemical drug
that simply kills fast-growing cells. Newer approaches, such as anti-sense
drugs, offer the promise of even greater precision; they work on the genes
within cells that prompt the production of these proteins. Anti-sense drugs are
made of genetic material that binds with and thus neutralizes the sense strand,
which is also known as messenger-RNA, that prompts a cell to produce proteins
that can cause cancer.

   "With anti-sense, we have a scalpel with which we can go in and cut out an
offending part of the cell without hurting the healthy part," said Stanley
Crooke, chairman and chief executive of Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Carlsbad,
Calif.

   Isis has two anti-sense drugs in clinical trials for a wide variety of solid
tumors. In earlier studies of animals implanted with human tumors, the drugs
displayed potent anti-cancer activity, according to a paper Isis published in
December. Though results are not yet available for the human trials, the drugs
have been well tolerated, with no apparent toxicity, even at very high doses.

   Anti-sense drugs offer the promise of switching off cancer-causing genes, but
some cancers are caused by the opposite problem: a deficiency of natural
tumor-suppressive genes. One potential solution is gene therapy, the injection
of DNA into human cells, to replace damaged genes or produce proteins that
stimulate the immune system. Gene therapy can also enhance chemotherapy by
sensitizing cells to drugs.

   The Introgen Corporation of Austin, Tex., is in clinical trials of a regimen
that augments a gene called P53 that is often deficient in cancer patients.
These trials -- on patients with lung cancer and on those with tumors of the
head and neck -- are still at an early stage. But researchers have found that
raising the level of P53 can shrink tumors even in patients who were not
deficient.

   More advanced in clinical trials is a gene therapy for inoperable brain
cancer, developed by Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersberg, Md., which is now
part of Novartis, the Swiss pharmaceuticals giant. This therapy for malignant
brain tumors, which affect about 40,000 new patients a year in the United States
and Europe, causes the tumor cells to produce a protein making them susceptible
to the drug ganciclovir. If data from the current trials are positive, this
could be the world's first commercial gene-therapy product.

   Inserting whole genes into cells is difficult, so most companies rely on a
genetically modified virus as a carrier. But other, still more novel, approaches
are now in clinical trials.

   Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Richmond, Calif., has developed a virus, without
a gene attached, that selectively infects and kills only cells that are
deficient in P53, such as tumor cells. Vical Inc. of La Jolla, Calif., has
developed a treatment for malignant melanoma using injections of so-called naked
DNA -- DNA that has no virus to carry it into a cell -- directly into the tumor
site. The DNA prompts production of proteins on the surface of the tumor cells
that activate the immune system to destroy the tumor. Both the Onyx and Vical
drugs are in the second phase of testing.

   Monoclonal antibodies, anti-sense and gene therapy all now require an
injection, sometimes directly into the tumor site, but the gold standard in
chronic disease treatment remains a small-molecule drug that can be given in
pill form. Much attention has been focused recently on a group of drugs called
matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors, which disable an enzyme that tumors use to
invade surrounding tissues. British Biotech P.L.C. has such a drug in the final
phase of trials for brain cancer. Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of La Jolla has
just begun the first phase of trials of a similar drug.


GRAPHIC: Photo: At a lab at Genentech Inc., a biotechnology company in South San
Francisco, researchers have co-developed the drug rituximab to treat
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system. (Peter DaSilva for The
New York Times)

Chart "Preparing For Battle"
Biotechnology companies are competing to develop new drugs to treat a variety of
cancers. A host of new treatments are in the final phase of clinical trials
typically required for Food and Drug Administration approval. Chart lists some
of those drugs and their manufacturers. (Sources: Vector Securities
International, company reports)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1997


                             2418 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 30, 1997, Wednesday, City Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 856 words

HEADLINE: Scientists encouraged by test of AIDS vaccine in chimps

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    A test vaccine that uses the AIDS virus's genetic material to stimulate
immunity has given several chimpanzees yearlong protection against infection
after a massive dose of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

   The experimental vaccine recently entered human trials of its safety and
ability to stimulate signs of immunity in several dozen volunteers, said David
B. Weiner of the University of Pennsylvania, whose team reported the chimp
experiments in the journal Nature Medicine today.

   The vaccine's success in protecting chimps against AIDS infection is giving
heart to researchers who not long ago doubted whether such an approach would
work - or, in fact, whether any AIDS vaccine would be feasible.

   Chimps, the species genetically closest to humans, do not ordinarily get sick
after exposure to the AIDS virus. But they can be infected with it, and HIV can
replicate in chimps' cells over long periods. That offers scientists what they
consider the best - albeit most expensive - animal model on which to test AIDS
vaccines.

   Ronald C. Kennedy, a University of Oklahoma immunologist, said his pessimism
about achieving a successful HIV vaccine "could be raised to guarded optimism"
by the new results.

   "This first data in monkeys is very exciting," added David Baltimore, an MIT
biologist who heads a new federal AIDS Vaccine Research Committee set up last
December to jump-start the flagging effort to engineer an AIDS vaccine.

   Baltimore said the "naked DNA" approach, as it is called, is one reason he
concluded recently that science will succeed in making a vaccine to prevent
AIDS. "I believe this can be done," he said.

   The "naked DNA" vaccine consists of several HIV genes, made of viral DNA,
rather than the proteins made under instructions from these genes - the more
conventional vaccine strategy.

   When injected into test animals, the HIV genes got inside some of the
animals' cells and caused them to sprout viral proteins on their surfaces. These
surface markers, in turn, stimulated the animals to make antibodies against HIV
and also to produce white blood cells called killer T-cells that are capable of
recognizing and destroying any cells that later became infected with the real
AIDS virus.

   Most AIDS researchers think both types of defenses - antibodies and cellular
immunity - will be necessary to thwart HIV infection. Antibodies search out and
destroy viruses circulating in the bloodstream, while killer T-cells target
HIV-infected cells.

   Researchers only recently considered using viral DNA to immunize against
disease. They got the idea from failed gene therapy experiments in which animals
and humans who received inoculations of DNA - in this case, genes designed to
correct a genetic defect - mounted immune defenses against it.

   The Pennsylvania group, which devised the DNA vaccine in collaboration with a
company called Apollon Inc., in Malvern, Pa., injected it into three chimps in
eight inoculations. A fourth chimp got a similar preparation that lacked any HIV
genes. All were later injected with the AIDS virus in a dose 250 times greater
than earlier studies indicated was necessary to establish an HIV infection in a
chimpanzee.

   The chimp that got the false vaccine developed an HIV infection within two
weeks that persists nearly a year later. The vaccinated chimps were able to beat
back HIV infection, although two of them developed transient, low levels of
virus in their bloodstream six and eight weeks after viral inoculation. They
remain free of infection 53 weeks after the inoculation, Weiner said.

   The three vaccinated chimps developed varying levels of either antibody or
cellular immunity. "What's encouraging," Weiner said, "is that it didn't matter
whether they had high antibody response or high cellular immunity, animals with
both responses were able to resist challenge by the virus."

   Injecting DNA directly, rather than viral proteins, is a simpler and more
efficient way to make a vaccine, and it should be more cost-effective, some
scientists said.

   "A DNA vaccine is cheaper and easier to make, and it's more stable and more
developing-country-friendly because it wouldn't require as much refrigeration,"
said Dr. Max Essex, director of the Harvard AIDS Institute. "It wouldn't require
the labor-intensive purification steps that a protein-based vaccine does.

   "So if this really shows protection, even in three chimps, I think it's quite
important," Essex added.

   Until now, many thought the only way to achieve effective immunity against
HIV would be to use a protein-based vaccine made of living but crippled copies
of the AIDS virus. Such "live attenuated" viruses "are the vaccines of choice
immunologically," Weiner said, because they produce a strong and durable
response involving antibodies and white blood cells.

   "In contrast, the killed vaccines - such as the Salk polio vaccine - are the
vaccines of choice for safety," Weiner continued. "But they tend to lose their
potency over time, require multiple doses, and only infrequently give rise to
cellular responses. So they don't do very well against viruses hiding in cells,
as HIV does."

CORRECTION-DATE: May 2, 1997

CORRECTION:
 CORRECTION: Because of a reporting error, a Page One article on Wednesday
incorrectly reported the number of chimpanzees protected against AIDS virus
infection by an experimental vaccine. Two chimps were protected against
infection; a third vaccinated chimp was not subsequently exposed to the AIDS
virus, so scientists do not know whether the vaccine was protective in that
animal.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1997


                             2419 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 30, 1997, Wednesday, City Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: Scientists encouraged by test of AIDS vaccine in chimps;
.

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    A test vaccine that uses the AIDS virus's genetic material to stimulate
immunity has given several chimpanzees yearlong protection against infection
after a massive dose of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

   The experimental vaccine recently entered human trials of its safety and
ability to stimulate signs of immunity in several dozen volunteers, said David
B. Weiner of the University of Pennsylvania, whose team reported the chimp
experiments in the journal Nature Medicine today.

   The vaccine's success in protecting chimps against AIDS infection is giving
heart to researchers who not long ago doubted whether such an approach would
work - or, in fact, whether any AIDS vaccine would be feasible.

   Chimps, the species genetically closest to humans, do not ordinarily get sick
after exposure to the AIDS virus. But they can be infected with it, and HIV can
replicate in chimps' cells over long periods. That offers scientists what they
consider the best - albeit most expensive - animal model on which to test AIDS
vaccines.

   Ronald C. Kennedy, a University of Oklahoma immunologist, said his pessimism
about achieving a successful HIV vaccine "could be raised to guarded optimism"
by the new results.

   "This first data in monkeys is very exciting," added David Baltimore, an MIT
biologist who heads a new federal AIDS Vaccine Research Committee set up last
December to jump-start the flagging effort to engineer an AIDS vaccine.

   Baltimore said the "naked DNA" approach, as it is called, is one reason he
concluded recently that science will succeed in making a vaccine to prevent
AIDS. "I believe this can be done," he said.

   The "naked DNA" vaccine consists of several HIV genes, made of viral DNA,
rather than the proteins made under instructions from these genes - the more
conventional vaccine strategy.

   When injected into test animals, the HIV genes got inside some of the
animals' cells and caused them to sprout viral proteins on their surfaces. These
surface markers, in turn, stimulated the animals to make antibodies against HIV
and also to produce white blood cells called killer T-cells that are capable of
recognizing and destroying any cells that later became infected with the real
AIDS virus.

   Most AIDS researchers think both types of defenses - antibodies and cellular
immunity - will be necessary to thwart HIV infection. Antibodies search out and
destroy viruses circulating in the bloodstream, while killer T-cells target
HIV-infected cells.

   Researchers only recently considered using viral DNA to immunize against
disease. They got the idea from failed gene therapy experiments in which animals
and humans who received inoculations of DNA - in this case, genes designed to
correct a genetic defect - mounted immune defenses against it.

   The Pennsylvania group, which devised the DNA vaccine in collaboration with a
company called Apollon Inc., in Malvern, Pa., injected it into three chimps in
eight inoculations. A fourth chimp got a similar preparation that lacked any HIV
genes. All were later injected with the AIDS virus in a dose 250 times greater
than earlier studies indicated was necessary to establish an HIV infection in a
chimpanzee.

   The chimp that got the false vaccine developed an HIV infection within two
weeks that persists nearly a year later. The vaccinated chimps were able to beat
back HIV infection, although two of them developed transient, low levels of
virus in their bloodstream six and eight weeks after viral inoculation. They
remain free of infection 53 weeks after the inoculation, Weiner said.

   The three vaccinated chimps developed varying levels of either antibody or
cellular immunity. "What's encouraging," Weiner said, "is that it didn't matter
whether they had high antibody response or high cellular immunity, animals with
both responses were able to resist challenge by the virus."

   Injecting DNA directly, rather than viral proteins, is a simpler and more
efficient way to make a vaccine, and it should be more cost-effective, some
scientists said.

   "A DNA vaccine is cheaper and easier to make, and it's more stable and more
developing-country-friendly because it wouldn't require as much refrigeration,"
said Dr. Max Essex, director of the Harvard AIDS Institute. "It wouldn't require
the labor-intensive purification steps that a protein-based vaccine does.

   "So if this really shows protection, even in three chimps, I think it's quite
important," Essex added.

   Until now, many thought the only way to achieve effective immunity against
HIV would be to use a protein-based vaccine made of living but crippled copies
of the AIDS virus. Such "live attenuated" viruses "are the vaccines of choice
immunologically," Weiner said, because they produce a strong and durable
response involving antibodies and white blood cells.

   "In contrast, the killed vaccines - such as the Salk polio vaccine - are the
vaccines of choice for safety," Weiner continued. "But they tend to lose their
potency over time, require multiple doses, and only infrequently give rise to
cellular responses. So they don't do very well against viruses hiding in cells,
as HIV does."

CORRECTION-DATE: Friday, May 2, 1997

CORRECTION:
Because of a reporting error, a Page One article on Wednesday incorrectly
reported the number of chimpanzees protected against AIDS virus infection by an
experimental vaccine. Two chimps were protected against infection; a third
vaccinated chimp was not subsequently exposed to the AIDS virus, so scientists
do not know whether the vaccine was protective in that animal.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1997


                             2420 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    April 30, 1997, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 5227 words

SERIES: IN OUR OWN IMAGE.  Life in a genetically engineered world. One in a
series

HEADLINE: GENE SLEUTHS SEEK ASTHMA'S SECRETS ON REMOTE ISLAND;
 RESIDENTS, WHO APPARENTLY INHERITED SUSCEPTIBILITY, HAVE COME UNDER THE
MICROSCOPE OF A BOOMING BIOTECH INDUSTRY.

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   When it steamed out of Cape Town at midnight last Sept. 27, heading for the
world's "loneliest island," the South African Navy supply ship Drakensberg
carried a few unusual passengers: gene hunters.

   They were headed for Tristan da Cunha, a grass-ringed volcano rising 6,700
feet out of the South Atlantic halfway between Africa and South America.

   The 40-square-mile island is home to a few hundred hardy souls, most of them
descended from the British sailors who settled there in 1817.  Tristanians are
primarily known for their cheerful resilience, collectible postage stamps and
the big crawfish they catch, which American restaurants turn into "South African
lobster tail."

   But to a handful of geneticists, the islanders are known for a medical
problem that one might not expect to find thousands of miles from the pollution
and stress of urban life: They are plagued by asthma.  Evidently, at least one
of Tristan's founding fathers was afflicted, and his asthma-susceptibility gene
or genes were passed down through the inbred generations, according to Dr. Noe
Zamel, a University of Toronto medical geneticist who first studied the disease
on Tristan in 1993.

   Since then, there has been a boom in commercial genetics research, and
Zamel's asthma study is no longer just an academic pursuit. When he went to
Tristan on the Drakensberg last fall, a U.S. biotechnology company was also on
board.

   Sequana Therapeutics of La Jolla is working with Zamel and his colleagues to
pinpoint genes underlying the islanders' asthma. Though the disease is
extraordinarily common there--half of the islanders have symptoms--the
scientists believe that the disorder is similar to that elsewhere.

   Finding the genetic basis should lead to broadly applicable insights into the
complex disease, and that information may lead to new treatments. Sequana has
agreed to sell any gene discoveries it makes on Tristan to a German drug
company. Sequana chief scientist Timothy Harris said the company may make an
official announcement about its Tristan research within months.

   If nothing else, this far-flung project underscores the epic scope of human
genetics research today. Although Dolly the sheep--the first mammal cloned from
a single adult cell--symbolizes a new era in science's dominion over
reproduction, Sequana's voyage to one of the world's remotest human societies is
emblematic of a new scientific enterprise, what might be called the human gene
industry.

   Sequana is one of eight public U.S. biotech companies dedicated to
prospecting for valuable genes among the roughly 100,000 in the complete human
set, or genome. These "genomics" firms, no more than 4 years old, promise to
enhance and possibly transform medicine with drugs, diagnostic tools--and a
torrent of theories about what makes us tick.

   The companies have sprung up in the wake of the gargantuan federal
undertaking known as the Human Genome Project. Started in 1990, the
government-led effort expects by 2005 to map all the human genes strung along
the 23 pairs of chromosomes. It also aims to decode the exact chemical sequence
of the DNA making up those genes--a set of instructions spelled out in some 3
billion chemical units. To suggest the accelerating pace of discovery, one
disease gene was discovered in 1989; last year, there were at least 21.

   The genomics explosion is creating dilemmas and controversies. Critics have
accused Sequana of "biopiracy" for exploiting Tristanians to gain access to
their potentially lucrative genes. Sequana counters that the islanders, who are
English-speaking British subjects, were given detailed forms describing the
study, and only people who freely gave informed consent participated.

   "They wanted to take part," said Carrie Le Duc, the Sequana scientist who
accompanied Zamel to Tristan last fall. "They know what asthma is and they want
to be a part of helping other people."

   'Everything Had to Work'

   The Drakensberg took four days to get within helicopter or barge range of the
wave-pummeled island, which has no airstrip or protected harbor.  Islanders
hoist their fishing boats into dry dock after every trip.

   "WELCOME TO THE LONELIEST ISLAND," says a painted wooden sign at the water's
edge.

   The island's 90 or so families live in lava-rock houses on a grassy ledge in
a settlement called Edinburgh. Potato patches fill another ledge two miles away.
Cattle and sheep graze.

   For the three weeks she was there, Le Duc lived with a young Tristanian
couple, there being no public lodging on the island. They gave her what she says
is the traditional gift to a newcomer: heavy wool socks. "They bring hospitality
to a new level," she said of the islanders.

   Le Duc had spent six months getting ready, adapting standard experimental
techniques to the island's two-bed, bare-bones unheated hospital. Her portable
lab filled five car-size wooden shipping crates: a plexiglass compartment for
handling sterile samples, table-top centrifuges, tanks of liquid nitrogen,
carboys of chemical reagents, gallons of bleach disinfectant, pipettes,
thousands of test tubes and a number of large red plastic bags in which to carry
every scrap of lab waste back to Cape Town.

   "It was like an expedition to the moon," said Sequana's director of genetics,
Jeff Hall. "There was just one chance, and everything had to work."

   All told, about 270 of the island's 300 residents participated in the study.
Zamel and another Toronto researcher gave the study subjects various clinical
asthma tests and took blood samples and family histories. Some also had a skin
test for allergies.

   Working in the converted maternity room wearing a heavy wool sweater under
her white lab coat against the spring chill, Le Duc worked 12-hour days
processing blood samples, dividing each sample into four tubes.

   She added buffer chemicals to the blood and centrifuged the tubes to separate
the red cells, which contain no genetic material, from the sought-after white
cells. Then, in the most onerous step, she had to freeze the purified white
cells for storage and shipping; but if they froze too quickly, they would burst,
making the trip a bust. Using a crank-operated device adapted for the task, she
lowered the tubes oh-so-slowly into a fog of liquid nitrogen.

   Only months later, after the cells were thawed and tested back in Sequana's
La Jolla facility, did she learn that she had succeeded: The cells were intact
and alive.

   They responded to a standard lab procedure to get them dividing and growing
in a test tube, and transformed into what biologists call a cell line. Although
the knack of culturing cells has been around for decades, it may still seem
amazing that a California lab is home to living tissue derived from hundreds of
people on the other side of the world.

   By culturing the Tristanians' cells, Sequana has created a virtually
unlimited supply of genetic material to analyze. "Even after islanders pass
away, we've got their DNA for perpetuity," Hall said.

   Searching for Evidence of Genetic Causes

   It is not uncommon for researchers to zero in on an insular population for
clues to the genetic basis of a disease.

   They have sought genetic links to mental illness in the Old Amish of the
eastern United States; their extensive intermarrying, well-documented family
histories and relative isolation simplify gene searches, though no conclusive
links have been found. Researchers have found evidence of a genetic basis of
certain forms of diabetes by analyzing the Pima Indians of Arizona, who are
especially burdened by the disease.

   In perhaps the most famous example, the key to unlocking the Huntington's
disease gene was found by studying an isolated Venezuela community that had a
high level of the disease.

   But the direct involvement of a biotech company in such research is a new
twist, and it has aroused concern among groups claiming to be champions of
indigenous peoples. The Rural Advancement Foundation International, an
Ottawa-based group, has criticized Sequana and other genomics companies for
"committing acts of genetic biopiracy and, in the process, violating the
fundamental human rights of the people from whom DNA samples are taken."

   The foundation is leading a drive to develop international sanctions
preventing the patenting of DNA information gleaned from indigenous peoples.

   For its part, Sequana says not only that Tristanians are literate people who
gave their consent to be studied, but that the company has donated medical
equipment for diagnosing asthma to the island hospital.  In exchange for their
cooperation, the islanders have been promised a lifetime supply of any
medication developed as a result of the research, said Sequana's Harris. Still,
the company has declined requests to examine the consent forms used on Tristan.

   The Tristan project also exemplifies the increasing tension between
commercial and academic genomics. At scientific meetings, Sequana-sponsored
researchers have said that two "candidate genes" responsible for asthma on
Tristan--called "wheeze1" and "wheeze2"--have been identified. But the company
has declined to divulge crucial details, such as the chromosomes where the
candidates lie.

   That irks other government-funded researchers hotly pursuing
asthma-susceptibility genes. They worry about "wasting" vast resources
duplicating Sequana's efforts when they could be searching different chromosome
areas for other candidate genes, said Susan Banks-Schlegel, a cell biologist at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and a member of the Collaborative
Study on the Genetics of Asthma, a group of researchers at nine U.S.
institutions.

   "There's concern in the community that Sequana should be more forthright
about what's going on," she said.

   The company is only protecting its investment, Harris said. "There's always
the argument that industry is a parasite, that we keep everything secret. But we
do release as much information as soon as we can."

   Henry Greely, a Stanford University law professor and co-director of
Stanford's Program in Genomics, Ethics and Society, says that the government-led
Human Genome Project "is in some ways being superseded by private research."

   Some academics, he said, will be chagrined to find that their gene discovery
has already been made--and patented--by a genomics firm. "What bothers some
people is the idea that this genome, which would seem to be the property of us
all, is being used for profit by some companies."

   Despite Advances, the Task is Daunting

   To get at sought-after genes, Sequana uses an approach called positional
cloning--so called because the aim is to copy, or clone, a desired gene by
zeroing in on its location along the chromosome.

   Essentially, it involves breaking down all of an individual's DNA; sifting
through thousands of DNA fragments for known markers; and comparing the marker
patterns of large numbers of related people with and without a hereditary
disease. The DNA of people in the same family who have a gene predisposing them
to a disease will yield similar marker patterns.

   Typical of genetic engineering techniques, positional cloning is easier said
than done. But the key is identifying large numbers of close-knit families with
well-documented medical histories. Going to Tristan, where all islanders are at
least cousins, provided Sequana with something of a shortcut.

   Hall had done pioneering work on the breast cancer-susceptibility gene,
BRCA1, while on a UC Berkeley fellowship in the early '90s--the old days, before
there were any genomics companies. Even he is somewhat startled by how quickly
commercial gene hunting has advanced.

   Referring to the computerized gene-sequencing machines outside his office
door, he said, "An academic lab would be lucky to have one or two of these
machines. But we have 35 right here, and another 12 upstairs."

   When he was at Berkeley looking for BRCA1, it took the team three years to
analyze 400 different DNA markers from 400 people, he said. At Sequana, with its
massive "bioinformatics" capability, he estimated that the same job would take
about two months.

   But that does not mean that finding disease genes is a breeze. "The easy
genes have already been cloned," Hall said, referring to those involved in
disorders like Huntington's disease, which develops in every person who inherits
the singular Huntington's gene.

   Asthma's genetic roots are far more difficult to uncover, researchers say,
because only 5% to 10% of cases have a clear genetic component. And because the
disease takes many different forms, affecting people at various ages and to
varying degrees, many genes appear to be involved, researchers say.

   On Tristan, Zamel said, most islanders given a skin allergy test were
sensitive to dust mites--probably the island's leading asthma trigger, because
there are no cats, trees, air pollution or other usual suspects.  "They are very
sensitive to house dust," he said. "It's not something special that causes
asthma on Tristan. When people from there go any place else they have the same
asthma."

   Decoding DNA, Raising New Questions

   Unlike drug and biotech companies that are hoping to develop products to
sell, genomics firms are primarily in the information-gathering business.

   A few, such as Incyte Pharmaceuticals in Palo Alto and Human Genome Sciences
in Rockville, Md., are chemically analyzing human DNA and building computerized
DNA libraries without worrying overmuch about the genetic material's actual
function. Eventually, the thinking goes, the decoded DNA will be invaluable.

   Sequana's tack is more disease-directed, and its asthma research will bring
in money whether or not it leads to new diagnostics or drugs.  Boehringer
Ingelheim, the German drug company, has agreed to pay Sequana up to $ 30.5
million for exclusive access to findings, and more money will pour in if the
drug company ends up marketing a new asthma treatment.

   Sequana has deals with other drug companies, too, to hunt for genes involved
in osteoporosis, obesity, diabetes and schizophrenia. "We're using genetics to
validate targets for drug discovery," Harris said.

   Visitors to Sequana's hillside lab--located in an area of La Jolla known to
insiders as Biotech Beach--receive a compact disc case customized with their
name emblazoned across a DNA model. The gimmick is meant to suggest that day in
the future when scientists will have the ability to quickly "read" an
individual's DNA sequence, or "genotype" that person, and store all the genetic
information on a CD--including information about diseases that may not strike
for years.

   "There will be an ability someday to genotype somebody," said Sequana's
founder and CEO, Kevin Kinsella. "The question is, how will people use that
information?"

   The hope, of course, is that such information will help people avoid diseases
to which their genes predispose them. But Kinsella acknowledges that a
comprehensive genetic profile would raise questions about protecting people's
privacy and preventing job or insurance discrimination on the basis of their
genetic risks.

   Then there is the issue of futility, of knowing long in advance that some
illness may strike but not being able to do much about it.

   Kinsella said he had a great-aunt who died of Alzheimer's, a disease that in
many instances has a genetic component, researchers say. "Where has that gene
ended up? Would I want to know that? I don't know."

   A 'Most Patient People'

   At the end of their three-week stay on the island, Zamel, Le Duc and the
other Toronto researcher, Patricia McClean, threw a party for the islanders in
the island pub. They danced, drank Castle beer and ate deviled eggs, stuffed
mutton, little quiches and Tristan potato chips.  Curry scented the air, a
reminder of the days in the last century when ships plying the spice trade
stopped at the island for fresh water.

   In a speech, Zamel thanked the islanders for their cooperation in the asthma
study and expressed the hope that something would come of it.

   "They're the most patient people I've ever known," Le Duc said, "and the only
ones who haven't lost the meaning of community. There's no crime on Tristan.
Money means nothing to them." She said that as soon as she boarded the barge
that took her to the waiting ship, she was crying.  "It's a very hard place to
leave."


   Question

   By the year 2005, scientists led by the National Institutes of Health and the
Department of Energy expect to decipher all the DNA in a representative set of
the roughly 100,000 genes that make up the human genome. That means determining
the sequence of human DNA's 3 billion chemical bases--information that would
fill 1,000 1,000-page telephone books. What are some of the potential uses--and
misuses--of the human genome sequence information when it becomes available?

   Daniel J. Kevles, Head, Program in Science, Ethics, and Public Policy,
Caltech:

   "One of the most important uses of the Human Genome Project will be, of
course, the information that it provides that will greatly assist in the
understanding, diagnosis, and treatment of disease. Beyond that, the data about
our genetic essence should be used to illustrate how much we are the products of
the interaction of nurture with nature, that environment counts. And it should
be employed to call attention to how closely related we are to the rest of life
and to each other."

   ****

   Peter Singer, Centre for Human Bioethics, Monash University, Victoria,
Australia:

   "The worst way in which sequencing the human genome could be used would be as
a pseudo-scientific prop to racism. Sequencing the human genome will undoubtedly
show genetic diversity between different ethnic groups, and some may try to
twist diversity into a hierarchy in which their own ethnic group comes out on
top."

   ****

   Dr. W. French Anderson, Director, Gene Therapy Laboratories, USC School of
Medicine:

   "The best possible use is for the development of treatments for disease...
The ultimate value is to use the genes themselves as treatment, in other words,
human gene therapy. There are two major areas of concern. First, ...
discrimination in health coverage, insurance rates, job selection, or worse,
could occur if the genetic makeup of an individual is allowed to be known and
used without the consent of the individual. Second is the future misuse of
trying to use the information that goes into a human being to try to 'redesign'
humans or make them 'better' by human genetic engineering."

   ****

   Dr. Leroy Hood, University of Washington:

   "The information generated by the human genome project, as well as the new
technologies that emerge from this endeavor, will ensure the United States a
highly competitive position in the worldwide biotechnology industry."

   ****

   National Human Genome Research Institute:

   "The Human Genome Project will develop tools to identify the genes involved
in both rare and common diseases over the next 15 or 20 years... Once the
molecular basis of a disease is revealed, scientists have a far better chance of
defeating it. One approach is to design highly targeted drugs that act on the
cause, not merely the symptoms, of disease. Another is to correct or replace the
altered gene through gene therapy."

   ****

   Panel to Assess the National Institutes of Health Investment on Research on
Gene Therapy, 1995:

   "Overselling of the results of laboratory and clinical studies by
investigators and their sponsors--be they academic, federal, or industrial--has
led to the mistaken and widespread perception that gene therapy is further
developed and more successful than it actually is.  Such inaccurate portrayals
threaten confidence in the integrity of the field and may ultimately hinder
progress toward successful application of gene therapy to human disease."

   Researched by TERENCE MONMANEY and TRACY THOMAS / Los Angeles Times


   Tracking a Rogue Gene

   Inherited genetic errors directly cause 3,000 to 4,000 diseases, such as
cystic fibrosis, and play an indirect role in many others, including asthma.
Here's one approach that researchers use to zero in on a gene harboring a
defect, or mutation, associated with disease:

   1. Launch investigation: Studies of extended families or isolated communities
in which a disease is very common may show that susceptibility to it is
inherited.

   2. Gather evidence: After collecting blood samples from many family or
community members, scientists extract DNA from the white blood cells, then
compare the DNA of afflicted and healthy individuals.

   3. Narrow the search: Using genetic "markers," or fragments of DNA that occur
at known locations along chromosomes, scientists look for a marker pattern
unique to the afflicted people; the disease-causing gene should lie near those
markers.

   4. Identify a suspect: Hundreds of genes in that chromosome region are
analyzed and compared, until a "candidate" gene surfaces. Once the gene is
located, the crucial sequence of chemicals along its DNA strand is determined.

   5. Build the case: More afflicted people are studied to see if they carry a
gene with the same sequence. If so, the gene may be defective.

   6. Further testing: Comparing the candidate gene's DNA sequence in afflicted
and healthy people reveals the exact difference, or defect.  Even if one of the
chemical bases is out of order, disease could result.

   7. Treat the problem: If many people with the disease have the same gene
mutation, a diagnostic test may be possible. Also, by studying the gene's normal
function, scientists may develop new treatments--perhaps even gene therapy, an
experimental technique where researchers try to endow a patient with a "normal"
copy of the gene.

   ****

   Gene: A segment of double-stranded DNA holds the recipe for making a specific
molecule, usually a protein. Structural proteins make up muscle fibers and other
tissues, while catalytic proteins, or enzymes, spur chemical reactions.

   Gene Mapping: Researchers, attempting to find the locations of specific genes
on a chromosome, create a map using genetic "markers," which consist of
well-defined DNA fragments at known locations.

   Chromosomes: Each chromosome contains the DNA for thousands of individual
genes.

   Human Cell: Each cell in the human body (except red blood cells) contains the
genetic information to build a human being.

   Cell Nucleus: Inside the nucleus, 6 feet of DNA is packaged into 23
chromosome pairs.

   Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services


   Asthma Island

   The 300 residents of Tristan da Cunha are thousands of miles from the stress
and pollution of urban life, yet half are plagued by asthma.


   About This Series

   The cloning of a sheep named Dolly sent shockwaves throughout the world this
year. But that is only one of a host of advances in biotechnology. The
revolution is touching virtually all corners existence, from conception to
nutrition to disease control. The genetic engineering advances also raise basic
questions about how society will deal with these newfound abilities, who should
control their use and how far research should be allowed to proceed.

   Sunday: The biotechnology revolution--the future has arrived.

   Monday: What is the "self" and can it be cloned?

   Tuesday: The U.S. government's reluctance to regulate reproductive technology
raises some thorny issues.

   Today: The quest to map the human genome leads down some unusual roads.

   Thursday: Barnyard biotech--of cows with medicinal milk and pigs with
human-like organs.

   ON THE WEB: Graphics, photos and stories from "In Our Own Image" are
available on the Los Angeles Times World Wide Web site at:
http://www.latimes.com/cloning/

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Many of the asthma-plagued residents of tiny Tristan da Cunha
share common forebears, providing an ideal opportunity to study the condition's
genetic links.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Carrie Le Duc PHOTO: Jeff Hall and Carrie Le Duc
are studying Tristanians' cell cultures at Sequana Therapeutics lab in La Jolla.
PHOTOGRAPHER: MICHAEL POCHE / For The Times GRAPHIC-CHART: Tracking a Rogue
Gene, REBECCA PERRY / Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: Tracking a Rogue Gene,
REBECCA PERRY / Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-MAP: Asthma Island / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2421 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    April 30, 1997, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 1614 words

HEADLINE: THE BIG C, FROM A TO Z;
 IN THEIR NEW BOOK, A DOCTOR AND HIS COLLEAGUES EXPLAIN CANCER SPECIFICS WITH
WARMTH AND PLAIN WORDS. AND THEY OFFER INFORMATION ABOUT TREATMENT OPTIONS.

BYLINE: BETTIJANE LEVINE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   So you're in pain. The doctor says "describe it," and you're stuck for words.

   See Page 269 of the big, friendly new encyclopedia called "Informed
Decisions: The Complete Book of Cancer Diagnosis" (Viking), edited by Dr.
Gerald P. Murphy, Lois B. Morris and Dianne Lange, and put out by the American
Cancer Society.

   Here, you'll find a word list that runs the pain gamut, from "flickering" and
"throbbing" to "radiating" and "piercing."

   The glossary is just one small illustration of how unstuffy this big book is.

   Its goal is to explain and define every little thing you ever wanted to know
about cancer--and were afraid to ask.

   Starting quite literally at the top of your head and ending at your soles,
"Informed Decisions" spells out and diagrams what symptoms to look for, what to
do if you find them, and where to go from there.

   The book's dust cover is a ghostly, uninviting, antiseptic white, not at all
in keeping with the plain-spoken warmth of the writing inside.

   But if you fear cancer, or have cancer, or know someone who does--or if
you're just an information junkie who wants to be informed and prepared--this
could be a good read.

   Also covered are explanations of all the treatment options for each form of
cancer, how to select the best for you, cure rates and survival statistics, how
to deal with the HMO, and all sorts of other potential questions that people
usually don't think about until they're confronted with them.

   Among these: sexuality after radiation or chemotherapy; how and why you
should seek a second opinion after diagnosis; what kind of foods to eat.

   But the most important and optimistic thing to know about cancer, says
Murphy, former chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society and lead
editor of the book, is that "we are entering an era of new therapies never
available before."

   Immunotherapy, or cancer vaccine therapy, has been introduced in the last 12
months in lymphoma, melanoma and prostate cancer, he says. "And I'm sure that as
we speak, it is being advanced into other areas."

   Immunotherapy is the injection of body products, such as proteins, or of
tumor antigens, which exist on the surface of cancer cells.

   "With new delivery systems now available, we are able to stimulate the immune
system to respond to these antigens to destroy the tumor," he says.

   It was the absence of such delivery systems that "bugged up" the whole
immunotherapy field for years, the doctor explains.

   And the same can be said for gene therapy, he adds. "Gene therapy will work
when the proper mechanism is found to place a particular gene at a particular
spot, to regulate the system it is designed to regulate."

   Suppressor genes normally regulate cell growth, he explains, and since cancer
is out-of-control cell growth, these genes can make order out of the cellular
chaos that is cancer once the delivery system is perfected.

   These new therapies and others are just around the corner, Murphy says.

   Even today, he says, there are many more treatment options than just a few
years ago. And patients have a new attitude.

   "A few years back, everybody sat and waited for the doctor to tell them what
to do. You never questioned his opinion. Nowadays, people are more informed.
They are more able to discuss cancer and more willing to ask the doctor to tell
them all the treatment options that exist. That is essential for patients to
do," Murphy insists.

   "So get into that discussion," he says. "Ask, 'What are my other options?
What else might I be able to do?' Most physicians are used to handling that sort
of discussion."

   And if you happen to have one who isn't, do yourself a favor and take a
meeting with someone else.


   The Faces of Cancer

   TEN LEADING SITES OF NEW CANCER CASES, 1997*

   Men:

   Melanoma of skin: 3%

   Oral cavity and pharynx: 3%

   Lung and bronchus: 13%

   Stomach: 2%

   Colon and rectum: 8%

   Kidney and renal pelvis: 2%

   Prostate: 43%

   Urinary bladder: 5%

   Leukemia: 2%

   Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: 4%

   All other sites: 16%


   *

   Women:

   Melanoma of skin: 3%

   Breast: 30%

   Lung and bronchus: 13%

   Pancreas: 2%

   Colon and rectum: 11%

   Ovary: 4%

   Cervix uteri: 2%

   Corpus ad uterus, NOS**: 6%

   Urinary bladder: 3%

   Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: 4%

   All other sites: 21%

   * Estimates

   ** Not otherwise specified

   TEN LEADING SITES FOR CANCER DEATHS, 1997*

   Men:

   Esophagus: 3%

   Lung and Bronchus: 32%

   Pancreas: 5%

   Stomach: 3%

   Liver and intrahepatic bile duct: 3%

   Colon and rectum: 9%

   Prostate: 14%

   Urinary bladder: 3%

   Leukemia: 4%

   Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: 4%

   All other sites: 21%

   Women:

   Brain and other nervous system: 2%

   Breast: 17%

   Lung and bronchus: 25%

   Pancreas: 5%

   Stomach: 2%

   Colon and rectum: 10%

   Ovary: 5%

   Corpus ad uterus, NOS**: 2%

   Leukemia: 4%

   Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: 4%

   All other sites: 23%

   * Estimates

   ** Not otherwise specified

   Source: CA, A Cancer Journal for Clinicians; January/February 1997.  Excludes
basal and squanmous cell skin cancer and carcinoma in situ except bladder.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (E1) THE BIG C: In their new book, Dr. Gerald Murphy and two
colleagues explain all about cancer.  GRAPHIC-CHART: The Faces of Cancer, Los
Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2422 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 30, 1997 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: STANFORD RESEARCH ON TUMOR SUPPRESSORS SHOWS EARLY PROMISEResearch
Notebook

BYLINE: Compiled by Richard L. Hill, of The Oregonian staff<

BODY:

   Wednesday, April 30, 1997 STANFORD RESEARCH ON TUMOR SUPPRESSORS SHOWS EARLY
PROMISE

   Research Notebook

   Neurosurgeons have found that tumor suppressor genes from humans
dramatically reduce the size of deadly brain tumors in laboratory rats,
prolonging their lives.

   In gene therapy experiments, the researchers at Stanford University School
of Medicine studied a rat tumor that models human glioblastoma, the deadliest
brain cancer in humans. The cancer strikes more men than women and is most
common in people ages 40 to 60. Glioblastoma accounts for as many as half of
all malignant brain tumors, which usually result in death within one to two
years after diagnosis.

   The researchers focused on tumor suppressor genes p53, p21, p16 and pRb,
which contain the instructions to make various proteins capable of stopping
cell division. Tumor cells often lack working copies of at least one tumor
suppressor gene.

   The researchers used a harmless virus, fitted with copies of the human
tumor suppressor genes, to infect the rat tumor cells in culture. The
transplanted genes began churning out growth-blocking proteins.

   The gene therapy substantially slowed tumor growth. When injected into the
brains of live rats, the tumors infected with human genes became smaller, and
the animals survived longer than control rats with the same tumors that
received viruses without the added genes.

   The implications for treating human glioblastoma are promising, the
scientists said.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2423 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       APRIL 29, 1997 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1419 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   In the Region ARMSTRONG RAISES QUARTERLY DIVIDEND Armstrong World Industries
Inc., Lancaster, raised its quarterly dividend by 4 cents to 44 cents a share.
The new dividend is payable June 3 to shareholders on May 9. Separately,
Armstrong said its joint ceiling grid venture with Worthington Industries would
buy Peytesa SA, a privately held Spanish manufacturer.

   RHONE-POULENC COULD SEEK EARLIER DRUG APPROVAL * Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.'s
chief executive said the Collegeville company could seek regulatory approval for
a gene-therapy cancer treatment as soon as 1999, earlier than expected. Michel
de Rosen said the treatment was being worked on by an RPR research program
called Gencell. The treatment, which is in early clinical testing, involves
manipulation of a tumor-suppressor gene known as P53.

    MERCK'S OSTEOPOROSIS DRUG APPROVED FOR NEW USE The Food and Drug
Administration approved a new use for Merck & Co.'s osteoporosis drug Fosamax,
one that could expand annual sales by $1 billion or more by 2000. Fosamax, now a
treatment for osteoporosis, under the new approval could be sold for preventive
use as well. Merck, based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., has its research
headquarters in Montgomery County. The new approval is likely to intensify the
marketing battles between Merck and American Home Products Corp., the St. Davids
drug company that makes the estrogen product Premarin.

   LITHIUM TECHNOLOGY A PARTNER IN NASA CONTRACT * Lithium Technology Corp.,
Plymouth Meeting, joined with Yardney Technical Products, Pawcatuck, Conn., on a
NASA research contract for a high-performance lithium battery. The $70,000,
six-month contract is for development of a novel, lightweight, rechargable
battery for satellite applications. Yardney, the main contractor, intends to
compete for a longer-term contract after completion of the initial work. The
second contract could be worth up to $600,000.

   Elsewhere U.S. CALLS ON EUROPE TO INVESTIGATE AIRLINE-RESERVATIONS DISPUTE *
The Justice Department has asked Europe to take over its investigation into
whether three European airlines are illegally preventing U.S.-based computer
airline reservations systems from competing on the continent. The request to the
antitrust authority of the European Communities was the first made under a 1991
agreement to improve U.S.-European cooperation in enforcing antitrust laws, the
department said.

   "We believe there are indications that exclusionary conduct may be preventing
U.S. companies from vigorously competing in computer reservation system markets
in Europe," said acting Assistant Attorney General Joel I. Klein. The request
was made in January but not disclosed until yesterday "to protect the integrity
of the investigation," the department said.

   The U.S. investigation had been triggered by complaints from Sabre, a
computer reservation system largely owned by American Airlines. The department
said Sabre complained that the three European carriers - Lufthansa, Air France
and Iberia - did not give Sabre many air fares on a timely basis, refused to
provide certain promotional or negotiated fares, and denied Sabre the ability to
perform some ticketing functions. Sabre said it had provided such fares and
functions to Amadeus, the dominant computer reservation system in Europe.

   INTEL REDUCES PRICES BY UP TO 48 PERCENT Intel Corp. unveiled price cuts of
as much as 48 percent to boost the sales of lower-end personal computers. The
world's largest chipmaker cut the price of its Pentium 200 Megahertz chip by 48
percent to $257 from $498. It cut the price of its Pentium 166 Megahertz chip by
29 percent to $209 from $295. The price cuts will enable PC manufacturers and
retailers to offer a faster, more powerful low-end PC to consumers, said Daniel
Niles, an analyst at Robertson, Stephens & Co. "The way you sell more PCs is by
giving people a better bargain for the money," Niles said. The price cuts would
have little impact on Intel's revenue, he said, because the company is
increasing production of its Pentium chips even as it reduces prices.

   CARL'S OWNER TO BUY HARDEE'S RESTAURANT CHAIN * The parent company of
hamburger chain Carl's Jr. announced it would acquire the struggling Hardee's
restaurant business, making it one of the nation's largest fast-food companies.
The $327 million deal greatly expands the operations of CKE Restaurants Inc.
beyond its Southern California base and instantly gives the chain a presence
east of the Mississippi River. The agreement ends months of speculation that CKE
would buy Rocky Mount, N.C.-based Hardee's, which has 3,100 outlets and strong
positions in the Midwest and Southeast. Carl's Jr. is a 675-store chain that
operates mostly in California and six other western states.

   METROMEDIA SELLING ITS FILM LIBRARY TO MGM Metromedia International Group
Inc. has agreed to a $573 million deal to sell its film library, which includes
Oscar winners Dances With Wolves and The Silence of the Lambs, to
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. The deal, which includes 2,200 Metromedia feature film
and television titles as well as the production and distribution activities of
its Entertainment Group, would give MGM the largest modern film library in the
world. The move comes on the heels of a $1.3 billion management-led buyout of
MGM, which has passed through four owners in the last six years. Chairman and
chief executive Frank Mancuso called it the "second chapter" in a rebuilding
process.

   NEW-HOME SALES CONTINUE HEALTHY PACE * New homes sold briskly in March for
the third consecutive month, down only slightly from the month before, when
sales hit the highest level in 11 years. New homes sold at a seasonally adjusted
annual rate of 813,000 last month, a 2.5 percent decline from a rate of 834,000
in February that was the highest since April 1986, the Commerce Department said.
The sales pace was 825,000 in January. The three months mark the first time
since 1978 that sales have topped the 800,000 level three times in a row. In
advance, many economists were looking for a less torrid sales pace of about
790,000 in March. Also, the department substantially raised February and January
sales from previous estimates. The report was the first of a passel this week
that will be closely examined by financial markets seeking clues on whether
Federal Reserve policy-makers meeting in three weeks will increase interest
rates for the second time this year.

   INTEREST RATES ARE UP FOR 3- AND 6-MONTH T-BILLS * Interest rates on
short-term Treasury securities rose in yesterday's auction. The Treasury
Department sold $7.08 billion in three-month bills at an average discount rate
of 5.22 percent, up from 5.21 percent last week. An additional $7.03 billion was
sold in six-month bills at an average rate of 5.45 percent, up from 5.38
percent. The new discount rates understate the actual return to investors - 5.36
percent for three-month bills, with a $10,000 bill selling for $9,868.10, and
5.68 percent for a six-month bill selling for $9,724.50.

   AVERAGE YIELD FOR 1-YEAR T-BILL AT 6.01 PCT. * The Federal Reserve said the
average yield for one-year Treasury bills, the most popular index for making
changes in adjustable rate mortgages, rose to 6.01 percent last week from 5.98
percent the previous week.

   MARVEL ENTERTAINMENT LOOKS TO TOY BIZ * Spider-Man publisher Marvel
Entertainment still sees toys in its future. The comic-book company, also home
to X-Men and Captain America, said it planned to merge with Toy Biz Inc., which
makes toys based on Marvel characters. More than a simple business combination,
the deal also represents an effort to let Marvel emerge from bankruptcy court
protection. Under the plan, which would combine Marvel's character-generating
businesses with Toy Biz, Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.'s bank lenders receive
28 percent of the combined Marvel and Toy Biz. They would also get $420 million,
as well as full ownership of Marvel's Fleer/SkyBox trading card unit and its
Panini children's sticker subsidiary.

   US AIRWAYS REGISTERS BRITISH AIR STAKE * US Airways Group Inc. filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission to register the 24 percent company stake held
by a unit of British Airways plc. The registration will enable British Airways
to sell the stake, composed of preferred stock, to the public. US Airways in
February said it declined the opportunity to buy back the preferred shares from
British Airways.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2424 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        April 29, 1997, Tuesday , ALAMO

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1, Part E

LENGTH: 1362 words

HEADLINE: Museum quality - S.A. company's exhibits tour the world

BYLINE: Dan R. Goddard Express-News Arts Writer


BODY: She has done dinosaurs, bats, bugs, trash and Africa. Now Stacy Frieden
Bishkin is creating touring exhibits based on robot animals, microbes, Peter the
Great and the deep blue sea.

   Bishkin's BBH Exhibits Inc., based in San Antonio, has become the country's
largest and most successful for-profit company creating touring, interactive
exhibits for natural history and science museums.

   Bishkin's newest exhibit, "The Robot Zoo," based on a popular children's book
by John Kelly and Obin, will make its world debut May 24 at Space Center
Houston. With eight giant see-through robotic animals, it uses machine parts and
gadgets such as shock absorbers and pumps to demonstrate how animals work.

   "I'm tremendously lucky because I'm doing something that I really enjoy
doing," Bishkin says. "It's amazing how fast this company has grown. We've
doubled our sales every year. We've found a niche and filled it, becoming one of
the biggest, international touring exhibit companies in the world."

   "Backyard Monsters," about insects and arachnids, is still touring the
country, recently stopping at McAllen. "Masters of the Night: The True Story of
Bats" has toured Mexico and is currently touring Europe's major science museums.



   "Earthquest," the hands-on recycling exhibit featured at the Witte Museum
last spring, is going to Phoenix, Atlanta and Indianapolis this year.

   After opening last year at the Franklin Institute Science Museum in
Philadelphia, "Africa: One Continent. Many Worlds," is on a five-year, 15-city
tour sponsored by Ford Motor Co. and Time magazine.

   Dennis Wint, president and CEO of the Franklin Institute, says, "We did
extremely well with 'Africa,' which greatly exceeded our expectations. Not only
was the exhibit popular with African-Americans, but it had a lot of appeal for
everyone. It was a very powerful exhibit, especially the section on the African
diaspora. While this show is not as interactive as some of Stacy's other
exhibits, it effectively used artifacts to explore many different aspects of
African culture.

   "Stacy is not only good at putting the exhibits together, she's also able to
find major sponsors, which helped us tremendously in terms of expenses."

   A scaled-down version of a permanent exhibit at Chicago's Field Museum,
"Africa" uses hands-on activities and an outstanding collection of artifacts to
demonstrate the enormous diversity of African geography, societies and political
systems.

   Leo Brennan, vice president of the Ford Fund, says his company has sponsored
both "Earthquest" and "Africa" because the exhibits appeal to audiences that
Ford wants to reach.

   "We've been pleased not only with the quality of the exhibits, but with the
quality of the public response," Brennan said. "People just love these shows."

   "Africa" was featured last fall at the Dallas Museum of Natural History. This
year, it will be seen at the St. Louis Science Center, the Detroit Museum of
African-American History and the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History.

   "The Robot Zoo" is being co-sponsored by Silicon Graphics Inc., a pioneering
computer 3-D animation company, and Time magazine. Bishkin said Silicon Graphics
created eye-popping computer animation for "The Robot Zoo," which will be on
view at Space Center Houston from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day.

   Dick Raskopf, an associate publisher of Time, said Bishkin has broken a lot
of new ground, bringing together major corporate sponsors and museums for
exhibits that have proven extremely popular with the public.

   "Stacy really handles herself with grace and finesse. We've been very happy
with the response to 'Africa,' and we think 'The Robot Zoo' is going to be big
with families with children, which is a market that we are very interested in
reaching," Raskopf said.

   "We'll be featuring 'The Robot Zoo' in our magazine, Time for Kids, which
will be seen by a lot of third to fourth graders. Stacy also put us together
with Silicon Graphics; so it's been wonderful to work with her and her company."



   Dirk Vande Beek, director of development for Space Center Houston, says BBH
Exhibits creates the most effective and popular interactive exhibits in the
country.

   "We're impressed with the hands-on quality of Stacy's exhibits," Vande Beek
said. "She really knows how to create exhibits that appeal to people of all
ages, not just children, but their parents as well. The technology in 'Robot
Zoo' is just amazing, and we've been able to add some components to the exhibit
about how NASA uses robots. While children will like the giant robotic animals,
the technology created by Silicon Graphics will fascinate the adults.

   "Stacy's approach is intelligent and thoughtful. When you go through one of
her exhibits, you feel as if you have explored every aspect of the topic. We
deal with a lot of touring exhibits, but her's are the most fun and exciting. I
think this is why BBH has become the No. 1 exhibit company in the country."

   "The Robot Zoo" will feature cutaways exposing the animals' insides,
revealing how powerful springs launch a grasshopper in the air, how a bat
locates prey using sonar and how a giant squid uses jet propulsion. Philip
Whitfield, head of the Division of Life Sciences at King's College, University
of London, assisted in transforming the innovative book into an exhibit.

   Joe DiNucci of Silicon Graphics, which creates 90 percent of the special
effects seen in movies and on TV, said his company enjoyed the challenge of
getting children interested in science rather than video games - which Silicon
Graphics also has created.

   "We were just enchanted by Stacy's presentation, which made it easy to make a
$2 million commitment to the project. The robot animals are great, but we added
a lot of graphics," DiNucci says. "For example, in the chameleon's room,
children can use a computer mouse to indicate the color they want to see and the
entire environment will change as well as the chameleon."

   Examining the little-seen world of bacteria, protozoa, viruses, infection,
antibodies, genes, DNA, vaccines and gene therapy, this three-dimensional,
interactive exhibit will show that microbes, far from being solely a threat, are
necessary to sustain all life.

   At her corporate headquarters in northeast San Antonio, Bishkin and her
10-member staff are assembling two new major exhibits. She's working with the
Peter the Great Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia, to create a major exhibit to
tour this country.

   "We expect to have the exhibit ready to tour in the U.S. by 1998," Bishkin
says. "Peter the Great's personality shaped Russia as we know it today.
Artifacts will range from an 8,000-year-old northern Russia tribal scepter to a
complete gold suit for a horse, which was a gift to Nicholas and Alexandria from
the King of Siam. We'll try to combine art and history so that families will
understand Peter the Great in context."

   BBH also is working with the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, which found
the Titanic, on an exhibit tentatively titled "Destination Deep Sea."

   "We also plan to develop exhibits for smaller markets. We're doing a
scaled-down version of 'Masters of the Night,' for example, that will tour to
smaller cities," Bishkin says. "There's a real demand for high-quality science
and history exhibits. Not many companies are involved in creating them, and we
think we can do it better than anybody else."

   Bishkin says the smaller exhibits include "Poisonous Animals" and "Volcanos."



   San Antonian Sam Barshop, one of BBH's main investors, says he is extremely
pleased with the financial success of the exhibit company.

   "I guess the proof is in the pudding. The company's ability to attract major
sponsors along with the public response has made it a success," Barshop says.
"Not only do I invest in Stacy's company, but I am a partner with Coca-Cola in
the Mexico tour of 'Masters of the Night.' We've had tremendous response at more
than a dozen different venues in Mexico, including Monterrey, Pueblo and Mexico
City. Stacy's exhibits are top-of-the-line and state-of-the-art."

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2425 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 29, 1997 Tuesday
                                 STATE EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: A chromosome out of `The X-Files' gave us men

BYLINE: Amy Finkenaur

BODY:

   Out of the esoterica of science comes evidence that a little factor,
appropriately named Xist , may shut down the function of the "extra" X
chromosome in women. Chromosomes contains thousands of genes, each one
contributing one small aspect of the total human form. At birth, little boys are
dealt an X from their mother and Y from their father. The Y chromosome is
essential, providing every scrap of information about male sexual attributes.

    Girls get an X from both parents. Recent scientific studies theorize that
girls' cells contain a mechanism for silencing one of their X chromosomes. It
starts with the first cell division and doesn't end for a lifetime. Apparently
the consequence of two functioning X chromosomes is lethal.

    Not so in fruit flies. Males of the species work their single X in overdrive
just hoping to keep up with the female's two. (Finding that gem of information
is justification for mountains of scientific literature on fruit fly
reproduction.)

    I have a different theory, derived purely from observation, about the
chromosomal variations between the sexes. Long ago, all humans carried two X
chromosomes. Somewhere along the way, a mutant strain evolved, one that survived
the accidental loss of an arm of its X chromosome.

    The creature adapted to a strange new form, a little larger and hairier than
the average female. And we called it male. Of course it became more aggressive
since it was bereft of the natural benefits of womanly hormones. Male bodies
tried to adapt to the missing arm of their chromosome by growing a pathetically
short appendage. Anyone can tell by looking that it was an evolutionary error.

    Over time, men grew accustomed to their differences and even made them a
source of pride. So we let them do the really nasty jobs, hunting woolly
mammoths and such. Sadly, some of men's weaknesses are insurmountable. They
still die younger than women and suffer more from nearly every affliction.

    But they've exacted their revenge. Despite feminist prodding, they continue
to rule most corporate worlds. And medical research favors men for clinical
studies.

    They've turned the tables on us. Attributes once thought of as weaknesses,
like aggressive tendencies, are a strength in the struggle for territory and
power. War ravages countries around the globe while women clamor for an
opportunity to experience battle. Our modern culture is only beginning to
appreciate traditionally female attributes like nurturing others and working
cooperatively. How did our values get so scrambled?

    And if that wasn't enough, now we must contend with this Xist gene stuff.

    Can't we find some middle ground? Does it make sense that male fruit flies
have to work twice as hard to keep up with their female counterparts? Should a
woman have to silence one of her chromosomes just for survival sake?

    I say no.

    Let's create a world where a woman's unexpressed X genes can have a voice.
Let's treasure the blessing of two X's. And while we're at it, let's scare up
funding to learn which genes disappeared when Y lost its arm and then perform a
little gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2426 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     April 28, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: History in the making;
Researchers are hoping the creation of the first artificial human chromosomes
will lead to new treatment of genetic diseases.

BYLINE: KURT LOFT; of The Tampa Tribune

BODY:


   Dolly the sheep has been stealing most of the genetic thunder lately, but
researchers fashioning the first artificial human chromosomes are creating their
own storm in the science world.

   A team from Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine in Ohio
recently announced a landmark achievement by making synthetic chromosomes, which
one day could become weapons in the genetic manipulation of disease, especially
cancers. Called a synthetic microchromosome, the material is made from elements
found in the human body, and divides and replicates like a natural one, says
John J. Harrington, a Case Western scientist.

   "What we've done is to create a miniature version of a normal human
chromosome, about 10 times smaller than a natural one," he says by telephone.
"It's been very difficult to isolate the inner region of the chromosome, but
we've found a way to do it in a test tube."

   The biomedical feat is a boon to the Human Genome Project, a federally
funded, multibillion-dollar effort to map the nature, location and pattern of
all human genes. The way in which genes arrange themselves into 23 pairs of
chromosomes and replicate is one of the mysteries of science.

   Chromosomes are thread-like structures found in the cells of all organisms.
They are made up mostly of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and protein. Humans have
46 chromosomes in 23 pairs.

   "From a research standpoint, this could be a powerful tool in understanding
how chromosomes actually work," Harrington says. "We really don't have a good
idea how they work. But we do know that when they don't work, various diseases
can result."

   The Cleveland team hopes their research will add to the growing knowledge of
gene therapy, in which genetic diseases would be treated - and prevented - by
introducing designer genes into target cells to repair defects. Once in a
person's system, the gene creates a therapeutic effect by supplying a factor
lacking in the tissue or bloodstream, or by suppressing the dysfunctional gene.

   "This opens the door to a whole new avenue of research in chromosome biology
and gene therapy," says Huntington F. Willard, senior author of the study and
chairman of genetics at the university. He adds that the effort could move
scientists "from just mapping genes to actually understanding how they work and
influence human disease."

   A technical paper explaining the artificial chromosome appears in the April
issue of the journal Nature Genetics. Similar work has been attempted before but
without success, says journal editor Kevin Davis.

   "This is the first time all the pieces have been assembled together in a
stable manner," he says. "It appears it can be made to work. If a way can be
devised to introduce genes to replace defective cells, then this would be a
wonderful way to tackle gene therapy."

   However, gene therapy is far from practical, and many geneticists say it
could be 20 years before the public benefits from related research.

   The synthetic chromosome works by remaining independent inside its host cell,
functioning like a friendly chromosome. In similar experiments, scientists use
what are called viral vectors, but which often cause damage inside the cell.
These altered viruses also can set off immune-system cells that attack them,
destroying the experiment. Much remains to be learned, Davis adds.

   "The chromosome structure and its key component parts are still mysterious to
researchers in the field," he says. "This could be a screening method to
understanding the actual architecture of a human chromosome."

   Athersys, a biotechnology company based in Cleveland, holds a license to the
technology and has filed patent applications on fundamental aspects of the new
chromosome. The research has nothing to do with cloning and its ethical
controversy, says Harrington.

   "It simply can lead to treatments that might increase the quality of life,"
he says. "With cloning you're creating new organisms. This can't be used to
create new humans."     (CHART) Artificial human chromosomes   For the first
time, scientists at Case Western University in Cleveland have created miniature
replicating versions of human chromosomes.   SOURCES: The Bantam Medical
Dictionary; AMA Encyclopedia of Medicine; news reports   KRT News Service
graphic

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C); CHART (C),
 (C) The arrow indicates the synthetic microchromosome that was inserted into
the nucleus of a cell. Photo from Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine

NOTES: SCI TECH

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1997


                             2427 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 27, 1997, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 8387 words

SERIES: IN OUR OWN IMAGE: Life in a genetically engineered world. * First in a
series

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
 BIOTECH: THE REVOLUTION IS ALREADY UNDERWAY;
 DOLLY THE CLONED SHEEP MADE HEADLINES. BUT SHE IS JUST ONE OF MANY LIVING
INVENTIONS--CREATED BY THE NEW WORLD OF BIOLOGY--THAT ARE PUSHING THE FRONTIERS
OF SCIENCE AND SOCIETY.

BYLINE: ROBERT LEE HOTZ and THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES STAFF WRITERS

BODY:


   These are the unlikely avatars of biology's new age--a set of test tube twins
in London, a cotton boll in Alabama, a spider mite in Florida, a bull named
Hermann, a boy named Andrew, and a white-faced sheep named Dolly.

   As milestones in the evolving technology of life, they are tokens of a
scientific upheaval that is transforming society as rapidly as it is reshaping
medicine, agriculture and the pursuit of science itself.

   Each is a creation born of a revolution in biology.

   A lab technician screened the twins--Hannah and Danielle--for genetic defects
when they were laboratory embryos outside their mother's womb.  Farmers
cultivated the cotton from seeds created by combining plant and bacteria genes,
while the bug has a new gene to help researchers track it in the wild. Los
Angeles doctors performed gene therapy on Andrew to strengthen his immune
system. Dutch researchers engineered the bull so it would sire cows whose cream
contains an important medicinal compound normally found in human breast milk.

   In creating Dolly from a single adult ewe cell, researchers at Scotland's
Roslin Institute crafted the latest living invention to mark the crossroads of
science and human values.

   These experimental creations are more than laboratory curiosities.  Indeed,
the seeds of the new biology are being sown across millions of farm acres this
year, and its fruits are appearing on supermarket shelves and in medicine
cabinets in hundreds of thousands of homes. The biological revolution is
altering--in ways that we have yet to recognize--our image of ourselves.

   Researchers now are poised to push the technology of life into even more
challenging areas, some of them long forbidden by federal regulation or by
ethical and religious constraints.

   For many scientists, cloning offers an unprecedented opportunity to engineer
new life forms more efficiently, to revive endangered species and to explore
treatments for a host of human diseases. However, critics in the United States
and around the world have argued that cloning oversteps the bounds of morality,
offering humanity too much power to manipulate living things. And the prospect
of cloning human beings, they say, is repugnant.

   While most scientists publicly reject the idea of cloning complete human
beings, many molecular biologists are eager to clone human cells using the
techniques developed by the team behind Dolly.

   To carry out those experiments, geneticists will be creating for research
purposes what many will consider human embryos. Such endeavors have been
forbidden to federally funded researchers for almost 25 years, primarily because
many people consider it wrong to create a human life only to destroy it.

   Indeed, some respected medical experts have begun to quietly debate whether
they should attempt to cure hereditary diseases by making genetic changes in
human embryos that can be inherited by succeeding generations.  Many biomedical
ethics experts, religious leaders and researchers have long contended that such
"germ-line" genetic changes are too technically uncertain and morally perilous
to be allowed.

   At the same time, researchers at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center
are preparing to conduct the first genetic engineering experiment on healthy
human volunteers. Scientists investigating treatments for cancer and other
diseases want to inject harmless engineered genes into normal people to see how
their immune systems respond.

   Some experts worry that the research--touted as a way to better understand
gene therapy--may pave the way for other experiments in healthy people seeking
to enhance themselves genetically.

   "I am wondering if it is not time to set some limits on science," said Lori
Andrews of Chicago-Kent College of Law at the Illinois Institute of Technology,
an authority on genetic engineering and reproductive technologies.

   A Pervasive Force in Agriculture

   The international furor provoked by cloning comes at a time when the medical
and agricultural products of genetic engineering are becoming pervasive.

   This spring, millions of acres of U.S. farmland are being sown with seeds of
genetically altered cotton, corn and soybeans. For the first time, genetically
engineered crops comprise a significant portion of American agriculture, experts
say.

   More than three-quarters of the cotton in Alabama last year was genetically
engineered to kill insects.

   Now researchers are experimenting with cotton plants that contain polyester.

   Farmers are planting 8 million acres in genetically engineered soybeans, 3.5
million acres in modified corn and 10,000 acres of altered potatoes, Monsanto
Co. officials said. The company is selling genetically engineered seed as fast
as it can make it.

   "People's heads are still spinning at how quickly this is being adopted,"
said Margaret Mellon, a biotechnology analyst at the Union of Concerned
Scientists in Washington.

   Last spring, the first genetically engineered bug--a predatory mite designed
to eat insects that plague strawberries and other crops--was released in
Alachula County, Fla. The first transgenic nematode worms, a laboratory variant
of a garden pest, are being field-tested in Salem County, N.J., with the hope
that they eventually can be rendered harmless.

   Even more dramatic are the inroads biotechnology has made into medicine.

   Tens of millions of people have used genetically engineered medicine to
control heart disease and diabetes, treat cancer or offset the effects of
stroke, according to the Biotechnology Industry Assn.

   Tens of thousands more routinely undergo genetic testing--either to judge the
health of their unborn children or to tell if they themselves are susceptible to
chronic diseases or cancer. Thousands of children owe their existence to the
innovations of assisted reproduction technology such as in vitro fertilization.

   But sociologists and anthropologists who study the impact of the new
biotechnology say its most far-reaching effects may be on how people think of
themselves and their ideas of law, family, insurance, property and animals.
Fundamental concepts of what it means to be human have been colored by the
notion that the blueprints of all living things are drawn from the same genetic
code.

   "These ideas are a major consequence of the last 20 years, entering people's
consciousness piece by piece," said Alexander Capron, an authority on biomedical
ethics at the University of Southern California and a member of the federal
bioethics commission asked by President Clinton to consider the implications of
cloning.

   "The advances in biology have made a huge difference in how we think and it
is only going to get more so," he said. "You can avoid genetically engineered
produce if it bothers you, but that is very hard to do with an idea."

   In some instances, critics say, society has gone overboard in its rush to
embrace insights arising from the new biology. Henry Greely, co-director of
Stanford University's Program in Genomics, Ethics and Society, said the
scientific emphasis on genes is unintentionally buttressing political beliefs
that biology is the root of human character and of social ills ranging from
racial inequality to violent crime.

   "Our society has been jumping in recent years toward . . .  scientifically
unjustified and culturally dangerous ideas of genetic determinism.  This . . .
is a gross overestimate of how important genes are to how humans behave," he
said.

   To complicate matters even further, the technology of test-tube conception
has divorced parenting from conventional reproduction and made family formation
less a matter of biology than of personal preference and contract law.

   Prenatal testing also is creating a new generation of parental obligations
and strengthening the idea that the fetus has a legal identity separate from the
woman who bears it.

   "Biological innovations are often regarded as perversions when they first
come along. Then they often become widely practiced," said Caltech science
historian Daniel Kevles.

   Then he paused and added: "I think there is something different about the
prospect of human cloning."

   Cloning Brings New Possibilities

   As a breakthrough in cell biology, cloning joins the new technology of
reproduction to genetic engineering.

   The techniques discovered by Ian Wilmut at the Roslin Institute offer the
unprecedented opportunity to reawaken all of the genes inside an adult cell,
rewind the clock that governs cell development and, perhaps, unlock the secrets
of aging, experts say.

   Cloning holds the promise of bypassing conventional breeding techniques to
allow creation of thousands of precise duplicates of genetically engineered
mammals in a single generation, Wilmut explained.

   Breeders could create a viable embryo by the cloning technique of nuclear
transfer, which Wilmut employed. In that process, the nucleus from any cell of a
genetically altered animal is transferred into a specially prepared,
unfertilized egg, then grows a perfect genetic copy.

   "I am not actually sure it is such an incredible breakthrough," Wilmut said.
But "there is this aura about it that makes people jump."

   Until the advent of cloning, the ability to create new species of transgenic
animals--by inserting new genes into an embryo--was hit or miss. Less than
one-tenth of 1% of genetically engineered embryos properly incorporated a new
gene, researchers said.

   "The technique of nuclear transfer offers us . . . a way to target genes,"
said Alan Colman, research director of PPL Therapeutics Ltd. in Edinburgh, which
collaborated with Wilmut on the controversial experiment.

   "Cloning is a bonus," he said. "We can make a cell into an instant flock or
an instant herd."

   Those who are wary of the new technique warn that equally controversial
advances in the technology of animal husbandry have virtually always presaged
similar developments in human reproduction--from artificial insemination, in
vitro fertilization and the use of fertility drugs to frozen embryos and the
micro-manipulation of human eggs, embryos and sperm. Such a progression seems
inevitable for cloning as well.

   But even those who object to the idea of human cloning can see its potential
usefulness in certain situations, such as cases of infertility.

   Barely a week after National Institutes of Health Director Harold Varmus
declared human cloning "repugnant," he testified to Congress that he could
imagine a scenario in which an infertile couple used a cloning procedure for
family planning.

   Indeed, cloning theoretically could simplify the complex equation of human
reproduction. Technology already has introduced so many variables that one child
can have up to five parents: a sperm donor, an egg donor, a surrogate mother and
two adoptive parents.

   Cloning could reduce that to the biological prime number of one: a woman who,
through cloning, gives birth to a genetic duplicate.

   Science of Life a Major Industry

   A generation ago, scientists worried that tinkering with the genes of even
the simplest organisms was too dangerous--so much so that they convened an
unprecedented conference at the Asilomar Conference Center in Monterey, Calif.,
to establish universal ground rules for gene research.

   But as the specter of extreme danger has faded in the past decade,
biotechnology companies have conducted more than 2,500 field tests of
genetically engineered organisms and plants in the United States, without a
serious accident, federal agriculture and food safety officials said.

   The science of life has created a major industry, with more than 1,300
companies, nearly $ 13 billion in annual revenues and more than 100,000 people
on its payroll--a significant percentage of them in California.  Instead of
spawning rogue microbes or ecological disasters, that industry has sharply
changed ideas about the ownership of living organisms while researchers have
raced to patent the creatures they create and the genes they find.

   At the same time, changes in federal technology transfer regulations have
fostered more intimate relationships between publicly financed laboratories and
commercial biology ventures. And federal researchers now are encouraged to
patent the fruits of their research.

   For example, scientists at Case Western Reserve University who recently
discovered how to create human chromosomes conducted most of their research with
public funding from the National Institutes of Health. They patented the
technique and acquired a corporate partner to exploit it before the research
ever became public.

   Such a thorough mingling of public research and private enterprise, although
troubling to some, is now the rule.

   Wilmut and his colleagues also patented their cloning technique before making
their experiment public. The stock price of PPL Therapeutics, their corporate
collaborator, jumped 16% on the announcement.

   "The tens and tens of billions of dollars from biotechnology companies have
fundamentally changed the way science is done in the United States," said
Stanford anthropologist Paul Rabinow, who studies the business of molecular
biology and genetics.

   In 1995 alone, medical researchers patented 500 genetic engineering products.
And the pace of development is accelerating. More than 284 new genetically
engineered medicines for diseases ranging from the common cold to AIDS were
tested in 1995--up almost 20% from the year before, industry surveys show.

   Some of the 44 biotech drugs already approved have, in fact, replaced other
drugs from more conventional sources.

   Genetically engineered human insulin has almost completely supplanted insulin
from cows and pigs. As many as 3.4 million Americans are now taking genetically
engineered insulin, according to the American Diabetes Assn.

   Recombinant human growth hormone has greatly expanded the supply of the rare
substance, allowing physicians to treat not only insufficient growth, but also
to heal wounds or to retard the effects of aging. It has even gotten into the
black market among athletes who believe it will enhance their bodybuilding
efforts and boost performance.

   Amgen Inc.'s erythropoietin is given to all but a few of the 200,000 people
who are on kidney dialysis each year. By stimulating the growth of red blood
cells, it frees them from the risks of blood transfusions and alleviates the
fatigue of most dialysis patients who have been suffering from anemia.

   "I think . . . genetics, immunology and so on are really paying off
tremendously" in new treatments and a better understanding of medicine, said
French Anderson, a USC molecular biologist who pioneered the concept of human
gene therapy to treat inherited diseases.

   Before Genentech introduced tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), there was
nothing to dissolve clots. Erythropoietin also had no predecessor.  There was no
hepatitis B vaccine. Avonex and Betaseron, the beta-interferons, represent the
first useful therapies for multiple sclerosis. Pulmozyme (DNase) is the first
effective product for treating lung congestion in cystic fibrosis patients.

   Doctors hope to identify more medical treatments as new genes are identified.
There is no shortage of raw material.

   So far, researchers have identified more than 16,000 of the roughly 100,000
genes that make up the molecular blueprint for human growth and development.
Federal medical authorities are confident that they will have decoded all human
genes by 2005.

   The number of human genes mapped has tripled in less than two years and that
number is expected to double this year, according to Dr. Frances Collins,
director of the National Center for Human Genome Research. Last year,
researchers identified 21 genes responsible for inherited diseases--twice as
many as the year before.

   The effect of the new technology is only beginning to be felt, experts say.
This first wave of medical products resulted from relatively simple
manipulations of life. Most of the first biotech products to reach the market
were simply normal human proteins produced by genetically engineered bacteria.

   Now researchers are perfecting more powerful techniques to produce the next
generation of treatments.

   Many of the newer drugs being studied are more complex products, such as
vaccines and monoclonal antibodies as well as tools for gene therapy.

   And the altered bacteria themselves used to produce the first round of
medical compounds are being replaced by more complex living bioreactors.

   Man-made sheep, designed to give a human protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin
in their milk, graze in the hills outside Edinburgh. Their milk is being tested
on people as a treatment for emphysema and cystic fibrosis. Genetically
engineered cattle, which give human alpha-latalbumin in their milk, are pastured
outside Blacksburg, Va.

   Genetically engineered mice with human diseases are the living test tubes
found in dozens of medical research laboratories.

   Some Early Hopes Fail to Pan Out

   But if the original fears about manipulating life have not materialized, the
benefits also have not developed quite as its boosters had predicted:

   * Many genetically engineered foodstuffs cleared technical and regulatory
hurdles only to run afoul of consumer distaste, labeling disputes and
international trade boycotts. The Flavr-Savr tomato, touted for its ability to
stay fresh longer, was withdrawn for further development. Milk produced by
treating cows with bovine growth hormone has been widely boycotted for fear of
bacterial contamination caused by the drug.

   Now evidence suggests that new genes in some crops can trigger allergies in
sensitive people. Other studies indicate that by sharing pollen, some weeds can
pick up new genes for herbicide resistance or other engineered traits from
nearby crops. In addition, crops designed to contain their own pesticide may
actually promote resistance to common organic pesticides. A mutation in a single
gene in one crop pest--a moth--can confer resistance to four varieties of
organic pesticide, researchers have determined.

   * Scientists have created dozens of genetically engineered animals as models
of human diseases, but efforts to create livestock tailored to the demands of
modern factory farming--from self-shearing sheep and faster-growing pigs to
featherless fowl--have resulted in creatures that were crippled by
arthritis-like conditions, diabetes or ulcers, subject to heatstroke and often
infertile. Attempts to use "humanized" pigs in human organ transplants have been
slowed by fears that the organs may transmit animal viruses to human patients.

   * Human gene therapy--which attempts to cure inherited diseases by altering
the genes in human cells, as in the case of Andrew in Los Angeles--has been
disappointing, experts convened by the National Institutes of Health concluded.
Doctors conducted 106 clinical trials of experimental gene therapies in the past
five years involving more than 597 patients, but "clinical efficacy has not been
definitively demonstrated at this time in any gene therapy protocol, despite
anecdotal claims of successful therapy," the NIH group said. The panel warned
proponents of gene therapy to stop promising what they cannot yet deliver.

   * Some genetically engineered microbes, such as those designed to protect
plants from pests, survive better in the wild than many scientists had
assumed--so long, that some researchers are concerned that they might upset the
ecology into which they are released, new research shows. Many molecular
biologists had believed that it was safe to release man-made microbes, in part,
because the genetic alterations generally leave the organism weaker than its
natural competitors, and so it would quickly die off under natural conditions.
But University of Georgia scientists--in the first study of its kind--determined
recently that genetically engineered microbes can survive quite well in the
wild.  "There is probably some level of over-optimism in assuming that
genetically engineered organisms can be magic bullets to do a certain job
without ever harming the ecosystem," said Robert Hodson, the senior scientist
who conducted the study.

   * Discovery of genes that predispose people to diseases, including breast,
ovarian and colon cancers, generated new diagnostic tests, but some experts warn
that the tests are misused or given without adequate counseling. Doctors who
test patients for a gene that causes colon cancer often fail to perform the test
properly and commonly give inadequate or misleading information about the
results, researchers at Johns Hopkins University recently found. Although a
genetic diagnosis can often be a life-or-death matter, the doctor's
interpretation of the results was wrong in nearly one-third of the cases, the
researchers said.

   Genetic tests for susceptibility to chronic diseases and cancer also are
creating new opportunities for discrimination.

   A recent Georgetown University study of people in genetic-disease support
groups determined that 47% of those who mentioned the inherited condition on
their insurance forms were denied coverage.

   "The capacity to predict diseases without being able to treat them will be a
social nightmare, an employment nightmare, an insurance nightmare," said UC
Berkeley sociologist Troy Duster, who is chairman of a federal task force at the
NIH and the Department of Energy investigating the social, legal and ethical
implications of the new technology.

   Last month, a coalition of health experts and ethicists urged Congress to
enact measures protecting people against abuse of genetic information to deny
jobs, promotions, insurance coverage or other benefits. Eighteen similar
measures have previously been introduced without success.

   The International Bar Assn., which represents 167 countries, expects to
present proposed regulations guarding against the misuse of genetic data to the
United Nations later this spring.


   *

   ON THE WEB

   * Graphics, photos and stories from "In Our Own Image" are available on The
Times' World Wide Web site at http://www.latimes.com/cloning/


   *

   About This Series

   The cloning of a sheep named Dolly sent shockwaves throughout the world this
year. But that is only one of a host of advances in biotechnology. The
revolution is touching virtually all corners existence, from conception to
nutrition to disease control. The genetic engineering advances also raise basic
questions about how society will deal with these newfound abilities, who should
control their use and how far research should be allowed to proceed.

   * Today: The biotechnology revolution--the future has arrived.

   * Monday: What is the "self" and can it be cloned?

   * Tuesday: The U.S. government's reluctance to regulate reproductive
technology raises some thorny issues.

   * Wednesday: The quest to map the human genome leads down some unusual roads.

   * Thursday: Barnyard biotech--of cows with medicinal milk and pigs with
human-like organs.


   Custom-Talioring Nature

   Researchers use the tools of genetic engineering to transfer genes beteween
different species, but conventional genetic engineering techniques can be hit or
miss. Researchers hope that cloning will be more efficient. That will allow them
to create transgenic animals more quickly and also to create new types of human
cells to investigate potential medicial treatments.

   Conventional Gene Splicing

   1. Most gene transfer experiments start with a plasmid, a circular strand of
bacterial DNA that lies outside the bacterium's nucleus.

   2. Scientists use special enzymes to cut the plasmid open, remove unwanted
DNA and add desired genes.

   In Plants

   There are many ways to add plasmids to plant cells. One of the most common is
to coat small gold or plastic balls with the plasmids; the balls are then fired
into the cells with a special gun.

   The plasmids are then taken up by the cells, giving them a new genetic
characteristic.

   The cells can then be induced to form seedlings that contain the new genetic
trait.

   In Animals

   Plasmids are generally injected into fertilized embryos with a long thin
needle, a process called micro-injection.

   The altered embryos are then inserted into surrogate mothers, where they are
grown into intact animals.

   About one in 100 of the new animals produced this way will contain the
desired gene. It is this basic inefficiency that makes cloning so potentially
valuable.

   3. The rusulting plasmid is a "vector," a tool used for inserting DNA into
another species.

   The Difference Cloning Could Make

   Researchers create a clone by combining a genetically engineered cell with an
unfertilized donor egg. They can repeat the process for as many eggs and
surrogate mothers available, allowing them to create an entire herd of
genetically identical animals in a single generation.

   Researchers isolate an adult cell 1, starve it so it becomes dormant 2, and
then remove it nucleus 3.

   They also take an egg from a second donor 4, remove its nucleus 5; and then
fuse the egg cell with the adult nucleus 6 to create an embryo 7.

   The new embryo is implanted in a surrogate mother 8. The end result is a
genetic duplicate 9 of the ewe that provided the adult cell.

   Researched by ROBERT LEE HOTZ and VICKY McCARGAR / Los Angeles Times

   Biology on the Fast Track

   Key developments in modern biology.

   1871

   * Discovery of DNA.

   1884

   * The first recorded instance of artificial insemination with donated sperm
takes place in Philadelphia.

   1943

   * DNA is proved to be the genetic molecule.

   1952

   * American biologists develop the basis for cloning, by removing the nucleus
of a cell, which contains all the genetic material of the organism, and
substituting another.

   1953

   * James Watson and Francis Crick discover the structure of DNA.

   1960

   * Amniocentesis, a procedure that allows for the diagnosis of Down's syndrome
and other genetic disorders, is introduced.

   1966

   * The gentic code is identified.

   1967

   * British biologist John P. Gurdon successfully clones a frog, but the cloned
frog does not mature.

   1973

   * Foreign DNA fragments are inserted into bacteria.

   1976.

   * National Institues of Health issues safety guidelines to control laboratory
procedures for gene splicing. Rules later are relaxed as process proves safe.

   1978

   * Louise Joy Brown, the first child conceived through in vitro fertilization
(IVF), is born in Great Britain.

   1979

   * The Ethics Advisory Board of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
concludes that federal support of IVF research and embryo transfer could be
ethically acceptable.

   * First IVF clinic in the United States opens in Norfolk, Va.

   1980

   * NIH Ethics Advisory Board is disbanded by the Carter administration before
it approves any funding for IVF research, beginning an indefinite moratorium on
federal funding for such research.

   * U.S. Supreme Court rules that manmade lifeforms can be patented.

   * Biotech firm Genentech sets Wall Street record for fastest stock increase:
from $ 35 to $ 89 a share in 20 minutes.

   1981

   * First American IVF baby, Elizabeth Jordan Carr, is born in Norfolk, Va.

   1982

   * Insulin becomes the first genetically engineered drug approved by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for use on people.

   * Presidential commission debates genetic engineering of human beings.

   1983

   * The first 'donor baby' is born in Australia, created with a donated human
egg.

   1984

   * First embryo "twinning" with sheep is reported. Others replicate this feat
in cattle, pigs, goats, rabbits and rhesus monkeys.

   1985

   * NIH approves experimental guidelines for treatment in which genes are
transplanted to correct hereditary defects in humans.

   * Monsanto attempts first deliberate release of manmade microbes into the
environment.

   1986

   * U.S. Patent and Trademark Office issues the first patent on a plant
produced through genetic engineering.

   1987

   * A committee of the National Academy of Sciences concludes that transferring
genes between species poses no environmental hazards.

   1988

   * First U.S. patent on a genetically engineered higher animal is issued--a
mouse used in cancer research.

   * Patent office suspends the granting of patents on new life forms for five
years to consider implications.

   1990

   * The FDA approves rennin, used in cheese, as the first genetically
engineered food product.

   * The first human gene therapy experiment is conducted.

   1991

   * Researchers create a transgenic dairy bull carrying a human gene for a
lucrative medicinal compound.

   1992

   * A healthy baby girl is born to a British couple following the first
successful application of preimplantation diagnosis to detect genetic diseases
in a human mebryo.

   1993

   * Researchers at George Washington University in Washington announce that
they have successfully "cloned" some defective human embryos by splitting
eight-cell human embryos.

   * A 59-year-old British woman gives birth to IVF twins, touching off a
worldwide debate over the ability of new reproductive technologies to allow
post-menopausal women to carry a pregnancy to term.

   * Congress lifts 20-year ban of federally funded reseach on human embryos,
but the ban is quickly reimposed.

   * Cornell researchers announce the birth of the first U.S. babies born from
embryos screened in a laboratory for genetic flaws before being transferred to
their mother's womb.

   1994

   * First cloning of calves grown from more advanced embryos.

   * Federal panel urges funding of some human embryo research. Ban continues.

   1995

   * Nearly 200 religious leaders from Roman Catholic, Protestant and Jewish
denominations, as well as associations of Buddhists, Hindus and Muslims, call
for a halt to the patenting of human and animal life forms for profit.

   1996

   * Genetically engineered cotton goes on sale.

   * Scottish scientists produce the first cloned mammal--a sheep named
Dolly--using an udder cell from a 6-year-old adult sheep.

   1997

   * The birth of Dolly is made public seven months after the fact.

   * President Clinton temporarily bans federally funded cloning research.

   Source: Congressional Quarterly, Designs On Life

   Compiled by ROBERT LEE HOTZ and SCOTT J. WILSON / Los Angeles Times

   Spliced Genes on the Job

   Biotechnology firms have conducted more than 2,500 field tests of genetically
engineered organisms and plants in the United States. The biggest categories
include:

   Herbicide tolerance: 27.6%

   Enhanced product quality: 26.7%

   Viral resistance: 10.4%

   Insect resistance: 24.3%

   Fungal resistance: 3.8%

   Other*: 7.2%

   * Marker genes, selectable markers bacterial and nematode resistance

   Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture

   The Patent Picture

   The U.S. patent office in 1995 issued 350 patents for genetic engineering,
almost half of which were for health care. The U.S. biotech companies dominate
the scene, holding more than 80% of the health care patents.

   * 1995 genetic engineering / pharmaceutical health care patents: 150

   The U.S. holds the bulk of the 150 patents for health car genetic
engineering.

   United States: 122

   European Community countries: 11

   Japan: 6

   Others: 11

   Source: Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America

   The Business of Biotech

   * Industry growth: U.S. pharmaceutical companies are currently testing or
seeking FDA approval for more almost 300 biotech medicines. There were 113
companies involved in testing products in 1996, 11% more than in 1995.

   * Product growth: Fifty new biotechnology medicines alone went into
development last year, a 21% increase over the previous year.

   * Top targets: Fully 40% of the products are being tested for cancer
treatment. About 10% are for treating or preventing HIV and AIDS.

   * Gene therapy: The fastest growing category of biotech products is gene
therapy, with 28 new products in 1996 compared with 17 in 1995.

   * Vaccines: The second-fastest growing segment is vaccines, up 44% in 1996 to
62 in development. Target illnesses are cancer, AIDS, rheumatoid arthritis and
multiple sclerosis.

   Source: Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America

   Voices

   "We are very concerned that in prohibiting any potential misuse of this
technology, society does not lose the opportunity to develop new treatments ...
But "it is the unanimous view of the group within the institute and within the
company that we would find this sort of work with human embryos offensive."

   --Ian Wilmut, senior researcher, Roslin Institute, Scotland


   *

   "Why are we uneasy about cloning? We might be worried about the dangers of
excessive control over human reproduction, about the dangers of unbounded human
pride."

   --Thomas H. Murray, member, National Biotehics Advsiory Commission


   *

   "Cloning research must be allowed because of its contribution to
understanding human disease. If an infertile couple sees cloning as an option, I
see nothing wrong with that."

   --Moshe Tendler, bioethics expert, Yeshiva University


   *

   "There is concern this is going to lead to a knee-jerk reaction."

   --Jonathan MacQuitty, chief executive, GenPharm International Inc


   *

   "We simply cannot stand by and allow humans to be copied. That would be
breaking through an ethical barrier that goes far beyond even the barrier of the
atomic bomb."

   --Juergen Ruettgers, German research minister


   *

   "There is much about cloning that we still do not know. But this much we do
know Any discovery that touches upon human creation is not simply a matter of
scientific inquiry, it is a matter of morality and spirituality as well."

   --Bill Clinton, U.S. president


   *

   "My own feeling is that if that were ever to be used, it would be used
incredibly sparingly."

   --Harold Varmus, director, National Institutes of Health


   *

   "Cloning is not a threat to public saftey. It is a potential threat to public
morals."

   --W. French Anderson, molecular biologist, USC


   *

   "The cloning issue is the coming together of reproductive technology and
eugenics."

   --Alexander Capron, member, U.S. National Biotehics Advisory Commission


   *

   "Cloning adds to the notion that animals are like machine parts that can be
mass produced and, for some people, reduce the sanctity of living things. There
is truth to that notion. There is a point where you can mass produce living
things to reduce their value and sanctity."

   --Sheldon Krimsky, science policy analyst, Tufts University.


   *

   "We may wonder whether this is a miracle for which we should thank God, or an
ominous sign that we want to play God,"

   --Nancy Duff, theologian, Princeton Theological Seminary


   *

   "We should not assume the free choice of (a clone's potential parents) is the
only choice that has large implications for society."

   --Lisa Cahill, theologian, Boston College


   *

   "We hardly know enough now to risk cloning a human being but we should not
close the door on it."

   --Daniel Kevles, science historian, California Institute of Technology


   *

   "What we are concerned about is that there is research that could be highly
beneficial that involves the cloning of certain cells...It's a wise idea to call
a time out. This has happened a bit sooner than people expected."

   --Carl Feldbaum, president, Biotechnology Industry Association


   *

   "We mustn't shut down other related forms of research that could unlock the
secrets to diseases."

   --Ronald M. Green, director, Dartmouth College Ethics Institute


   *

   "This aims at the heart of the mystery of the child. It breaks the connection
between procreation and sexuality."

   --Gilbert Meilaender, theologian, Valparaiso University in Indiana

   Compiled by ROBERT LEE HOTZ / Los Angeles Times

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-CHART: The Business of Biotech, Los Angeles Times
GRAPHIC-CHART: The Patent Picture, Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-CHART: Spliced
Genes on the Job, Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (...) GRAPHIC-CHART:
Biology on the Fast Track, LESLIE CARLSON / Los Angeles Times PHOTO: (...)
PHOTOGRAPHER: Times staff GRAPHIC-CHART: Custom-Talioring Nature, LORENA INIGUEZ
/ Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2428 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 25, 1997 Friday
                                 ESSEX EDITION

SECTION: ESSEX; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: Caldwell school raises `designer babies,' clone issues during seminars

BYLINE: Allison Freeman, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   The death penalty, cloning and the use of animals in research were some of
the topics tackled by students at Mount Saint Dominic Academy in Caldwell as
part of the school's Bioethics Day.

    Ethics professionals and scientists offered 12 seminars for the nearly 300
students at the girls high school, and honors biology and advanced biology
students presented classroom topics during the half-day program.

    Students exchanged views on "designer" babies, the reported practice of
conceiving children for organ sales in developing countries and whether
governments should cover the costs of expensive medical treatments.

    "This is a good way to educate people and make people think," said senior
Kristen Scarola of Verona. "These are the kinds of things we don't think about
every day."

    Scarola added the issues made students open their minds and question their
own beliefs.

    Students are usually wrapped up in their own lives and do not think about
these things, said Maria Astiz, a freshman from Livingston.

    Astiz and Scarola were in a group of students who presented a case study on
a group of women who participated in a study on the breast cancer susceptibility
gene.

   In the study, women agreed to participate and signed a form stating they
would not be told whether they had the gene. However, after the testing many
wanted to know and filed challenges when not told.

    Freshman Elizabeth Hoehn of West Orange said the women should not have been
told the results because they agreed to participate in a blind study, but most
students in the class said the women should have been informed.

    In a seminar, Larry Katz, a professor in the animal science department at
Rutgers University, talked to students about the use of animals in education and
research. "There is a lot of misinformation out there," he said.

    Advocating such studies, he said the research also can solve problems for
animals, pointing to the example of distemper. The disease killed one of every
two puppies before a vaccine was discovered through research, he noted.

    Katz added the use of animals for classroom dissection helps educate
students beyond computers, diagrams and books. The animals used for dissection
are bred at special farms just for that purpose, he said.

    On other issues that prompted ethics dilemmas for some and decisiveness on
the part of others, Sister Alice McCoy, director of Hudson County Hospice in
Jersey City and pastoral associate at Our Lady of Sorrows in Jersey City, asked
students should a terrorist who admitted to killing many people be put to death?
She also asked students if their child was in desperate need of a transplant,
would they pay $50,000 on the black market for a poor couple in Latin America to
conceive a child so they could obtain the organ.

   And Jeanne Magram, chair of the New Jersey Association of Biomedical Research
and a scientist at Hoffmann-La Roche, talked to students about transgenics and
cloning involving animals and how they benefit animals and humans. "We want to
understand how different diseases work," she said.

    Gene therapy is important because it will enable scientists to correct
genetic defects, Magram said. She asked students if people have the right to use
animals for their own benefit. Students' views were mixed. Magram told students
that research animals typically are not in pain, but added some are given pain
relievers or are euthanized.

    In the session on "designer" babies, students asked themselves if they would
choose the hair or eye color of their babies. Most said no, but many stated they
would try to delete cancer or other diseases from the DNA.

    One student suggested by the time she is ready to have a child she might be
able to select features from a computer list, and then see a picture of her
baby-to-be on a monitor.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2429 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 24, 1997 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 778 words

HEADLINE: LAWMAKER DOUBLES THE EFFORT TO BAN HUMAN CLONING

BYLINE: PATRICK O'NEILL, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Thursday, April 24, 1997 LAWMAKER DOUBLES THE EFFORT TO BAN HUMAN CLONING

   Sen. John Lim contends cloning would disrupt the `natural order,' and he
wants it outlawed in humans until ethical issues are studied

   A  state senator who fears that human cloning would disrupt the ``natural
order'' wants Oregon to become a no-clone state.

   Sen. John Lim, R-Gresham, has introduced a bill in the Oregon Legislature
that reflects worldwide concern over about the possibility that scientists one
day might turn out carbon copies of people.

   In late February, Scottish researchers revealed stunning news that they had
grown produced a sheep named Dolly from a mammary cell of a single an adult
sheep. The announcement raised the possibility that human beings humans could
be cloned in the same way.

   Instantly, Debates arose over about the ethics of human cloning. On March  4,
President Clinton announced a ban on the use of banned using federal funds
money for the study of human cloning.

   Bills banning human cloning experiments have been introduced in at least
seven states, including California and New York.

   Lim said he fears that human cloning would reduce the amount of biological
diversity that is necessary for a healthy population. He worries, too, that
there may might be other, unknown ramifications that would make the practice
risky.

   In addition to banning cloning, Lim wants to create a nine-member  commission
to make public policy recommendations on human and animal cloning  issues.

   ``Human cloning gives us a good moral and ethical question we have to
resolve,'' Lim said. Without full knowledge of how cloning could be used and
misused, we must stop it from happening, the state must prevent it, he said.

   Human beings are individual entities, and the idea of Cloning humans makes
them less individual, he Lim said. ``This (human cloning) Human cloning ``is
breaking the natural order,'' he said.

   The proposed legislation, Senate Bill 1017, would make it illegal to create a
clone from a human cell. The bill defines a clone as ``an individual human
being grown from a single cell, embryonic or somatic, of a human individual  and
genetically identical to that individual.''

   The bill will get its first hearing before the Senate Health and Human
Services Committee at 3 p.m. today Thursday in Hearing Room B of the state
Capitol in Salem.

   Dr. Robb Moses, chairman of the Department of Molecular and Medical  Genetics
at Oregon Health Sciences University, said the bill ``probably won't  do any
harm. The question is whether it will give us protections.''

   Legitimate researchers already have to clear a number of hurdles before  they
can work on genetics, Moses said. Institutions such as OHSU require  researchers
to justify costs and benefits of a project , as well as and to  address ethical
considerations.

   If a genetics proposal is approved, by the institution, he said, it goes to a
funding financing agency, -- most likely the National Institutes of Health  in
Bethesda, Md. -- There it comes under the scrutiny of is scrutinized by the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee.

   ``If I were to propose experimental gene therapy for human beings, the
review of that would be done by 12 to 14 committees,'' Moses said.

   Laws might deter the eventual development of a black market in humam human
cloning, Moses said. If that were the case, he said, ``I would feel better
having that on the books.''

   ``While I'm delighted in the interest in this question,'' he said, ``for  the
ethical institutions, it won't make much of a difference.''

   The nine-member commission, proposed in an amendment by Lim to his own  bill,
would include three members appointed by the governor, three by the  speaker of
the Oregon House of Representatives and three by the president of  the Oregon
Senate.

   It would include at least one attorney, one ethicist, one practicing
physician and one theologian. At least a third and no more than half of the
group would be scientists ``who have made significant contributions to the
advancement of biomedical and behavioral science,'' Lim said.

   The idea of Cloning has captured popular imagination, giving has given rise
to speculation that people might be able to duplicate themselves not only
physically but also mentally and emotionally. Experts say, however, that it
would be impossible to make those kinds of human copies because the way people
think and act is largely mostly the product of their life experiences.

   Patrick O'Neill covers health care policy issues for The Oregonian's
Health/Medicine/Science team. He can be reached at 221-8233 or by fax at
294-4150.

   ILLUSTRATION: Graphics - Sidebar - SENATE BILL 1017  Color photo of John Lim

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2430 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    April 22, 1997, Tuesday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 11A; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL EARNINGS;
VALLEY AND VENTURA COUNTY BUSINESS;
 Amgen's Net Income Rises 26% in 1st Quarter

BODY:


   Amgen Inc. posted a 26% increase in net income in its first quarter on a 13%
rise in revenues.

   The Thousand Oaks-based biotechnology giant posted net income of $ 180.3
million, compared to a profit of $ 143.6 million in the same period the year
before. Total revenues in the latest quarter were $ 575.5 million, up from $
507.9 million a year earlier.

   Amgen also said that it has filed a lawsuit in federal court in Boston for
patent infringement against Transkaryotic Therapies and Hoechst Marion Roussel
to prevent the companies from selling copies of Amgen's profitable biotechnology
drug erythropoietin.

   EPO is used to treat anemia in kidney disease and other disorders.  Amgen
first won FDA approval to sell the drug in 1989, and Amgen recently bolstered
its legal position by winning additional patents on the drug.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2431 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     April 21, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FLORIDA/METRO, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1245 words

HEADLINE: Cancer drug offers hope

BYLINE: DANIEL BERGER; of The Tampa Tribune

BODY:


   SUMMARY: Marimastat, an experimental new cancer drug being tested in the Bay
area, brings hope by altering tumors and limiting their ability to spread.

   TAMPA - When Lois Tatman was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 1995, it
came as a terrible shock.

   Pancreatic cancer, aggressive and hard to treat, is usually a death sentence.
Only 5 percent can count on successful surgery. The rest die within an average
of five months.

   "I didn't have much hope in the beginning. I didn't think I was going to be
here very long," said Tatman, 78, of Punta Gorda.

   Two years later, "I feel so much better," she said. Her blood tests are good
and the cancer shows no sign of returning.

   Tatman was among the first to take Marimastat, a new cancer drug plowing with
hope a field long sown with disappointment.

   Her doctor, Alex Rosemurgy, had operated on her April 12, 1995.

   But blood tests and CAT scans just seven weeks later showed new signs of
cancer, all too common after pancreatic surgery, said Rosemurgy, one of those
researching the experimental drug. He is director of the University of South
Florida surgical digestive disorder center at Tampa General Hospital.

   Until now, pancreatic cancer recurrence has been a virtual guarantee of death
within five years. But for Tatman it was a sentence of life: It made her
eligible by Food and Drug Administration rules to start taking Marimastat, then
in a preliminary phase of testing.

   "I felt like I had a chance of staying around a little longer if I went on
this cancer study," she said. "When it's staring you in the face, you'll grab at
anything."

   While most cancer drugs only work on one kind of tumor, Marimastat and its
family of drugs show signs of working against various cancers.

   They may spare patients the agony of chemotherapy. They work on cancer
patients whose disease is too far along for surgery to help.

   And they may alter cancer from "an acute, life-threatening illness to one
which is chronic and with a good quality of life," said Jules Harris, a medical
oncologist at Chicago's Rush University.

   "Before, you tried to control a tumor by killing it," Harris said. But
Marimastat's approach means "you control a tumor by altering its behavior.
Instead of killing it, you teach it to behave better, more like normal tissue,
by limiting its ability to spread."

   Marimastat's developer, British Biotech LPC, in July began its final phase of
testing to win FDA approval, said Henrik Rasmussen, the doctor heading British
Biotech's North American research.

   Rasmussen said his best recruiter so far is Rosemurgy, who has put about 45
patients on the drug at Tampa General.

   Rosemurgy and other researchers presented early findings at American and
European cancer treatment meetings last year.

   About 800 patients so far have gotten it worldwide, 400 suffering from
pancreatic cancer, Rasmussen said. About 150 American hospitals are now test
sites enrolling patients with inoperable pancreatic cancer.

   They are given either Marimastat or Gemzar, a traditional chemotherapy drug
approved by the FDA last June and considered the most effective treatment so far
against pancreatic cancer.

   Marimastat's pancreatic cancer tests began in July 1996 and will take two to
2+ years. Tests against other cancers began later.

   The company won't speculate when it may become available if approved, but the
best guess is not before 2000.

   Marimastat's potential impact is profound. At least three other major drug
manufacturers, including Roche, Ciba Geigy and Bayer, are all working on similar
drugs, although British Biotech is furthest along, Rasmussen said.

   He urged caution in predicting too rosy a future for the new drugs,
acknowledging others have sparked much excitement only to fail in trials.

   But, he said, Marimastat has worked in animal tests against tumors of the
ovary, lung, breast, stomach, brain, pancreas, colon and skin.

   "It doesn't seem to matter which animal model we test it on," he said. "It
works in all. That indicates it's universal. It should be effective against all
kinds of solid tumors."

   Three things define a cancer, said Harris: rapid growth of cells; invasion of
surrounding tissue; and spreading to distant sites.

   Marimastat stops all three. It doesn't kill tumors but stops them from
growing or spreading.

   Most cancer drugs are cytotoxic: They kill cancer and healthy cells alike,
making patients horribly ill in the process. Tumors often recur. The drugs
become less effective with repeated applications.

   The body normally builds a protective sac to wall off a tumor, Rasmussen
said.

   Tumors, though, make an enzyme called matrix metalloproteinase, or MMP, which
breaks the sac and breaks bonds between the tumor's own cells. That allows the
tumor to spread, cuts free cancer cells to travel elsewhere in the body, and
makes room for new cancer cells.

   Marimastat is an MMP inhibitor, stopping the breakdown process. Tumors
treated with it grow slowly or not at all. Walled off and less energetic, the
tumors become more similar to benign growths, said Rosemurgy.

   Unlike chemotherapy, patients don't get sick when they take Marimastat,
Rosemurgy said. He described how frustrating it is to treat pancreatic cancer.

   "If I see 100 patients a year I know they'll all be dead in two years," he
said.

   Pancreatic cancer patients risk little in testing this new drug. And the
tumor is uniformly fast-growing, making it easy for researchers to distinguish
the drug's effects from the slow growth other tumors might naturally show.

   Rosemurgy's first two patients started taking the drug in April 1995 and are
both still alive.

   Rosemurgy's lab is using gene therapy in an unrelated type of cancer
treatment also designed not to poison the body.

   Medical residents Mike Franz and Daphne Watkins are using a virus to knock
out cancer-cell DNA that codes for an enzyme aiding rapid tumor growth, an
enzyme called proteinkinase C alpha. The virus then plugs in some harmless DNA,
Rosemurgy said.

   Controlled studies show the technique works in mice bred to accept implanted
human tumors. Mice without the DNA substitution die quickly, Rosemurgy said.
Those getting it, don't. They hope to begin human testing within two years, he
said.

   Only a few cancer treatments work without killing cells, notably drugs
blocking hormones essential for growth of prostate and breast cancers, Rosemurgy
said.

   Marimastat's only side effects are arthritic pain, he said. The pain vanishes
when patients stop taking the drug, but it's not known if they can ever stop
taking it.

   Tatman said she suffered arthritis before her dosage was lowered, but the
pain has since subsided and her use of her hands is near normal.

   Unknown, too, are any side effects Marimastat causes with long-term use, or
if cancers build resistance to it.

   Marimastat's class of drugs first aroused interest in the 1980s as potential
treatments for rheumatoid arthritis, but the drugs have not yet proven effective
there, Rasmussen said.

   They still think it might do that, he said, and help with osteoarthritis too.
But the bigger fish is cancer. Rasmussen, privately optimistic, is careful about
what he'll say publicly.

   "We're not going to turn cancer treatment upside down. It will be an
evolutionary process," he said. "We believe MMP inhibitors will play an
important role in the treatment of cancer. But we are not going to cure cancer
from one day to another."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C),
 (C) Lois Tatman, 78, has survived pancreatic cancer on an experimental drug.
JIM REED, Tribune photo

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1997


                             2432 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                         April 18, 1997, Friday , ALAMO

SECTION: MAIN MEDICINE GENES GENETICS MEDICAL RESEARCH STUDY ; Pg. 1, Part A

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: Altered cold virus proving its worth as anti-cancer tool

BYLINE: Don Finley Express-News Medical Writer


BODY: A Houston researcher who last year successfully replaced a faulty gene in
patients with advanced lung cancer said Thursday that additional patients have
been similarly treated with a genetically engineered cold virus.

   Combining the genetic therapy with traditional chemotherapy and radiation
also appears promising, said Dr. Jack Roth, chairman of thoracic and
cardiovascular surgery at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.

   Roth spoke Thursday at the ninth International Congress on Genes, Gene
Families and Isozymes at the Hilton Palacio Del Rio. The meeting is sponsored by
Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research.

   Last year, Roth and his colleagues said they had successfully replaced the
defective P53 gene in nine patients with advanced lung cancer, using a virus. It
was the first time scientists had corrected the common cancer-causing genetic
effect in lung cancer patients.

   All the patients died, but two survived 22 weeks after treatment. Three
patients saw significant destruction of their cancer, and three others saw their
disease stabilized.

   P53 is a tumor-suppressor gene defective in more than 50 percent of all human
cancers. It was discovered 17 years ago by Princeton University researchers.

   "Now, 17 years later, we realize this is a finding that is actually helping
patients with cancer, and in some cases it is showing some very significant
results," Roth said.

   The researchers since have treated 18 additional patients by injecting a
common cold virus containing the healthy P53 gene directly into the lung tumors.



   Some of the patients also received cisplatin, a common anti-cancer drug.

   While the results are preliminary, at least one patient who received high
doses of P53 and cisplatin appears to be in complete remission, he said.

   Four of the patients have died. As in the earlier study, some tumors
stabilized and others have shrunk.

   In other studies looking at human tumors in mice, the researchers found
dramatic improvement combining P53 with radiation therapy, Roth said.

   While injecting gene therapy agents directly into tumors is of limited use in
patients whose cancer has spread, Roth said between one-fourth and one-third of
cancer patients die "from failure to control the primary tumor."

   The researchers are studying ways to diffuse the gene throughout the body,
instead of injecting it into single tumors, to benefit patients whose cancer has
spread.

   "The area of gene replacement and gene therapy is one that has come under a
lot of scrutiny and, I think, remains somewhat controversial," Roth said, adding
that slow but steady advances have given researchers reason for optimism.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2433 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     April 18, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 19

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: Monet and medical ethics

BYLINE: AMY E. SCHWARTZ

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A decade ago someone sent me a squashed-looking photocopy of a poem called
"Monet Refuses the Operation." It was a gentle monologue in which the
Impressionist painter, advanced in age, explains to his doctor that no, he
doesn't want to undergo cataract removal; he's spent his whole life learning to
see things blurry. The poet's name was Lisel Mueller, and I knew exactly nothing
about her till last week, when it was announced she had won the 1997 Pulitzer
Prize in poetry.

   The poem itself contained considerably more information, though not about
Mueller. With every rereading it seemed to bear more sharply on medical wonders
and public conundrums from genetic engineering to cosmetic surgery - puzzles
that, in the years since I first read it, have risen in visibility to make a
fair bid for the status of Great Question of our age. What if we can, in fact,
fix the body - as it seems more plausible every year that we can? Lifesaving
surgery, elective cosmetic surgery, Prozac, the lure of perfect children and the
gene therapies and diagnostics done in the womb - does their magic open a
promised land where we all function perfectly - or all function alike?

   "Doctor," says Mueller's Monet, "you say there are no haloes/ around the
streetlights in Paris/ and what I see is an aberration/ caused by old age, an
affliction. I tell you it has taken me all my life/ to arrive at the vision of
gas lamps as angels ...

   "Fifty-four years before I could see/ Rouen cathedral is built/ of parallel
shafts of sun,/ and now you want to restore/ my youthful errors ..."

   This is fanciful, but only slightly. If Monet could have gotten his eyes
fixed, should he have? And if Monet really just painted his canvases foggy and
blurry because of a simple eye problem, does art go away?

   With a cloning story every week and the definition of "essential" medical
care gone political beyond recovery, such questions are now so omnipresent as to
approach cliche. They cloak the big shift we are only beginning to glimpse:
Unlike all those past generations that wrestled with their inability to curb
pain and suffering in an uncaring universe, ours struggles with the implications
of our rising ability to do just that. If citizens with mood problems can fix
them with Prozac, is every citizen entitled, or even maybe obligated, to have
the treatment? And so on and so forth.

   Poets tend to see things ahead. It doesn't always matter exactly why or how
they happened to see, and in some ways it's helpful not to know too much: You
can't tell, from the poem, whether Mueller really thinks Monet has the answer or
whether he is just in a fine frenzy of artistic passion.

   There are two equally good ways to get intimately close to a poet or novelist
or musician, to nourish the feeling of connection with and affection for the
thoughts in her head. The more usual one in an era of plentiful biographical
material is to look for more - research your artist, read up on anything by her
or about her, purchase a 700-page biography, join an Internet chat site and
practice fandom. The other way is to keep reading the one poem you like over and
over and over. "Monet Refuses the Operation" kept getting blurrier and more
intriguing the more times I read it; the photocopy got squashier-looking each
time I dug it out to pass it along.  Amy E. Schwartz is a member of the
Washington Post editorial page staff.

NOTES: COMMENTARY

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1997


                             2434 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 17, 1997, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: Amgen files patent infringement suit vs. Transkaryotic

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    An expected legal clash between giant Amgen Inc. and Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. erupted yesterday when Amgen filed a patent infringement suit against the
Cambridge biotech start-up.

   The suit, filed in US District Court in Boston, casts a legal cloud over
whether Transkaryotic will be able to make and sell an antianemia drug that
would be its first commercial product.

   For Amgen, the issue is protecting its crown jewel: erythropoetin, or EPO,
also known by its trade name Epogen. The hormonal drug stimulates red blood cell
production in bone marrow to fight anemia. With revenues last year of $ 1.07
billion, it is the world's best-selling drug and accounts for nearly half of
Amgen's $ 2.2 billion in annual revenue.

   Based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., Amgen, the world's largest biotech company,
filed suit against both Transkaryotic and its corporate partner, Hoechst Marion
Roussel, to stop Transkaryotic from producing a substantially comparable version
of EPO using an alternative manufacturing process.

   Last year, Amgen's shares fell after Transkaryotic announced it would begin
testing its own EPO product during the first half of 1997.

   The question is whether Transkaryotic's alternative production method
infringes on Amgen's five EPO patents - including one issued two days ago and
another last week.

   With Hoechst Marion Roussel, one of the world's largest pharmaceutical
companies, as its partner, Transkaryotic has the deep financial pockets to
battle Amgen. The large German pharmaceutical firm owns 13 percent of
Transkaryotic Therapies and is reportedly prepared to invest up to $ 125 million
for a new version of EPO.

   Yesterday, Dr. Richard F. Selden, Transkaryotic's founder, chairman and chief
executive, declined to comment about the Amgen lawsuit, although he and his
company have indicated they expected it.

   Wall Street reaction favored Amgen, whose shares rose 1 1/8 to 57, while
Transkaryotic shares dropped 1 3/4 to 17 1/4 on Nasdaq.

   Transkaryotic's strategy is to develop alternative versions of blockbuster
biotech drugs using alternative manufacturing processes. Several companies have
developed comparable strategies, such as Ares-Serono SA of Switzerland, which
last year gained US Food and Drug Administration approval for its version of
human-growth hormone made in mice. The original bio-engineered human growth
hormone was developed by Genentech Inc. in bacteria.

   Amgen has a combination of product and manufacturing process patents that it
plans to enforce. Amgen's EPO is Transkaryotic's "prime and initial copycat
target," according to the 21-page Amgen complaint. The suit noted that the
Cambridge biotech company has increased pilot production in Massachusetts and
that Hochest also has full-scale production capabilities.

   Transkaryotic claims that its protein is made in human skin cells instead of
through the traditional method of splicing genes into animal or bacteria cells.
But the suit maintains that the newly issued Amgen patents now cover human and
non-human methods of EPO production and that Transkaryotic thus violates Amgen's
latest patents.

   Last October, Transkaryotic amended its registration to state explicitly that
its technologies did not infringe on Amgen's patent.

   Transkaryotic is the second Cambridge company to feel Amgen's legal wrath.
Several years ago, Genetics Institute Inc. lost a patent fight against Amgen
over EPO.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1997


                             2435 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                  April 17, 1997, Thursday, Southland Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: THE STATE;
CALIFORNIA;
 BIOTECHNOLOGY;
 Amgen Sues Transkaryotic, Hoechst Unit

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Amgen Inc. said it sued Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and Hoechst's drug unit
for infringing U.S. patents that Amgen holds on its Epogen drug. Epogen, which
accounted for about half of Amgen's fourth-quarter revenue of $ 593.5 million,
is used to spur red blood-cell growth in patients with kidney disease. Thousand
Oaks-based Amgen said the suit, filed in Boston, seeks to prevent Transkaryotic
and Hoechst from making, importing or selling their own version of Epogen in the
U.S. Amgen shares rose $ 1.125 to close at $ 57 on Nasdaq. Shares of Cambridge,
Mass.-based Transkaryotic fell $ 1.75 to close at $ 17.25, also on Nasdaq. Amgen
also said it was awarded a U.S. patent providing further protection against the
unauthorized making or selling of Epogen. The company already holds several
patents on how Epogen is made and used.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2436 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 15, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 999 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine turns cancer on itself; Altered tumor cells spur immune system

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Using an experimental cancer vaccine, researchers at the Johns Hopkins
Oncology Center say they have spurred the immune system to rise up against
cancer in a manner that resembles the body's fight against infection.

   The trial, described yesterday at a national meeting of cancer researchers in
San Diego, showed that the vaccine is capable of waking a person's immune system
from the slumber that allows cancer to spread. The treatment involves injections
of altered tumor cells back into the patient.

   Coming after eight years of laboratory, animal and human studies, the report
represents an early but crucial step in the development of a new strategy
against cancer.

   Future experiments will determine whether the immune response is sufficient
to cure anyone, a result this study was not designed to measure.

   "The chapter isn't written yet," said Dr. Jonathan Simons, an oncologist and
principal investigator. "We're about to ask the good questions."

   The experiment involved 18 patients who were in advanced stages of kidney
cancer. Their tumors were removed and then given back to them in three
injections spaced several months apart.

   Half the patients received tumor cells that had been genetically altered to
produce proteins that, in effect, served as red flags to the immune system.

   Following the rules of human experimentation, researchers chose patients for
the so-called phase-1 trial whose conditions were too advanced to be cured.

   The purpose was to judge the vaccine's safety and its ability to generate an
immune response.

   One patient did experience a sudden remission marked by shrinkage of his
tumor, although that person and many others eventually died of their cancers.

   Researchers are hoping the vaccines will bring about reversals in patients
whose cancers haven't progressed nearly as far.

   In an experiment scheduled to begin later this year in Japan, the vaccine
will be given to a larger group of patients who have millions -- rather than
billions -- of cancer cells.

   "If you made a vaccine for these kinds of patients where the immune system is
taking on a number of cells they can handle, you might make a big difference,"
Simons said.

   Although much work remains to be done, the researchers hope that cancer
vaccines will become an effective adjuvant therapy to accompany surgery and
other conventional approaches.

   Cancer vaccines are being tried elsewhere against other types of cancers,
including melanoma and brain cancer.

   The concept is an outgrowth of gene therapy, an experimental approach in
which normal genes are delivered to tissues in hopes of correcting inherited
abnormalities such as cystic fibrosis.

   Similarly, cancer vaccines carry genes that serve as factories for proteins
helpful to humans.

   But these proteins are used to fool the immune system into mounting a defense
-- not to correct a defect by themselves.

   In the Hopkins experiment, urologist Fray Marshall removed kidney tumors from
all 18 patients. The tumors were then chopped up and expanded in laboratory
culture dishes.

   Half of the tumors were turned into cancer vaccines. This was done by
inserting copies of an "immune system activating gene" -- so named because the
gene produces proteins that help the immune system recognize the presence of a
foreign invader. The gene is known as GM-CSF (for granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor.)

   The researchers irradiated all of the tumor cells to render them incapable of
spreading once they had been returned to the body.

   The injections sparked an immune response in both groups, but it was more
powerful among people receiving the altered cells.

   "Probably what happens in the crudest sense is that the body's immune system
is blinded in some way to cancer, possibly by substances created by the tumor,"
Marshall said.

   "Putting the GM-CSF cells is probably like putting a little red light in the
cells. The body's immune system can now recognize the tumor as foreign and bad,
and the immune system can go attack it."

   Simons presented the study results yesterday at the annual meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   "This is absolutely a pioneering study," said Dr. Donald Coffey, the
association's incoming president and a leading cancer researcher at Hopkins.

   The Hopkins team worked in relative quiet at a time when many gene therapy
trials were generating hoopla followed by disappointment. In many experiments,
researchers were unable to deliver genes to enough cells to trigger the desired
responses.

   "There were too many studies of gene therapy where everybody got excited and
then everybody said nothing happened," Simons said. "Maybe they were able to get
the gene into only 1 percent of the cells."

   In contrast, the Hopkins team delivered the gene to well over half the cells
in most cases -- and to virtually all the cells in a few.

   The vaccine was developed and tested on animals in 1989 by Dr. Drew Pardoll,
Dr. Elizabeth Jaffe and Dr. Hyam Levitsky at Hopkins along with collaborators at
MIT. In those tests, scientists gave mice a lethal dose of cancer, then cured
them with injections of altered tumor cells.

   "That work was basically a series of experiments trying to find the best gene
to introduce in tumor cells to stimulate the immune response," said Dr. Glenn
Dranoff, formerly of MIT and now an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard.
"From that work, GM-CSF popped out as the best."

   Dranoff is trying the same vaccine approach for melanoma and plans to begin a
lung cancer study this year. The Hopkins group recently began giving a vaccine
to prostate cancer patients.

   "At this point, all you can really say is that the approach clearly shows the
generation of an immune response against tumors, which in and of itself is
exciting," he said. "But it's premature to know how strong the overall strategy
is and whether it's powerful enough to make a difference in the outcome of
cancers for people."

   Pub Date: 4/15/97

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1997


                             2437 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 1997 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: Salmonella might aid cancer war

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Salmonella, a potentially lethal bacterium, appears to be a natural
cancer-fighter, researchers reported here yesterday. In a novel way of attacking
cancer, scientists from Yale University and a Connecticut drug company said they
have greatly slowed tumor growth in mice using salmonella as a weapon. Injected
into the bloodstream, the bacteria show a surprising propensity to seek out and
invade tumor cells and then thrive there, said David Bermudes, senior research
scientist at Vion Pharmaceuticals, in New Haven.

   He said the bacteria alone slow tumors but they will be most effective when
loaded with anti-cancer genes. Other scientists hearing the report at the annual
meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research said they were intrigued
but worried about giving patients something as dangerous as salmonella. Bermudes
said he and colleagues at Yale University School of Medicine have modified a
salmonella strain so that it won't cause illness but retains its cancer-fighting
strengths. "We mutated salmonella to make it safe," he said.

   "These are bacteria that know their way around the human body.

   They have the ability to find all the tumors in a laboratory animal.

   How that happens, we're not exactly certain." Many cancer researchers are
seeking ways to deliver toxins directly to tumors while sparing normal tissue in
the body.

   Some are experimenting with using viruses as the carriers -- or vectors -- of
gene therapies, but no other bacteria have been used. Salmonella may have an
advantage over viruses and other genetically engineered cancer therapies that
must be injected directly into the tumor, since those therapies are useless
against tumors whose location is not known, said Dr. Frank Marini, of the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. "The dream of gene therapy is
to have an injectable vector that . . . goes straight to the tumor," Marini said
after hearing Bermudes' presentation, "and it sounds like he's got something
that may do that." Dr. Jack Roth, chief of the gene therapy program for the
international association's annual meeting, agreed that "it's a very interesting
and unique idea.

   It really is a concept that hasn't been brought forward before." But Roth and
others said they remain concerned about the potential risk of using salmonella,
which can cause food poisoning, typhoid fever and septic shock when ingested in
contaminated food. In the mice tested, the modified bacteria also gathered in
the animals' livers but did no harm there, Bermudes said.

   He said the salmonella grew rapidly inside tumors, to a concentration 1,000
times greater than that found in the liver or elsewhere in the body. He reported
that mice with six types of solid tumors lived twice as long when injected with
the bacteria than when untreated.

   The treatment was tested on mice with breast, lung, liver, kidney, colon and
skin cancers. However, none of the tumors were cured.

   Bermudes said his research team is experimenting with attaching the bacteria
to different genes that produce anti-tumor proteins, but it has not yet found a
combination that does more than slow tumor growth. The potential therapy won't
be ready to be tested in people with cancer for at least another year and a
half, he said. Another advantage of using bacteria instead of viruses as the
gene "taxis," Bermudes said, is that bacteria can be eliminated from the body
with antibiotics after their work is done. But Dr. James Mule, of the University
of Michigan, said he is concerned salmonella may not be as safe or effective as
it first seems and the dosage may have to be so high that antibiotics wouldn't
be able to control the infection. However, Mule said the idea is promising
enough that other researchers probably will jump into studying it. "It needs
careful analysis," he said.

   "I think a number of individuals should go after it very quickly.

   People are grasping for the next type of vector." About 7,500 researchers
from around the world are gathered at the San Diego Convention Center for the
cancer research association's annual meeting, which continues through tomorrow.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2438 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     April 15, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z17

LENGTH: 1161 words

HEADLINE: Looking Anew at Growing Old

BYLINE: Natalie Davis Spingarn, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:


   Cheating Time: Science, Sex and Aging

   By Roger Gosden

   W.H. Freeman and Company, New York

   427 pp.; $ 23.95

   Aging used to be regarded as a morbid subject; no one would have thought of
gerontology, the scientific study of its problems, as a particularly sexy or
amusing field.

   No more. As the number of older men and women has grown, so has the number of
experts trying to produce accessible and accurate, even entertaining, books to
satiate burgeoning appetites for information about how we age and why. Roger
Gosden, a distinguished British researcher who has worked in the United States
at Duke University and the University of Southern California and now is
professor of reproductive biology at the University of Leeds in England, is the
latest.

   No ivory tower scientist, Gosden never misses a chance to point out that
gains in human life expectancy, at least in the more prosperous parts of the
world, have come largely from public health measures (like safe water supply and
sewage systems) and other social changes (like improved housing and diet) as
much as from medical conquests of the scourges that cut down our ancestors at an
early age.

   His broad approach across the species notwithstanding, he is oriented more to
people than fruit flies. His research at the University of Edinburgh on ovarian
transplants inspired headlines in 1994 ("Use of Fetuses' Eggs for Fertility
Sparks Furor"). Gosden reasoned that a transplant of youthful eggs from a young
cadaver or fetus might rejuvenate the ovaries of older women, enabling them to
get pregnant at whatever age they chose and in the time-honored way, rather than
with the help of a bevy of doctors and in vitro technology.

   Progress aside, Gosden stresses that the aging process, with its build-up of
degenerative diseases, its crippling disabilities, its fear of ugliness and
dependency, still underlies most health problems and is a modern blight on the
enjoyment of life. He finds it odd that though everyone is comfortable with
efforts to prune back its effects, tackling unwelcome changes one by one, fewer
applaud attempts to "pull it up by the roots" by achieving changes in hormone
and other body systems and finding a slower pace of aging.

   He began "Cheating Time," he confesses, to explain why our sexual parts
deteriorate and to suggest some remedies. But since reproduction is not just
another bodily function, but is "writ large in the rationale of life," he soon
became convinced that he would have to address the larger tapestry of life and
old age.

   This is a tall order, perhaps too tall. He begins, not in the genetics
laboratory, but in the harsh Australian outback, inhabited by a brown male
marsupial mouse with a long pointed snout, great bulging eyes, an attractive
yellow underbelly, long tail and genitals in reverse order (two testicles in
front and penis behind). Born in September, Antechinus stuartii takes longer
than ordinary mice to reach puberty, but once his sex hormone levels begin to
rise at the end of winter, he goes on an orgy of "mating madness," using his
teeth to subdue as many as 16 females in succession (for up to 12 hours each).
With an appetite only for sex, he quickly becomes old, balding and haggard, and
expires. Literally, he has run out of time.

   Antechinus is only one of many wondrous creatures (and fewer plants) Gosden
introduces as he describes the varied biological clocks that program aging.
Every species has its own timetable of events and has acquired its own cocktail
of genes to cope with circumstances and environment. In the process, some live
much longer than others.

   We lucky humans have used our big brains in the past to try to gratify our
appetite for a longer, or at least a "rejuvenated," life with limited success.
Gosden gives us a fine and fun overview of the ways in which dubious scientists
and outright quacks have experimented toward this end, grafting young goat and
later monkey glands onto those of nonfunctioning male patients, for instance.

   Ultimately, Gosden feels the phenomena of aging must be explained at the
level of genetic action. But at this point, when scientists have proved only
that longevity can be inherited and the first of what will probably be a
multitude of aging genes has just recently been discovered, there is little we
can do to control our genetic spots. The pace of human aging has not changed.

   What's more, the genes that set the upper limits of the human life span a
million or so years ago are still with us; no one around the globe has ever
lived to be more than about 120. And the question that bothers the author, as
well as many older folks worried about a few extra years in some nursing home,
is whether we may be gaining more years of disability than vigor.

   All this sound depressing? To the contrary, reading Gosden will refresh as
well as enlighten those turned off by current media hype about "Forever Young"
research and give them a new respect for the ways of nature and modern
gerontology.

   No one but a "crank," he holds, says a basic cure for aging is just around
the corner. Though we are identifying genes at a remarkable rate and long-range
genetic prospects are "dazzling," it may be well into the next century before
gene therapy can attempt to remove all the blemishes we suffer.

   Don't get too excited by the news that a famous slow-softening tomato has
reached the supermarket because a gene involved in ethylene production was
knocked out. Our human overripening cannot be cured so easily; the creation of
novel heritable changes in animals requires transferring genes into eggs or
embryos (germ-line technology). It is a process showing success in the
laboratory but offering little to modern medicine because genes cannot be
targeted to a precise part of a chromosome and attempts to do so might lead to
disaster.

   In the next 10 years, Gosden predicts, it will be possible to read the human
DNA code from end to end on a CD-ROM, and this will enable doctors to predict,
diagnose and hopefully treat genetic diseases. Tackling single mutations is
challenging enough, but it is child's play compared with the intricacies of
aging. We will be lucky if something as "simple" as knocking out a few
gerontogenes or transferring antioxidant genes provides more than a temporary
respite.

   Still, Gosden, the realist, points out that "decay is not a necessary fact of
life, and rates of deterioration vary enormously." He puts his hopes for the
immediate future more in hormone than gene therapy.

   This is because reproduction, so dependent on hormones, is a special case:
Our sex organs are not vital, like our hearts or kidneys; our life span is not
cut short by castration or menopause. So we do not have to put up with the
hormone levels nature dictates, and if we shrewdly control these levels, we just
may be able to "play nature's wild cards in such a way as to win a few more
tricks and stay healthy a little longer."

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1997


                             2439 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           April 13, 1997 Sunday All

SECTION: Lifestyle Pg. 3

LENGTH: 191 words

HEADLINE:  Perfect' baby is a bundle of genetics

SOURCE: Knight-Ridder Newspapers

BODY:

   Want to have the perfect baby?

   In his book "The Perfect Baby: A Pragmatic Approach to Genetics," University
of Pennsylvania Medical School bioethicist Glenn McGee says that within the next
10 years, expectant parents could potentially choose from a veritable "salad
bar" of traits, including height, muscle tone, disposition to obesity,
aggressiveness and risk-seeking behavior.

   He says not to be alarmed because "the new genetic tests and gene therapies
are not radically different from options open to parents right now. For every
parent who uses Ritalin or Prozac to improve SAT scores, there are just as many
using vitamins and private schools."

   Speaking of babies, with keen competition to fill maternity beds, more
hospitals are offering amenities normally found at luxury hotels.

   At Women & Infants Hospital in Providence, R.I., a Jacuzzi is available,
mothers can drink fresh juice at the "nourishment bar," and hungry relatives can
sample baked goods from the afternoon dessert tray. During the last night of a
stay, new parents dine in their room on filet mignon or seafood, courtesy of the
hospital's "Stork Club."

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1997


                             2440 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     April 13, 1997, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: Lisel Mueller's Monet

BYLINE: Amy E. Schwartz

BODY:


   A decade ago someone sent me a squashed-looking photocopy of a poem called
"Monet Refuses the Operation." It was a gentle monologue in which the
Impressionist painter, advanced in age, explains to his doctor that no, he
doesn't want to undergo cataract removal; he's spent his whole life learning to
see things blurry. The poet's name was Lisel Mueller, and I knew exactly nothing
about her till last week, when it was announced she had won the 1997 Pulitzer
Prize in poetry.

   The poem itself contained considerably more information, though not about
Mueller. With every rereading it seemed to bear more sharply on medical wonders
and public conundrums from genetic engineering to cosmetic surgery -- puzzles
that, in the years since I first read it, have risen in visibility to make a
fair bid for the status of Great Question of our age. What if we can, in fact,
fix the body -- as it seems more plausible every year that we can? Lifesaving
surgery, elective cosmetic surgery, Prozac, the lure of perfect children and the
gene therapies and diagnostics done in the womb -- does their magic open a
promised land where we all function perfectly -- or all function alike?

   "Doctor," says Mueller's Monet, "you say there are no haloes/around the
streetlights in Paris/and what I see is an aberration/caused by old age, an
affliction. I tell you it has taken me all my life/to arrive at the vision of
gas lamps as angels . . . . Fifty-four years before I could see/Rouen cathedral
is built/of parallel shafts of sun,/and now you want to restore/my youthful
errors . . ." This is fanciful, but only slightly. If Monet could have gotten
his eyes fixed, should he have? And if Monet really just painted his canvases
foggy and blurry because of a simple eye problem, does art go away?

   With a cloning story every week, and the definition of "essential" medical
care gone political beyond recovery, such questions are now so omnipresent as to
approach cliche. They cloak the big shift we are only just beginning to glimpse:
Unlike all those past generations that wrestled with their inability to curb
pain and suffering in an uncaring universe, ours struggles with the implications
of our rising ability to do just that. If citizens with mood problems can fix
them with Prozac, is every citizen entitled, or even maybe obligated, to have
the treatment? And so on, and so forth.

   Poets tend to see things ahead. It doesn't always matter exactly why, or how
they happened to see, and in some ways it's helpful not to know too much: You
can't tell, from the poem, whether Mueller really thinks Monet has the answer or
whether he is just in a fine frenzy of artistic passion.

   There are two equally good ways to get intimately close to a poet or novelist
or musician, to nourish the feeling of connection with and affection for the
thoughts in her head. The more usual one in an era of plentiful biographical
material is to look for more -- research your artist, read up on anything by her
or about her, purchase a 700-page biography, join an Internet chat site and
practice fandom. The other way is to keep reading the one poem you like over and
over and over. "Monet Refuses the Operation" kept getting blurrier and more
intriguing the more times I read it; the photocopy got squashier-looking each
time I dug it out to pass it along.

   The prize did not exactly lead to an outpouring of background material on the
poet. Mueller, it's reported, is in her seventies, lives quietly, expects her
routine to go immediately back to normal; she wrote "Monet Refuses the
Operation" in 1982, and it obviously attracted other fans, since it appears in a
1984 volume of favorites by the Academy of American Poets. Local bookstore owner
Terri Merz, whose two copies of Mueller's "Alive Together: New and Selected
Poems" sold out promptly after the prize was announced, says Mueller's
publishers are hurrying and struggling with deliveries.

   When she called to ask if the poet would consider coming to read her work,
she heard something more. Mueller, a friend said, finds readings difficult
because of problems with . . . her eyesight. Never mind the paintings, or the
lilac-covered bridge at Giverny. Lisel Mueller knows a few things we could stand
to learn.

   The writer is a member of the editorial page staff.


GRAPHIC: Photo, ap

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1997


                             2441 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       April 11, 1997 Friday 1ST EDITION

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. F-14

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: 'Construction' circus takes on gene therapy

BYLINE: By Sandra Brooks-Dillard, Denver Post Theater Critic

BODY:

   Linda Blumenthal's "Under Construction" offers a "whimsical yet sardonic look
at the pros and cons of gene therapy" that is imaginative and provocative, but
sometimes confusing.

   The experimental comedy/drama presents life as a circus, fea- turing a
long-married clown couple (Pavlina Emily Morris and Michael Bruen) and a
tight-rope walker (Sandra Shipley).

   There's also a too-tame lion (Darren Schroader) and an out-of-work hot dog
vendor (Daniel Horsey), who discovers a new calling.

   Encouraged by Arielle, the tightrope walker, the circus people are working to
create a monument to the human race.

   Arielle exhorts the others and envisions 100,000 photographs of people
captured at varying moments in their lives.

   (Some of the show's most versatile performances come as the actors re-create
these moments. Schroader, for example, has a nice bit as a hunched old European
woman who makes her living as a smuggler.

   The clowns are amusing as an elderly couple who begin almost every sentence
with "Remember?" and then proceed to act out the amemory.

   Arielle wants to create this monument before humans become extinct, and she's
racing against time because geneticists are working to improve the human race as
it is.

   She anticipates they will create people with "no disease, no stupidity, no
crime and no tendency to overeat     and, of course, everybody will be
beautiful."

   But is the geneticists' goal the right one?

   At one point, when the long-married elderly couple is suddenly restored to
youth, they decide they are both too young and beautiful "to be tied down," and
go their separate ways.

   Blumenfeld's thought-provoking ideas surpass her material, but director Pam
Clifton manages to make the most of the play, which is performed on a colorful
set and enhanced by slide projections.  UNDER  CONSTRUCTION

    1/2

   PLAY BY: Lenore Blumenfeld

   STARRING: Pavlina Emily Morris, Michael Bruen and Sandra Shipley DIRECTED BY:
Pamela Clifton

   SCENERY AND LIGHTING BY: Denis Horvath

   PRESENTED BY: The Changing Scene

   WHERE:1527 1/2 Champa St.

   WHEN: 8 p.m., Fridays and Saturdays, 7 p.m., Sundays through April 20.

   RESERVATIONS: $ 6 to $ 7. 893-5775.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1997


                             2442 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 11, 1997, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Area Briefs; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 88 words

HEADLINE: New gene therapy chief

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Malcolm K. Brenner has been named director of the Shell
Center for Gene Therapy at Baylor College of Medicine
effective January 1998.

   Brenner is currently director of the bone marrow transplant
division at St. Jude Children's Hospital and professor of
pediatrics and medicine at the University of Tennessee, both
in Memphis.

   He was one of the first in the nation to begin gene therapy
trials for cancer.

   Brenner will be a professor in the department of pediatrics,
section of hematology and oncology.


LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1997


                             2443 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 9, 1997, Wednesday, City Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 735 words

HEADLINE: Molecular millionaires;
Interneuron executives top Massachusetts list;
FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Microbiology millionaires continue to be worth mountains of money.

   Boosted by a rise in biotechnology stocks last year, 72 "molecular
millionaires" made the annual list of the wealthiest biotech officials compiled
by Genetic Engineering News. The monthly publication's roster appears in its
April issue.

   In Massachusetts, the two leading molecular millionaires come from
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc., the Lexington company that developed the
enormously successful fat-fighting drug Redux.

   Company chairman Lindsay A. Rosenwald's 2.58 million shares are worth more
than $ 70.8 million, according to Genetic Engineering News. Richard J. Wurtman,
chairman of Interneuron's scientific advisory board and professor of brain and
cognitive science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, holds more than
920,000 shares worth $ 24.6 million. Wurtman's research is at the heart of the
diet pill.

   Both were among a dozen molecular millionaires linked to Massachusetts
companies. The Bay State had the second largest number after California, which
had 25 super-wealthy biotech leaders. Maryland followed with six.

   The publication calculated the stock holdings based on Feb. 17 and 18 share
prices.

   Among the other local millionaires and the value of their shares:

   - Orrie M. Friedman, retired founder of Waltham-based Collaborative Research
Inc., now known as Genome Therapeutics Inc. ($ 24.1 million)

   - Dr. Richard F. Selden, founder and chief executive of Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge. ($ 14.9 million)

   - James L. Vincent, who recently retired as chief executive of Biogen Inc. of
Cambridge. ($ 9.4 million)

   - Philip A. Sharp, Biogen's scientific advisory chairman and head of MIT's
biology department. ($ 8.9 million)

   - Frank Lee, chief scientific officer at Cambridge-based Millennium
Pharmaceuticals Inc. ($ 8.6 million)

   - Spiros Jamas, president and cofounder of Alpha-Beta Technology Inc. of
Worcester. ($ 6.6 million)

Biotechnology FDA stalls Apligraf despite Canadian OK

    Canadian regulators this week may have given Canton-based Organogenesis Inc.
permission to market its replacement human skin product, but the US Food and
Drug Administration continues to question the company's product, called
Apligraf.

   And some Organogenesis analysts have begun to doubt whether US regulators
will approve it.

   On Monday, Organogenesis's shares rose 3 7/8 to 22 1/8 after it announced
Apligraf can now be used in Canada to treat venous ulcers. The company said
Apligraf was the first living manufactured organ - skin - to be approved for
marketing by a major regulatory agency.

   Yesterday, however, the stock dropped 1 1/8 to close at 21.

   Organogenesis said the Canadian Health Protection Branch's approval of
Apligraf will enable it to receive revenue from its skin product later this
year.

   Unlike cutting skin from another part of the body to graft over a wound or
using skin from cadavers, Organogenesis has grown full-thickness human skin in a
laboratory from the foreskins of circumcised infant males. The goal is to use
so-called "skin transplants" to heal severe burns and other injuries such as
venous ulcers.

   The company convinced the FDA that its skin, formerly called Graftskin, is a
permanent replacement for natural skin and should receive expedited review - a
process that could speed up approval to within 10 months. That request was made
in June 1995.

    Now, 22 months later, company officials say they are still waiting FDA
approval. A company spokeswoman declined to explain the FDA delay.

   Meanwhile, Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. of La Jolla, Calif., an
Organogenesis rival, has developed a less-sophisticated skin product, called
Dermagraft, an artificial mesh with some human cells, which can be used as a
temporary dressing for burns. Last month, Advanced Tissue Sciences gained FDA
approval for Dermagraft as a temporary covering to protect body fluids and
prevent infection from burns until a permanent skin graft arrives. Advanced
Tissue Sciences claims Dermagraft is the first genetically engineeered human
tissue to be approved by the FDA.
Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce Small Business of the Year awards luncheon.
Keynote speaker: George Gendron, editor, Inc. magazine. Thursday, April 10. Noon
to 1:30 p.m. Boston Marriott Copley Place, 110 Huntington Ave., Boston. To
register, call (617) 337-4500, ext. 410.

CORRECTION-DATE: April 23, 1997

CORRECTION:
 CORRECTION: Because of a reporting error, a Fast Track item in the April 9
Business section incorrectly reported the date when Organogenesis Inc. applied
for marketing approval from the US Food and Drug Administration for Apligraf,
its full-thickness skin substitute.The company applied in October 1995. Also
because of a reporting error, the item misidentified a product from Applied
Tissue Sciences Inc. that already received FDA approval. That product is
Dermagraft-TC, a nonliving temporary skin product.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1997


                             2444 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 9, 1997, Wednesday, City Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: Molecular millionaires;
Interneuron executives top Massachusetts list;
FAST TRACK;
.

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Microbiology millionaires continue to be worth mountains of money.

   Boosted by a rise in biotechnology stocks last year, 72 "molecular
millionaires" made the annual list of the wealthiest biotech officials compiled
by Genetic Engineering News. The monthly publication's roster appears in its
April issue.

   In Massachusetts, the two leading molecular millionaires come from
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc., the Lexington company that developed the
enormously successful fat-fighting drug Redux.

   Company chairman Lindsay A. Rosenwald's 2.58 million shares are worth more
than $ 70.8 million, according to Genetic Engineering News. Richard J. Wurtman,
chairman of Interneuron's scientific advisory board and professor of brain and
cognitive science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, holds more than
920,000 shares worth $ 24.6 million. Wurtman's research is at the heart of the
diet pill.

   Both were among a dozen molecular millionaires linked to Massachusetts
companies. The Bay State had the second largest number after California, which
had 25 super-wealthy biotech leaders. Maryland followed with six.

   The publication calculated the stock holdings based on Feb. 17 and 18 share
prices.

   Among the other local millionaires and the value of their shares:

   - Orrie M. Friedman, retired founder of Waltham-based Collaborative Research
Inc., now known as Genome Therapeutics Inc. ($ 24.1 million)

   - Dr. Richard F. Selden, founder and chief executive of Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge. ($ 14.9 million)

   - James L. Vincent, who recently retired as chief executive of Biogen Inc. of
Cambridge. ($ 9.4 million)

   - Philip A. Sharp, Biogen's scientific advisory chairman and head of MIT's
biology department. ($ 8.9 million)

   - Frank Lee, chief scientific officer at Cambridge-based Millennium
Pharmaceuticals Inc. ($ 8.6 million)

   - Spiros Jamas, president and cofounder of Alpha-Beta Technology Inc. of
Worcester. ($ 6.6 million)

Biotechnology FDA stalls Apligraf despite Canadian OK

    Canadian regulators this week may have given Canton-based Organogenesis Inc.
permission to market its replacement human skin product, but the US Food and
Drug Administration continues to question the company's product, called
Apligraf.

   And some Organogenesis analysts have begun to doubt whether US regulators
will approve it.

   On Monday, Organogenesis's shares rose 3 7/8 to 22 1/8 after it announced
Apligraf can now be used in Canada to treat venous ulcers. The company said
Apligraf was the first living manufactured organ - skin - to be approved for
marketing by a major regulatory agency.

   Yesterday, however, the stock dropped 1 1/8 to close at 21.

   Organogenesis said the Canadian Health Protection Branch's approval of
Apligraf will enable it to receive revenue from its skin product later this
year.

   Unlike cutting skin from another part of the body to graft over a wound or
using skin from cadavers, Organogenesis has grown full-thickness human skin in a
laboratory from the foreskins of circumcised infant males. The goal is to use
so-called "skin transplants" to heal severe burns and other injuries such as
venous ulcers.

   The company convinced the FDA that its skin, formerly called Graftskin, is a
permanent replacement for natural skin and should receive expedited review - a
process that could speed up approval to within 10 months. That request was made
in June 1995.

   Now, 22 months later, company officials say they are still waiting FDA
approval. A company spokeswoman declined to explain the FDA delay.

   Meanwhile, Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. of La Jolla, Calif., an
Organogenesis rival, has developed a less-sophisticated skin product, called
Dermagraft, an artificial mesh with some human cells, which can be used as a
temporary dressing for burns. Last month, Advanced Tissue Sciences gained FDA
approval for Dermagraft as a temporary covering to protect body fluids and
prevent infection from burns until a permanent skin graft arrives. Advanced
Tissue Sciences claims Dermagraft is the first genetically engineeered human
tissue to be approved by the FDA.
Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce Small Business of the Year awards luncheon.
Keynote speaker: George Gendron, editor, Inc. magazine. Thursday, April 10. Noon
to 1:30 p.m. Boston Marriott Copley Place, 110 Huntington Ave., Boston. To
register, call (617) 337-4500, ext. 410.

CORRECTION-DATE: Wednesday, April 23, 1997

CORRECTION:
Because of a reporting error, a Fast Track item in the April 9 Business section
incorrectly reported the date when Organogenesis Inc. applied for marketing
approval from the US Food and Drug Administration for Apligraf, its
full-thickness skin substitute. The company applied in October 1995. Also
because of a reporting error, the item misidentified a product from Applied
Tissue Sciences Inc. that already received FDA approval. That product is
Dermagraft-TC, a nonliving temporary skin product.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1997


                             2445 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 8, 1997 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: BRINGING A CHANGE OF GENES

BODY:

   News that researchers at Case Western Reserve University have built
themselves a chromosome is most exciting for those who understand the finer
technical points of the achievement.

   But in years to come, many people - especially those who suffer from ailments
driven by faulty genes or chromosomes - may come to appreciate the work of
Huntington F. Willard and his staff.

   Willard, chairman of CWRU's genetics department, led the study that created a
synthetic human chromosome. The hope is that the synthetic chromosome can
somehow be added to naturally occurring cells to fix errors in genetic coding
that produce such maladies as sickle-cell anemia, cystic fibrosis and even
certain varieties of cancer.

   The problem remains in developing a method to get these "repair" chromosomes
into a patient's body in significant enough numbers to reverse an illness.

   Willard and his group are working on that, as are many other researchers
around the world. And although it may turn out that implanting synthetic
chromosomes proves too cumbersome a method to cure efficiently, experts in gene
therapy are hailing as outstanding basic science the CWRU team's research into
what chromosomes do and how they do it.

   The knowledge Willard and company can offer the field of genetic research
could put someone else with an idea on the road to making it reality.

   If nothing else, the success recently announced here in Cleveland should
inspire gene-therapy researchers to continue their efforts toward a workable
"delivery system."

COLUMN: EDITORIALS

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1997


                             2446 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        APRIL 7, 1997 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2111 words

HEADLINE: HOW GENE THERAPY MIGHT CURE HEMOPHILIA TURNING THEORY INTO REALITY A
VIRUS CARRIES PRIOMISE OF A BREAKTHROUGH. PENN RESEARCHERS PICKED HEMOPHILIA TO
TEST ITS EFFECTIVENESS.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Word was quickly spreading through the close-knit group of gene therapy
researchers that a remarkable discovery had been made at the University of North
Carolina.

   Richard Jude Samulski reportedly had found a way to turn the muscle cells of
animals into factories that could churn out disease-controlling biochemicals. He
did this by injecting the animals with a virus that had been outfitted with the
genes needed to make the proteins.

   Apparently this virus - called adeno-associated virus (AAV) - had gotten
around the major obstacles that for years had been preventing scientists from
developing an effective gene drug.

   University of Pennsylvania gene therapy pioneer James W. Wilson was only
mildly interested when he heard the news more than a year ago. Too many times,
Wilson had checked out what appeared to be an exciting advance, only to discover
that the work didn't hold up.

   But if this did, it could lead to the first effective gene therapy. Such a
discovery could help millions of people with diseases that doom them to lifelong
illness or certain early death - things such as cystic fibrosis, muscular
dystrophy, hemophilia, and maybe even heart disease and cancer.

   Though skeptical, Wilson asked Krishna J. Fisher, one of the young
researchers in his laboratory at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, to
inject mice with AAV and see if he could turn their muscle cells into factories
that produced therapeutic biochemicals.

   * Samulski wasn't the only scientist getting promising results with AAV.

   After years of frustration, a handful of others who had doggedly kept working
with the virus were beginning to publish intriguing papers.

   Ninety miles to the north of Wilson's laboratory, at Rockefeller University
and New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical College, neurosurgeon Michael
G. Kaplitt was injecting AAV into the brains of rats with damage similar to that
of Parkinson's disease. The AAV, which had been outfitted with a gene that
helped promote the production of important brain chemicals, seemed to ease the
symptoms of their severe movement disorder.

   Kaplitt was also injecting the virus, carrying a different gene, into the
hearts of pigs. This gene forced the cardiac muscle cells to churn out proteins
that made them more responsive to the heart-stimulating hormone adrenalin.

   The hope was that this could make people's hearts beat more forcefully and
lead to a treatment for congestive heart failure, a leading killer.

   Ninety miles to the south in Baltimore, at Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Paul D. Kessler was using AAV to force the muscle cells in mice to
produce erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone that stimulates the formation of red
blood cells. The hope was that life-threatening anemia could be treated with AAV
carrying an EPO gene.

   And down in Gainesville, AAV was being used by three teams of researchers
working at the University of Florida with AAV pioneer Nicholas Muzyczka.
Ophthalmologist William Hauswirth was injecting AAV into the eyes of rats, and
neurosurgeon Paul Reier was putting it into the spinal cords of rats and guinea
pigs.

   The researchers hoped eventually to move on to humans, using AAV to deliver
one type of gene to stop the degenerative eye disease retinitis pigmentosa and
another type to force the nerve cells in damaged spinal cords to start growing
again so crippled patients could walk.

   Terence R. Flotte, also of Gainesville, was in the midst of human trials
using AAV to treat cystic fibrosis, an inherited lung disease.

   Despite the differences in the diseases, all gene drugs work the same way.
Consisting of vectors - in these cases, an adeno-associated virus - they
transport into the patients' cells specific genes that produce specific proteins
to control specific diseases - both inherited and acquired.

   Such an internal fix of the genetic machinery of cells holds tremendous
promise for medical care.

   But with the first human gene therapy experiments being done only in 1990,
the field had yet to prove itself beyond the theoretical level.

   The latest work was suggesting that scientists might be on the verge of
turning theory into reality.

   * Wilson had reason to hope that Penn's institute would be the first to
develop an effective gene therapy.

   With 159 faculty scientists plus post-docs (researchers in the final stages
of training), technicians and other support personnel, it was one of the largest
centers of its type in the world. Few if any could move discoveries more quickly
from laboratory to bedside.

   All the diverse capabilities necessary for doing this - a basic research
laboratory, a production facility for making vectors safe for human use, an
animal colony for safety testing, and a hospital with patients for clinical
trials - were at Wilson's disposal.

   Though the institute was started only in 1993, its researchers were already
conducting human trials of drugs for cystic fibrosis, brain cancer, the
pulmonary cancer mesothelioma, and an inherited liver disease.

   The vector being used in these trials was a modified adenovirus, which
normally infects the upper respiratory tract and causes colds. AAV causes no
known human disease.

   Until now, Wilson had put all his energies into using the adenovirus. It
simply made the most sense that this cold virus, so adept at infecting lung and
nasal tissues, would be the best way of carrying needed genes into the body.

   Also, Fisher had already spent two years trying without success to infect
liver and lung cells with AAV.

   But they hadn't tried muscle or nerve cells.

   * Fisher was not enthusiastic when Wilson asked him early last year to see if
he could infect the muscle cells. He had just published a paper in the Journal
of Virology, based on his two years of AAV work, in which he concluded that the
virus had limited usefulness for gene therapy.

   It took Fisher a few weeks to gear up for the AAV studies that Wilson
suggested. Ordering six mice for the study, he started preparing an ultrapure
batch of AAV.

   He injected it into the leg muscles of the mice. The AAV carried a "reporter
gene," so called because it produced a protein that turned tissue blue when
exposed to a certain dye, showing scientists when vectors have successfully
infected cells.

   Three days after injecting the mice, Fisher put samples of the muscle tissue
onto microscope slides, dipped them into dye and waited for them to turn blue.
They didn't. Fisher was not surprised.

   He waited two weeks and took more tissue from the mice. The slide turned
completely blue. He repeated the experiments to make sure there were no
mistakes. Again, blue slides. The cautious scientist was beginning to get
excited.

   An additional 48 mice were treated and followed for several months.

   Month after month, Fisher dipped samples of muscle tissue into dye and
watched them turn blue. The cells just kept making the protein, even though the
animals had been inoculated only once.

   Such sustained protein production had never been achieved with adenoviruses
or any other vector because they were all quickly destroyed by the immune
system.

   Karin Jooss, a researcher in Wilson's lab who specialized in immunity, joined
the study to find out why the AAV-infected muscle cells were protected from the
immune system. Working with Yiping Yang, another post-doc, she discovered that
for some reason AAV did not activate specific white blood cells - called CD4 and
cell-killing T cells - that were always turned on when adenoviruses were used.

   Maybe it was something special about mice that accounted for the AAV's
survival, so they injected it into the muscles of monkeys, genetically much more
similar to humans.

   More blue cells.

   Wilson and Fisher were ecstatic.

   This remarkable virus was bypassing all the obstacles that had been
undermining adenovirus vectors.

   What's more, with adenoviruses, therapeutic benefits had disappeared with the
death of the cells, usually after a few months. But the AAV was inserting genes
into the genetic machinery of the cells it infected so that generation after
generation of cells would contain the therapeutic gene.

   This raised the breathtaking possibility that a single injection of AAV with
the right gene could permanently cure patients of disease.

   But there was a big problem with this virus. It was very difficult to grow.

   Many thousands of lab dishes and more lab space would be needed just to grow
enough AAV for a small human trial.

   Last fall, Wilson decided to hire three more technicians and add on three
rooms to grow AAV, doubling the size of his production operation. And he asked
Guang-ping Gao, who was in charge of vector output, to start looking for a more
efficient way to make AAV.

   By early this year, half of Wilson's own laboratory of 22 researchers was
working on different aspects of the AAV project.

   With Samulski and others pressing ahead with their AAV research, Wilson knew
he had to move fast to get ahead of them.

   * Wilson still thought that a new adenovirus vector he was testing in
continuing trials with cystic fibrosis patients would be effective, but final
results weren't expected for a few years.

   The AAV might demonstrate its effectiveness more quickly with another
disease, he thought, and become the first proven gene therapy.

   But what disease should he go after?

   Wilson decided on hemophilia, an inherited blood disorder that afflicts
24,000 Americans.

   In hemophiliacs, genes necessary for making the factors that clot blood are
missing or malfunctioning, and patients bleed easily. Most patients require
weekly injections of the missing factor, which can cost up to $100,000 a year.

   Even with the many treatments, patients suffer tissue damage and joint pain
and are at risk for potentially lethal bleeding crises.

   There were also many scientific reasons for picking this disease.

   Scientists had already isolated the hemophilia genes, and they had already
shown that the disease could be controlled, if not cured, if an adequate level
of the missing factor could be maintained in the blood.

   And unlike diseases in which vectors must infect specific cells - lung cells,
in the case of cystic fibrosis - it didn't matter what cells produced the
missing factor as long as it got into the blood. Muscle cells would do just
fine.

   Fortuitously, one of the nation's foremost researchers in the molecular
genetics of hemophilia, someone who had even experimented unsuccessfully with
AAV, was working nearby at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. The scientist
was Katherine High, medical director of the hospital's hematology lab.

   Wilson called High and invited her to meet with him and Kris Fisher. He
wanted to talk about a possible collaboration.

   * High met with the two researchers in the small library off Wilson's office.

   Fisher projected pictures of the blue muscle cells onto a screen at the end
of the conference table, and Wilson talked about his plans to make ultrapure
AAV.

   High talked about hemophilia. More than 20,000 Americans have hemophilia A,
which means they lack a functioning gene for the manufacture of the Factor VIII
clotting factor. And 4,000 have hemophilia B, in which a functioning Factor IX
gene is missing.

   The Factor VIII gene is too large to be fitted into the tiny AAV virus, but
the Factor IX gene can just make it. They would go after hemophilia B.

   Using a technique to prepare and purify AAV developed by Fisher, High would
inject viruses carrying the Factor IX gene into mice and see if she could force
their muscle cells to churn out the clotting factor.

   Would the Factor IX manufactured by the infected muscle cells reach the
circulation? Would enough be made to clot the blood? Would the muscles keep
producing protein so that a single treatment would be enough?

   The mice experiments should answer these questions, and the scientists hoped
all the answers would be "yes."

   High left the meeting and walked back to her office in the hospital's new
research building at the other end of the Penn Medical Center campus. She was
excited, anticipating the project that lay before her. With luck, she should be
able to complete the study and publish the results by summer.

   High was well aware that many researchers have thought they were on the verge
of a breakthrough, only to be disappointed by the results of their studies.

   She did not allow herself the luxury of thinking that she might be on the
verge of developing the world's first successful gene therapy drug and finding a
cure for hemophilia.

   A virus that causes no known disease may be able to carry healing genes into
some patients.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Richard Jude Samulski (left), of the University of North Carolina, discovered
AAV's potential use as a vector for gene therapy. (Associated Press, CHUCK
LIDDY)
Weidong Xiao (left) and Terry Freeman examine the adeno-associated virus (AAV)
via computer. Scientists hope to use AAV to treat one type of hemophilia and
other diseases. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
Weidong Xiao holds lab dishes containing AAV at Penn. (The Inquirer, VICKI
VALERIO)

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2447 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 6, 1997, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: CITY WEEKLY; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 996 words

HEADLINE: Determined to aid sight research;
CITY WEEKLY

BYLINE: By Gloria Negri, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Joel Davis was in his late teens and in college when he was diagnosed with
retinitis pigmentosa, a genetic eye disease that eventually leads to blindness.
Doctors in New York told his parents to take him home and teach him Braille.

   That was some 30 years ago. He never did learn Braille. Now 51 and senior
vice president in charge of corporate planning and development for Gillette,
Davis is legally blind. But he still reads with the help of a machine that
magnifies letters.

   "My father was really a fighter," Davis recalled last week at his office in
the Prudential Tower. "He wasn't going to accept that kind of defeatist view and
I have the same attitude."

   That is only part of Davis's inspiring story. And now, after a lifetime of
shunning the limelight, he has agreed to serve as honorary chairman at
Saturday's eighth annual "Seeing Is Believing Ball" at the Hyatt Regency in
Cambridge to benefit the Foundation Fighting Blindness. The goal is to raise $
80,000.

   He consented so others can benefit from the research the international
foundation supports. The organization was founded in 1971 by philanthropist
Gordon Gund of Princeton, N.J., brother of Boston architect Graham Gund, and the
late Bernard Berman of Baltimore. Gordon Gund, who has RP, is owner of the
Cleveland Cavaliers basketball team and San Jose Sharks hockey team.

   "Now is the time for me to do everything I can," Davis said. "So much of the
foundation's first quarter century was taken up with basic research. I think now
we're at a point where we are able to productively fund a number of very
promising research clinical approaches that could lead to a cure or treatment of
the disease."

   In most cases, RP is a slow degenerative disease of the retina, marked by
night blindness, narrowing of the visual field, loss of peripheral vision and
eventually central vision.

   Among newer clinical approaches, Davis said, are gene therapy, retinal cell
transplants and work done by Dr. Eliot L. Berson, director of The Berman-Gund
Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations at Harvard Medical School and
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary on the use of electroretinograms to measure
retinal degeneration "long before" clinical symptoms are obvious. Berson also
pioneered Vitamin A therapy for the disease.

   Davis, described by Berson as "always willing to participate in new research
ideas," is on Vitamin A therapy.

   Davis is a former president of the blindness foundation in Massachusetts, and
his parents had both been president of the Brooklyn chapter years ago. Though
neither parent had RP, Joel and his sister both did. Another brother did not.

   According to Berson, one out of 4,000 Americans have RP and 1.5 million are
affected worldwide.

   Davis was born in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, "a pretty competitive
neighborhood," he said, that might have nurtured his tenacious approach to
business and personal matters.

   His parents didn't tell him he had RP until several years later as his vision
diminished. He stopped driving, but still earned his degree in economics from
the University of Pennsylvania, where he entered at age 16, and masters' degrees
from Penn's Wharton School of Business and New York University.

   After working five years for General Foods Corporation in White Plains, N.Y.,
he came to the Boston-based Gillette Company in 1975 as product manager in the
toiletries division. There has been no stopping him since.

   In spite of his failing vision, he was, in 1981 and 1982, Gillette's
marketing and new business development manager in Europe, a responsiblity that
spanned 15 countries.

   Davis has been "a great contributor" to the company and "played probably the
driving role" in the company's acquisition of Parker Pen in 1993, said Alfred M.
Zeien, Gillette's chairman and chief executive officer. "Joel listens. He plots
his course and he sells it to others, the three things necessary to be effective
in a large company.

   "If you didn't know for sure of his condition and you walked into a meeting
room where he is going to do a presentation, you would think there was nothing
wrong," Zeien said.

   Davis has accepted his disability philosophically, and in his orderly and
practical way, has accommodated it. Shades are electronically drawn in his
office to keep out the light. Pat Webb, senior executive assistant at Gillette,
seeks out the furniture and tools he needs. He lives in the Prudential complex
and walks about five miles a day on a treadmill in the company gym.

   He dotes on his two daughters, Jennifer, 22, a Phi Beta Kappa senior at
Harvard University, and Jillian, 12, a student at Beaver Country Day School.
Neither daughter has RP.

   Davis put off until two years ago the use of a white cane and mobility
training at the Massachusetts Commission for the Blind. They have helped him
enormously, he said, in getting around his neighborhood, doing his grocery
shopping and meeting people.

   "I can't be daydreaming too much," he said, "or I'll walk into a wall. I get
angry at that, but sometimes I do have to laugh."

   His sense of humor has helped him over many rough spots.

   "Once," he recalled, "I wanted to congratulate a lady on her speech, and
while I thought I was addressing her, I ended up talking to the wall."

   Davis loves to travel and does so frequently, for business and pleasure. He
has been on 15 flights in the last five weeks, trips that were well organized in
advance.

   "I feel like a baton," he said, "handed off from taxi driver to hotel clerk
and others along the way.

   "I don't define myself as a blind person," he said. "That just happens to be
one of many factors that make me me. I see life as a glass half-filled. I think
as architect Frank Lloyd Wright did when asked what his most exiting project was
and he replied, 'The next one.' I don't deal in 'what-ifs.' There are challenges
out there. I'm looking forward to them."
For information on the ball or the foundation, call (508) 369-3890.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Joel Davis hopes to raise $ 80,000 at Saturday's ball.  GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO/FRANK O'BRIEN

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1997


                             2448 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    April 2, 1997, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. C-3, CITY

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: GRANT TO FUND BIOENGINEERING

BODY:


   The University of Pittsburgh has received a $ 3 million Whitaker Foundation
Development Award that the school will use to create the first undergraduate
bioengineering department at a public university in Pennsylvania.

   The grant to Pitt's school of engineering is for ''innovation in
engineering.'' In addition to Pitt, four other universities in the nation
received awards from the foundation this year: Case Western Reserve, Harvard,
Rice and the University of Michigan.

   The grant carries the possibility of an additional $ 2 million in funding in
subsequent years.

   The bioengineering degree was developed in conjunction with the School of
Medicine and the School of Health and Rehabilitation Science.

   Pitt Chancellor Mark Nordenberg said the award reflected the national stature
and research capabilities of the bioengineering faculty, which already is doing
advanced work on artificial joints, artificial organs and genetic therapy.

   OAKLAND

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2449 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      April 1, 1997, Tuesday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 03C

LENGTH: 223 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
NEWS & NOTES

BYLINE: ---From news services

BODY:


   ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOMES: Scientists have developed artificial chromosomes, but
they are only one-fifth to one-tenth as long as the real thing, the 24 pairs of
human chromosomes that carry genes. The research may eventually help scientists
develop gene therapy ---giving people genes to treat disease ---and perhaps
prevent disorders such as Down syndrome, researchers said. The study is reported
in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   DIET DON'T: The American Heart Association has some advice for people
considering the "American Heart Association Diet for Overweight Heart Patients."
That advice is: don't. The diet, and a number of others currently circulating,
has never been endorsed by the heart association and may in fact offer advice
that could be unhealthy for heart patients. For information, call the local
heart association office: 770-952-1316.

   NO TWO ALIKE: One child's personality may be nothing like another child's,
and parents shouldn't be surprised, say researchers at Ohio State University in
Columbus, who note that there are at least 64 trillion possible individuals that
could be produced by a single mother and father. Physical and temperamental
resemblance from one sibling to the next is quite remarkable, given the genetic
possibilities, says Philip Newman, a senior researcher at OSU.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2450 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 1, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Artificial human chromosome created, researchers report; Human cell
did the work with 'construction kit'

SOURCE: LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


   In a major milestone in the study of human heredity, researchers announced
yesterday that they have created the first working, artificial human chromosome,
which experts said represents a quantum leap in the ability to probe the complex
molecules that make up humankind.

   The new technology offers scientists a powerful new research tool for
investigating fundamental questions about the chemistry responsible for human
heredity, experts said.

   Its inventors at Case Western Reserve University and Athersys Inc. hope the
techniques also may offer a way to cure inherited diseases by altering a cell's
genetic structure -- bypassing biochemical stumbling blocks that have so far
stymied efforts to accomplish that task.

   In research published in Nature Genetics today, the research team said they
were able to use the human cell itself to perform the trickiest portion of
creating a synthetic chromosome. The scientists basically gave the cell a
molecular construction kit developed after a decade of experiments and let the
cell do the actual work of assembling it.

   On at least two occasions, the result was a new artificial human chromosome,
the researchers reported.

   A normal cell has 23 pairs of natural chromosomes -- thread-like structures
inherited from an individual's parents that contain the genes that guide the
body's gender, growth and development.

   Natural chromosomes are built in pieces -- made up of hundreds or thousands
of genes, bracketed by protein structures that enhance the structure's stability
and guide its functions, turning genes on and off, for example.

   Taken altogether, the natural chromosomes contain roughly 100,000 separate
genes -- the molecular blueprint for human development.

   The artificial chromosome appears to coexist with the natural ones. It
appears to divide and multiply normally, surviving as a kind of accessory
chromosome for at least six months, the researchers said.

   French Anderson, a molecular biologist at the University of Southern
California who helped pioneer the concept of human gene therapy, called the new
research "a very important advance." The invention of synthetic human
chromosomes is, he said, "the next big step."

   Officials at Athersys said they hope eventually to use artificial chromosomes
as a way to a package treatments for diseases affecting the human immune system
such as AIDS, as well as blood disorders such as sickle cell anemia and
beta-thalassemia.

   Potentially this could be done by packaging a therapeutic gene inside an
artificial chromosome either replace a defective gene or generate a medicinal
protein.

   Anderson, who is working with the pharmaceutical firm Novartis on a competing
gene therapy technique, warned that the danger of chromosomal abnormalities may
be too high to make artificial chromosomes work as a medical product.

   In addition, the manufacturing problems in producing complex chromosomes in
industrial quantities may be too formidable, he said.

   Pub Date: 4/01/97

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1997


                             2451 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               April 1, 1997, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: Researchers create artificial human chromosomes

BYLINE: BY RICK WEISS

BODY:


   Scientists in Ohio have created the first artificial human chromosomes, an
achievement that may someday allow doctors to alter people's genetic inheritance
or cure diseases by slipping genetic "cassettes" directly into people's cells.

   The artificial chromosomes, made in the laboratory from a blend of natural
and synthetic human DNA, are miniature versions of human chromosomes -- the
corkscrew-shaped structures inside cells that carry all the genes required for
life.

   Scientists said the advance marks the first time anyone has created an
artificial human chromosome that can replicate like natural chromosomes when a
cell divides.

   In theory, the chromosomes could be custom designed to ferry curative genes
into people suffering from inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis, or even
to provide genetic enhancements such as added protection against cancer.

   More immediately, the chromosomes will help scientists learn how genes are
regulated inside cells -- a central question in biology.

   Some people predicted the success also would escalate concerns about
scientists' increasing ability to manipulate genes, which reached new heights in
February with the cloning of an adult sheep.

   Artificial chromosomes will not directly facilitate the cloning of animals or
people, medical ethicists said, but they represent a new power over biological
processes.

   So far, the research team at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland has
created only a handful of very small artificial chromosomes inside
laboratory-reared human cells, said geneticist John J. Harrington, who led the
work along with Huntington F. Willard.

   The group hopes to inject some of the manufactured chromosomes into animals
within six months, a necessary step before considering clinical trials in
people, said Harrington, who also is vice president of Cleveland-based Athersys
Inc., a biotechnology company that owns the rights to the new technology.

   "We think this may allow us to treat patients at a very young age, maybe
shortly after birth, so the treatment can be delivered to a few cells and then
spread as the cells divide and the child grows," Harrington said.

   Within a year, he said, he hopes to have created a modular system of
prefabricated chromosome parts, each bearing different key genes, which could be
pulled off a laboratory shelf, combined and inserted into a person's cells.

   "It clearly is novel and represents a new approach that seems to work," said
Arno Motulsky, a professor of medicine and genetics at the University of
Washington in Seattle who co-wrote a 1995 federal report that called for the
development of better gene-therapy techniques.

   Human cells have 46 chromosomes, each of which is a long, twisted strand of
genetic material, or DNA, made of millions of chemical subunits. Some stretches
of DNA work as a unit, called a gene. The order of chemical subunits within that
stretch constitutes a coded set of instructions, telling the cell what to do,
such as "make insulin."

   Chromosomes are extremely convoluted and complex structures, yet every time a
cell divides they manage to untangle their genetic threads and duplicate
themselves so each resulting cell can end up with a full complement of genes.

   Currently, the preferred method for getting new genes into human cells is to
load them into a virus that naturally inserts the genes into a cell's
chromosomes. But with that method there is no predicting which chromosome will
get the extra gene.  Also, viruses are sometimes rejected by the immune system.

   Artificial chromosomes would eliminate that risk because each new gene could
reside on its own chromosome.

GRAPHIC: WASHINGTON POST

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1997


                             2452 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             April 1, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOME IS CREATED

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   A genetics research group in Cleveland said yesterday that it is the first to
create a functioning artificial human chromosome.

   The breakthrough should improve the effectiveness of various therapies for
genetic diseases and contribute to scientific understanding of how genes work,
said Gil Van Bokkelen, president of Athersys, a Cleveland biotechnology company.

   The achievement may not be as sensational as Dolly, the cloned Scottish
sheep, but it likely is more significant in terms of human health, according to
scientists.

   Results of the research were announced jointly with Case Western Reserve
University and published in the journal Nature Genetics.

   ''This opens the door to a whole new avenue of research in chromosome biology
and gene therapy,'' said Huntington F. Willard, a co-author of the report and
genetics department chairman at Case.

   A reviewer in Nature Genetics - geneticist Melissa Rosenfelt of the National
Institutes of Health - was more cautious, describing the research as ''an
important step toward this goal'' of creating a functioning artificial human
chromosome.

   Chromosomes are microscopic rodlike structures that hold the thousands of
genes that pass on inherited traits as well as the biological support machinery.
Each cell normally has 46 chromosomes arranged as 23 pairs.

   Bokkelen said that, although scientists have produced artificial yeast
chromosomes, attempts to build a working human artificial chromosome go back
about a decade.

   In gene therapy, doctors may seek to correct body function by introducing
protein-producing genes that are missing, defective or deficient. Or they might
genetically engineer a virus to attack mutated cancer cells, for example.

   Most gene therapy, Bokkelen said, now depends on using a virus as a carrier,
but that has severe limitations.

   Viruses are attacked by the human immune system, he said, and they're not
stable over time because their chromosomes lack centromeres, the genetic
material that controls chromosome distribution when cells are created by cell
division.

   In other words, he said, the therapeutic genes being introduced into the
human body using viruses might work - but only temporarily.

   One key to the breakthrough, he said, was the ability to construct a working
centromere from human chromosomal material.

   Because human artificial chromosomes are ''all natural,'' he said, they
shouldn't trigger an immune response.

   They also can be more efficiently packaged ''to contain all of the machinery
necessary to promote and regulate the stable production of therapeutic
proteins,'' according to a statement from Case Western Reserve.

   The artificial chromosomes produced by the Case scientists, Bokkelen said,
are ''microchromosomes'' a fifth to a tenth smaller than natural chromosomes.

   ''It is an important step, and it's the first time it's been done,''
Rosenfelt said last week.  ''They achieved it, but it wasn't very predictable,''
she said of the process. ''Lots of work has to be done to figure out what the
contents of the chromosome should be.''

   Eventually, she said, clinical trials could test the artificial chromosomes,
''but there are quite a few steps between here and there.''

   Arthur Burghes, associate professor of molecular genetics at Ohio State
University, said human artificial chromosomes have the potential to solve two
major problems in gene therapy: ''Delivering it where you want it to go and then
keeping it there.''

   He said they ''will have applications in certain areas but won't be
universal. . . . As with everything in science, it solves some problems but
doesn't solve everything.''

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2453 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        April 1, 1997 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Artificial human chromosome created Breakthrough called valuable
research tool

BYLINE: By Robert Lee Hotz, Los Angeles Times

BODY:
 In a major milestone in the study of human heredity, researchers announced
Monday that they have created the first working, artificial human chromosome,
which experts said represents a quantum leap in the ability to probe the complex
molecules that make up humankind.

   The new technology offers scientists a powerful new research tool for
investigating fundamental questions about the chemistry responsible for human
heredity, experts said.

   Its inventors at Case Western Reserve University and Athersys Inc. hope the
techniques also may offer a way to cure inherited diseases by altering a cell's
genetic structure - bypassing biochemical stumbling blocks that have so far
stymied efforts to accomplish that task.

   In research published in Nature Genetics today, the research team said it was
able to use the human cell itself to perform the trickiest portion of creating a
synthetic chromosome. The scientists basically gave the cell a molecular
construction kit developed after a decade of experiments and let the cell do the
actual work of assembling it.

   On at least two occasions, the result was a new artificial human chromosome,
the researchers reported.

   A normal cell has 23 pairs of natural chromosomes - threadlike structures
inherited from an individual's parents that contain the genes that guide the
body's growth and development, including a pair that determine gender. Natural
chromosomes are built in pieces - made up of hundreds or even thousands of
genes, bracketed by special protein structures that enhance the structure's
stability and guide its functions, turning genes on and off, for example. Taken
altogether, the natural chromosomes contain roughly 100,000 separate genes - the
molecular blueprint for human development.

   The artificial chromosome appears to co-exist with the natural ones. It
appears to divide and multiply normally, surviving as a kind of accessory
chromosome for at least six months, the researchers said.

   French Anderson, a molecular biologist at the University of Southern
California who helped pioneer the concept of human gene therapy, called the new
research "a very important advance." The invention of synthetic human
chromosomes is, he said, "the next big step."

   Melissa Rosenfeld, a senior researcher at the National Genome Research
Institute called it "an important landmark."

   Officials at Athersys said they hope eventually to use artificial chromosomes
as a way to a package treatments for diseases affecting the human immune system,
such as AIDS, as well as blood disorders such as sickle cell anemia and
beta-thalassemia.

   Potentially this could be done by packaging a therapeutic gene inside an
artificial chromosome either replace a defective gene or generate a medicinal
protein.

   If the technology proves itself clinically, it could be applied to an even
wider range of inherited or infectious diseases, they said.

   Anderson, who is working with the pharmaceutical firm Novartis on a competing
gene therapy technique, cautioned, however, that the danger of chromosomal
abnormalities may be too high to make artificial chromosomes work as a medical
product. In addition, the manufacturing problems in producing complex
chromosomes in industrial quantities may be too formidable, he said.

   Even so, he said, artificial human chromosomes would be a powerful tool for
help fathom the mysteries of human genetics.

   The discovery comes at a time when researchers engaged in the federal Human
Genome Project are rapidly charting the unexplored regions of the human genetic
structure, determining where each human gene is located.

   But mapping a gene is only the first step in determining what it does in the
larger universe of the human body, researchers said. Despite their high-speed
gene machines and DNA microprocessor chips, scientists know more about where
genes are physically located - having mapped more than 16,000 human genes so far
- than they do about how they function.

   Even with their rudimentary knowledge of individual genes, researchers have
been able to create a bestiary of novel life forms. But until now, scientists
had no way to assemble human genes together with all the chemical elements
necessary to their proper function, the way nature does in the large,
daisy-chains of protein and DNA that make up a human chromosome.

   "This opens the door to be able to study human genes in their normal context
- as part of a chromosome," said Huntington F. Willard, chairman of the Case
Western Reserve genetics department who led the research team.

   The Case Western team and Athersys, the team's privately held business
partner, have patented the new technology and are seeking patents on the
artificial chromosomes themselves.  For more than a decade, gene experts have
been able to assemble the chromosomes that guide the simplest living organisms -
yeast, for example.

   Last year, researchers at Chromos Molecular Systems created the first
mammalian chromosomes, stitching together the gene packages that shape a mouse.
By February, the company had completed a manufacturing plant capable of churning
out 3-to-5 million of them per day.

   But the chemical essence of a human chromosome had eluded researchers until
now.

GRAPHIC:  AP/Amy Kranz Artificial chromosomes

LOAD-DATE: April 01, 1997


                             2454 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 1, 1997, Tuesday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: Scientists develop chromosome in lab;
Study of human heredity gets big boost

BYLINE: ROBERT LEE HOTZ; Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   In a major milestone in the study of human heredity,
researchers announced Monday that they have created the first
working, artificial human chromosome, which experts said
represents a quantum leap in the ability to probe the complex
molecules that make up humankind.

   The new technology offers scientists a powerful new research
tool for investigating fundamental questions about the
chemistry responsible for human heredity, experts said.

   Its inventors at Case Western Reserve University and Athersys
hope the techniques also may offer a way to cure inherited
diseases by altering a cell's genetic structure -bypassing
biochemical stumbling blocks that have so far stymied efforts
to accomplish that task.

   In research published in Nature Genetics today, the research
team said they were able to use the human cell, itself, to
perform the trickiest portion of creating a synthetic
chromosome.  The scientists basically gave the cell a molecular
construction kit developed after a decade of experiments and
let the cell do the actual work of assembling it.

   On at least two occasions, the result was a new artificial
human chromosome, the researchers reported.

   A normal cell has 23 pairs of natural chromosomes - threadlike
structures inherited from an individual's parents that contain
the genes that guide the body's growth and development,
including a pair that determine gender.  Natural chromosomes
are built in pieces - made up of hundreds or even thousands of
genes, bracketed by special protein structures that enhance
the structure's stability and guide its functions, turning
genes on and off, for example.  Taken altogether, the natural
chromosomes contain roughly 100,000 separate genes -the
molecular blueprint for human development.

   The artificial chromosome appears to co-exist with the natural
ones.  It appears to divide and multiply normally, surviving as
a kind of accessory chromosome for at least six months, the
researchers said.

   French Anderson, a molecular biologist at the University of
Southern California who helped pioneer the concept of human
gene therapy, called the new research ""a very important
advance. '' The invention of synthetic human chromosomes is, he
said, ""the next big step. ''

   Melissa Rosenfeld, a senior researcher at the National Genome
Research Institute called it ""an important landmark. ''

   Officials at Athersys said they hope eventually to use
artificial chromosomes as a way to a package treatments for
diseases affecting the human immune system, such as AIDS, as
well as blood disorders such as sickle cell anemia and
beta-thalassemia.

   Potentially, this could be done by packaging a therapeutic
gene inside an artificial chromosome either replace a
defective gene or generate a medicinal protein.

   If the technology proves itself clinically, it could be
applied to an even wider range of inherited or infectious
diseases, they said.

   Anderson, who is working with the pharmaceutical firm Novartis
on a competing gene therapy technique, cautioned, however,
that the danger of chromosomal abnormalities may be too high
to make artificial chromosomes work as a medical product.  In
addition, the manufacturing problems in producing complex
chromosomes in industrial quantities may be too formidable, he
said.

   Even so, he said, artificial human chromosomes would be a
powerful tool to help fathom the mysteries of human genetics.

   The discovery comes at a time when researchers engaged in the
federal Human Genome Project are rapidly charting the
unexplored regions of the human genetic structure, determining
where each human gene is located.

   But mapping a gene is only the first step in determining what
it does in the larger universe of the human body, researchers
said.  Despite their high-speed gene machines and DNA
microprocessor chips, scientists know more about where genes
are physically located - having mapped more than 16,000 human
genes so far - than they do about how they function.


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2455 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 1, 1997, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1574 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN CHROMOSOME CREATED ARTIFICIALLY;
 SCIENCE: TECHNOLOGY IS CALLED A MAJOR ADVANCE IN STUDY OF GENES. IT MAY OFFER A
WAY TO CURE INHERITED DISEASES.

BYLINE: ROBERT LEE HOTZ, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:


   In a major milestone in the study of human heredity, researchers announced
Monday that they have created the first artificial human chromosome, which
experts said represents a quantum leap in the ability to probe the complex
molecules that make up humankind.

   The new technology offers scientists a powerful new research tool for
investigating fundamental questions about the chemistry responsible for human
heredity, experts said.

   Its inventors at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland and Athersys
Inc. hope the techniques may also offer a way to cure inherited diseases by
altering a cell's genetic structure, bypassing biochemical stumbling blocks that
have so far stymied efforts to accomplish that task.

   As a medical tool, a custom-tailored chromosome could potentially be used as
a package for introducing a therapeutic gene into a cell. The new gene could
either replace a defective gene or generate a medicinal protein.

   In research published today in Nature Genetics, the researchers said they
were able to use the human cell itself to perform the trickiest portion of
creating a synthetic chromosome. The scientists basically gave the cell a
molecular construction kit developed after a decade of experiments and let the
cell do the actual work of assembling it.

   On at least two occasions, the result was a new artificial human chromosome,
the researchers reported.

   A normal cell has 22 pairs of natural chromosomes--threadlike structures
inherited from an individual's parents that contain the genes that guide the
body's growth and development. An additional pair determine gender. Natural
chromosomes are built in pieces, made up of hundreds or even thousands of genes,
bracketed by special protein structures that enhance the structure's stability
and guide its functions--turning genes on and off, for example. Taken
altogether, the natural chromosomes contain roughly 100,000 separate genes--the
molecular blueprint for human development.

   The artificial chromosome appears to co-exist with the natural ones.  It
appears to divide and multiply normally, surviving as a kind of accessory
chromosome for at least six months, the researchers said.

   French Anderson, a molecular biologist at USC who helped pioneer the concept
of human gene therapy, called the new research "a very important advance." The
invention of synthetic human chromosomes is, he said, "the next big step."

   Melissa A. Rosenfeld, a senior researcher at the National Genome Research
Institute, called it "an important landmark."

   Officials at Athersys said they hope eventually to use artificial chromosomes
as a way to package treatments for diseases affecting the human immune system,
like AIDS, as well as blood disorders like sickle cell anemia and
beta-thalassemia.

   If the technology proves itself clinically, it could be applied to an even
wider range of inherited or infectious diseases, they said.

   Anderson, who is working with the pharmaceutical firm Novartis on a competing
gene therapy technique, cautioned, however, that the danger of chromosomal
abnormalities may be too high to make artificial chromosomes work as a medical
product. In addition, the manufacturing problems in producing complex
chromosomes in industrial quantities may be too formidable, he said.

   Even so, he said, artificial human chromosomes would be a powerful tool to
help fathom the mysteries of human genetics.

   The discovery comes at a time when researchers engaged in the federal Human
Genome Project are rapidly charting the unexplored regions of the human genetic
structure, determining where each human gene is located.

   But mapping a gene is only the first step in determining what it does in the
larger universe of the human body, researchers said. Despite their high-speed
gene machines and DNA microprocessor chips, scientists know more about where
genes are located--having mapped more than 16,000 human genes so far--than they
do about how they function.

   Even with their rudimentary knowledge of individual genes, researchers have
been able to create a bestiary of novel life forms, from genetically engineered
crops to bacteria that produce drugs for humans. But until now, scientists had
no way to assemble human genes together with all the chemical elements necessary
to their proper function, the way nature does in the large daisy-chains of
protein and DNA that make up a human chromosome.

   "This opens the door to be able to study human genes in their normal
context--as part of a chromosome," said Huntington F. Willard, chairman of the
Case Western Reserve genetics department and leader of the research team.

   The Case Western Reserve team and Athersys, the team's privately held
business partner, have patented the new technology and are seeking patents on
the artificial chromosomes.

   For more than a decade, gene experts have been able to assemble the
chromosomes that guide the simplest living organisms--yeast, for example.

   Last year, researchers at Chromos Molecular Systems created the first
mammalian chromosomes, stitching together the gene packages that shape a mouse.
By February, the company had completed a manufacturing plant capable of churning
out 3 million to 5 million of them a day.

   But the chemical essence of a human chromosome had eluded researchers until
now.

   To make a human chromosome, the Case Western Reserve researchers added to a
normal human cell separate portions of ordinary DNA, protein structures called
telomeres, which help protect the chromosome from damage, and other structures
called centromeres, which help control the way a chromosome divides and
reproduces.

   The cell did the rest.

   "We were letting nature takes its course," Willard said. "For all intents and
purposes, they are 'real' chromosomes . . . to our delight."


   Hacking the Human Chromosome

   Researchers created the first working artificial human chromosome by
inserting the raw material into a normal human cell--ordinary DNA, telomeres and
centromeres--which then assembled a working package of genes.

   HUMAN CHROMOSOME

   Telomere

   Euchromatin with genes

   Satellite DNA

   Centromere

   Euchromatin with genes

   Telomere


   *

   ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOME

   Centromere

   Foreign DNA with genes

   Satellite DNA

   Telomere

   ****

   How Cells Split

   Chromosomes and centriles duplicate

   Centrioles move towards opposite sides of the cell

   Duplicated chromosomes split; move to sides

   The cytoplasm divides and cells splits

   Source: Nature Genetics, Case Western Reserve University

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-CHART: Hacking the Human Chromosome, LORENA INIGUEZ / Los
Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2456 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          April 1, 1997 Tuesday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 6

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Scientists build mock chromosomes
 First artificial chain of human molecules hailed as genetic landmark

SOURCE: Washington Post, Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   In a major milestone in the study of human heredity, researchers announced
Monday that they have created the first working, artificial human chromosome,
which experts said represents a quantum leap in the ability to probe the complex
molecules that make up humankind.

   The achievement may someday allow doctors to alter people's genetic
inheritance or cure diseases by slipping genetic "cassettes" directly into
people's cells.

   The artificial chromosomes, made in the laboratory from a blend of natural
and synthetic human DNA, are miniature versions of human chromosomes the
corkscrew-shaped structures inside cells that carry all the genes required for
life.

   Scientists said the long-sought advance marks the first time anyone has
created an artificial human chromosome that can replicate the way natural
chromosomes do every time a cell divides.

   French Anderson, a molecular biologist at the University of Southern
California who helped pioneer the concept of human gene therapy, called the new
research "a very important advance." The invention of synthetic human
chromosomes is, he said, "the next big step."

   Melissa Rosenfeld, a senior researcher at the National Genome Research
Institute called it "an important landmark."

   In research published in Nature Genetics Tuesday, researchers at Case Western
Reserve University and Athersys Inc. said they were able to use a human cell
itself to perform the trickiest portion of creating a synthetic chromosome. The
scientists basically gave the cell a molecular construction kit developed after
a decade of experiments and let the cell do the actual work of assembling it.

   On at least two occasions, the result was a new artificial human chromosome,
the researchers reported.

   A normal cell has 23 pairs of natural chromosomes thread-like structures
inherited from an individual's parents that contain the genes that guide the
body's growth and development. An additional pair determine gender.

   Natural chromosomes are built in pieces made up of hundreds or even thousands
of genes, bracketed by special protein structures that enhance the structure's
stability and guide its functions, turning genes on and off, for example. Taken
altogether, the natural chromosomes contain roughly 100,000 separate genes the
molecular blueprint for human development.

   The artificial chromosome appears to co-exist with the natural ones. It
appears to divide and multiply normally, surviving as a kind of accessory
chromosome for at least six months, the researchers said.

   In theory, the artificial chromosomes could be custom-designed to ferry
curative genes into people suffering from inherited diseases such as cystic
fibrosis, or even to provide genetic enhancements such as added protection
against cancer.

   More immediately, the chromosomes will serve as miniature "laboratory
benches," helping scientists learn how genes are regulated inside cells a
central question in biology.

   So far, the research team at Case Western in Cleveland has created only a
handful of very small artificial chromosomes inside laboratory-reared human
cells, said geneticist John Harrington, who led the work along with Huntington
Willard.

   The group hopes to inject some of the manufactured chromosomes into animals
within six months, a necessary step before considering clinical trials in
people, said Harrington, who also is vice president of Cleveland-based Athersys,
a biotechnology company that owns the rights to the new technology.

   "It clearly is novel and represents a new approach that seems to work," said
Arno Motulsky, a professor of medicine and genetics at the University of
Washington in Seattle who co-wrote a 1995 federal report that called for the
development of better gene therapy techniques. "You can't go to the lab tomorrow
and start using it for gene therapy. But it's coming along."

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2457 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 1, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words

HEADLINE: Artificial Human Chromosome Is New Tool for Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   BIOLOGISTS have accumulated wonderfully detailed insights into the genetic
causes of human disease but in many cases still lack the tools to make use of
the knowledge. A treatment of great promise, gene therapy, has long been stalled
by the lack of suitable vehicles to get genes into human cells and maintain them
in working order. But that obstacle could dissolve if a strange new biological
invention works as well as its makers hope.

   The invention is an artificial human chromosome.

    Synthesizing just the essential components of a human chromosome,
researchers found that human cells would assemble the inserted pieces into a
working chromosome, which could serve as a vehicle for therapeutic genes, they
report in today's issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   Gene therapy holds such promise in combating inherited diseases, heart
disease and cancer that the Federal Government has been pouring $200 million a
year into research, and the pharmaceutical companies' research efforts are said
to be even larger.

   But so far, almost all attempts to introduce curative genes into patients
have fizzled. A report prepared for the National Institutes of Health in
December 1995 concluded, "While the expectations and the promise of gene therapy
are great, clinical efficacy has not been definitively demonstrated at this time
in any gene therapy protocol." Little has changed since, said a co-author of the
report, Dr. Arno G. Motulsky of the University of Washington in Seattle.

   A major reason is that the stripped-down viruses used in many experiments to
move human genes into cells do not provide a stable platform for the genes to
operate. The viruses are good at sneaking into cells, as nature designed them to
do, but some are not large enough to carry a full human gene and all its genetic
control switches, while others provoke attack by the immune system.

   So most introduced genes have lacked stable expression, the biological term
for a gene producing its protein. The artificial human chromosome could sidestep
many of these problems because it promises to provide a stable, natural platform
for human genes to function and to be passed to daughter cells when the parent
cell divides.

   Commenting on the development, Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the Institute
for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania, said, "Stability of
expression is a big deal, and if we can in fact create a genetic element that
functions like a chromosome, it is a really important advance."

   Dr. W. French Anderson, director of the gene therapy laboratories at the
University of Southern California School of Medicine, described the advance as
"fascinating science" that would be "very helpful for the development of gene
therapy vectors." He predicted, however, that improved viral vectors were likely
to be in use before artificial chromosomes could pass manufacturing and
regulatory hurdles.

   The artificial chromosome is the fruit of more than a decade's work by Dr.
Huntington F. Willard, a human geneticist at the Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, together with colleagues at the university and at Athersys,
a Cleveland biotechnology company.

   The project is based on the insight that if the minimum essential components
of a human chromosome were to be introduced into a cell, the cell's natural
repair system might be able to stitch them together into a a working whole.

   The Cleveland team synthesized the ends of human chromosomes, short runs of
DNA known as telomeres, and a long stretch of DNA designed to correspond to the
centromere, a vital structure toward the center.  Human centromeres, the staging
posts for the apparatus that spins dividing chromosomes apart during cell
division, are still somewhat mysterious. Synthetic versions have not been made
until now, although several groups have been trying.

   The synthetic telomeres and centromeres and a long test region of human DNA
were all inserted separately into test-tube cultures of human cells with the
help of a fat-based chemical that helps DNA squeeze through cell membranes.

   As the researchers had hoped, not only did the cells' repair systems knit
together the fragments of DNA, but the assembled DNA molecule also became
clothed in chromatin, the special proteins characteristic of chromosomes.

   The human cells treated the artificial chromosomes like one of their own,
dutifully furnishing a copy to each daughter cell throughout the 240 cell
divisions of the six-month experiment.

   Dr. Willard and his colleagues, in their report, called the development an
important step "toward building a prefabricated artificial chromosome capable of
introducing and stably maintaining therapeutic genes in human cells." His
colleagues were Drs. John J. Harrington, Gil Van Bokkelen, Robert W. Mays and
Karen Gustashaw.

   The Cleveland biologists believe that human genes built into the artificial
chromosomes would operate normally, but they have not yet tested the idea. The
DNA used in these preliminary experiments carried a marker gene, which was
expressed, but no known human genes. "We have every reason to expect human genes
would be expressed just fine," Dr. Willard said.

   Dr. Van Bokkelen, president and chief executive of Athersys, the company that
hopes to exploit the invention, said the immediate plan was to improve the
artificial chromosomes as vectors for moving genes into cells. After that, the
technology might be used to treat blood cell disorders like sickle-cell disease,
hemophilia and immune deficiencies. These diseases have long been a target of
gene therapy because blood-forming cells can be removed, treated and injected
back into the body.

   In the longer term, Dr. Van Bokkelen said, the new technique could be applied
to developmental diseases like muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis and to
forms of hereditary cancer.

   Among the advantages of the artificial chromosomes, he noted, are their
mitotic stability, which means that they are reliably reproduced and passed on
every time the cell divides. There appears to be no immediate limit to the
number of genes and regulatory elements that could be loaded onto them, he
added.

   Some cancers develop when a cell's tumor suppressor genes get knocked out of
action by a mutation. The ample carrying capacity of the artificial chromosome
makes it possible to think of packing it with spare copies of tumor suppressors
and other disease-preventing genes, along with switches to turn them on should
the natural copies fail.

   But Dr. Van Bokkelen said his company was considering gene therapy only for
somatic cells, the ordinary tissues of the body, and not for germ-line cells,
the ones that give rise to eggs and sperm. "There is definitely a boundary there
that the National Institutes of Health and conventional medicine has decided it
isn't going to cross," Dr. Van Bokkelen said. "The idea of germ-line therapy is
something people aren't ready even to consider at this point."

   Experts in gene therapy generally agreed in interviews that the creation of
artificial human chromosomes was a valuable scientific advance and held the
theoretical promise described by the Cleveland team. But they cited the hurdles
that remain to be cleared, like understanding the components of the artificial
chromosome better and developing a more efficient way of inserting the DNA into
cells.

   "One of the great appeals of using artificial chromosomes," said Dr. Alan E.
Smith of the Genzyme Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., "is to introduce all the
subtleties of the genetic controls that exist at the chromosomal level."

   Artificial chromosomes were first created in yeast, a model organism much
studied by biologists, in the early 1980's, but efforts to do the same for
humans have long been frustrated. Building a working centromere was the missing
piece.

   "Before this paper, no one could do it," said Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, a gene
therapy expert at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical College. "It's like when
people first put genes into cells 20 years ago -- it's a starting point."

   Gene therapy aside, Dr. Willard regards the artificial chromosomes as a means
toward understanding how chromosomes work. "One of the questions that has dogged
me for the 10 to 15 years I have been in this business is that of what
chromosomes are," Dr. Willard said. "We are totally ignorant of the rules that
apply here. By manufacturing chromosomes, we can try to understand nature's
rules."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Huntington F. Willard, left, and his team have synthesized
artificial human chromosomes; the arrow at right points to one synthetic
microchromosome, a miniature version of the surrounding natural human
chromosomes. (Photographs by Case Western Reserve University)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1997


                             2458 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 1, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: Editorial Notebook;
Cloning as an Anticlimax

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

BODY:

   With all the hand-wringing over the cloning of sheep in Scotland, it is easy
to forget that society confronted a far more radical biological breakthrough a
quarter-century ago and has emerged none the worse for it. That earlier
revolution, known as "gene splicing" or "recombinant DNA technology," gave
scientists the awesome power to snip genes from one species and insert them into
another, producing creatures with characteristics never before seen. It has
spawned such useful advances as bacteria that make human insulin and crops that
resist insect attacks. But it has also produced some pretty freakish creatures
in the name of science.

   In one outlandish example just reported, scientists took the gene governing
eye formation in a squid and stuck it into fruit fly larvae, with the result
that the insects developed eyes on their wings, legs and antennae. That sounds
more like "fooling with Mother Nature" or "playing God" than anything the
cloners are up to.

    For all the furor it excites, the power of cloning pales in comparison with
gene splicing. Cloning does not allow scientists to create anything new, it
simply lets them copy something that already exists. On any rational worry
scale, cloning poses less risk to health and the environment than does gene
splicing, promises fewer benefits and raises ethical issues no more difficult
than those grappled with for the past quarter-century.

   It is salutary to recall the outcry that greeted the advent of gene splicing
in the early 1970's. The biggest concern then does not even arise in the cloning
debate, namely the fear that reckless scientists might create novel pathogens
that would devastate the world's population, or new plants that would grow out
of control and bury the herbal competition. That concern was soon alleviated,
thanks to astonishing self-control by a scientific community eager to stay one
jump ahead of the Luddites and regulators. Guidelines were drawn up that
stipulated high-level containment for the most dangerous experiments and
approval by institutional and government authorities before experiments could be
conducted. The guidelines applied to all scientists receiving Federal funds, and
were followed voluntarily by others.

   Once it became clear that no catastrophe was on the way, the guidelines were
relaxed and the whole field fell under routine supervision by regulatory
agencies. True, some critics still complain that genetic engineering is booming
ahead without adequate public discussion or vigorous oversight. But now the more
frequent complaint is that progress is too slow, the benefits long in coming.
The genetically engineered tomatoes are hard and flavorless, the genetically
engineered bovine growth hormone to boost milk production is meeting resistance,
and most biotech companies have yet to show a profit.

   Fears that gene splicing might be misapplied to humans have also proved
unfounded. Gene therapy to cure disease has progressed much slower than hoped
and has thus far been applied to cases almost everyone would find ethical --
replacing a defective gene with a good one in an effort to cure an inherited
disease, for example. A consensus has developed, reinforced by government
guidelines, that gene therapy will be tried only on somatic cells that affect an
individual patient, not on the reproductive, or germ, cells that will affect
future generations. So far as is known, no one is trying germ line experiments
and no one is trying to produce a more perfect human being in a new wave of
eugenics.

   Now the cloning breakthrough is upon us. Scientists have finally cloned an
adult animal, a big step beyond the past cloning of embryos and fetuses. This is
a striking technical achievement, for it shows that mature cells can be
reprogrammed to start anew and produce a younger twin of an adult with known
characteristics. The immediate goals are in animal husbandry. Some scientists
hope to take a cow that produces a lot of high-quality milk -- perhaps one that
has first been genetically modified to do so -- and then clone its cells to
produce multiple copies. Genetic alteration is notoriously hit-or-miss and it
would be highly useful, once a "supercow' is produced, to be able to multiply
its numbers more easily. But whether the new techniques will work efficiently
must still be demonstrated.

   Meanwhile, there is not likely to be any great rush to clone humans. Indeed,
it is difficult to imagine how such cloning could even be tested, given the high
likelihood of producing malformed babies or fetuses in the process.

   None of this is to deny that cloning raises tough ethical questions, such as
potential loss of individuality when one's genetic identify is deliberately
copied, or possible abuses in the hands of a dictator or megalomaniac
multimillionaire. The apprehension over cloning will be useful if it triggers a
deeper debate on the dangers. But if recent history is any guide, Nature will
prove far more intractable than expected, and the cloners far less diabolical
than feared.   PHILIP M. BOFFEY

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1997


                             2459 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                        APRIL 1, 1997 Tuesday PM EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: VITAMIN E CAN HARM IF YOU OD

BYLINE: Associated Press, Daily News wire services

BODY:

   People loading up on vitamin E supplements to stay healthy may be making a
mistake. Researchers say most pills have only one form of the nutrient and it
can be harmful in large doses.

   People should take only modest levels of vitamin E in pills and then eat
foods that contain more complete forms of the nutrient, said Stephan Christen, a
biochemist and researcher at the University of California, Berkeley.

   Earlier studies had shown that vitamin E protects against heart disease and
cancer and slows aging by absorbing oxygen free radicals, destructive chemicals
that form during metabolism and when the body fights disease.

   But a study to be published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences suggests that alpha-tocopherol, the form of vitamin E found in
pills, does an incomplete job of neutralizing some compounds.

   To get full benefit from the vitamin, people also need gamma-tocopherol,
found in soybeans, nuts and grains, said Christen, lead author of the study.

   The researcher said he hopes vitamin pill companies soon will add that second
form of the vitamin to their formulas. It is the main form of vitamin E in the
American diet, said Christen, "but it stays in the body only a short time."

   DNA TOOTHBRUSHES Investigators identified a victim of the TWA Flight 800
explosion by examining DNA on toothbrushes at his home, a striking example of
how useful genetic analysis can be in a disaster.

   In a few years it might become the main tool investigators use, if scientists
can find ways to make the analysis faster, said the man in charge of DNA
identification for Flight 800.

   Jack Ballantyne, supervisor of biological sciences at the Suffolk County
Crime Laboratory in Hauppauge, N.Y., described the toothbrush identification in
a recent telephone interview, while commenting on a study in the April issue of
the journal Nature Genetics.

   To use the technique, investigators compare DNA taken from the remains with
DNA obtained from close relatives of people known to have been in a crash. If
samples from relatives aren't available, investigators can get DNA from
hairbrushes, dirty laundry or toothbrushes in the homes of the victims.

   Toothbrushes work because a person scrubs microscopic bits of tissue from the
gums and lining of the mouth while brushing.

   Flight 800 crashed off Long Island last July, killing all 230 people aboard.

   MORE GENES People have always gotten along just fine with the 24 kinds of
human chromosomes, the microscopic strands that carry genes. But now, scientists
have created a few more.

   That could eventually help scientists develop gene therapy - giving people
genes to treat disease - and even lead to preventive measures against Down
syndrome, researchers said.

   The artificial chromosomes, made by assembling pieces of human DNA, are
runts. They're only one-fifth to one-tenth as big as the smallest human one.

   But they behave just like the real thing when they're in human cells. They
duplicate themselves as the cell gets ready to divide, and each copy passes into
one of the resulting cells.

   The work was reported in this month's issue of the journal Nature Genetics by
Huntington Willard, chairman of genetics at the Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine and University Hospitals of Cleveland, and scientists at
Athersys Inc., in Cleveland.

   HEARTFELT DRINKING Moderate drinking apparently improves the survival rate of
some heart attack victims, researchers said yesterday.

   A study of guinea pigs found that moderate alcohol consumption after a heart
attack cut cell death in half and almost doubled the recovery of muscle function
in the heart.

   The same occurred in coronary disease patients who went on to have heart
attacks, said Dr. Vincent Figueredo, a cardiologist at the San Francisco General
Hospital and principal author of the University of California-San Francisco
study.

   "If they've been consuming moderate amounts of alcohol on a regular basis,
they certainly have a better chance of survival, of having less heart damage,"
he said.

   Previous studies have shown that alcohol can reduce the incidence of heart
attacks in healthy people and have suggested the same for those who have
suffered some heart damage.

   The UCSF research, published yesterday in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, suggests that alcohol achieves the same results as an
experimental medical procedure which has been performed in the laboratory.

NOTES: Health Watch

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2460 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     April 1, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: ARTIFICIAL HUMAN CHROMOSOMES MADE IN OHIO LAB

BYLINE: ROBERT COOKE, NEWSDAY

BODY:


   The first artificial human chromosomes that work properly inside living cells
- offering a potent new way to attack genetic diseases and perhaps cancer - are
now being used in biomedical experiments, scientists reported yesterday.

   The achievement, announced by a research team at the Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine in Cleveland, surmounts two major barriers
scientists have faced in trying to put new genes into human cells using viruses
as the carriers. Viruses are too small to carry chunks of DNA larger than about
40,000 base pairs long, and viruses prompt strong immune responses, which has
historically limited the long-term effectiveness of genetic therapy.

   Because the new artificial chromosomes are far larger than viruses, they can
hold chunks of DNA up to 2 million bases pairs long. And since artificial
chromosomes mimic existing chromosomes - by participating in the life of the
cell, carrying specific genes and being reproduced as the cell divides - they
don't face rejection.

   As a result, even when using large genes ''we can put them in, study their
activity, and regulate their activity'' inside human cells, geneticist
Huntington Willard explained. This could include replacing a missing or faulty
gene, or even inserting a tumor-suppressor gene to help stop cancer.

   The new results are reported in Nature Genetics.

   So far, the research team has created only a handful of very small artificial
chromosomes inside laboratory-reared human cells, said geneticist John J.
Harrington, who led the work along with Willard.

   Currently, the preferred method for getting new genes into human cells is to
load them into a virus that naturally inserts the genes into a cell's
chromosomes. But with that method there is no predicting which chromosome will
get the extra gene - an unfortunate bit of randomness that confounds results.
Also, viruses are sometimes rejected by the immune system.

   Moreover, a virus may insert its experimental genes into a location that
creates problems, such as disturbing part of a chromosome whose job is to
prevent cancer. Artificial chromosomes would eliminate that risk because each
new gene could reside on its own chromosome instead of getting jammed into an
existing one.

   Chromosomes are tiny rod-shaped bodies that serve as the carriers of genes,
the storehouse of genetic information inside the cell's nucleus. They are
measured in terms of base pairs, the individual links that make up the DNA
chain.

   Chromosomes are vital to life because they represent the basic blueprints,
the biochemical plans, that control construction and operation of the human
body.

   According to biologist Rudolf Jaenisch at the Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., gaining the ability to insert large DNA
segments into cells is ''of major interest not only for manipulating animals,
but also for understanding what assures the faithful segregation of
chromosomes'' during the process of cell division.

   One early goal of the research is to make micro-chromosomes that contain only
one gene, Willard said. Even though the new micro-chromosomes are only one-tenth
the size of the smallest human chromosome, they seem to work as well and are
reproduced properly in the process of cell division.

   ''This provides a completely alternative approach to gene therapy,'' he said.

   The artificial chromosomes are made by inserting telomeres - the DNA
structures that mark the ends of chromosomes - along with centromere and some
choromosmal DNA directly into the cell. When all the pieces are available, the
cell constructs the new chromosome by itself. The centromere acts as sort of an
organizing and stabilizing body near the middle of the artificial chromosome.

   In one experiment that lasted six months, genes on an artificial chromosome
were still present and functioning in daughter cells after the parent cell had
divided about 240 times.

   Harrington said the team will now leave certain pieces out and see whether
that interferes with chromosome synthesis. Piece by piece, that will allow them
to find out which elements are needed and which are not. Once they have
determined the minimal ingredients needed to make a chromosome, it should be
relatively easy to make custom-designed ones, he said.

   The Washington Post contributed to this story.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1997


                             2461 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     April 1, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: ARTIFICIAL HUMAN CHROMOSOMES MADE IN OHIO LAB

BYLINE: ROBERT COOKE, NEWSDAY

BODY:


   The first artificial human chromosomes that work properly inside living cells
- offering a potent new way to attack genetic diseases and perhaps cancer - are
now being used in biomedical experiments, scientists reported yesterday.

   The achievement, announced by a research team at the Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine in Cleveland, surmounts two major barriers
scientists have faced in trying to put new genes into human cells using viruses
as the carriers. Viruses are too small to carry chunks of DNA larger than about
40,000 base pairs long, and viruses prompt strong immune responses, which has
historically limited the long-term effectiveness of genetic therapy.

   Because the new artificial chromosomes are far larger than viruses, they can
hold chunks of DNA up to 2 million bases pairs long. And since artificial
chromosomes mimic existing chromosomes - by participating in the life of the
cell, carrying specific genes and being reproduced as the cell divides - they
don't face rejection.

   As a result, even when using large genes ''we can put them in, study their
activity, and regulate their activity'' inside human cells, geneticist
Huntington Willard explained. This could include replacing a missing or faulty
gene, or even inserting a tumor-suppressor gene to help stop cancer.

   The new results are reported in Nature Genetics.

   So far, the research team has created only a handful of very small artificial
chromosomes inside laboratory-reared human cells, said geneticist John J.
Harrington, who led the work along with Willard.

   Currently, the preferred method for getting new genes into human cells is to
load them into a virus that naturally inserts the genes into a cell's
chromosomes. But with that method there is no predicting which chromosome will
get the extra gene - an unfortunate bit of randomness that confounds results.
Also, viruses are sometimes rejected by the immune system.

   Moreover, a virus may insert its experimental genes into a location that
creates problems, such as disturbing part of a chromosome whose job is to
prevent cancer. Artificial chromosomes would eliminate that risk because each
new gene could reside on its own chromosome instead of getting jammed into an
existing one.

   Chromosomes are tiny rod-shaped bodies that serve as the carriers of genes,
the storehouse of genetic information inside the cell's nucleus. They are
measured in terms of base pairs, the individual links that make up the DNA
chain.

   Chromosomes are vital to life because they represent the basic blueprints,
the biochemical plans, that control construction and operation of the human
body.

   According to biologist Rudolf Jaenisch at the Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., gaining the ability to insert large DNA
segments into cells is ''of major interest not only for manipulating animals,
but also for understanding what assures the faithful segregation of
chromosomes'' during the process of cell division.

   One early goal of the research is to make micro-chromosomes that contain only
one gene, Willard said. Even though the new micro-chromosomes are only one-tenth
the size of the smallest human chromosome, they seem to work as well and are
reproduced properly in the process of cell division.

   ''This provides a completely alternative approach to gene therapy,'' he said.

   The artificial chromosomes are made by inserting telomeres - the DNA
structures that mark the ends of chromosomes - along with centromere and some
choromosmal DNA directly into the cell. When all the pieces are available, the
cell constructs the new chromosome by itself. The centromere acts as sort of an
organizing and stabilizing body near the middle of the artificial chromosome.

   In one experiment that lasted six months, genes on an artificial chromosome
were still present and functioning in daughter cells after the parent cell had
divided about 240 times.

Harrington said the team will now leave certain pieces out and see whether that
interferes with chromosome synthesis. Piece by piece, that will allow them to
find out which elements are needed and which are not.

   The Washington Post contributed to this story.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1997


                             2462 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 1, 1997 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1033 words

HEADLINE: CWRU RESEARCHERS CREATE ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOME;
ACHIEVEMENT MAY LEAD TO CURES FOR GENETIC ILLS

BYLINE: By ULYSSES TORASSA; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   The world's first artificial human chromosome has been synthesized by
researchers at Case Western Reserve University, a technical achievement that is
part of a larger quest to cure genetic diseases.

   Although it is still years away from being inserted into a human, researchers
involved in the project hope that some day the artificial chromosome could be
used to transport working copies of genes into people suffering from inherited
conditions like cystic fibrosis or sickle cell anemia.

   Scientists have been frustrated for years in the search for effective ways to
treat genetic diseases, even in cases where they have identified the faulty gene
and know how to fix it, because they can't deliver the fix.

   The announcement of the synthesis, which appears in today's edition of the
journal Nature Genetics, promises to solve some, but not all, of the roadblocks.

   Constructing the miniature chromosome, done in conjunction with Athersys
Inc., was based on the discovery of a once-mysterious component essential to a
chromosome's function.

   "This is the one remaining black box in the human genome, a pretty
fundamental black box," said Huntington F. Willard, chairman of the genetics
departments at University Hospitals and CWRU's medical school, and senior author
on the study. "We finally understand enough about what a chromosome is that we
can mix and match the relevant parts and re-create it."

   Each of us has 46 chromosomes that carry our genetic code. They have been
likened to a set of encyclopedias, with each chromosome representing one volume
and single genes representing sentences in the text.

   The microchromosome could be like an addendum or errata to the set - not
nearly as large as the original volumes, but similar in structure.

   The information it carries would correct a mistake deep inside one of the
other volumes that has led to disease.

   In the long run, it is hoped that the microchromosome will get around
problems with viral vectors, a technology that tries to use disabled viruses to
carry replacement genes into cells, but which has so far proved unworkable.

   "This is a completely alternative technology that in principle should have
none of the drawbacks of the vector technology and has a number of significant
advantages," Willard said. "There's a lot of things that have to be done between
here and there, but the potential and theoretical concerns will make this a
little more straightforward than the other technologies."

   For one thing, a working microchromosome promises to be less disruptive to a
person's genetic makeup than viral vectors. It can hold more genetic material,
allowing it to house very long genes and the instructions to help them act
properly when they get into cells. A microchromosome also remains with the cell
after it divides.

   Some viral vectors act more like an editing pen, scratching out the wrong
information and writing in the correct codes. That leaves the possibility that
other codes could be inadvertently scratched or altered, too.

   Another viral-based technology acts more like an addendum, but it doesn't
stay with the cell as it divides, making it obsolete after the first generation.

   But a major hurdle for all potential gene therapies, including the
microchromosome, is how to get the fix inside human cells.

   "It could be a step toward gene therapy, since these chromosomes could
contain even large genes intact. So if you wanted to correct for a broken gene,
you might be able to introduce the unbroken gene in the form of an artificial
chromosome," said David Schlessinger, professor of genetics at Washington
University and a leading human genome researcher. "But that's a long way off.
The main bottleneck has been the lack of an efficient gene delivery system, and
this is not overcome by this."

   Willard said his team is working on the problem.

   "We have some ideas in mind," for conquering the delivery issue, Willard
said. "Whether they are any better than anyone else's, time will tell."

   The CWRU researchers were able to get the microchromosome to assemble and
divide properly, and they watched to make sure the marker gene they put into it
actually worked.

   However, further studies will have to be done to see if they can make the
microcromosomes outside cells, and if they can be inserted into enough cells to
make a difference in diseases. After more laboratory work, there will be years
of animal experiments before any human trials would begin.

   Some of that work will be done by Athersys, a Cleveland company owned by
Willard and others connected to the research. It has a license from CWRU to use
the technology in the marketplace.

   Chromosomes have three parts: the DNA information itself, a set of telomeres
that keep the ends from fraying, and a centromere, which controls the stability
of the chromosome as it divides.

   It wasn't until Willard's group zeroed in on the code for the centromere that
the creation of a synthetic chromosome was possible. After years of searching,
they found it in a long string of what had been dismissed as "junk DNA" -
sequences of useless code that continues to be carried in our chromosomes.

   Then, late last year, researchers in the CWRU lab put all the elements inside
a human cell and waited as they formed a miniature chromosome.

   Because the centromere is crucial to chromosome division, the work in
Willard's lab also has the potential to shed light on diseases like Down
syndrome and even some cancers. They are not hereditary conditions but occur
when there is an error in the way chromosomes copy themselves.

   Jean-Michel Vos, a geneticist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, is also working with chromosomes and technologies that he one day hopes
will prove effective for gene therapy. He said the CWRU achievement is exciting,
but the delivery problems - exacerbated by the large size of even
microchromosomes - make its eventual use in patients far from certain.

   "I think this is a great experiment in terms of basic research, as a proof of
concept," he said. "It really shows one can build, artificially in a test tube,
a chromosome. I see it as a great research tool. As a therapeutic tool, there is
a way to go."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: ROADELL HICKMAN / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER (Page 6A); Three
men involved in creating the world's first artificial chromosome are from left,
Gil Van Bokkelen, president and chief executive officer of Athersys Inc.; John
Harrington, sitting, a post-doctoral fellow at Case Western Reserve University
and vice president of Athersys; and Huntington F. Willard, chairman of the
genetics departments at CWRU and University Hospitals. Willard's lab created the
michrochromosome, and the technology has been licensed to Athersys for
commercial development.; CHART: PLAIN DEALER; CREATING AN ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOME;
SOURCE: Case Western Reserve University

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2463 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 April 1, 1997, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 08A

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS CREATE CHROMOSOMES, SAY WORK MIGHT CURE DISEASES

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   People have always gotten along just fine with the 24 kinds of human
chromosomes, the microscopic strands that carry genes. But now, scientists have
created a few more.

   That could eventually help scientists develop gene therapy - giving people
genes to treat disease - and even lead to preventive measures against Down
syndrome, researchers say.

   The artificial chromosomes, made by assembling pieces of human DNA, are
runts. They're only one-fifth to one-tenth as big as the smallest human one.

   But they behave just like the real thing when they're in human cells. They
duplicate themselves as the cell gets ready to divide, and each copy passes into
one of the resulting cells.

   The work was reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics by
Huntington Willard, chairman of genetics at the Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine and University Hospitals of Cleveland, and scientists at
Athersys Inc., in Cleveland.

Important Step

   Dr. David R. Cox, professor of genetics and pediatrics at Stanford University
School of Medicine, called the work an important first step toward learning how
to use artificial chromosomes for gene therapy.

   The researchers created at least two artificial chromosomes, but it's their
technique that will be useful.

   For example, it will help scientists discover what turns particular genes on
and off, Willard said. That's a big question for treating genetic diseases by
planting genes in patients, because scientists want the implanted genes to
behave normally.

   Genes act like loyal citizens of their chromosome neighborhood, taking their
cues from neighbors. For most genes, scientists don't know which neighbors give
the cues to turn on or off.

   But now, scientists will be able to take a large chromosome fragment that
contains a gene plus some of its neighbors, turn the fragment into a full
chromosome, stick it into human cells and watch how the gene behaves. By
experimenting with different fragments that include different neighbors,
scientists will be able to pin down what regulates the gene.

   Artificial chromosomes may also prove useful for doing the gene therapy
itself. Scientists might deliver a mini-chromosome - rather than just the gene -
to the patient's cells. That way, the gene will be regulated by its normal
neighbors and inherited by later generations of cells, Willard said.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2464 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 1, 1997 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 857 words

HEADLINE: Ohio researchers make first-ever artificial human chromosomes

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   Scientists in Ohio have created the first artificial human chromosomes, an
achievement that may someday allow doctors to alter people's genetic inheritance
or cure diseases by slipping genetic "cassettes" directly into people's cells.

    The artificial chromosomes, made in the laboratory from a blend of natural
and synthetic human DNA, are miniature versions of human chromosomes - the
corkscrew- shaped structures inside cells that carry all the genes required for
life.

    Scientists said the long-sought advance marks the first time anyone has
created an artificial human chromosome that can replicate the way natural
chromosomes do every time a cell divides.

   In theory, the chromosomes could be custom-designed to ferry curative genes
into people suffering from inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis, or even
provide genetic enhancements such as added protection against cancer.

   More immediately, the chromosomes will serve as miniature "laboratory
benches," helping scientists learn how genes are regulated inside cells - a
central question in biology.

    Some people predicted that the success also would escalate concerns about
scientists' increasing ability to manipulate genes, which reached new heights in
February with the cloning of an adult sheep.

    Artificial chromosomes will not directly facilitate the cloning of animals
or people, medical ethicists and others said, but they represent a new power
over basic biological and reproductive processes.

    So far, the research team at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland
has created only a handful of very small artificial chromosomes inside
laboratory-reared human cells, said geneticist John J. Harrington, who led the
work along with Huntington F. Willard.

    The group hopes to inject some of the manufactured chromosomes into animals
within six months, a necessary step before considering clinical trials in
people, said Harrington, who is also vice president of Cleveland-based Athersys
Inc., a biotechnology company that owns the rights to the new technology.

    "We think this may allow us to treat patients at a very young age, maybe
shortly after birth, so the treatment can be delivered to a few cells and then
spread as the cells divide and the child grows," Harrington said.

    Within a year, he said, he hopes to have created a modular system of
prefabricated chromosome parts, each bearing different key genes, which could be
pulled off a laboratory shelf, combined and inserted into a person's cells.

    "It clearly is novel and represents a new approach that seems to work," said
Arno Motulsky, a professor of medicine and genetics at the University of
Washington in Seattle who co-wrote a 1995 federal report that called for the
development of better gene therapy techniques. "You can't go to the lab tomorrow
and start using it for gene therapy. But it's coming along."

    Human cells have 46 chromosomes, each of which is a long, twisted strand of
genetic material, or DNA, made of millions of chemical subunits. Some stretches
of DNA work as a unit, called a gene, and the particular order of chemical
subunits within that stretch constitutes a coded set of instructions, telling
the cell what to do, such as "Make insulin."

    Chromosomes are extremely convoluted and complex structures, yet every time
a cell divides, they manage to untangle their genetic threads and duplicate
themselves so each resulting cell can end up with a full complement of genes.

    Currently, the preferred method for getting new genes into human cells is to
load them into a virus that naturally inserts the genes into a cell's
chromosomes. But with that method, there is no predicting which chromosome will
get the extra gene - an unfortunate bit of randomness that confounds results.
Also, viruses are sometimes rejected by the immune system.

    Moreover, a virus may insert its experimental genes into a location that
creates problems, such as disturbing part of a chromosome whose job is to
prevent cancer. Artificial chromosomes would eliminate that risk because each
new gene could reside on its own chromosome instead of getting jammed into an
existing one.

    The Ohio team used synthetic DNA made by a machine that strings together the
chemical subunits of DNA, called nucleotides, which can be purchased from
chemical suppliers. They designed this synthetic portion to mimic a specialized
part of a chromosome, called the centromere, which is a key structure involved
in chromosome replication.

    They also included bits and pieces of natural DNA from human chromosomes,
because they didn't know what other DNA sequences might be necessary to make a
functioning chromosome.

    The team injected the pieces of DNA into cells growing in laboratory dishes,
where the pieces self-assembled into chromosomes, probably with the help of
enzymes naturally present in the cells. The researchers then let the cells
divide normally.

    In one experiment that lasted six months, genes on an artificial chromosome
were still present and functioning in daughter cells after the parent cell had
divided about 240 times, according to a report describing the work in the April
issue of the scientific journal Nature Genetics.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2465 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     April 1, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Artificial chromosomes small, but effective

SOURCE: An Associated Press report

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   People have always gotten along just fine with the 24 kinds of human
chromosomes, the microscopic strands that carry genes. But, scientists have
created a few more.

   That could help scientists develop gene therapy - giving people genes to
treat disease - and lead to preventive measures against Down syndrome,
researchers said.

   The artificial chromosomes, made by assembling pieces of human DNA, are
runts. They're only one-fifth to one-tenth as big as the smallest human one.

   But they behave just like the real thing when they're in human cells. They
duplicate themselves as the cell gets ready to divide, and each copy passes into
one of the resulting cells.

   The work was reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   The researchers created at least two artificial chromosomes, but it's their
technique that will be useful.

   For example, it will help scientists discover what turns particular genes on
and off. That's a big question for treating genetic diseases by planting genes
in patients, because scientists want the implanted genes to behave normally.

   Genes act like loyal citizens of their chromosome neighborhood, taking their
cues from neighbors. For most genes, scientists don't know which neighbors give
the cues to turn on or off.

   But now, scientists will be able to take a large chromosome fragment that
contains a gene plus some of its neighbors, turn the fragment into a full
chromosome, stick it into human cells and watch how the gene behaves.

   By experimenting with different fragments that include different neighbors,
scientists will be able to figure what regulates the gene.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2466 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          April 1, 1997 Tuesday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 380 words

HEADLINE: RUNT GENES COULD HELP TREAT DISEASE

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   People have always gotten along just fine with 24 kinds of human chromosomes,
the microscopic strands that carry genes. But now, scientists have created a few
more.

   That eventually could help scientists develop gene therapy - giving people
genes to treat disease - and even lead to preventive measures against Down
syndrome, researchers said.

   The artificial chromosomes, made by assembling pieces of human DNA, are
runts. They're only one fifth to one tenth as big as the smallest human one.

   But they behave just like the real thing when they're in human cells. They
duplicate themselves as the cell gets ready to divide, and each copy passes into
one of the resulting cells.

   The work was reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics by
Huntington Willard, chairman of genetics at Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine and University Hospitals of Cleveland and scientists at
Athersys Inc., in Cleveland.

   Dr. David Cox, professor of genetics and pediatrics at Stanford University
School of Medicine, called the work an important first step toward learning how
to use artificial chromosomes for gene therapy.

   The researchers created at least two artificial chromosomes, but it's their
technique that will be useful.

   For example, it will help scientists discover what turns genes on and off,
Willard said. That's a big question for treating genetic diseases by planting
genes in patients, because scientists want the implanted genes to behave
normally.

   Genes act like loyal citizens of their chromosome neighborhood, taking their
cues from neighbors. For most genes, scientists don't know which neighbors give
the cues to turn on or off.

   But now, scientists will be able to take a large chromosome fragment that
contains a gene plus some of its neighbors, turn the fragment into a full
chromosome, stick it into human cells and watch how the gene behaves. By
experimenting with different fragments that include different neighbors,
scientists will be able to pin down what regulates the gene.

   The artificial chromosomes were assembled by human cells in a laboratory.
Willard and his colleagues supplied three ingredients: ordinary DNA, a synthetic
centromere that makes chromosomes divide, and specialized DNA for the chromosome
tips.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2467 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          April 1, 1997 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: FIRST ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOMES ARE CREATED;
ADVANCE MIGHT LEAD TO CURATIVE GENE 'CASSETTES'

BYLINE: By RICK WEISS The Washington Post

BODY:

   Scientists in Ohio have created the first artificial human chromosomes, an
achievement that may someday allow doctors to alter people's genetic inheritance
or cure diseases by slipping genetic "cassettes" directly into people's cells.

   The artificial chromosomes, made in the laboratory from a blend of natural
and synthetic human DNA, are miniature versions of human chromosomes, the
corkscrew-shaped structures inside cells that carry all the genes required for
life.

   Scientists said the long-sought advance marks the first time anyone has
created an artificial human chromosome that can replicate the way natural
chromosomes do every time a cell divides.

   In theory, the chromosomes could be custom-designed to ferry curative genes
into people suffering from inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis, or even
to provide genetic enhancements such as added protection against cancer.

   More immediately, the chromosomes will serve as miniature "laboratory
benches," helping scientists learn how genes are regulated inside cells, a
central question in biology.

   Some people predicted the success also will escalate concerns about
scientists' increasing ability to manipulate genes, which reached new heights in
February with the cloning of an adult sheep.

   Artificial chromosomes will not directly facilitate the cloning of animals or
people, medical ethicists and others said, but they represent a new power over
basic biological and reproductive processes.

   So far, the research team at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland has
created only a few very small artificial chromosomes inside laboratory-reared
human cells, said geneticist John Harrington, who led the work along with
Huntington Willard.

   The group hopes to inject some of the manufactured chromosomes into animals
within six months, a necessary step before considering clinical trials in
people, said Harrington, who is also vice president of Athersys Inc., a
Cleveland biotechnology company that owns the rights to the new technology.

   "We think this may allow us to treat patients at a very young age, maybe
shortly after birth, so the treatment can be delivered to a few cells and then
spread as the cells divide and the child grows," Harrington said.

   Within a year, he said, he hopes to have created a modular system of
prefabricated chromosome parts, each bearing different key genes, which could be
pulled off a laboratory shelf, combined and inserted into a person's cells.

   "It clearly is novel and represents a new approach that seems to work," said
Arno Motulsky, a professor of medicine and genetics at the University of
Washington in Seattle who co-wrote a 1995 federal report that called for the
development of better gene therapy techniques. "You can't go to the lab tomorrow
and start using it for gene therapy. But it's coming along."

   Human cells have 46 chromosomes, each of which is a long twisted strand of
genetic material, or DNA, made of millions of chemical subunits. Some stretches
of DNA work as a unit, called a gene, and the particular order of chemical
subunits within that stretch constitutes a coded set of instructions, telling
the cell what to do, such as "make insulin."

   Chromosomes are extremely convoluted and complex structures, yet every time a
cell divides they manage to untangle their genetic threads and duplicate
themselves so each resulting cell can end up with a full complement of genes.

   Currently, the preferred method for getting new genes into human cells is to
load them into a virus that naturally inserts the genes into a cell's
chromosomes. But with that method there is no predicting which chromosome will
get the extra gene, an unfortunate bit of randomness that confounds results.
Also, viruses are sometimes rejected by the immune system.

   Moreover, a virus may insert its experimental genes into a location that
creates problems, such as disturbing part of a chromosome whose job is to
prevent cancer. Artificial chromosomes would eliminate that risk because each
new gene could reside on its own chromosome instead of getting jammed into an
existing one.

   The Ohio team used synthetic DNA made by a machine that strings together the
chemical subunits of DNA, called nucleotides, which can be purchased from
chemical suppliers. They designed this synthetic portion to mimic a specialized
part of a chromosome, called the centromere, which is a key structure involved
in chromosome replication.

   They also included bits and pieces of natural DNA from human chromosomes,
because they didn't know what other DNA sequences might be necessary to make a
functioning chromosome.

   The team injected the pieces of DNA into cells growing in laboratory dishes,
where the pieces self-assembled into chromosomes.

   "It's absolutely fascinating and it's beautiful work that will lead to all
kinds of advances, but it's not going to lead to new therapies in humans," said
W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California, who performed the
world's first gene therapy experiment at the National Institutes of Health in
1990.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1997


                             2468 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     April 01, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1279 words

HEADLINE: Artificial Human Chromosomes That Replicate Developed in Lab;
Scientists Aim to Ferry Curative Genes to Cells

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Scientists in Ohio have created the first artificial human chromosomes, an
achievement that may someday allow doctors to alter people's genetic inheritance
or cure diseases by slipping genetic "cassettes" directly into cells.

   The artificial chromosomes, made in the laboratory from a blend of natural
and synthetic human DNA, are miniature versions of human chromosomes -- the
sausage-shaped structures inside cells that carry all the genes required for
life.

   Scientists said the long-sought advance marks the first time anyone has
created an artificial human chromosome that can replicate the way natural
chromosomes do every time a cell divides.

   In theory, the chromosomes could be custom designed to ferry curative genes
into persons suffering from inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis, or even
to provide genetic enhancements such as added protection against cancer. More
immediately, the chromosomes will serve as miniature laboratory benches, helping
scientists learn how genes are regulated inside cells -- a central question in
biology.

   Some predicted the success would also escalate concerns about scientists'
increasing ability to manipulate genes, which reached new heights in February
with the first cloning of an adult sheep. Artificial chromosomes will not
directly facilitate the cloning of animals or people, medical ethicists and
others said, but they represent a similarly surprising and somewhat
disconcerting new power over basic biological and reproductive processes.

   So far, the Ohio team has created only a handful of very small artificial
chromosomes inside laboratory-reared human cells, said geneticist John J.
Harrington, who with Huntington F. Willard led the work at Case Western Reserve
University in Cleveland.

   The group hopes to inject some of their chromosomes into animals within six
months, a necessary step before considering clinical trials in humans, said
Harrington, who is also vice president of Cleveland-based Athersys Inc., a
biotechnology company that owns the rights to the new technology.

   "We think this may allow us to treat patients at a very young age, maybe
shortly after birth, so the treatment can be delivered to a few cells and then
spread as the cells divide and the child grows," Harrington said. Within a year,
he said, he hopes to have created a modular system of prefabricated chromosome
parts, each bearing different key genes, which could be pulled off a laboratory
shelf, combined and inserted into a person's cells.

   "It clearly is novel and represents a new approach that seems to work," said
Arno Motulsky, a professor of medicine and genetics at the University of
Washington in Seattle who co-wrote a 1995 federal report that called for the
development of better gene therapy techniques. "You can't go to the lab tomorrow
and start using it for gene therapy. But it's coming along."

   Mark A. Rothstein, director of the Health Law and Policy Institute at the
University of Houston Law Center, was among those expressing concern.

   If artificial chromosomes really make it easy to rewrite a person's genetic
code, Rothstein said, they could create a demand not only for the treatment of
genetic diseases but also for the enhancement of intellectual or physical traits
as the genes for those traits get identified, a pursuit with troubling ethical
implications.

   "This certainly raises new issues that need to be dealt with," Rothstein
said. "I think the challenge for us all is to develop some sort of criteria for
identifying where we want to draw the lines -- if we want to draw lines at all
-- and develop a cogent rationale of why certain types of genetic manipulation
are simply unacceptable."

   Human cells have 46 chromosomes, each of which is a long twisted strand of
genetic material, or DNA, made of millions of chemical subunits. Some stretches
of DNA work as a unit, called a gene, and the particular order of chemical
subunits within that stretch constitutes a coded set of instructions, telling
the cell what to do, such as "make insulin."

   Chromosomes are extremely convoluted and complex structures, yet every time a
cell divides, they manage to untangle their genetic threads and duplicate
themselves so each resulting cell can end up with a full complement of genes.

   In 1980, researchers created the first yeast artificial chromosomes, or YACs,
which immediately became invaluable research tools. Scientists can now insert a
poorly understood gene into a YAC, then plug the YAC into a yeast cell and see
what the cell does in response to the new genetic program. If the cell starts
making insulin, for example, the gene must have been an insulin gene.

   But human genes are best understood within human cells. The preferred method
for getting new genes into human cells now is to load them into a virus that
naturally inserts the genes into a cell's chromosomes. But with that method,
there is no predicting which chromosome will get the extra gene -- an
unfortunate bit of randomness that confounds results. Also, viruses are
sometimes rejected by the immune system.

   Moreover, a virus may insert its experimental genes in a bad location,
perhaps damaging, for example, a part of the chromosome whose job is to prevent
cancer. None of the hundreds of patients who have received new genes by viral
gene therapy have developed cancer as a result of the experimental treatment,
but the theoretical possibility looms large in doctors' minds.

   Artificial chromosomes would eliminate that risk because each new gene could
reside on its own chromosome instead of getting jammed into an existing one.

   The Ohio team used synthetic DNA made by a machine that strings together the
chemical subunits of DNA, called nucleotides, which can be purchased from
chemical suppliers. They designed this synthetic portion to mimic a specialized
part of a chromosome, called the centromere, which is a key structure involved
in chromosome replication. They also included bits and pieces of natural DNA
from human chromosomes, because they didn't know what other DNA sequences might
be necessary to make a functioning chromosome.

   The team injected the pieces of DNA into cells growing in laboratory dishes,
where they self-assembled into chromosomes, probably with the help of enzymes
naturally present in the cells. The researchers then let the cells divide
normally.

   In one experiment that lasted six months, genes on an artificial chromosome
were still present and functioning in daughter cells after the parent cell had
divided about 240 times, according to a report describing the work in the April
issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   Harrington said the team will now leave certain pieces out and see whether
that interferes with chromosome synthesis. Piece by piece, that will allow them
to find out which elements are needed and which are not. Once they have
determined the minimal ingredients needed to make a chromosome, it should be
relatively easy to make custom designed ones, he said.

   Not everyone agrees. "It's absolutely fascinating and it's beautiful work
that will lead to all kinds of advances, but it's not going to lead to new
therapies in humans," said W. French Anderson, of the University of Southern
California, who performed the world's first gene therapy experiment at the
National Institutes of Health in 1990.

   The chromosomes were too big to be made cheaply and would have trouble
passing safety muster with the Food and Drug Administration, Anderson said. He
predicted that other experimental gene delivery vehicles, including a new
generation of engineered viruses, will be successful long before artificial
human chromosomes.


GRAPHIC: Photo, courtesy case western reserve university and athersys inc.,
Researchers at Case Western Reserve University have succeeded in constructing
the first functioning artificial human chromosome. In this image, the artificial
chromosome (highlighted by the arrow) is surrounded by much larger, natural
chromosomes. The bright spots in the middle of the natural chromosomes are the
centromeres, which are important for cell reproduction. The artificial
chromosome is much smaller because it carries only two functioning genes.

LOAD-DATE: April 01, 1997


                             2469 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Arkansas Democrat-Gazette
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             March 30, 1997, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 3481 words

HEADLINE: Scientists cracking DNA code  But genetic testing comes with a cost

BYLINE: DOUG PETERS, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:



   Slowly at first, and now with increasing speed, Mother Nature has whispered
her secrets into the ears of researchers, helping them crack the code of human
genetics.

   These are the intimate secrets of what makes an individual, and they offer
glimpses into the future of life and health.

   The advances allow doctors to test people for diseases years before the first
symptoms appear, a first step toward diagnosis and treatment of genetic diseases
that could save thousands of lives and millions of health-care dollars. More
than 4,000 diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, cystic fibrosis and many
types of cancer, have been linked to breakdowns in individual genes.

   Scientists now can test for many of these breakdowns.

   Knowing the chances of developing a debilitating or deadly disease can allow
for vigilance in scheduling diagnostic tests and for early treatment.  It also
allows carriers of a gene mutation to plan for the future -- what career path to
follow, what financial arrangements to make, whether to have children and even
whom to marry.

   But the bright lights of genetic science cast long shadows. For all the
potential of predictive gene testing, there are also pitfalls. As predictive
genetic tests become available for larger numbers of common diseases, and as the
tests become more comprehensive and less expensive, more people will face the
choice of whether to be tested.

   So now, in what one expert dubbed "the very dawn of this genetic age," a
giant question mark looms over everything scientists know about genes and
predictive testing.

   Often there is an unexpected price to pay for a glimpse of the secrets that
nature has kept locked away in the double helix of DNA molecules:

   v A positive predictive test for a genetic disease could make it difficult to
get or pay for insurance. And as is often the case with rapidly advancing
technology, laws in many states, including Arkansas, haven't kept pace with
progress.

   v The identification of hereditary, disease-causing gene mutations is only
the first step in genetic research. In many cases, the knowledge a positive test
provides can't be followed up with effective treatment. In others, treatment is
drastic and based on an incomplete knowledge of if, when and how strongly the
disease will strike.

   v Genetic testing can pack a powerful psychological punch, whether the result
is positive or negative. This is especially true when test results implicate not
only the test subject, but the subject's ancestors and children.

   genetic blueprints

   Fifty thousand to 100,000 genes reside in every cell of the body, passed from
parents to children. The proteins that they tell cells to produce carry out the
instructions held in the genetic blueprint of DNA, from the color of one's eyes
to the body's ability to ward off illness.

   A cell normally activates only the genes that are important to that cell's
functions. Bone cells activate the genes they need, while brain cells activate
others.

   Occasionally, however, genes do their jobs either not well enough, too well,
or not at all. Everyone has five to 12 defective genes, said Susan Hassed, a
genetic counselor at the Arkansas Genetics Program, a joint program of Arkansas
Children's Hospital and the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences.

   Most of the time, the defects are minor. But in some cases, a gene's
inability to function properly can lead to genetic disease.

   Inherited genetic traits are present at conception and in every cell as a
child develops from a single cell to trillions of them, allowing testing to
pinpoint potential health problems years, sometimes decades, before symptoms
appear.

   The ability to identify the chances of developing certain diseases has many
far-reaching implications. The effect of testing on insurance is not the least
of them.

   Ripples in the risk pool

   "Nancy" is a 40-year-old with a history of cancer on both sides of her
family. Her mother and two of her aunts died of cancer, as did her father and
one of his brothers.

   The west Little Rock mother of two asked that her real name not be used,
because she's afraid of what her family history could mean to her insurability
-- and the insurability of her children.

   She could take a test to identify gene mutations that might predispose her to
several different kinds of cancer, but she hasn't and doesn't plan to. The tests
are expensive -- often several thousand dollars -- and a positive result could
be just one more thing for insurers to use against her or her family, she says.

   "These are things that are beneficial to mankind," she says of the tests.
"But they can label you."

   Predictive test results become part of an individual's permanent medical
record, which insurance companies might ask to consider when issuing coverage or
setting premiums.

   "Ten years down the road, my son goes to get insurance and they say, 'Oh, no,
we can't cover him, he's got a genetic link to cancer.' "

   Nancy's concern is common, insurance executives say, but unfounded.

   At the heart of America's private, voluntary health insurance system lies a
Catch-22, says Dr. Thomas Murray, professor and director of the Center for
Biomedical Ethics at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio.

   Insurance underwriters, Murray says, "make sure that they don't insure you
for the diseases you're most likely to actually have."

   What worries Murray is that predictive genetic testing makes it easier for
insurers to pinpoint and "weed out" high-risk applicants. Murray is a member of
President Clinton's National Bioethics Advisory Commission, which is working on
a policy draft on this and other genetics issues.

   Mark Rothstein, director of the Health Law and Policy Institute at the
University of Houston, shares Murray's concern.

   "In any given year, 5 percent of health insurance claimants are going to
represent 50 percent of health insurance costs," said Rothstein, who has
testified about genetic testing before Congress and the World Health
Organization, "so there are many economic advantages to be gained by excluding
the few people who are going to run up tremendous bills."

   Managed-care systems such as health maintenance organizations have similar
incentives to eliminate high-risk people from their rolls, Rothstein said. To
many insurance companies, using genetic test results to calculate risk isn't
discrimination. It's just good business.

   Arkansas Blue Cross and Blue Shield, one of state's largest providers of
individual health insurance, does not use genetic information when considering
health insurance applications or when setting premiums, spokesman Max Parker
said.

   Neither does national insurance giant Mutual of Omaha, which provides health
insurance for more than 5,000 Arkansans. The company does not ask for genetic
information or family medical history when considering applications, a company
executive said, and even disregards genetic test results it finds among clients'
medical records.

   'Prior knowledge'

   But as technology allows more people to know their risk while leaving
insurers in the dark, the system will have to change, said Cecil Bykerk, Mutual
of Omaha's executive vice president and chief actuary.

   Hiding genetic risk factors makes it difficult for insurers to put
policyholders in the appropriate "risk pool" -- a group of people who are
thought to be at the same risk of illness and who therefore pay similar
premiums, Bykerk said.

   "The whole concept is that everyone has an equal chance of being reimbursed
for medical expenses," he said. "When you start to deviate from that, when one
person starts to have prior knowledge that we don't have when we categorize
them, they take advantage of their fellow policyholders and get subsidized by
those people."

   "It's something we're going to have to wrestle with," he said.

   Some state legislatures already have.

   Thirteen states ban the use of genetic information by insurance companies to
determine health-insurance coverage or rates.

   Although these laws are a start, Rothstein said, 37 states, including
Arkansas, have no laws barring insurers from requiring genetic information or
using that information to determine whether to issue a policy, and at what
rates.

   In Arkansas, a bill intended to address the problem awaits Senate action as
the end of the legislative session approaches this week. The bill was scheduled
for a committee hearing last week but was tentatively rescheduled for Monday.

   House Bill 2011 proposes that "DNA analysis shall not be used in any decision
to grant or deny any insurance, employment, mortgage, loan, credit, or
educational opportunity." The bill was introduced by Rep. Scott Ferguson, D-West
Memphis, a physician. It would make Arkansas the first state to address the use
of DNA tests in considering loans, mortgages and credit, Rothstein said.

   But this proposed law and others already in place around the country are
riddled with loopholes and vagueness, Rothstein said.

   First, he said, DNA testing is only one source of genetic information.  The
law would not ban insurers from looking at family history, for example.

   The proposed law says nothing about rates. While an insurer could be
compelled to grant insurance regardless of genetic information, that information
could be used to justify higher rates.

   There are other problems, as well.

   Under the proposed law, insurers would have to grant coverage to a woman who
carries a genetic mutation signaling a predisposition to breast cancer, for
example.

   "However, when this woman becomes symptomatic, that's not the same thing,"
Rothstein said. When symptoms show up, he said, insurers could terminate
coverage despite the law.

   "So they're basically allowing you to get insurance when you don't need it,"
he said, and allowing insurers to cut you off when you do.

   Rothstein advises caution when considering whether to take a predictive test.

   "If there's some medical intervention that's possible ... then by all means
have the test, but if you can, pay for it in cash -- and have no records kept.

   "If you can't do that, just assume that everybody under the sun is going to
have access to the results."

   Solving the puzzle

   Genetic testing involves more than simply giving blood and waiting for
results. Actual DNA testing is the last in a series of diagnostic steps that
sometimes lasts for months, local genetics professionals say.

   Doctors and genetic counselors first look at family history to estimate the
chance that a genetic disease runs in a patient's family, said Dr. Mary Curtis,
director of clinical genetics at Arkansas Children's Hospital.

   Checking a patient's medical records comes next, she said, then physical
examinations, X-rays, magnetic resonance imaging, CT scans and other imaging
tests.

   If a disease has started to show symptoms, those diagnostic tools usually are
enough.

   The promise of predictive tests, however, is that they can foresee the
development of certain diseases years before traditional diagnostic tests could.
And even for diseases that have begun to show symptoms, doctors might need more
information to make a diagnosis, Curtis said.

   "There are some conditions where what you see isn't the whole thing as to
what you get," she said. Hearing or vision loss, kidney problems and other
symptoms might be only small parts of larger problems, she said.

   That's where the DNA testing comes in.

   Taken from blood, other bodily fluids or tissue, DNA can tell its secrets in
different ways. Sometimes, large abnormalities, such as the absence or addition
of part or all of one of a cell's 46 chromosomes, show doctors where the problem
lies. Other times, a slight change in one of the millions of tiny chemical bases
that make up DNA can cause the problem.

   These minor changes can cause major damage. A gene could end up in the wrong
place or be switched on or off at the wrong time, spurring or ceasing production
of a specific protein. Or it could be missing completely.

   While predictive testing can pinpoint many of these gene defects, there are
many things the testing cannot show. Most predictive tests give only a
percentage risk of developing a disease, because most diseases are caused by a
combination of genetic, environmental, behavioral and other, still unknown
factors. In fact, genetically linked cancers make up only a small percentage of
total cancer cases. In other words, having cancer does not mean someone has the
"cancer-causing" gene, but having the gene means a person is likely to develop
cancer at some point in life.

   The technology gap

   Predictive genetic tests for most diseases can't tell if, when or how
strongly most diseases will strike. Instead, they give ranges, estimates and
percentages. And even then, many of the diseases that genetic tests can predict
have no cure and few, if any, treatment options.

   For example, if Nancy, the woman with relatives who had cancer, tested
positive for BRCA1 or BRCA2, the genes that signal a predisposition to breast
cancer, she would face an 82 percent chance of developing breast cancer by age
70. A negative test would still leave her at the same risk as other women --
about 11 percent. The two gene mutations account for 5 percent to 10 percent of
all U.S. breast cancer cases, researchers estimate.

   A positive test for the gene that signals susceptibility to hereditary colon
cancer would indicate a nearly 100 percent chance of developing the disease in
her lifetime, assuming she lived out her expected life span.

   With that knowledge, though, her options still are limited.

   Direct treatments for most genetic diseases, whether through "gene therapy,"
directly manipulating damaged genes, or through neutralizing or bolstering the
proteins that damaged genes produce, have eluded scientists so far, said Curtis,
of Children's Hospital and UAMS.

   A positive test can encourage vigorous screening, including regular
mammograms or colonoscopies to detect the onset of cancer in those parts of the
body, Curtis said, but a strong family history should prompt the same practices.
The only other treatment option is to remove the breasts or the colon in an
attempt to pre-empt the cancer.

   Nancy said that would be a small price to pay for life.

   "Anything they can take off or take out, they can have," she said.

   But no one knows how effective such surgeries, called prophylactic surgeries,
really are, Murray said. And even a positive test for the breast cancer gene
leaves an 18 percent window of chance that breast cancer will never develop.

   Those problems complicate two already cloudy questions: First, whether to
have a predictive test at all; and second, what to do with the results.

   The answers are intertwined, Rothstein said. Without the ability to treat a
disease or make important decisions based on a test result, a genetic test is of
little benefit, he said.

   "If there's nothing you can do except worry," Rothstein said, "don't have the
test."

   Murray, of Case Western Reserve, agrees.

   "Are you doing this just to satisfy your curiosity?" he asked, "or because
there might be something you could actually do, some steps you might take either
to protect your own health or to make some positive decisions for your children,
your spouse?"

   The pain of knowing

   Those who decide to have a predictive test face more than possible insurance
problems and a frustrating lack of treatment options. They face the wrenching
experience of confronting what could be a tragic future -- and dealing with the
results.

   When the test comes back positive, the psychological aftershocks can be
crushing, said Becky Butler, a licensed clinical social worker who works in the
genetics clinic at Children's Hospital. Butler and genetic counselors Susan
Hassed and Beth Poling talk to prospective patients about the tests and what the
outcomes could mean.

   Parents who learn that their unborn child carries a genetic mutation that
will result in illness or birth defects grieve the loss of a "normal" child,
Butler said. And adults who learn that their later years are at risk of being
lost in the fog of Alzheimer's disease or cut short by cancer grieve the loss of
a normal life of their own.

   Because of the psychological impact, genetic testing often requires visits
with a genetic counselor before the test and counseling after the results come
back, Butler said.

   "There's been some criticism of this method," she said, "some people say its
pretty paternalistic."

   Researchers are still studying the psychological effects of positive tests.
The January 1997 issue of Health Psychology, a journal of the American
Psychological Association, deals entirely with the effects of genetic testing.

   Surprisingly, several studies showed very little major depression or despair
among those who tested positive.

   Many people with family histories of genetic disease, like Nancy, simply
assume they will get it as well. For them, the test is nothing more than a
confirmation of what they already suspected.

   Also, the journal cautioned, some of the subjects who suffered major
depression because of the test results refused to participate in the
psychological studies; others dropped out midway.

   Even a negative test result can cause distress.

   Danny Hardy of Little Rock, who tested negative for Huntington's chorea about
21/2 years ago, can attest to that.

   The guilt of escaping a disease that ravaged other family members was
intense, Hardy said, and largely unexpected.

   Now, Hardy is over the guilt, he said. But his voice is quiet and shaky when
he recounts his decision to take the test.

   "I felt very confident I was clean, but I didn't know for sure, and I was
willing to take the risk just to have the answers," he said.

   "It's a big gamble."

   Power of genetics

   While Butler, Poling and Hassed inform their clients of test results and
often counsel them that few treatment options are available, scientists move
closer to completing a monumental undertaking known as the Human Genome Project.

   The project, expected to be completed between 2001 and 2005, involves
transcribing the entire human genetic code.

   This research has prompted some unrealistic predictions, experts say.

   "Once the full sequence of human DNA has been disassembled and annotated, we
will be able to recompile the resulting code for our own purposes," journalist
Charles Platt wrote in a recent issue of Wired magazine. "We will be able to
customize ourselves and our children -- and, by extension, their children and
their children's children."

   This kind of thinking risks overemphasizing the power of genetics, Murray
said.

   "The image that's been popularized is that knowing a person's genome is like
having a crystal ball to foretell their future," he said. "That gives way too
much importance to genetics."

   Advances may some day allow scientists to fix broken genes or, more probably,
compensate for their effects, Murray said. But the study of genetics is a
drawn-out process and only part of the puzzle.

   Murray worries that the "crystal ball" mentality will lead to an overemphasis
of genetic information and possibly to discrimination based on a false notion of
what genetics can and cannot tell.

   "If it isn't happening today, it will happen, because there's been a kind of
overselling of the importance of genetics," he said.

   Murray prefers the image of genetics as a weather map. He compares a positive
genetic test to a cold front.

   "But we don't know how cold it's going to be, and maybe it'll even turn in a
different direction," Murray said. Like a weather map, genetics can play an
important role in how we plan and live our lives, Murray said.

   But in the end, he said, "it's still a weather map, with all the imprecision
that weather maps have."

   What tests are available

   Scientists can run DNA tests for scores of genetic diseases, and more are
added to the list nearly every day. The Arkansas Genetics Program at Arkansas
Childrens Hospital, with clinics also at University Hospital and the Arkansas
Cancer Research Center, is the states only genetics center.  The clinic can
arrange tests for many types of genetic disorders, including:

   m BRCA1 and 2, identifying a predisposition to familial breast cancer.

   m Predisposition to some hereditary types of colon cancer.

   m Cystic fibrosis.

   m Sickle cell disease.

   m Several types of muscular dystrophy.

   m Huntington's chorea.

   m Predisposition to hereditary types of Alzheimer's disease.


GRAPHIC: Graph by Knight-Ridder Tribune/Arkansas Democrat Gazette

   Graph by Arkansas Democrat-Gazette/LIZ ROBERTS

   Photo by Arkansas Democrat-Gazette/MARK WILSON

   Susan Hassed, genetic counselor at the Arkansas Genetics Program, speaks with
patient Hillary Wantulok, 12, and Hillarys stepmother Melvie Wantulok, during
one of Hillarys yearly follow-up visits. Like many people tested for genetic
disorders, Hillary did not need full-sale DNA testing for a diagnosis.

LOAD-DATE: April 03, 1997


                             2470 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       March 29, 1997 Saturday 2D EDITION

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E-01

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: WHAT'S UP

BODY:
 SEND IN THE CLONES? Scheduled to open April 3 at The Changing Scene theater,
1527 1/2 Champa St., is Lenore Blumenfeld's "Under Construction." The premise of
the play is the construction of a monument to the human race - to make sure
everyone knows what human beings were like before gene therapy and the
"perfection of humanity" came on the scene. The show tackles today's headlines
with direction from Pamela Clifton. "Under Construction" will be on stage
through April 13. For reservations, call 893-5775. NEW CLASSIC New on the music
scene, composer William Bolcom has written a piano concerto called "Gaea." But
this is a concerto with a difference. Bolcom conceived the work as independent
concertos for the left hand as Gaea's first and second movements, with the third
movement being the simultaneous performance of both. Following World War I,
several works were conceived for pianists who had lost the use of an arm,
notably from Maurice Ravel and Leos Janacek. And composer Darius Milhaud
experimented with string quartets that could be played simultaneously as an
octet. Bolcom is the first to attempt a fully orchestrated work as simultaneous
"jigsaw puzzle music." LEARN ABOUT CACTUS The Colorado Cactus and Succulent
Society will have its annual show and sale beginning at 9 a.m. today and
continuing Sunday in Mitchell Hall of the Denver Botanic Gardens. During the
show and sale there will be a free workshop about cactuses and how to grow them.
FACING ALZHEIMER'S Alzheimer's is one of the most dreaded of diseases because it
seems to attack the very core of a person's being. The Alzheimer's Association
is sponsoring a three-week program beginning Thursday called "Getting Started:
When the Diagnosis Is Alzheimer's Disease." All sessions will be at the East
Boulder Community/Senior Center beginning at 7 p.m. The cost is $ 25 and
pre-registration is required. Call 813-1669.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1997


                             2471 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    March 27, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C, Maryland Watch

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: British firm wraps up purchase of Pharmavene

BODY:


   Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC, a British pharmaceutical firm, said
yesterday that it has completed the purchase of Pharmavene Inc., a
Rockville-based biotechnology company.

   Under the agreement, announced last month, Shire initially will pay $ 25
million in cash and about $ 65 million in Shire stock for privately held
Pharmavene.

   The purchase price could reach $ 160 million if certain contingencies are
met, including final Food and Drug Administration approval for Carbatrol, an
epilepsy drug developed by Pharmavene.

   The deal represents one of the largest amounts ever paid for a Maryland
biotechnology company.

   The most ever paid for a Maryland biotechnology company is believed to be the
$ 295 million spent in 1995 by the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Sandoz for Genetic
Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg.

   Rolf Stahel, Shire's chief executive officer, said the Pharmavene acquisition
would add 11 drug development projects to Shire's pipeline and "significant
short-term to medium-term revenue streams to the group."

   Pub Date: 3/27/97

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1997


                             2472 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        March 27, 1997, Thursday , ALAMO

SECTION: MAIN MEDICINE MEDICAL STUDY RESEARCH ; Pg. 13, Part A

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: New method may end need for insulin shots


BODY: Chicago Tribune News Service

   CHICAGO - A new method of delivering drugs inside the body may enable the
nation's 700,000 diabetics, who must take daily insulin shots, to some day throw
away their needles.

   The technique's versatility also opens the possibility of making gene therapy
as easy as swallowing a pill and turning some failed drugs into medicinal
superstars.

   By cramming insulin, drugs and genes into microscopic plastic beads, Brown
University researchers successfully overcame two major roadblocks that reduce
the effectiveness of many drugs: their destruction by the digestive system and
their inability to transfer from the intestine into the bloodstream.

   This barrier bedevils drug makers who develop new compounds that work well in
the test tube but fail to have any effect in humans. Insulin, for example, has
to be injected several times a day because it is useless when taken orally.

   That problem may be overcome with the biodegradable plastic beads, Edith
Mathiowitz, an associate professor of medical science and engineering at Brown,
reported in today's issue of the British journal Nature.

   Only one-tenth the width of a human hair, the beads protect insulin from the
digestive process and ferry the hormone into the blood stream, she said.

   The microscopic beads have been tested only in animals and it may take two to
five years before they are tested in humans, Mathiowitz said.

   To make the tiny beads, Mathiowitz mixes insulin, drugs or genes in a special
liquid plastic solution. A chemical is then added that causes the mixture to
solidify into microscopic spheres.

   The tiny beads stick to cells in the lining of the intestine, gradually
working their way through and into the bloodstream where they slowly
disintegrate to release their cargo, she said.

   Dicumarol is a potent drug that prevents blood from coagulating to form
clots. Taken orally, most of it is swiftly digested and only a small amount gets
into the blood.

   But when encapsulated in plastic beads, the amount of drug that gets into the
blood stream is increased by 112 percent, Mathiowitz said.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2473 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 27, 1997, Thursday, FIRST EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: New vaccine fights cancer of prostate

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: RESTON, Va.

BODY:

   RESTON, Va. -- An experimental vaccine shows promise in fighting
prostate cancer that has spread to the bone and tissues, researchers
reported Wednesday.

   Preliminary studies suggest the new vaccine has the potential
to attack the disease in its advanced stages and may be adapted
to fight a wide range of other cancers.


   Prostate cancer kills 42,000 men each year and is very difficult
to treat in late stages.

   The strategy, described at an American Cancer Society science
writers seminar:

   -- From the patient's blood, scientists take immune system cells
called dendrites, which are capable of activating the body's cancer-killing
T-cells, and multiply them by the millions in the laboratory.

   -- The new dendrites are infused with a component of prostate
tumor cells so they can recognize those tumor cells in the body.

   -- The "trained" dendrites are injected back into the bloodstream.
They head to their familiar hangouts -- immune system tissues
such as the lymph nodes, spleen and liver -- where they draw a
crowd of cancer-killing T-cells. Each dendrite will activate 100
T-cells, researchers say.

   -- The T-cells then move out to all parts of the body, seeking
and destroying prostate cancer cells wherever they hide.

   "These hard-working little soldiers are a new vista in cancer
therapy," says Gerald Murphy, director of research, Pacific Northwest
Cancer Foundation, Seattle.

   The strategy is still in development, but one patient whose prostate
tumor had spread to the bone no longer appears to have any cancer.

   Of 18 patients treated in a Phase 1 study, five have improved
and there were no side effects. Phase 1 studies are done only
to determine if the therapy is toxic. Phase 2, to test the effectiveness
of the vaccine in 67 patients, is under way.

   Murphy says the strategy could be adapted to other cancers and
would be much less expensive and less complicated than gene therapy
approaches. "It's like one-stop shopping."

   Prostate cancer expert Donald Coffey of Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore, calls the approach "a hallmark discovery. . . . You
don't see this (promising development) in advanced disease."

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1997


                             2474 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 27, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS;

LENGTH: 306 words

HEADLINE: New vaccine fights cancer of prostate

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: RESTON, Va.

BODY:

   RESTON, Va. -- An experimental vaccine shows promise in fighting
prostate cancer that has spread to the bone and tissues, researchers
reported Wednesday.

   Preliminary studies suggest the new vaccine has the potential
to attack the disease in its advanced stages and may be adapted
to fight a wide range of other cancers.

   Prostate cancer kills 42,000 men each year and is very difficult
to treat in late stages.

   The strategy, described at an American Cancer Society science
writers seminar:

   -- From the patient's blood, scientists take immune system cells
called dendrites, which are capable of activating the body's cancer-killing
T-cells, and multiply them by the millions in the laboratory.

   -- The new dendrites are infused with a component of prostate
tumor cells so they can recognize those tumor cells in the body.

   -- The "trained" dendrites are injected back into the bloodstream.
They head to their familiar hangouts -- immune system tissues
such as the lymph nodes, spleen and liver -- where they draw a
crowd of cancer-killing T-cells. Each dendrite will activate 100
T-cells, researchers say.

   -- The T-cells then move out to all parts of the body, seeking
and destroying prostate cancer cells wherever they hide.

   The strategy is still in development, but one patient whose tumor
spread no longer appears to have any cancer.

   Of 18 patients treated in a Phase 1 study, five have improved
and there were no side effects. Phase 1 studies are done only
to determine if the therapy is toxic. Phase 2, to test the effectiveness
of the vaccine in 67 patients, is under way.

   Gerald Murphy of the Pacific Northwest Cancer Foundation, Seattle,
says the strategy could be adapted to other cancers and would
be much less expensive and complicated than gene therapy approaches.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1997


                             2475 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 25, 1997, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: Gene trial gives hope on ovarian tumors;
No bad side effects in initial study

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Scientists say their first attempts to use the BRCA1 gene in gene therapy
has shown a suggestion of benefits in advanced ovarian cancer, and no harmful
effects from the treatment.

   BRCA1 in a mutant form is the notorious gene found to cause inherited breast
and ovarian cancer.  For the gene therapy experiment, the scientists used normal
copies of BRCA1, which acts as a tumor suppressor gene, serving as a brake on
unruly growth of cells.

    People who inherit mutant, or flawed, versions of the gene are highly prone
to breast and ovarian cancer because the cells in those tissues lack the growth
regulator.

   BRCA1 may also be defective in breast and ovary cancers that aren't
inherited, though exactly how this works isn't clear, says Dr. David L. Tait of
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. So adding healthy, normal copies of
BRCA1 to patients with these cancers might help to re-regulate cell growth and
stem the progression of tumors.  Whether or not the tumors are caused by an
inherited BRCA1 gene may not matter, if the added gene can bring the tumor cells
back under the inserted gene's control, says Tait.

   Tait and his colleagues are reporting today at a meeting of the Society for
Gynecologic Oncology on attempts to replace BRCA1 genes in a dozen women who had
advanced ovarian cancer.

   Placed inside specially designed DNA carriers, the normal BRCA1 genes were
infused into the womens' abdomens, the site of cancerous spread from the
ovaries.  All other drugs had failed to halt the often fatal cancer.

   "Ovarian cancer patients have hundreds or thousands of small tumors scattered
throughout their abdominal cavity," said Tait in a telephone interview.  "So we
bathed the tumors in the solution that contained the gene," he said.  The hope
was that the genes would enter at least some of the cancer cells and order those
cells to manufacture the tumor-suppressing protein that normal BRCA1 encodes.

   Tait said the initial BRCA1 study, known as a Phase One trial, was intended
to determine the treatment's safety over a range of doses, not to show whether
it was effective.  But in seven patients, the disease stabilized for up to three
months before it progressed again.  And one patient had a partial response,
meaning that a sizable tumor shrank. Four of the 12 patients are still alive,
said Tait.

   Even a partial response in a Phase One trial "is almost unheard of," said
Tait, and the lack of toxicity is also encouraging.  The next step is to develop
Phase II trials with more patients to continue evaluating the treatment, he
said.

   The research team also included Dr. Jeffrey Holt from Vanderbilt and
geneticist Mary-Claire King from the University of Washington, who first
discovered evidence of the BRCA1 gene in 1990.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1997


                             2476 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 23, 1997 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ACCENT; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: No gains found from breast self-exam

BODY:

   A rigorous program to train more than 133,000 women to routinely examine
their breasts for lumps has not reduced breast-cancer deaths after five years,
reports a study in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Final answers
from the study, done in China, where few women ever have breast X-rays, are
another five years away. But experts say the preliminary findings suggest that
public health programs should put even more emphasis on mammography and less on
breast self-examination.

   Cystic fibrosis progress

    Good news for cystic fibrosis patients and their families: British
researchers say they have taken a big step toward finding a gene-therapy
treatment for the genetic disease that involves using fatty molecules to deliver
healthy genes into the body. Two studies in the journal Gene Therapy describe
the use of liposomes to deliver genes that researchers hope can "reprogram" the
cells of cystic fibrosis sufferers. Growing blood supply

   We may not be able to get blood from a stone, but scientists have coaxed
human hemoglobin from genetically engineered tobacco plants. The researchers
report in the journal Nature that this opens up new possibilities for creating
artificial blood free of infection from HIV, hepatitis or other viruses.

   The setting suns

    When we finally have a close encounter of the first kind, E.T. may have a
heck of a tan. Also reporting in the journal Nature, Paul Kalas of the Max
Planck Institute for Astronomy in Heidelberg, Germany, and David Jewitt of the
University of Hawaii say they've found evidence that there could be planets in
outer space with two suns in their skies. Greetings from Earth

    Speaking of close encounters, Earthlings will get a first chance to send
messages to space aliens this year on a rocket bound for Saturn's biggest moon.
The European Space Agency says that, as a "token of human life" in deep space,
it will collect electronic signatures and messages and pack them onto a computer
disk aboard the Huygens probe scheduled to blast off Oct. 6 for a seven-year
voyage to Titan. KRT News Service

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2477 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                     March 22, 1997, Saturday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 14E

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: Savannah accountant, associates accused of insider trading;
Sister's tip brought profits, SEC says

BYLINE: Rob Chambers; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The Securities and Exchange Commission has accused a Savannah accountant and
his associates of illegally profiting from inside information about
pharmaceutical giant Sandoz Ltd.'s 1995 acquisition of Genetic Therapy Inc.

   Gregory M. Hirsch is charged with having obtained a tip from his sister,
Susan L. Hirsch, who worked for Sandoz's New York public relations firm,
Ruder-Finn. She also was charged with violating insider trading laws.

   The SEC says Gregory Hirsch and a friend, Danny B. Kaminsky, together bought
shares and call options of Genetic Therapy, a Maryland- based company
specializing in gene therapy, in advance of the Sandoz deal, obtaining profits
of $ 251,290.

   The two allegedly tipped Savannah associates Lewis A. Kooden, Daniel H.
Klugman and Michael D. Kooden, who are also accused of obtaining illegal profits
of, respectively, $ 43,795, $ 28,107 and $ 14,666.

   Kaminsky, Klugman, and Lewis Kooden could not be reached for comment Friday.
Michael Kooden and Gregory Hirsch declined to comment.

   Gregory Hirsch's attorney in Washington, Bruce A. Baird, said the SEC's case
is based solely on the theory that Susan Hirsch "misappropriated" the
information, a theory that has been rejected by two U.S. circuit courts. The
attorney said courts have ruled that stealing information is not a crime.
Although charged with violating insider trading law, Susan Hirsch was not
accused of profiting personally. Her attorney, Anne C. Flannery in New York,
said Hirsch would fight the charges. While she currently resides in Italy, her
permanent address is Savannah.

   Another former Ruder-Finn employee in New York, Susan S. Smirnoff, and her
husband, Kirk J. Zachary, who were charged with insider trading in the same
deal, have settled with the SEC, returning $ 5,527 in profits and paying $ 5,527
in penalties and $ 728 in interest.

   Bernard Bressler, general counsel to Ruder-Finn, said that his firm had
cooperated with the SEC and that the complaint did not name Ruder- Finn or
Sandoz. Last December, Sandoz merged with rival Ciba-Geigy to form Swiss drug
making giant Novartis.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1997


                             2478 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    March 22, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLES, Pg. 7C

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: WE'RE AWASH IN CHEMICAL 'STEWS' AND PAYING FOR IT

BYLINE: Pat Swift

BODY:


   Women's health risks will get prominent attention during a day-long seminar
on cancer and the environment on May 10 at Erie Community College North Campus.

   The New York Branch of the National Ovarian Cancer Coalition and Western New
York REACH (Regional Environmentalists and Concerned Homeowners) are planning
the conference that will deal with screening, treatment and research
developments for breast, ovarian and prostate cancers.

   Speakers, including oncology professionals and researchers,
environmentalists, legislators, nutritionists and representatives of support
groups, will look at legislation and insurance and employment issues that affect
cancer patients.

   A primary focus will be on how carcinogens in the environment impact on
incidences of cancer and possible links between toxic chemicals and hormone
disruptions in humans.

   Gene therapy, heredity, diet and prevention also will be discussed, according
to Marcia A. VanDewark, one of the organizers.

   Last week, the Environmental Protection Agency moved to increase research
into a possible link between industrial chemicals and human hormonal problems.
There is no conclusive evidence that exposure to industrial chemicals causes
infertility or cancers of the breast or prostrate, the agency stated, but animal
studies have led some scientists to suspect that there is a connection.

   Directed by Congress to develop a screening and testing program to identify
chemicals that can disrupt hormonal systems (chemicals referred to as endocrine
disrupters), the EPA looked at 300 scientific studies and concluded that while
exposure to some of these chemicals can lead to cancer, sterility and
developmental problems in animals, there is not enough data to determine the
risks they pose to humans.

   So they will go looking for more data.

   That's an incredibly complicated process according to Jennifer D. Mitchell, a
researcher for Worldwatch Institute, who thinks that all over the globe people
are ingesting chemical cocktails in deadly proportions.

   In the current issue of Worldwatch, Ms. Mitchell says there are about 70,000
synthetic chemicals on the global market and nearly 1,000 new substances are
introduced each year. Just to test the new ones, singly or in combinations of
three, would require more than 166 million tests. To check for long-term effects
such as cancers and endocrine disruptions would take two years for each of the
tests.

   In the laboratory, testing is done on a chemical-by-chemical basis, she
states. In the real world, people are exposed to combinations of hundreds of
them.

   If the EPA can't determine that a new chemical is suitable for the market
within 90 days, law directs that it automatically be approved.

   Ms. Mitchell's answer is to restrict the introduction of new chemicals and
reduce dependency on those already in use.

   She shares a growing suspicion that these chemicals cause breast cancer, are
harmful to reproduction and may be affecting child development. By mimicking
natural estrogens and blocking the effects of other natural hormones, some
synthetic chemicals can upset the body's natural balance, destroy the immune
system or harm a fetus in the womb.

   Ms. Mitchell believes that proliferation of synthetic chemicals is causing
their "murky brew" around us to rise and spread globally, leaving us with
nowhere to hide.

She doesn't know how lethal this brew is but Ms. Mitchell is convinced that
lifestyle and technological changes, along with careful monitoring of the
chemicals, must come before all the research returns are in.

   Only two women made the cut when "a heavy-hitting group of 25 local business
community leaders" was selected to save the Buffalo Bills.

   Were the two added to the Bills' task force as a curt nod to the 52 percent
female Western New York population? Is the region so bereft of female leadership
that the community's power brokers can find only two qualified women to engage
in such lofty discussions? Could it be that the Greater Buffalo Partnership and
the Erie County Legislature think only men understand the relationship between a
football team and the region? Ah -- perhaps so few women are on this area's
boards, advisory committees and task forces because they don't want to work with
these guys?

   Surely someone out there in the land of Ozzies must know.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1997


                             2479 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 22, 1997, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words

HEADLINE: S.E.C. Sues Public Relations Executive

BYLINE: By Dow Jones

BODY:

   The Securities and Exchange Commission filed suit this week against an
executive of the New York public relations firm of Ruder-Finn Inc., contending
that she passed inside information to her husband about Sandoz Ltd.'s 1995
acquisition of Genetic Therapy Inc.

   The suit, filed in Federal court in Manhattan, contended that Susan S.
Smirnoff, a senior vice president of Ruder-Finn, had obtained nonpublic
information about Sandoz's offer from others at the firm, which represented
Sandoz in the transaction.

    Ms. Smirnoff then passed the information to her husband, Kirk J. Zachary,
who made $5,527 by trading on Genetic Therapy call options, the suit said.

   Mr. Zachary is also named as a defendant.

   Ms. Smirnoff had no immediate comment on the suit.

   Rosalind Safrin, executive vice president of Ruder-Finn, said the firm had
been cleared of any wrongdoing.

   Daniel Nathan, an S.E.C. lawyer, said that Ms. Smirnoff and Mr. Zachary had
agreed to settle the commission's lawsuit. Ms. Smirnoff and Mr. Zachary have
also agreed to forfeit the $5,527 in trading profits plus another $728 in
interest, and Mr. Zachary will pay an additional fine of $5,527, he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1997


                             2480 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 22, 1997 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:6,7; A-1:1,2,3,4,5

LENGTH: 1679 words

HEADLINE: Brain tumor had to wait: Laura's courage came first

BYLINE: Susan Gembrowski, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: VALLEY CENTER

BODY:

   VALLEY CENTER -- Laura Gipson learned six weeks ago that she might not live
until the end of the year.

   She had already undergone one surgery on her brain, but the news, giving her
life a deadline, could not defeat her competitive spirit. The Orange Glen High
School senior was so determined to take her place in the California Academic
Decathlon that she put off for a week a second surgery to remove the cancer that
was growing above her right eye. Her courage paid off. Laura walked away with a
silver medal last weekend.

   Two days ago, a doctor removed all of the tumor -- and bought her more time.
As she sat in her family dining room Tuesday, medal draped from a mirror in
front of her, Laura's blue eyes shone radiant below a thin, red scar from the
first surgery that stretched from near her right earlobe across her forehead,
under a fringe of blond hair. She had invested too much of herself to miss the
decathlon, a rigorous two days of mental gymnastics with the state's top teens,
Laura said. "I wanted to be there for the team.

   I decided this (cancer) wasn't going to beat me." Laura's prognosis still is
tenuous.

   Going into surgery Thursday, she had a 1 percent chance of living five years.

   Now, her doctor says, "Her chances are better." As she lay in intensive care
yesterday at UCLA Medical Center, Laura, 17, talked to her parents about the
decathlon, the event that consumed her life for most of the past eight months.

   Her mother, Penny Gipson, said Laura is especially pleased that she was able
to spotlight the academic decathlon by going public with her cancer. "It was
Laura's main hope," her mother said. A special bond Almost every day during the
summer, the nine members of Orange Glen High School's decathlon team met at
teacher Pat Boldt's three-bedroom Escondido home.

   They were the county defending champions and were aiming even higher this
year. Laura excelled in the classroom, where her grade point average was up
there with the best of them -- 3.75 or higher. Spending so much time with the
team was good for Laura. She overcame her shyness and learned to express ideas
she had once kept to herself.

   She was the only girl on the team and worked to make sure that didn't make a
difference. Laura found special encouragement in Boldt, whose bond with the
Gipson family formed long before the decathlon. Back in 1990, Laura's mother,
who is a registered nurse, supervised the care of Boldt's father, who had
Alzheimer's disease.

   Penny Gipson was the one who told Boldt that her father was dying. The
academic decathlon students drilled, as hard as any athlete, at Boldt's house
and in the classroom.

   For hundreds of hours, they challenged their brains in speech-giving, essay
writing, social studies, economics, fine arts, language and literature,
mathematics and science. In November, the decathlon team members won the No. 1
slot in the county for the third straight year. They celebrated with a trip to
Farrell's Ice Cream Parlor in Mira Mesa. The students gorged themselves on
banana splits.

   They joked and laughed with their parents.

   Laura was happy. The "avalanche" The dizzy spells started in late October.

   But each passed uneventfully.

   In December, Laura had numbness in her left hand.

   Diagnosis: middle-ear infection.

   She took the prescribed antibiotics. All the while, Laura studied the
information age and computer materials, bent on beating the guys on the team in
the Super Quiz, something of a rapid-fire version of the game show "Jeopardy."
"She was determined to show the boys that she could really do it," Boldt said.
In mid-January, Laura blacked out while driving her 14-year-old sister Cassie
home from school.

   Cassie screamed Laura's name.

   No response. Laura slowed her 1988 Jeep Cherokee Wagoneer and let go of the
steering wheel.

   The car hit the guardrail on a winding portion of Valley Center Road that is
called Valley Grade, about three miles from her home. Laura came out of what she
later described as a dreamlike state.

   The car was slightly dented.

   That's the last time she drove it. A week later, Laura went to see her family
physician, Dr. James Schultz.

   He did a blood test and sent her for an MRI -- magnetic resonance imaging.
Penny and husband Larry Gipson thought things would be fine, but on Jan. 24,
when Laura had the MRI, everything started to tremble. Laura had a brain tumor,
probably not cancerous, the doctors said.

   They recommended surgery. "When they first told me I had to have surgery, I
was just shocked," Laura said.

   "It's a hard concept to grasp -- that they're going to cut a hole in your
head." The next few days were like "an avalanche," Penny Gipson said. When Laura
walked into Room 814 at Orange Glen, she just said it.

   "I have to have brain surgery," she told her decathlon teammates.

   She didn't cry. THe boys stumbled to find the right words.

   Good luck was all they could say.

   Boldt walked over and put her arms around Laura.

   The two stood hugging. For once, the upcoming state competition wasn't the
focus of the group. Boldt, who raised her two children after her husband died,
started calling Laura daily.

   As often as four times each week, she made the 25-minute trek from the high
school in Escondido to Laura's home to tutor the teen-ager in calculus and the
other subjects she needed to graduate. Laura planned to attend UCSD, after being
accepted to every school where she applied. "It's a small world, isn't it?

   It's funny how the circles meet," said Boldt, thinking back on her father's
death and Peggy Gipson's kindness. Don't ask for help, the teacher told Penny
Gipson.

   She would be there. The first surgery On Feb. 4, Laura had surgery to remove
a walnut-sized tumor in the part of the brain that affects personality and
memory. Her biggest fear was that she would be a different person when it was
over. Pat Boldt sat with Penny and Larry Gipson in the waiting room at Palomar
Medical Center in Escondido. When she came out of recovery about 5:30 p.m. and
was wheeled into her room, her dad, standing with his wife and Boldt, asked
Laura: "How many fingers am I holding up?" He had asked her that same question
the weekend before, and she had answered: "Five." "That's wrong," he'd said
then.

   "It's four fingers and a thumb." This time, Laura answered: "Four fingers and
a thumb."

   Things were all right -- for the moment. The pathology report came back a
week later.

   The tumor was malignant. It was what is called Grade IV, the worst,
fastest-growing kind.

   It meant Laura had a 50 percent chance of making it through the first year.
Doctors determined that it had been there for several years.

   Laura was told not to make any long-term plans. Laura's liveliness and
sharp-witted humor didn't change, as she had feared, but her physical strength
was gone.

   She couldn't do things like feed the family's birds, geese, dogs, cats and
horses.

   She couldn't even read. Still, she clung to the goal of the academic
decathlon.

   She had worked too hard; her team and her teacher depended on her too much.
But Laura couldn't prep any more for the competition.

   It was all she could do to concentrate on her school work. The Gipson family
learned a lot about brain tumors quickly.

   Larry Gipson, an electrical engineer, coped by looking for answers on the
Internet. After asking for help from his online resources, he wanted a second
opinion.

   Laura and her mother flew to the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center at the
University of Texas in Houston. Laura was evaluated Feb. 24. Dr. Kurt Jaeckle
offered them a small ray of hope. The core of the tumor was malignant, he
explained.

   Part of it had been removed in the first surgery.

   But if more of the outer benign tumor was taken out, perhaps the cancer
wouldn't spread. He recommended a second operation. But he also gave them a
warning.

   Even if the cancer was contained, the second operation could leave Laura with
weakness on her right side.

   She could accept that.

   Life was more important. The surgery would be done at UCLA Medical Center.

   She made one request -- delay the surgery for a week so she could compete
with her teammates at the state decathlon.

   Done. The contest Pat Boldt arranged for a friend of Laura's, Cindy Tran, to
accompany her into the testing rooms at the decathlon at Cal Poly, Pomona,
because Laura was experiencing seizures. Laura wrote the essay first; then took
four half-hour tests. Coach Boldt anxiously worked crossword puzzles outside,
cheering on the team members as they completed each test. That night, all 45
schools gathered for an ice cream social.

   The students exchanged gifts.

   The Orange Glen team brought oversized post cards of the white rhinoceros at
the Wild Animal Park. The next day started at 8 a.m. Laura gave two speeches and
had an interview.

   She took the math and science quizzes.

   On to the Super Quiz. The awards ceremony was Sunday morning. As she sat
there, Laura thought her chances of getting a medal were slim. Then, her name
was called.

   She'd won second place in her division for her essay on time management.

   She tied for the highest score on her team in the Super Quiz. Laura was
stunned.

   Boldt urged her to head for the stage. "When she won, I forgot about the
brain tumor for just a few minutes," Penny Gipson said.

   "For that one moment, I forgot everything else." In their division,
individual team members won a first place in language and literature, and second
and third places in other subjects. They placed second in their division in the
Super Quiz. Laura was wheeled into surgery at UCLA around 4 p.m. Thursday.
Nearly five hours later, Dr. Keith Black told her parents, grandparents and an
aunt that he had removed all of the visible tumor. She may need radiation
treatments. Laura appears to have no physical or mental impairments.

   She can raise her legs, move her hands, and she can talk. With Laura having
better than a 1 percent chance of living five years, Black hopes that, in that
time, he and other researchers will perfect gene therapies and other anti-tumor
drugs.

   The fact remains that brain cancer is the second leading cause of cancer
deaths among young people. Still, her mother said, "This has given me my hope
back."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Competitor: Laura Gipson delayed brain surgery to
be in an academic decathlon. (B-1:7; B-4:6) 2. Competitor: Orange Glen High
School student Laura Gipson delayed her brain surgery so she could compete in
the California Academic Decathlon. "I wanted to be there for the team," she
said. (A-1:1,2,3,4,5) 3. Words of encouragement: Orange Glen High School senior
Laura Gipson listens to Pat Boldt, her teacher and academic decathlon coach.
After Laura was diagnosed with a brain tumor, Boldt called her often and tutored
her in her home. (A-1:1,2,3,4,5); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3. SCOTT LINNETT / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2481 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    March 22, 1997, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D01; DIGEST

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   GSE Systems of Columbia revised its earnings for the year ended Dec. 31 based
on the completion of its audit by Coopers & Lybrand. Earnings for the year were
$ 4.14 million (82 cents a share), not $ 4.5 million (89 cents) as previously
reported.

   Rite Aid will spend $ 60 million to $ 70 million to build a mid-Atlantic
distribution facility in Perryman, Md., that will employ about 50 people within
three years. Initially, the center will employ 400 people when it opens next
year.

   Mutual fund inflows slowed last week, AMG Data Services reported. An
estimated $ 475 million was invested in stock funds in the one-week period ended
Wednesday, down from $ 4.4 billion the week before.

   Space Systems/Loral signed a contract to build a $ 200 million communications
satellite for China Telecommunications Broadcast Satellite, to be put in orbit
next year.

   Bergen Brunswig ended its planned $ 1.65 billion merger with generic
drugmaker Ivax and has filed suit against Ivax, accusing it of breaking terms of
the agreement.

   Tribune Co. won regulatory approval to buy six TV stations from Renaissance
Communications. The FCC turned down a request by Tribune for a permanent waiver
of federal ownership rules so it may continue to own the Sun-Sentinel newspaper
in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and WDZL-TV, the Renaissance station in the same
market. Tribune has 12 months to divest one of the media properties and comply
with the cross-ownership rule.

   The SEC filed insider trading charges against a former public relations
executive, Susan Hirsch of the firm Ruder-Finn, in connection with Sandoz's 1995
takeover of Genetic Therapy. The charges say she improperly passed information
about Sandoz's bid for Genetic Therapy to her brother Gregory Hirsch, an
accountant.

   Pan American World Airways and Carnival Air said they would merge in a deal
that gives Carnival's billionaire owner Micky Arison a 42 percent stake in Pan
Am.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1997


                             2482 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 18, 1997 Tuesday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 012

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: Baby home while battling rare ailment

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   A 4-month old baby girl was finally able to go home from the hospital
yesterday after doctors diagnosed a rare immune system disorder and found a
miracle treatment that may give her a chance at a normal life.

   "We're taking her home and it's been a long time coming," gushed Sherri
Stonkus-Gordon of Brockton, mother of little Olivia Rose Gordon, who was
discharged yesterday from Massachusetts General Hospital.

   Olivia, born Nov. 21, was premature, weighing in at only 3 pounds, 5 ounces.
She was in and out of hospitals for the first few weeks of her life, but she
kept developing pneumonia and suffered a collapsed lung on several occasions.

   Every time it appeared she was getting better, the baby suffered a setback.
"It was an emotional roller coaster," said her mother.

   Doctors couldn't figure out what was wrong. In January, she was transferred
to MGH, where Dr. Alan Ezekowitz, chief of pediatrics, diagnosed her as having
Subacute Combined Immune Deficiency Syndrome (SCIDS), an AIDS-like condition.

   The odds of being born with SCIDS are one in four million.

   A series of tests, however, found the condition was caused by an even rarer
occurence, a deficiency of an enzyme known as adenosine deaminase.

   There are only 20 known cases in the United States.

   Patients with SCIDS are lacking stem cells in their bone marrow that produce
infection-fighting white blood cells. In Olivia's case, the enzyme deficiency is
causing the buildup of toxins that are killing off the stem cells.

   Most patients with SCIDS need bone marrow transplants. But Olivia may be able
to avoid that risky procedure, because there is now a treatment for the enzyme
deficiency - injections of a replacement enzyme made from cow intestines.

   Doctors at MGH were able to get the enzyme for Olivia within 24 hours of
making the diagnosis. And there is already evidence the weekly injections are
starting to work.

   Since starting the treatment, Olivia has gained weight - she is now up to 7
pounds, 10 ounces.

   Dr. John Robinson of Quincy, her pediatrician, said the treatments have
started to produce new white blood cells, although the new cells have not yet
started to make antibodies.

   "We're hoping that will change," he said. "But this is a new therapy and we
just don't know."

   In the meantime, Olivia must avoid germs at all costs. Visitors to the
family's home, for example, must wear masks.

   Ezekowitz, however, said he is hopeful the infant's immune system will
improve in time.

   "It could take a few months, but, overall, her prognosis is optimistic," he
said.

   Even if it doesn't prove to be the cure, the treatment may buy her time until
something better comes along.

   She may still need a bone marrow transplant.

   "Down the road, we will look for other innovative therapies, like gene
therapy," Ezekowitz said.

   Stonkus-Gordon and her husband, Brian, realize Olivia is not out of the woods
yet, but they are hopeful.

   "We don't know what the future holds," Stonkus-Gordon said. "But right now,
we feel fantastic."

   Photo Caption: FIGHTER: Sherri Stonkus-Gordon and Brian Gordon cradle their
baby Olivia. Staff photo by Nancy Lane


LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1997


                             2483 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     March 18, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

NAME: REBECCA LILLY

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z11

LENGTH: 3797 words

HEADLINE: HANGING TOUGH; Rebecca Lilly Keeps Up Hectic Pace Despite Her Brain
Tumor

BYLINE: Don Colburn

BODY:


   Can you spell 'world' for me backwards?" the doctor asked.

   Sixteen-year-old Rebecca Lilly concentrated hard and answered slowly:

   "H -- T -- R -- A -- E."

   Neurologist Roger Packer, director of the brain tumor program at Children's
National Medical Center, was taken aback. His patient's answer was a startling
example of the tricks the tumor plays on her these days.

   As he does every month, Packer also tested Becca's balance, eyesight and
coordination. The most obvious recent change was a loss of peripheral vision on
the right.

   "Are you bumping into things?" he asked.

   Becca smiled sheepishly and started to tell the story. "On Saturday we were
at this restaurant, and I ran into someone. It was -- um -- the man -- "

   "The waiter," said her father, Joe Lilly, supplying the word she couldn't
think of.

   "Oh, cool," said Packer, rolling his eyes. "Did you knock him down?"

   "No," she said. "But there were a lot of noodles."

   They had gone to Slade's American Grill after a basketball game. Becca headed
off to the bathroom. A waiter carrying a tray approached from her right, and she
never saw him. There was a crash, and then a broken plate and a mess on the
floor.

   No one was hurt, but Becca was in tears -- frightened and embarrassed.

   "He was on my right," she explained later. "I can't see half. My eyes don't
work right."

   Becca Lilly, of Takoma Park, has battled a malignant brain tumor for nearly
six years. She has undergone every major form of cancer treatment -- four brain
surgeries, two kinds of radiation and three types of chemotherapy. In November
1995, with her doctors running out of standard treatments for her, Becca became
the first child with a brain tumor ever treated with gene therapy.

   None of those treatments was able to keep the tumor from growing back. Over
the past year, Becca has coped with growing symptoms while undergoing further
experimental treatments.

   The tumor is in the upper left part of Becca's brain, inside her left temple.
It is growing around the rim of the cavity left by her last surgery. On recent
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of her brain, it has shown jagged edges
reaching into the surrounding tissue.

   Even before the tumor was diagnosed, Becca had dyslexia, so reading and
writing have never been easy for her. But she has grown more forgetful and has
more trouble following fast conversations. She has to fish for ordinary words as
she talks.

   "Ketchup" may come out "gravy," and "last night" may come out "tomorrow." In
the hospital recently, she called the wheelchair a "cart." And when the doctor
said "world," her disrupted brain heard "earth."

   The tumor and the treatments for it have caused a kind of aphasia, a
difficulty with language similar to what victims of a mild stroke experience.

   "Sometimes I don't know what to say," she told Packer this month.

   And yet, what teenager -- or family -- has had a busier winter? Welcome to
March Madness, Lilly-style.

   Becca's Catholic Youth Organization basketball team made the league playoffs.
So did her 13-year-old brother Joe's team. Their older sister, Anne Marie, plays
for Marymount University's nationally ranked team, which reached the "sweet 16"
round of the NCAA Division III national championships. Younger sister Sarah may
have attended more basketball games this season than any other 5-year-old in the
Washington area.

   Becca is a junior at Good Counsel High School in Wheaton, where she takes a
reduced academic load. Three mornings a week, she helps out with the preschool
class at nearby St. Patrick's Apostle School.

   Last Friday, she briefly addressed a congressional briefing on Capitol Hill
for the National Coalition for Cancer Research. Sunday, she helped present the
four-foot-tall Rebecca Lilly trophy to the Mid-Atlantic CYO champion in girls'
basketball.

   The Lillys had a personal tour of the White House -- a Christmas gift for
Becca arranged by her friend Colleen McGowan, of Falls Church, who also has a
brain tumor. The two families met with President Clinton for about 15 minutes
and -- the highlight for Sarah -- also got to pet the First Cat, Socks.

   A jar of jellybeans arrived by mail from Nancy and Ronald Reagan. Capt. John
L. Bender, of Bethesda, sent Becca the bronze star he had been awarded in 1943
with a simple note: "To Rebecca Lilly -- A token of my admiration for your
valor."

   And while no one keeps statistics on such matters, Becca may now hold the
local record for duckpin bowling in a prom dress and pearls.

   "I might be going to a dance," Becca announced on the last day of January.
Without telling anyone, she had called up her classmate Justin Smith, whom she
met last year in computer class, and invited him to the Winter Ball at Good
Counsel.

   "No fear," said her sister Anne Marie. "She just asked him. Out of the blue.
It was so Becca."

   Her maternal grandmother, Adele Traber, offered to buy her a new dress for
the occasion.

   Becca went to three stores the first night and six the second, and still she
couldn't decide on a dress. Finally, she settled on a long velvet burgundy one
with spaghetti straps. It was open in the back but with a high neck in front
that easily covered the intravenous catheter valve near her collarbone. To go
with it, she chose black open-toed heels. "A little on the clunky side but very
'in,' " said her mother, Maureen Lilly.

   "I want to have my hair up," Becca said. "I don't want it in my face."

   "She's so excited," Grandma reported. "Her eyes are dancing. Oh, to be 16 and
a girl -- what can I say?"

   She told Becca: "Dance every dance."

   It didn't exactly work out that way. After dinner at the Anchor Inn, Becca
and Justin showed up at the dance about 8:15. They hung out there in the gym for
an hour or so, dancing a couple of cuts. Then they left to go bowling.

   Whose idea was that? "Mine, or maybe his -- I don't know," was Becca's
cryptic answer. Whatever. Among the small crowd of regulars at the Glenmont
Lanes that night, there was one young man in a tuxedo and one young woman in a
floor-length dress with a wristlet of baby's breath and roses.

   "It's not easy to bowl in a long dress," Becca noted after rolling a gutter
ball. In her only concession to the duckpin decor, she had kicked off her black
heels in favor of two-tone rental bowling shoes.

   They bowled two strings, then went to Roy Rogers for chocolate shakes, and
then he drove her home.

   "The tumor is growing," neurologist Packer warned the Lillys after an MRI
just before Thanksgiving. Even though Becca was "not at the point where we've
run out of things to try," he asked them to consider a huge question:

   "The real issue that you have to begin to think about, and help me think
about, is how far do we go with this? When do we say we've put her through
enough?

   "My general approach is: You go ahead with treatment if the child is happy
and reasonably well, and if there's a legitimate chance it could help her. But
if she's really sick, we say enough is enough. I hope we never get there."

   "I think we're in agreement with you there," Joe Lilly said.

   The important thing, Packer noted, was that Becca "has somehow maintained a
great quality of life, whatever we've given her."

   "In terms of activities, is there anything we should tell her to avoid?" her
mother wanted to know.

   "You think we could stop her?" Packer joked. "If she's up for it, I think she
should go for it."

   In the waiting room, Becca was asleep on a couch.

   With the tumor still growing, Packer could not recommend continuing the
initial chemotherapy combination that Becca began last fall. Instead, he
suggested a new drug, temozolomide, that had been tried in about 50 American
children, with promising but preliminary results in some of them. Unfortunately,
Phase 1 testing of the drug (to prove safety) had finished, but Phase 2 (to
measure effectiveness) had not begun.

   Packer obtained special permission for Becca to take the drug immediately
under a "compassionate use" exception to Food and Drug Administration rules. In
effect, Becca started her own individual clinical trial, under Packer's
direction. The exception is designed for patients who face extraordinarily
hard-to-treat illnesses and are ineligible for an existing clinical trial of a
still-unproven drug.

   Normally, Packer doesn't like to go outside of official clinical trials, but
in this case the formal test was not yet underway, and Becca had no time to
wait. The drug's maker, Schering-Plough, agreed to pay for the medicine.

   The drug, a pill, is taken once a day for five days. Becca has gone through
four rounds of temozolomide, one each month since December. The most recent
round ended two days ago.

   The chemo temporarily lowered her blood counts and made her extremely tired,
but the nausea subsided after the first day. Best of all, it did not make her
hair fall out.

   "Your hair is fantastic," Packer told her last month. "I keep looking at it
and thinking: Are you really taking those pills?"

   Each time Becca undergoes a brain scan, the Lillys steel themselves against
the worst. When the news is ambiguous, they're relieved it's not awful. They
have learned that reading a brain scan is as much art as science. Packer always
cautions that tumors can fool even the most sophisticated MRI machines and that,
for example, inflammation mimics cancerous growth on a scan. His calm,
deliberate appraisal of Becca's February scan -- "not a great deal different
from where we were a couple of months ago" -- brought the Lillys relief at first
but seemed a little downbeat as they played it over and over in their minds.

   "Clear as mud," Joe Lilly said.

   Becca was holding her own against the tumor, Packer had told them, "but we
haven't seen what we really want, which is shrinkage." With no better
alternative available, he recommended two more rounds of chemo, but he
reiterated his earlier imponderable question:

   "Is there a point when talking about cure is not really reasonable, and what
we need to talk about is quality of life. We're in a long shot. You've known
that before."

   Hours after the meeting with Packer, Maureen Lilly found herself thinking,
"Does he know something we don't know?"

   The Lillys try not to leave Becca home alone anymore. On her left wrist, she
wears a bracelet noting that she has a malignant brain tumor, a risk of seizures
and an allergy to sulfa drugs, and listing an emergency phone number to call
collect for her medical history. Even little Sarah knows how to speed-dial from
home: 1 for Mom at work, 2 for Dad at work, 3 for sister Anne Marie's college
dorm.

   Her parents are no longer fazed when Becca forgets the name of a movie she
has just watched or calls up from school to ask about car pool arrangements that
they went over five times that morning.

   "What's interesting is how it just became normal for her to forget stuff,"
Anne Marie Lilly said. "Now it's just part of her life."

   Since her surgery last May, Becca's peripheral vision has been less than 100
percent on the right side. But it worsened markedly in the past few months.
"It's not a blur, it's a void," Maureen Lilly said.

   Becca got a new bicycle for Christmas but has not ridden it yet, which is
actually a relief to her parents. And at a time when all her friends are getting
their driver's licenses, Becca hasn't broached the subject.

   "That makes me think she has some sense of her limitations," her mother said.

   Still, when Becca's CYO basketball coach, Mike McGinn, offered her a chance
to be a sort of nonplaying assistant coach this year, she nixed that idea. She
wanted to play.

   She has had to adjust to the reality of being a second-stringer, riding the
bench during close games. She tires faster than last year, and her reflexes and
reactions are slower, McGinn said. A lack of depth perception makes shooting
difficult and leads to occasional air balls.

   "I was, like, way off," she told Packer disgustedly the day after a bad
practice. "The basket was here and the ball was over here." She held her arms
wide apart.

   "Basketball is such an instinct game," said Anne Marie Lilly. "I can't
imagine what it must be like when you can't see the whole court."

   At a practice scrimmage one night, Becca ran down the court on the right,
looking to her left to catch a pass. With her head turned, her right-side blind
spot was directly in front of her -- which is why she saw the ball but not the
defender who cut in front of her to snatch it right out of her hands. Flustered,
she uncharacteristically brooded over it for the rest of practice. She knew she
had been in exactly the right position. It wasn't fair. Becca and her mother had
a talk about it in the girls' bathroom.

   But she's usually unflappable.

   "There's very little anger in her," her grandmother Traber said. "She takes
the knocks well."

   "She's very laid back about [the tumor]," Joe Lilly said. "In some ways,
she's not as aggressive as we would like. But that's her personality."

   "It has to be bothering her, but she's a good cover-up-er," her grandmother
said. "She never complains."

   Whenever neurologist Packer examines Becca, he asks her if she has any
questions and tries to sense whether anything in particular is troubling her.
She tends to respond in a teenager's shrugs and clipped answers: "yeah" or
"sorta" or "I dunno." Rarely does she offer Packer much in the way of feedback,
and she gladly leaves the medical talk to her parents.

   After a recent MRI, she held up the glossy black-and-white scans of her brain
and tried in vain to make out the traces of tumor -- what she called "this white
thing around the other part." But she gave up "because I can't understand it at
all. That's for doctors -- and really smart parents."

   "You know how your parents like to ask me questions?" Packer said to her in
his office.

   She nodded.

   "You're welcome to stay. You're 16 now. Up to you -- your call."

   "I'll go outside," Becca said.

   Packer was worried, and not just about her loss of peripheral vision on the
right. "I just don't think she's doing well," he said. The chronic fatigue and
trouble with language suggested that the chemo was not having much effect.

   If so, he said, "we obviously have to look for something else. And that
something else becomes harder and harder to find." All the other possibilities
were even bigger unknowns, in the earliest stage of testing in patients.

   "How's her spirits?" Packer asked.

   "Pretty good," Joe Lilly said. He mentioned basketball and dancing.

   "You think she understands?"

   "I think she understands, sort of," Joe Lilly said.

   "I mean, does she realize where we are in this?"

   "I think she's living in denial," her father said. "We don't get much more
specific information out of her than you do," he added. "We don't fathom Becca
very well."

   They talked about her attitude and the risks of messing with it.

   "The way she responds is her personal choice," Packer said. "I think the way
she's coping is . . . phenomenally well." Her upbeat stoicism was fine with him
as long as her parents agreed.

   "I don't want to browbeat her into being depressed," Packer said.

   At the annual Special Love Christmas party, Becca hung out with her friends
from Camp Fantastic, a summer camp for children with cancer. But Kelley Bula
wasn't there this year. She was at home, dying.

   Becca and Kelley, of Derwood, had met through Special Love two years before,
and the families had grown close. Kelley had a brain tumor too, a different
type. The last time Becca saw Kelley was in October, in the waiting room on the
13th floor of the Clinical Center of the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda. Kelley was in a wheelchair, puffed up from the steroid drugs and no
longer able to walk or hear or see very well. What struck Becca most was the way
the steroids made her look fat.

   After Kelley died in January, Becca told a teacher at Good Counsel that "it
was better, because she was so swollen."

   They went to the wake and the standing room-only Mass at St. Mary's Catholic
Church in Rockville. Becca cried through the Mass. On the way home, Sarah was
full of questions. "Do you still have cancer?" she asked Becca.

   "Yes," Becca said.

   The Lillys were trying to learn to pace themselves.

   Early last month, on Becca's first day back at school after exams, a teacher
found her standing in the hallway, lost and wobbly. Her parents took the
incident as a warning that Becca's teenager schedule and gung-ho attitude had a
price. She might sail through a jam-packed day -- only to crash from fatigue the
next morning.

   "We can't do that anymore," Maureen Lilly said. "She doesn't call a halt, so
we keep going and going -- and don't realize until too late that it's taking a
toll on her."

   They eased into a new routine, letting her sleep late on Tuesdays and
Thursdays and go to school whenever she got up. Most days, she takes a nap --
sometimes two.

   "It's getting a lot harder for her," said her Good Counsel classmate Karen
Gangloff, who's in Becca's math class. "In class, if the teacher is talking
fast, she can't understand. She gets frustrated because she wants to catch up,
but it's just too much."

   "We all -- patients, parents and physicians -- go through phases in these
cases," neurologist Packer said. "These diseases are marathons."

   For many cancer patients, five years is a magic number: If they live five
years beyond their diagnosis, it may mean the cancer is under control or even
gone.

   When Becca's tumor was diagnosed in mid-1991, the Lillys were told that three
to five years was a realistic hope, with treatment. Now it has been more than
five years, but five years of continual treatment. The five-year landmark --
last June -- held little magic for Becca; she was groggily recovering from her
fourth brain surgery.

   "Yeah, we got the five years," Maureen Lilly said, "but by no stretch of the
imagination are we home free."

   There were two especially scary times this winter.

   On the morning she was scheduled to start the temozolomide chemo, Becca came
downstairs and said she felt "really strange." She was resting on the living
room couch when she went into a seizure that lasted four minutes. Her eyes
rolled and her body alternately shook and went rigid. Maureen Lilly dialed 911,
and when the dispatcher came on, relayed his instructions to Joe, who was trying
to help Becca until the ambulance came.

   To the Lillys, it was eerily like the seizure Becca had nearly six years ago,
before they even knew about the tumor.

   Becca's little sister, Sarah, saw the whole thing. She dashed back and forth
between her mom on the phone and her dad comforting Becca on the couch until
they posted her by the window as a lookout for the ambulance.

   Becca was rushed to nearby Washington Adventist Hospital, where she recovered
quickly. By early afternoon, she was home asleep. When Sarah got to kindergarten
that day, she told her teacher that Becca had had a heart attack.

   It turned out that Becca had forgotten to take her anti-seizure medicine the
night before. That was a something of a relief, to know that she might be able
to prevent such seizures by taking the Tegretol pills. If she could remember.

   The other scary spell came six days before Christmas. It started with double
vision and a headache, then worsened into what Becca calls "that 'whoa' feeling
like at the top of a roller coaster." Becca called from the nurse's office at
Good Counsel, and Joe Lilly raced from work and drove her to Children's
Hospital.

   Seated in the waiting room, she looked terrified, her eyes teary and
unfocused. The world would not hold still for her. Her father stood directly in
front of her and asked, "What do you see?"

   "Two of you," she whimpered.

   Packer ordered an electroencephalogram (EEG), a chart of her brain's
electrical activity. On the way to the EEG room, Becca clutched onto her father
and walked as if she were afraid of where to put each foot down.

   In the EEG room she sat down and suddenly had to vomit. She grabbed a Foot
Locker shopping bag and threw up into it. Then she tied her hair back with a
rubber band and lay down on the examining table.

   "Dad, give me your hand," she said. She gripped his right in her right, and
closed her eyes.

   Technician Shirley Jacobs began attaching electrodes to Becca's head. Soon
there was a tangle of 21 colored wires leading from her forehead, temples, chin
and neck to a panel behind her, where Jacobs watched the computer printouts of
squiggly brain waves.

   The headache was subsiding, but she still saw double. Nausea came over her in
waves.

   "Just relax," her father said, holding her shoulders. "I got you. You're
okay."

   Packer came into the room. "Are you still dizzy?" he asked her.

   "I don't know. I have to throw up." She spat up again into a bedpan as Jacobs
held the EEG wires away from her face.

   The brain-wave printouts showed that whatever was happening in Becca's brain,
it was not a seizure. It was probably the equivalent of a very bad migraine,
triggered directly or indirectly by the tumor. Packer decided to keep Becca in
the hospital overnight.

   She protested with a scrunched-up scowly face.

   The doctor pointed out that she wasn't eating, wasn't drinking and could
barely walk. If they didn't replenish her fluids intravenously, she might become
dehydrated. Plus, they had to make sure the spell didn't recur. He promised to
kick her out of the hospital in the morning if she felt better.

   "I just want to go to sleep," Becca said.

   She was home by noon the next day.

   Becca had yet another MRI last week -- her eighth in the past year -- and
once again the Lillys cringed. This time, the news was somewhat better. The
tumor appeared to have stabilized. On some of the brain scans it even appeared
slightly smaller than in January -- and about the same size as last November.

   Packer was still worried by her symptoms: the fatigue, forgetfulness and
trouble with language. "But we're dealing with a malignant tumor," he reminded
the Lillys. "It's good news that we haven't lost control of it." Brain tumors
that recur after treatment, as Becca's did, sometimes start to grow like
wildfire.

   For the time being, he recommended that she stick with the temozolomide
chemo-by-pill.

   "Better than we thought," Maureen Lilly said as they left Packer's office. "I
was afraid he would say something else."

   "Me too," Becca piped up.

   "Really?" her mother said. "What did you think Dr. Packer was going to say?"

   "That I'd have to try something new," Becca said, stuffing her geometry
homework into her backpack.

   "How do you feel about what he did say?" Maureen Lilly asked.

   "Fine with me," Becca said. She had a busy weekend planned.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, Maureen Lilly and Becca make sure everything
looks just right before the high school Winter Ball. Becca surprised her family
by inviting a date to the formal dance.  Becca Lilly's battle with brain cancer
has been chronicled in the Health section on April 2, June 11, August 13 and
November 26, 1996.  Becca pins a corsage on her date, Justin Smith, before they
go out to dinner.  After leaving the Good Counsel dance early, Becca and Justin
went bowling in Wheaton.  Becca played less this year, but St. Bernadette's
reached the league finals.  Becca snaps a shot of sister Sarah after cheering
Marymount University's first-round win in the NCAA Division III national
championships. Their sister Anne Marie plays for Marymount.  Above, neurologist
Roger Packer discusses Becca's MRI brain scan with Joe and Maureen Lilly at
Children's Hospital. At left, radiology technician Victoria Glasow prepares
Becca for an MRI at the Kaiser Permanente Imaging Center in Fairfax while
Maureen Lilly looks on. At far left, Maureen Lilly reads to her daughter while
they wait to see Packer.  Becca keeps up a busy tempo -- even when that means
dancing and bowling in the same evening.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1997


                             2484 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            March 15, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS SECTION BUSINESS, Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: PROGENITOR TO TRY AGAIN IN BID TO BE PUBLIC FIRM;
IPO COULD RAISE $ 38 MILLION

BYLINE: Barnet D. Wolf<Dispatch Assistant Business Editor

BODY:


   Progenitor Inc. will made a second bid to become a public company.

   The Columbus-based biomedical company late yesterday filed documents with the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public stock offering
that could raise as much as $ 38 million.

   The company, with headquarters at 1507 Chambers Rd., was formed in 1992 to
make commercial cellular and genetic therapies that have been developed by
researchers at Ohio University's Edison Biotechnology Institute.

   Progenitor is owned by Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc., a Lexington,
Mass.-based company, that would retain a 41 percent stake in its subsidiary if
the stock offering is sold out.

   The offering of 2.75 million shares - plus another 412,500 shares if needed -
is expected to be priced between $ 10 and $ 12 per share. Lehman Bros. and
Genesis Merchant Group Securities will manage the offering.

   Progenitor sought to go public last August with a $ 30 million offering, but
after biotech shares slumped after the first half of 1996, the company decided
to postpone the IPO.

   With the market for biotech companies improving this year, the company
decided to take another shot at going public.

   The Columbus company's future improved this year when it reached a licensing
agreement worth up to $ 42 million with Amgen Inc. for Progenitor's
weight-reduction technology.

   Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., has tested the Progenitor's leptin receptor
technology, which allows the body to absorb leptin, a natural hormone thought to
help control body fat.

   At the time the IPO closes, Progenitor will sell Amgen $ 5.5 million of
Progenitor stock. The Columbus company also is swapping $ 22 million of its
stock to acquire another company, Mercator Genetics Inc.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1997


                             2485 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     MARCH 14, 1997, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: Key Finding in Fight Against AIDS Dementia
 S.F. researchers believe blood test could detect onse

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    In a major step toward understanding the dementia that disables the minds of
many AIDS patients, San Francisco researchers have found that a class of immune
system cells infected by the AIDS virus can cause the disorder by inducing the
brain's vital nerve cells to destroy themselves.

   The new evidence could yield the first blood test to detect the slow onset of
AIDS dementia and enable scientists to screen new drugs for treating or even
preventing the devastating condition, researchers believe.

   The discovery that certain blood cells can actually cause neurons in the
brain to self-destruct may also apply to other far more common brain disorders
unrelated to AIDS.

   Examples given by the researchers include Alzheimer's disease; Parkinsonism,
a nervous disease that resembles Parkinson's disease; or even the effects of
stroke on the brain.

   Headed by Dr. Lynn Pulliam, chief of microbiology at the Veterans Affairs
Medical Center in San Francisco, the research team is reporting the results of
its latest laboratory experiments in the current issue of the Lancet, a leading
British medical journal.  Pulliam is also on the faculty of the University of
California at San Francisco. Among her colleagues on the team is Dr. Michael
McGrath of UCSF, an AIDS laboratory researcher at San Francisco General
Hospital.

   For many years, the team has been studying a variety of neurological diseases
by culturing human brain cells in the laboratory. Most recently, they have
focused on cells of the immune system called macrophages, which act as a
reservoir for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

   As the researchers investigated the properties of certain types of unusually
dense and granular macrophages that circulate in the human bloodstream, the
scientists found a mystery: When they removed all traces of HIV from those
macrophages, Pulliam said, the remaining virus-free fluid contained a variety of
molecules the researchers have not yet identified.

   Those mysterious ''factors,'' as Pulliam called them, apparently caused genes
within the brain's neurons to begin a process known as apoptosis, or
''programmed cell death,'' that killed off all the brain cells in a kind of mass
cell suicide.

   Because the process of apoptosis is apparently regulated genetically, Pulliam
said, she and her colleagues are already seeking a way to forestall the death of
the brain cells by disarming the genes that cause the process -- an experimental
technique known as gene therapy.

   If blood tests show that increased numbers of blood-borne macrophages in AIDS
patients are a signal that the slow process of brain cell apoptosis is starting,
then regular blood tests could be a valuable tool for detecting the earliest
stages of dementia long before the disorder's devastating symptoms arise,
McGrath believes.

   And new drugs, he says, could be used to target the HIV-infected macrophages
and thus halt the death of brain cells before dementia becomes even moderately
severe.

   The disorder known as AIDS dementia complex affects as many as one-third of
adults infected with HIV, and one-half of all children with AIDS. It can cause
increasing memory loss, progressive inability to concentrate and, ultimately,
major mental disability and paralysis. Although there is no approved treatment
for the condition, the new combinations of antiviral AIDS drugs may help slow
the development of dementia by lowering the concentration of HIV in the body,
specialists say.


LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1997


                             2486 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    March 13, 1997, Thursday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 853 words

HEADLINE: Lawmakers urged not to overreact to furor over cloning

BYLINE: CURT SUPLEE; Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Numerous scientific experts - including the
Scottish researcher whose team was the first to clone an adult
mammal -Wednesday warned Congress against legislating
prematurely on the subject of human cloning, lest a hasty,
ill-drafted law stifle promising biological research.

   Ian Wilmut of the Roslin Institute in Scotland told a crowded
Senate hearing that cloning humans would be ""unethical'' and
""quite inhumane. '' His group, Wilmut said, ""would welcome any
efforts that could be made on an international basis'' to ban
the practice before it occurs.

   But he urged that new laws should ""preserve opportunities to
take advantage'' of advances in gene manipulation, and not
""throw out this particular baby with the bath water'' by
overreacting to the cloning news.

   Unduly restricting inquiry, Wilmut said before the Senate
Labor and Human Resources subcommittee on public health and
safety, could severely hamper progress toward gene therapies
for Parkinson's disease, cystic fibrosis and other maladies,
as well as fundamental discoveries in the way cells
specialize.

   Although world opinion has been galvanized by reports of the
cloned sheep named Dolly, ""the discussion is actually running
ahead of the science,'' said Harold Varmus, director of the
National Institutes of Health.  The prospect of human cloning
is extremely remote at present, Varmus said, because the
techniques used are ""extremely difficult, inefficient and not
established in species other than sheep. '' As a result, ""we're
not in a moment of crisis. ''

   Sen.Bill Frist, R-Tenn, a transplant surgeon, had convened
the hearing to begin to ""explore all of the medical, social
and ethical implications'' of the cloning technique.

   Three hours of testimony by 10 witnesses produced considerable
unanimity.  Nearly all panel members - including three
bioethicists and three representatives of biotechnology
enterprises - concurred that human cloning would be
reprehensible but that exploitation of new gene-manipulation
techniques holds extraordinary promise.

   In fact, the principal dissent came from Sen. Tom Harkin,
D-Iowa, who insisted it was ""utter nonsense'' for government to
try to regulate scientific inquiry.

   ""I don't think there are any appropriate limits to human
knowledge -none whatsoever,'' Harkin said.  He compared the
sudden spasm of revulsion at the possibility of human cloning
to the Vatican's attempt to suppress the work of Galileo in
the 17th century.  ""Some would have us believe that Dolly is a
wolf in sheep's clothing,'' he said, but ""human cloning will
take place in my lifetime, and I don't fear it.  I welcome
it. ''

   Sen. Christopher Bond, R-Mo., had previously taken the
opposite position, speaking in favor of a bill that would make
permanent President Clinton's temporary ban on human cloning
experiments and federally funded embryo research.  ""There are
aspects of life,'' Bond said, ""that should be off-limits to
science. ''

   Several witnesses expressed similar sentiments.  ""I hope that
you are wrong,'' Wilmut told Harkin, because ""I have never
heard of a potential application'' of cloning -including cases
in which parents lose their only child to disease - ""that I
would find ethically acceptable. ''

   James Geraghty, president of Genzyme Transgenics, a
Massachusetts biotechnology firm, emphasized that ""everyone in
the biotechnology industry shares the unequivocal conviction
that there is no place for the cloning of human beings in our
society. ''

   George Annas, a health law expert from Boston University,
agreed with Harkin that it was difficult to control science
but stressed that ""novelty is not always the same as
progress. '' The Dolly debate provides an ideal opportunity ""to
establish a new regulatory framework'' for directing medical
experimentation, he said.

   But any such framework, several experts cautioned, would have
to be very carefully crafted to avoid having a debilitating
effect on research.  For example, Alta Charo of the University
of Wisconsin, a member of the National Bioethics Advisory
Committee, explained that the central accomplishment of the
Scottish team - placing the genes of a fully developed adult
cell into an egg that has had its nucleus removed and then
generating a viable embryo from the combination - posed new
and troubling problems for federal rule-making.

   Because ""any cell in an adult body (can now) be regarded as
equivalent to a fertilized egg,'' she said, government may have
to reconsider the kinds of restrictions it places on
""fertilized eggs, embryos and our bodies in general. ''

   In addition, Varmus said, laws will have to be meticulously
worded so they do not prohibit various life-saving
technologies.  For example, he said, a law that made it illegal
to place the contents of one human cell into another would
eliminate many kinds of gene therapy.

   Wilmut said genetic manipulation, within two or three years,
would enable his lab to create animals that ""produce in their
milk proteins that can treat human disease. ''

GRAPHIC: Mug: Ian Wilmut

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1997


                             2487 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1997 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                         March 13, 1997, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; TODAY'S FOCUS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1212 words

HEADLINE: Cloning controversy;
 Cloned people? Senate panel tackles debate // The scientist who cloned a sheep
and created a debate in the process says there's no reason to clone humans. Yet
he says his discovery holds great promise for the treatment of disease.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

DATELINE: Washington, D.C.

BODY:

   The scientist who shattered a biological barrier by cloning an adult sheep
told a rapt U.S. Senate panel Wednesday that people should not be cloned but
that the discovery could lead quickly to farm animals that produce human
medicine.

    "I have not heard a suggested application of this to copy a person that I am
comfortable with," said Ian Wilmut, an embryologist who works in Scotland.

    In his first U.S. appearance since the discovery was announced, Wilmut said
that the techniques developed at the Roslin Institute near Edinburgh are too
crude to even consider using on humans.

    He said that it is "up to all of us" to decide how the techniques are
applied.

    Wilmut and a team of his colleagues reported in late February that they had
created a now-famous lamb named Dolly using cells from the udder of a
six-year-old ewe.

    It is recognized as the first clone from a mature mammal cell, something
many scientists doubted was possible.

    The stunning announcement propelled Wilmut into a whirlwind of debate over
the practical, legal and ethical implications of cloning.  Within 10 days, bills
were introduced in Congress to prohibit cloning humans and to outlaw federal
funding on research in human cloning.

    One measure of the stir it has created is the passion and the range of the
discussion at the hearing Wednesday before the Senate subcommittee on public
health and safety.


   'Playing God'

    "Human beings are not God and we should therefore not try to play God,"
insisted Sen. Christopher Bond, R-Mo., author of one of the bills.

    "They accused Galileo of playing God, too," retorted Sen. Tom Harkin,
D-Iowa, referring to the 17th-century astronomer who was condemned for heresy
for arguing that Earth and the other planets revolve around the sun.  "This is a
constant, common refrain down through the centuries that somehow we are playing
God."

    Remember the furor in the 1960s over heart transplantation, said Sen. Bill
Frist, R-Tenn., a surgeon.

    "The idea of cutting a diseased heart out of one person and replacing it
with the heart of another was seen as terrifying, and to many unethical," he
said.  "But as our scientific understanding advanced, and as bioethical
discussions and public input proceeded, heart transplantation became a 'miracle'
of modern medicine."

    Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., urged Congress to respond to cloning by taking
up bills that would protect genetic privacy so that health insurers and others
couldn't use genetic information without authorization.  But fear of cloning
should not stop genetic research, he said.

    At one point Wilmut - whose calm and measured words seemed somehow out of
joint with the fuss he has created - told Harkin that he wouldn't take the
technology as far as the senator is willing to go.

    Harkin: "Human cloning will take place.  It will take place in my lifetime.
. . .  I welcome it."

    Wilmut: "I would be very concerned that you do address the questions of the
individuals who would be involved, . . . the children who would be born.  I
personally have still not heard a potential use of this technique to produce a
new person that I would find ethically acceptable.  On that basis I hope that
you are wrong and that we do not see human cloning in our lifetimes."


   'Quite inhuman'

    The sheer crudeness of the sheep experiment makes human cloning unthinkable
in the short term, Wilmut said.  Dolly was the only lamb produced in 277
attempts.

    "The technique that we have is very inefficient," he said.  "There have in
the past been lambs that were born which have not completed development and have
died soon after birth.  I think now to contemplate using our present technique
using humans would be quite inhuman."

    But Wilmut does welcome and expect further breakthroughs in food production
and human and animal medicine.  And other scientists at the hearing urged
Congress to craft legislation carefully so that a ban on human cloning doesn't
block beneficial research.

    "Much of the research that is necessary will be carried out either with
laboratory animals or with farm animals in order to bring forth the new
biological understanding without having to use human embryos at all," Wilmut
said.

    Don't even look for mass production of cloned animals anytime soon.  In the
next two or three years, the technology will be used "to make precise genetic
changes in livestock rather than creating whole animals," he said.

    It should lead to streamlined techniques for breeding farm animals that give
milk containing proteins needed to treat human diseases such as hemophilia, he
said.


   Gene therapy

    The next development will be enhanced understanding of genetic diseases in
humans and farm animals.  Wilmut expects to genetically modify sheep, giving
them a mild form of cystic fibrosis in order to develop drugs and possibly gene
therapy for the disease.

    It will take five years or more for research to begin to reap what
scientists say is the revolutionary potential in the discovery: helping to
develop precise genetic profiles of people and animals and also to understand
how genes function as they specialize to form whole beings.  Wilmut foresees
therapies that will allow doctors to remove cells from patients - someone with
Parkinson's disease, for example - reroute the genes in the cells on a healthier
track and then transplant them back into the patient.

    The potential ramifications of the breakthrough have sometimes been
misconstrued, Wilmut said.

    "Some of the people are not thinking through carefully some of the suggested
applications for copying a person under circumstances which are sad, where
perhaps a child has been lost or the parent has died," he said.  "These
suggested applications actually depend on bringing a person back.  We can't do
that."

    President Clinton has asked the National Bioethics Advisory Commission to
issue long-range policy recommendations on cloning in late May.  Meanwhile, he
has temporarily banned federal funding for human cloning research and called
upon private researchers to honor the moratorium.


    - Sen. Christopher Bond, R-Mo.: "Human cloning is something we as a society
cannot and should not tolerate. This type of research on humans is morally
reprehensible, and we should not be creating human beings for spare parts, as
replacements, or for other unnatural and selfish purposes.  . . . I believe
there are aspects of life that should be off limits to science.  . . . Although
we can debate the technical feasibility of cloning humans, I think we can all
come to agreement on one thing: It is morally unacceptable and repugnant for
humans to try to play God."

    - Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa: "They accused Galileo of playing God, too.  . . .
It's our human nature to question, to ask why, to ask how and what if. I think
it's our humanness that compels us to probe the universe from the subatomic to
the cosmos, from blastocyst to the full human anatomy. . . . The human mind will
continue to inquire into this. Human cloning will take place. It will take place
in my lifetime. And I don't fear it at all. . . . I want to be on the side of
the Galileos."


GRAPHIC: Photograph

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1997


                             2488 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            March 13, 1997 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: BALD is beautiful and it may soon be curable

BYLINE: Bob Condor, krt news service

BODY:

   There can be distinct advantages to male baldness, including the recent
findings published in a professional journal called Ethology and Sociobiology. A
survey of 200 male and female college students - this would be the hip younger
generation - showed that balding and bald men are generally perceived as more
mature and even-tempered than men with a full head of hair. The bald men were
more frequently identified as leaders, and considered higher in social standing.

    All of which might provide encouragement to some 35 million American men who
face baldness.

    There's also solace in the athletes and movie stars who have shaved their
heads, making baldness more of a style than a stigma.

   Perhaps most relevant is the hope for a remedy. There are some encouraging
developments, but as yet no solution.

   "It's complicated because there is no one cure," said Dr. Arthur P.
Bertolino, director of the Hair Consultation Clinic at New York University
Medical Center. "We have a bunch of halfway measures but no home runs."

    One is minoxidil, a topical liquid now available over the counter as Rogaine
and various generic preparations. It is the first medically proven drug to help
stop hair loss.

    The Food and Drug Administration moved minoxidil (first approved in 1988)
from prescription-only status last April, after requiring rigorous testing about
side effects. There appear to be few, save the 2 to 3 percent who suffer severe
itching from the drug's alcohol base. No long-term side effects are suspected;
more research is needed.

    But minoxidil is not a cure-all. It works better in early stages of
baldness, and is more effective for individuals with baldness at the crown
rather than a receding hairline (women minoxidil users tend to grow new hair
more readily in front). Overall, roughly 40 percent will experience hair
regrowth, though many in a peach-fuzz form. It usually requires four to eight
months to determine if the drug is working.

    "There are a lucky 10 to 20 percent of total users who grow enough new hair
to make a difference," said Bertolino.

    For them, the $30 it costs for a monthly bottle is a bargain price. Yet the
drug does seem to have more universal value: Doctors agree monoxidil can
discourage additional hair loss in most patients.

    It must be applied twice daily to maintain scalp stimulation. Stopping or
down-dosing will halt any new hair growth and encourage the hair-loss pattern to
return. Bertolino said that applying minoxidil with a dropper brings the best
results.

    While Rogaine and similar preparations stimulate circulation in the scalp,
it's unknown why minoxidil helps grow hair or stops loss. Its capability was
discovered by accident, as the drug was used in oral form to treat high blood
pressure. Some patients were reporting unexpected hair growth.

    A similar situation developed with a new anti-baldness drug currently going
through the FDA approval process. Propecia is a brand-name drug from Merck and
Co. that is a low-dose form of Proscar, a medication prescribed to men with
enlarged prostates (some of them were delighted at the unexpected new hair on
their heads). A pill is taken once a day.

    There is speculation that combining minoxidil with Propecia might be even
more effective. Several other drugs are in development, but are years away from
FDA approval. Dermatologists are most enthusiastic about possible gene therapy
for baldness, now in preliminary stages of laboratory discovery.

    An interesting note: About 11 percent of men in the various minoxidil
studies showed new hair growth with placebos. Though there is no scientific
evidence that scalp massage, stress management or diet can offset hereditary
baldness, doctors like Dr. Andrew Weil of the University of Arizona Medical
School would argue there is something here for further investigation.

    The other medical option for men with baldness is surgery. Bertolino said
new "micro-grafting" techniques have allowed much less discernible hair
transplants.

    Surgery is expensive, however. The series of surgical procedures is likely
to cost $10,000 to $20,000 without insurance reimbursement. Bertolino said
beware anyone who claims the process can be done in one or two "mega- sessions,"
and make sure your surgeon is board-certified.

    "It's also a good sign if the surgeon is associated with a major medical
center," said Bertolino. "Ask about the doctor's experience and arrange to talk
to other patients who have completed the process.

    "The doctor should be open to such discussion. If not, look elsewhere. I see
too many patients who come to me for repairs rather than getting it right the
first time."

GRAPHIC: Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls, one of a growing number of
athletes who sport bald heads.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2489 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    March 13, 1997, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 895 words

HEADLINE: Top Scientists Warn Against Cloning Panic; Recreating Humans Would Be
Unethical, Experts Say

BYLINE: Curt Suplee, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Numerous scientific experts -- including the Scottish researcher whose team
was the first to clone an adult mammal -- yesterday warned Congress against
legislating prematurely on the subject of human cloning, lest a hasty,
ill-drafted law stifle promising biological research.

   Ian Wilmut of the Roslin Institute in Scotland told a crowded Senate hearing
that cloning humans would be "unethical" and "quite inhumane." His group, Wilmut
said, "would welcome any efforts that could be made on an international basis"
to ban the practice before it occurs.

   But he urged that new laws should "preserve opportunities to take advantage"
of advances in gene manipulation, and not "throw out this particular baby with
the bath water" by overreacting to the cloning news. Unduly restricting inquiry,
Wilmut said before the Senate Labor and Human Resources subcommittee on public
health and safety, could severely hamper progress toward gene therapies for
Parkinson's disease, cystic fibrosis and other maladies, as well as fundamental
discoveries in the way cells specialize.

   Although world opinion has been galvanized by reports of the cloned sheep
named Dolly, "the discussion is actually running ahead of the science," said
Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health. The prospect of
human cloning is extremely remote at present, Varmus said, because the
techniques used are "extremely difficult, inefficient and not established in
species other than sheep." As a result, "we're not in a moment of crisis."

   Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.), a transplant surgeon, had convened the hearing to
"explore all of the medical, social and ethical implications" of the cloning
technique.

   Three hours of testimony by 10 witnesses produced considerable unanimity.
Nearly all panel members -- including three bioethicists and three
representatives of biotechnology enterprises -- concurred that human cloning
would be reprehensible but that exploitation of new gene-manipulation techniques
holds extraordinary promise.

   In fact, the principal dissent came from Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), who
insisted that it was "utter nonsense" for government to try to regulate
scientific inquiry.

   "I don't think there are any appropriate limits to human knowledge -- none
whatsoever," Harkin said, and compared the sudden spasm of revulsion at the
possibility of human cloning to the Vatican's attempt to suppress the work of
Galileo in the 17th century. "Some would have us believe that Dolly is a wolf in
sheep's clothing," he said, but "human cloning will take place in my lifetime
and I don't fear it. I welcome it."

   Sen. Christopher S. Bond (R-Mo.), testifying earlier, took the opposite
position, speaking in favor of a bill that would make permanent President
Clinton's temporary ban on human cloning experiments and federally funded embryo
research. "There are aspects of life," Bond said, "that should be off-limits to
science."

   Several witnesses expressed similar sentiments. "I hope that you are wrong,"
Wilmut told Harkin, because "I have never heard of a potential application" of
cloning -- including cases in which parents lose their only child to disease --
"that I would find ethically acceptable."

   James A. Geraghty, president of Genzyme Transgenics Corp., a Massachusetts
biotechnology firm, emphasized that "everyone in the biotechnology industry
shares the unequivocal conviction that there is no place for the cloning of
human beings in our society."

   George Annas, a health law expert from Boston University, agreed with Harkin
that it was difficult to control science, but stressed that "novelty is not
always the same as progress." The Dolly debate provides an ideal opportunity "to
establish a new regulatory framework" for directing medical experimentation, he
said.

   But any such framework, several experts cautioned, would have to be very
carefully crafted to avoid having a debilitating effect on research. For
example, R. Alta Charo of the University of Wisconsin, a member of the National
Bioethics Advisory Committee, explained that the central accomplishment of the
Scottish team -- placing the genes of a fully developed adult cell into an egg
that has had its nucleus removed and then generating a viable embryo from the
combination -- posed new and troubling problems for federal rule-making.

   Because "any cell in an adult body [can now] be regarded as equivalent to a
fertilized egg," she said, government may have to reconsider the kinds of
restrictions it places on "fertilized eggs, embryos and our bodies in general."

   In addition, Varmus said, laws will have to be meticulously worded so that
they do not prohibit various life-saving technologies. For example, he said, a
law that made it illegal to place the contents of one human cell into another
would eliminate many kinds of gene therapy.

   Wilmut said that genetic manipulation, within two or three years, would
enable his lab to create animals that "produce in their milk proteins that can
treat human disease." And John Wallwork, a transplant surgeon at Papworth
Hospital in Cambridge, England, said that continued research is necessary to
make transgenic animals that can provide a source of compatible organs for
humans, ending what he called a transplant lottery system "that relies on a well
person to die in order for a sick person to live."


GRAPHIC: Photo, ray lustig, Ian Wilmut, the Scottish researcher whose team
cloned an adult sheep, testifies at Senate.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1997


                             2490 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 12, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: Pitofsky goes to bat for consumers FTC chief looks to legacy

BYLINE: Del Jones

BODY:

   Federal Trade Commission Chairman Robert Pitofsky co-founded a
fathers-children softball team 25 years ago. They still play on
Sundays.

   "We started when our kids were 7 years old, and we all cheered
when they got a hit," says Pitofsky, 67. "Now the kids are all
30, and they cheer when we get a hit."


   If anyone knows times have changed, Pitofsky says, it's him. He's
been FTC chairman for two years, and when his term expires in
2002, he wants to be known as a defender of consumers and competition.

   Protecting consumers has been a frequent goal of policymakers
since the days of Teddy Roosevelt. But Pitofsky says it was interrupted
in the 1980s when Ronald Reagan was president -- and Pitofsky
was dean of Georgetown University Law School. Then, the dominant
economic philosophy discouraged government interference in the
marketplace.

   But Pitofsky says antitrust enforcement during his tenure at the
FTC won't revert to the 1960s, when companies were considered
bad just for being big and had to be broken apart. In global markets,
the most efficient and innovative companies are by necessity big,
he says.

   So in an interview Tuesday, a day after the FTC said it would
block the $ 4.4 billion purchase of Office Depot by Staples because
it might drive up the price of office supplies, Pitofsky promised
the FTC would challenge more mergers and acquisitions on antitrust
grounds.

   But the challenges won't be excessive, he says -- and their numbers
will go up only because the number of deals has risen from less
than 2,300 in 1994 to 3,100 last year. He says 99% will still
go unchallenged.

   But the 1% have made headlines. The FTC blocked the $ 1.8 billion
merger of drugstore chains Rite Aid and Revco. And it demanded
concessions before approving the mergers of drugmakers Ciba-Geigy
and Sandoz, media companies Time Warner and Turner Broadcasting,
and drug companies Baxter International and Immuno International.

   In the Ciba-Geigy case, Pitofsky defended the "innovation market"
by insisting that gene therapy research not be sacrificed in the
merger -- a challenge that would have been considered extreme
government meddling under Reagan, as would have the Staples challenge.

   As chairman, Pitofsky has only one vote at the FTC. But he works
closely with other commissioners to develop cases that he supports,
says FTC general counsel Stephen Calkins. Calkins says he doesn't
remember a case in which Pitofsky was on the losing side of a
major vote.

   Eleanor Fox, a New York University law professor who has written
papers with Pitofsky, says the Staples decision marks a turning
point for the FTC. "He sees consumers are hurt and he takes action,"
Fox says.

   Pitofsky is "evolving," says former Justice Department lawyer
Peter Farkas, who has recently heard the chairman soften his attack
on the Reagan years. "Antitrust used to be keeping America safe
for Ma and Pa businesses. Now it's moved over to letting the consumer
get the best possible deal," Farkas says.

   Harvey Goldschmid, Columbia University law professor, says to
expect no radical moves from Pitofsky, just thoughtful ones. Pitofsky
has an interest in art and literature, and is a "pretty good"
tennis player, Goldschmid jokes: "Last time he beat me. That
makes him pretty good."

   Contributing: Jayne O'Donnell

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Matt Mendelsohn, USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Matt Mendelsohn,
USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1997


                             2491 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 11, 1997, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: NIH chief opposes legislation

BYLINE: By Larry Tye, Globe Staff

DATELINE: MEDFORD

BODY:

   Human cloning almost certainly is a wrongheaded idea, but it would be equally
wrongheaded to legislate a ban on it, the head of the National Institutes of
Health warned yesterday.

   "Legislation and science don't mix very well," Dr. Harold E. Varmus said. "We
demonstrated with research on DNA, gene therapy and in vitro fertilization that
we can regulate without legislating. . . . Nervousness reached similar levels
when we learned we could clone DNA, and there was a moratorium where scientists
and the government had long discussions."

   Similar discussions are under way now on cloning, under the auspices of the
National Bioethics Advisory Commission. President Clinton also has ordered that
no federal money be used on human cloning, and he has asked private researchers
to hold off any such work. "The chances that such work could or would have
happened," Varmus said, "are vanishingly small."

   The NIH chief was at Tufts University Medical School yesterday to give an
address before the university bestowed an honorary degree on Representative John
E. Porter, an Illinois Republican who heads the Appropriations subcommittee that
controls NIH funding.

   Varmus compared Porter to Prince Henry of Portugal - known as Henry the
Navigator - who in the 15th Century "helped make seafaring possible on a new
scale." Porter, he added, has showed equal vision in digging up extra resources
for basic research at a time when federal funding is scarce and both political
parties are set on slicing federal spending.

   In an interview after his address, Varmus talked about what federal response,
if any, is needed to last month's news from Scotland that a lamb named Dolly was
cloned from a ewe. Whether there is a need for legislation on cloning will
become clear after the Bioethics Commission reviews the issue, the NIH chief
said. "It is far from clear that human cloning is possible with current
technologies," he added.

   "We don't know the efficiency of cloning with species other than sheep, or
even if Dolly is a normal sheep or will have a normal lifespan."

   While he said he is exhausted from talking about cloning so much, Varmus
added that such discussions "bring us to the heart of biology. . . . It's a
chance to talk about what cloning is, what gene regulation is, what the
difference is between twins and the kind of clone that Dolly represents."

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1997


                             2492 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     March 11, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z06; SECOND OPINION

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: Fear of Cloning And the Ewe To-Do

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford

BODY:


   The most immediate medical consequence of cloning the Scottish sheep Dolly
has been a major outbreak of the Frankenstein Syndrome. In this recurring
epidemic, many people from all walks of life are seized with grandiose fantasies
that a supernatural force of evil is about to be unleashed on an unsuspecting
world.

   As with many modern afflictions, this syndrome is self-inflicted. It is
usually triggered by the announcement of a technological advance in medical
science.

   Before Dolly and the current cloning frenzy, it was DNA research and gene
therapy. When scientists announced they had the technology to insert new genes
into a cell to try to fix a genetic defect responsible for a disease,
Frankenstein maniacs had a field day. Manipulate a person's genes? Re-engineer
the soul? Turn on the aggression gene for future generations? Grow a monster
strain of Hitlers, not to mention a patch of killer strawberries in the garden?

   Before the genetics revolution, the birth of Louise Brown, the world's first
"test-tube" baby, triggered a similar outbreak. Create life in a petri dish?
Manipulate sperm and egg in the laboratory? Forget the wink of an eye, the will
of God -- put in your order for Junior at the local infant hatchery? Today, in
vitro fertilization is widely accepted.

   To be sure, there are reasons to be concerned about medical experiments and a
great need to address the ethical implications of new technology. But the
initial apocalyptic response to Dolly and the science of cloning seems to be
based more on imagination than factual data.

   According to British writer Jon Turney, an authority on the cult of
Frankenstein, the Frankenstein story reflects the public's deep ambivalence and
fear of science and scientists. Since Mary Shelley's novel was published in
1818, it has been recreated on stage and film and is now firmly entrenched as a
cultural fairy tale about what happens when man defies nature. This theme of the
diabolic potential to create and control life through applied research runs
through the many literary clones of Frankenstein from the baby hatcheries in
"Brave New World" to the Hitler-cloning scenario in "The Boys from Brazil."

   When Dolly burst forth on the scene, the possibility that an adult human
being could be reproduced by cloning once again ignited people's ambivalence
about science. What are those crazy scientists up to now?

   As a result, most of the public's attention has touched on the Frankenstein
aspect of Dolly's origins. "The Age of Cloning: A line has been crossed. . . . "
(Time). "Cloning for Good or Evil" (New York Times).. "Do we really want to play
God?" (Newsweek). President Clinton immediately banned federal funding of human
cloning research. Hearings are underway in Congress. The 18-member National
Bioethics Advisory Commission has set aside other issues to examine the
implications of cloning technology.

   "Where is the reality here? I think people will calm down," says John
Gerhart, director of research in obstetrics and gynecology at Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions.

   The reality is that the cloning technology used to produce Dolly is still
crude. It took 227 tries to get Dolly. Besides, this research is likely to
produce better treatments of disease that would make actual cloning unnecessary.

   Even if technically possible, cloning a whole human being does not come close
to the Frankenstein scenario of perpetuating a superclass of monsters. Cloning
is not an unnatural act. Mother Nature does it all the time with identical
twins. "This is not 'The Boys from Brazil,' " cautions embryologist Donald D.
Brown at the Carnegie Institution, who remembers the Frankenstein fears during
the early DNA debates. Unfortunately what has gotten lost during the current
Frankenstein outbreak is the medical significance of Dolly's birth. The key
point is that she was cloned from an adult ewe. Scientists were able to take a
mature cell (from an udder), return it to an embryonic state and then start it
up again. Eventually, this embryonic cell, stripped of its adult past, divided
and matured -- as embryos are wont to do -- and became a whole sheep.

   This is a spectacular achievement. The ability to reprogram mature cells and
start them up again has tantalizing implications for a host of medical problems,
especially those that involve muscle and nerves. What if this technology could
be used to repair severed spinal cords and damaged nerves? To improve the
chances of pregnancy with in vitro fertilization? To prevent certain inherited
diseases? The scientific race is on to identify those factors that can reprogram
the genetic makeup of cells.

   Meanwhile, the Frankenstein mania should peak soon. The main cure -- as with
most illnesses -- is time. As gene therapy studies proliferated, Frankenstein
visions faded. Ethical issues triggered by genetic research have to do with
discrimination, privacy and access to treatment. Certainly there is always the
potential for abusing technology. "People have to know what's going on [in
scientific research]," says Brown. "It all boils down to whether you trust the
authorities."

   But as doomsday scripts go, the story of Dolly is much ado about a ewe.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1997


                             2493 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     March 10, 1997, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-7

LENGTH: 1198 words

HEADLINE: LIFE AFTER HEART ATTACKS;
PITT ENGINEERS DEVELOP NEW TREATMENT FOR ARTERY RE-NARROWING AFTER BALOON;
ANGIOPLASTY

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   If nobody is building a better mousetrap these days, it may be because
everybody already is busy looking for ways to keep coronary arteries from
closing back up after balloon angioplasty.

   The procedure eliminates waxy bottlenecks in coronary arteries that cause
chest pain or lead to heart attacks. But in one case out of three, the artery
re-narrows within six months.

   Hundreds of researchers are looking for a solution. Among their strategies:
propping vessels open with metal scaffolding called stents; irradiating vessel
walls; spraying the walls with hormone-like drugs; gene therapy; estrogen
replacement; and paving the walls with biodegradeable plastic to create a
temporary stent.

   The list goes on. Add to it now ''molecular masking,'' a potential treatment
developed by a trio of University of Pittsburgh chemical engineers.

   The idea is to coat the inside of the blood vessel with a polymer that binds
tightly to tissue.

   The polymer coating, just billionths of a meter thick, doesn't prop the
vessel open or deliver a drug. Rather, it hides damaged areas of the vessel from
platelets. These blood components normally repair damage but, in the aftermath
of angioplasty, may trigger the re-narrowing process - what cardiologists call
restenosis.

   Angioplasty involves inflating a balloon inside a narrowed artery. This not
only blasts away unwanted plaque, but damages the endothelium cells that line
the vessel and the smooth muscle cells in the vessel walls, noted William
Wagner, a bioengineer with joint appointments in Pitt's surgery department and
its chemical and petroleum engineering department.

   Platelets normally gather at the site of such damage, releasing growth
factors that speed healing, he explained. But the body overreacts in some
patients, causing the smooth muscle cells to proliferate, swelling out the
vessel walls and re-narrowing the artery.

   The polymer coating, however, looks just like water to the platelets, said
Alan Russell, chairman of the chemical and petroleum engineering department, who
developed the coating with Wagner and Eric Beckman. The polymer stays in place
only a matter of hours or days, flaking off as the vessel heals underneath.

   In lab tests, few platelets stick to blood vessels coated with the polymer.
Early testing in rabbits, including some experiments last week, likewise show
that the coating can be effectively applied and that few platelets stick.

   ''It's very clever,'' said Jeffrey Hubbell, a chemical engineer at the
California Institute of Technology, who has helped develop a polymer ''paving''
material being studied as a means of propping open arteries and delivering
medication. ''I'm very enthusiastic about the potential,'' he added.

   How effective the molecular masking technique might be in preventing
restenosis is unclear, however, without further testing.

   Preventing platelets from accumulating at an angioplasty site has been shown
to prevent restenosis in healthy laboratory rats and rabbits, Hubbell said.

   ''But we're not healthy rats and rabbits,'' he emphasized. ''A lot of drugs
that have been tried in rats and rabbits have failed in humans.''

   Likewise, Dr. Nicolas Chronos, a cardiologist at Emory University in Atlanta,
said the molecular masking technique might prevent blood clot formation - a
complication of angioplasty - but questioned whether it would prevent
restenosis.

   Russell and Wagner say they are confident the coating remains in place at
least 24 hours and suggest that may be long enough to keep the restenosis
process from beginning.

   ''Nobody really knows what is long enough,'' Chronos admitted, but the
consensus is that seven or 10 days may be necessary. He also warned that
polymers can inflame tissues and that flaking of the coating might cause
obstructions elsewhere in the artery.

   ''They are right to be skeptical,'' Russell said. ''Our data is short-term
data.'' But, from an engineer's point of view, making the coating longer-lasting
is not a major issue, he said. And tests by the Pitt researchers suggest that
the coating is not likely to cause obstructions as it flakes off because the
coating is little more than a molecule thick.

   The polymer - polyethylene glycol, or PEG - was chosen in part because it
already is widely used in pharmaceuticals and is considered safe, Russell said.
PEG is used to extend the amount of time a drug remains in the body. It's an
ingredient found in many over-the-counter drugs, including the ''tiny time
pills'' once touted in advertisements for cold medications.

   The trick was to find a way to bind polymers securely to tissue. Getting
polymers to stick to tissue normally requires treatment at high temperatures or
requires changes in acidity levels impossible in a living being. But the Pitt
researchers found they could combine PEG with an isocyanate, a highly reactive
compound.

   The PEG-isocyanate is applied using a double-balloon catheter technique.
Balloons are inflated at either end of the portion of the artery to be treated,
blood is removed from between the balloons and the polymer coating is sprayed on
the vessel walls. The coating bonds in about 30 seconds.

   Many applications exist for such technology, said Richard McCabe, a West
Chester-based medical technology consultant. It would be useful even if it only
prevented blood clots following angioplasty and had no effect on restenosis, he
suggested; one recently approved drug, Centocor's ReoPro, is used for just this
purpose.

   ReoPro binds to platelets in such a way that they don't clump together.
Unfortunately, it prevents the platelets from aggregating not only at the
angioplasty site, but throughout the body, leading to bleeding problems.

   Molecular masking may be of use in other situations where clotting can cause
problems, particularly in microsurgery, such as limb reattachments, which
involve stitching of small arteries.

   The Pitt researchers, working through the McGowan Center for Artificial
Organs, are investigating the technique as a way of masking pancreatic islet
cells. Transplantation of insulin-producing islet cells is an experimental
treatment for diabetes. Masking the donor islet cells might protect them from
rejection by the body's immune system.

   %BC% Masking blood vessel damage %EC%

Balloon angioplasty is designed to eliminate waxy plaque that narrows blood
vessels in the heart. But in about a third of all cases, the vessel re-narrows
within six months. Researchers at the University of Pittsburgh believe this
re-narrowing may be prevented by covering the vessel walls with a polymer film.

   Cross-section of normal coronary artery

   Artery narrowed by plaque deposit

   Balloon angioplasty blasts plaque out of the way, but damages the vessel wall
and its lining.

   Platelets, blood components that aid in healing, gather at damaged area,
releasing growth factors.

   In some cases, overgrowth of vessel's smooth muscle cells result in
re-narrowing of artery.

   Platelets recognize unprotected vessel damage, activate themselves and gather
at the wound site.

   When polymer strands bind to the wound site, platelets do not recognize the
damage and do not clump together.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: University of Pittsburgh;
Post-Gazette:; (Masking blood vessel damage)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1997


                             2494 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 9, 1997, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2827 words

HEADLINE: BODY'S REACTION TO SMOG MAY BE TIED TO GENES;
 HEALTH: JOHNS HOPKINS SCIENTISTS FIND FIRST EVIDENCE OF LINK. CONFIRMATION
COULD AFFECT FACTORS EPA CONSIDERS WHEN IT SETS POLLUTION STANDARDS.

BYLINE: MARLA CONE, TIMES ENVIRONMENTAL WRITER

BODY:


   It's a quintessential smoggy afternoon in Los Angeles, one that makes you
feel as if your lungs have shut down. You can't take a deep breath without your
chest hurting. Walking up a hill leaves you panting.  Your eyes tear, you cough.
You might even come down with a cold or the flu.

   Your neighbor, on the other hand, is oblivious to the foul air. She heads out
for a hearty jog, her breathing effortless, as if the skies over Southern
California were cleansed by fresh country breezes.

   But don't admire her athletic prowess or her strong lungs--the difference
could lie in her genes.

   Scientists at the Johns Hopkins Schools of Public Health and Medicine have
discovered inherited traits that might explain why some people are resistant to
the effects of pollution while others are vulnerable, even if they are breathing
the same air.

   Fixed at birth, your genetic makeup--more than your physical fitness or your
overall health--could dictate whether you are likely to suffer during smog
bouts.

   A genetic link has long been suspected, but the recent discovery of the
specific chromosomal pattern in mice offers the first scientific evidence.

   When mice bred to be genetically similar are exposed to ozone--the potent gas
that is the predominant ingredient of smog--a set of three genes orders a large
volume of immune cells to move into the airways, triggering inflammation, said
Steven Kleeberger, an environmental health scientist who led the Johns Hopkins
research.

   But when these susceptible mice were treated with antibodies that turn off
the proteins dispatched by the genes, the inflammation--an injury that can
hamper breathing and lead to premature aging of the lungs--was prevented. The
mice became virtually invulnerable to smog.

   While environmental factors such as diet, vitamins and lifelong exposure to
air pollution are also likely to influence who winds up sensitive, Kleeberger
believes genetics plays a key--and often overlooked--role.

   "What we have found with ozone is that with an appropriate exposure--closely
resembling what we would find in Los Angeles--there are two or perhaps three
genes that control the inflammatory response that results in injury," Kleeberger
said. Most of the findings have not yet been published, but they have been
discussed at recent scientific conferences.

   Although researchers have not yet looked in the human body for these same
"smog genes," found on Chromosome 17 in mice, they probably exist, because there
usually is a human counterpart for genes found in mice.

   "It is very, very likely," Kleeberger said, "that whatever we found in the
mouse will be found in humans as well."

   Under the Clean Air Act, air throughout the United States must be safe to
breathe for even the most vulnerable people. Confirmation of a genetic link
might some day redefine whom the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency considers
sensitive, a critical factor in determining how stringent pollution standards
need to be to protect public health.

   If humans do share the smog susceptibility genes with mice, a genetic test
could identify people who might choose to alter how they live and breathe,
avoiding smoggy cities or spending afternoons indoors.  Eventually, Kleeberger
hopes the findings might even lead doctors to develop treatments to prevent the
health damage, as he did with mice.

   Still, the link in humans remains questionable. No one knows how many people
might fit the genetic background, how strong the tie runs in families, or how
big an influence the gene-caused inflammation has on symptoms.

   "Almost certainly we think there is a genetic component to people's response
to ozone," said Dr. Robert Devlin, EPA's chief of clinical research. "There is
good reason to think that's true, but there is not what I would call compelling
evidence yet."

   In fact, the only major human experiment--using 19 pairs of identical twins,
who share identical genes--has found no clear pattern of sensitivity or
tolerance to smog.

   "I was disappointed, because I thought surely there was going to be a very
striking twin effect," said Dr. Phil Bromberg, director of the Center for
Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology at the University of North Carolina,
which conducted the experiments.

   "There was a hereditary influence, but not to the point where scientists
would care to go out on a limb and say we have the evidence that there
definitely is a hereditary factor," he said. "The fact that we're not seeing a
statistically significant result implies that the trend is weaker than one might
have thought."

   In specially sealed chambers, the twins were exposed for two hours to fairly
high amounts of ozone--65% greater than the Los Angeles region's worst day last
year but similar to Mexico City's. After moderate exercise, their lung function
was compared with their twin's. In more than half of the pairs, each twin had a
lung response that matched the other's. But it wasn't a strong enough trend to
suggest that genetics played a dominant role.

   "The implication is that there are environmental factors working as well,"
Bromberg said, "things like diet, the amount of antioxidants you consume or
other exposures, such as going to a smoky bar and breathing passive smoke."

   Bromberg, though, said the findings are "by no means definitive" in ruling
out a genetic link. He is doubling the number of twins before publishing the
results.

   One explanation for the different results between the mice--which were bred
to be genetic replicas--and the human twins is that the mice were tested for
inflamed airways--the first sign of chronic lung damage caused by ozone. The
twins instead were tested for reduced ability to inhale and exhale, a more
immediate, acute effect caused by higher doses.

   In some humans, lungs become inflamed at fairly low levels of ozone: 0.08
parts per million, which the Los Angeles region exceeds on 35% of all days. But
inflammation does not always hamper breathing rapidly, so even if genes control
the inflammatory damage, it might have a long-term health effect on people but
not immediately change how well their lungs function.

   The Los Angeles Basin--with its tons of emissions baked by sunlight, blocked
by mountains and trapped near ground by stagnant weather conditions--has the
nation's worst concentrations of ozone. Formed when hydrocarbons and nitrogen
oxides react with the sun's rays, the colorless ozone often mixes with particles
and other gases to form the region's notorious whiskey-brown haze.

   Reduced lung function--which means people have trouble inhaling deeply--is
the most common symptom during exertion on smoggy days. In the long term, ozone
exposure seems to age the lungs prematurely. Ozone also might weaken natural
defenses against bacteria and viruses, bringing on colds and flu. Breathing it
aggravates respiratory diseases such as asthma, but whether long-term exposure
causes lung cancer and other chronic disorders is unknown.

   Since the early 1980s, medical experts have found enormous differences in how
individuals respond to air pollution, and it often has nothing to do with how
healthy or fit they are. Some people, even some asthmatics, seem resistant even
at high concentrations, while it takes a much smaller and shorter dose to
trigger breathing problems in others.

   "There is a tremendous amount of variability in how individual humans respond
when they are exposed to the same amounts of ozone in the same way," Bromberg
said. "Some people are unable to take a deep breath, they can lose a quarter of
their vital lung capacity. Others are totally nonreactive--nothing happens."

   Some Olympic cyclists suffered chest pain, shortness of breath and reduced
exercise performance when cycling while breathing small amounts of ozone in smog
chamber experiments at Rancho Los Amigos Medical Center in Downey. Others had no
symptoms at all.

   "It was very clear that some of these people, even though they are very fit
athletes, were very susceptible to a low concentration of ozone, and they stayed
very sensitive," said Dr. Henry Gong, the medical center's chief of
environmental health, who heads one of the most experienced teams testing people
in smog chambers.

   "But others were probably genetically gifted," Gong said, "with genes that
either protected them from ozone somehow, or the susceptibility genes were
gone."

   However, as with the twins in North Carolina, Gong said the differences in
the Olympians might not have been genetic, but instead due to antioxidants in
their diet such as beta carotene and vitamins C and E, or some other factor.

   Isolating the smog-sensitive genes is part of a fledgling field called
eco-genetics, which seeks to discover how inherited traits influence people's
response to pollution. Genes are believed to influence who gets cancer, asthma
and many other diseases, so it is reasonable to assume that they play a role in
injuries and illnesses linked to the environment.

   Perhaps some day a genetic test can identify who is vulnerable to smog. But
even if gene therapy works in the future, it doesn't mean that the EPA and local
officials will abandon their decades-long, costly efforts to clean the air. In
most urban areas, air quality is improving due to regulations targeting cars,
factories, consumer products and other sources.

   Yet the EPA this year is expected to set a tighter health standard for ozone,
which could add billions of dollars to the cost of smog cleanup.  The EPA says
the current limit, set 20 years ago, fails to safeguard all sensitive people.
The agency deems asthmatics and others with respiratory diseases the most
susceptible group, and sets its smog standard to protect them.

   If smog genes do exist, Gong said, it would "open up a Pandora's box" for the
EPA, raising tough questions about who is at risk and how to protect them. The
EPA, for example, would need to know if everyone with the genes is susceptible,
and how much so, before basing its public health decisions on such factors.

   Yet as Kleeberger strives to refine his research, and the tools of
eco-genetics are improved, science may be able to help officials understand more
fully who is at risk among the 70 million Americans who are breathing levels of
ozone considered unhealthful.

   "Extrapolation from mouse to man is always fraught with difficulties,"
Bromberg said.

   But as the map to human genes becomes more precise, perhaps it will provide
answers to the long-standing mystery of why some people fall victim to smog.

   "We don't really know how ozone works, and if we can isolate the genes, it
could provide answers," Devlin said. "When you think how many millions of people
are living in areas that exceed the health standard, we want to know, are there
ways to protect these people?"


   Smog Sickness

   Reactions to ozone in smog can be vastly different, and evidence is emerging
that genetic factors may play a key role. Here are some research results related
to breathing various amounts of ozone. For comparison, the Los Angeles Basin
surpassed the current health standard of 0.12 parts per million on 87 days last
year.

   Ozone Exposure: 0.12 parts per million for 1-3 hours or 0.08 for 6 hours

   Health Effect: In heavily exercising adults: Reduced lung function, cough,
shortness of breath, chest pain, airway inflammation

   ****

   Ozone Exposure: 0.18 parts per million for 1-3 hours

   Health Effect: In adults: Reduced exercise performance.

   ****

   Ozone Exposure: Chronic, repeated exposure to 0.12 parts per million

   Health Effect: In lab animals: Changes in lung structure, function and
biochemistry that could be signs of chronic lung disease.

   ****

   Ozone Exposure: 0.08 parts per million for 3 hours

   Health Effect: In lab animals: Increased susceptibility to bacterial
respiratory infections.

   ****

   Ozone Exposure: 0.01 to 0.15 parts per million for several days

   Health Effect: In children and adolescents playing outdoors: Reduced lung
function, Aggravation of asthma, increased hospital visits.

   ****

   The Research

   * When mice breathe ozone, a set of genes orders immune cells to accumulate
in airways, causing inflammation. In humans as well as mice, this inflammation
can hamper breathing, causing premature aging of the lungs.

   * When the mice with genes sensitive to smog are treated with certain
antibodies, the inflammation is prevented, making them resistant to smog.

   * Humans probably have the same "smog genes" as mice, but scientists have not
yet looked for them.

   Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Johns Hopkins University

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Smog in the Los Angeles Basin.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Los Angeles Times
GRAPHIC-CHART: Smog Sickness / Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC-DRAWING: Smog Sickness
/ Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2495 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  March 9, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

HEADLINE: The Age Boom: Keeping Old Age at Bay;
84 Going on 50

BYLINE: By Stephen S. Hall

BODY:

   How advances in medicine are extending the well-lived life.


   The human body is built for a long-distance ride. The main organs -- brain,
heart, lungs and liver -- are remarkably robust; if we take good care of them
through diet and exercise, they can last into our 80's and beyond. But for
potential trouble spots in the aging body, here are a number of potential
solutions that may allow people in their 30's and 40's to one day turn back the
clock.

THE BRAIN
A combination of drugs and nerve or brain-cell implants may in the next decade
or so prove effective against Alzheimer's disease and other dementias. "Smart"
pills, incorporating molecules designed to increase synaptic performance and
improve memory, are also being experimented with.


   EYES
Within a decade, eye surgeons may be able to restore failing vision with
transplants of human retinal cells. Doctors are also developing drugs that will
prevent the gradual damage of the optic nerve, which develops in patients with
glaucoma. Today lasers can be used to "spot weld" leaky blood vessels (a common
complication of diabetes), and lens replacement has become a routine procedure
for cataracts.

EARS
Within 20 years, eardrops promoting nerve growth may rejuvenate cells in the
auditory nerve. Or doctors may use the equivalent of jumper cables on the ears
-- quick hits of electrical current to boost the performance of hearing cells
whose batteries have run down. New digital hearing aids for the Walkman
generation are already in hand. These new aids can be programmed to tune out
ambient noise and amplify hard-to-hear frequencies.

NOSE
The sensory cells that detect odors replace themselves every 60 to 90 days in
young adults. But once the rate of turnover begins to slow down, the sense of
smell declines, and as a result so does the sense of taste. In the future, nose
drops that stimulate cell growth may arrest the decline of olfactory cells.

SKIN
Recent skin-tightening techniques like "laserbrasion," which vaporizes the top
layer of skin without harming underlying structures, will be supplemented in the
next decade or two by a variety of creams or injections containing molecules
that will revitalize the skin.

MUSCLES
Researchers are studying molecules that maintain muscle tissue as potential
drugs. Or we'll use combinations of either testosterone or growth hormone and
exercise to maintain muscle mass.

CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Doctors foresee injections of genetically modified viruses or even just plain
DNA, which will repair aging tissues with replacement genes. The new genes will
make vessels limber and flexible again or stimulate the growth of new blood
vessels around a vascular blockage.

ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Hormone-replacement therapy is already in advanced testing. In the near future,
we will probably pop pills called "secretagogues" -- molecules that induce
growth hormone production, for example. The cocktail of choice for the over-65
crowd may be customized combinations of growth hormone and the appropriate sex
hormone (estrogen or testosterone).

SEX HORMONES
Look for targeted hormone treatment soon -- for instance, estrogen formulations
that preserve bone mass without side effects in the breast and uterus. Doctors
will be able to start 40- and 50-year-old patients on hormone therapy so that,
in the words of one endocrinologist, "they can maintain their energy level and
have great sex until the day they die."

REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS AND SEXUAL FUNCTION
For impotence, men will be able to pop a pill about an hour before they would
like an erection. In addition, by age 80, almost all men will show some evidence
of prostate enlargement. Those who do may benefit from a new device being tested
called TUNA -- for Transurethral Needle Ablation -- which uses a flexible
catheterlike probe and radio-frequency energy to destroy enlarged prostate
tissue with heat.

JOINTS
The future promises drugs that block the enzymes that soften cartilage, leading
to the pain associated with osteoarthritis. Doctors may also remove bits of
cartilage or marrow during brief arthroscopic surgery, grow many more cartilage
cells in the lab and then implant the fresh tissue into an affected joint.

BONE
In the near future, doctors will be able to predict who is likeliest to lose
bone mass and initiate treatment in the early middle age. Gene therapy may
stimulate new bone formation by delivering special proteins to bone-making cells
in the marrow.

GRAPHIC: Photo: (TRIPTYCH PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD J. BURBRIDGE FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1997


                             2496 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      March 8, 1997 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 11B

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: CWRU RESEARCH LEADS TO CURES, JOBS

BYLINE: By Nathan A. Berger

BODY:

   A 26-year-old Cleveland woman, planning to have children, is haunted by the
many colon cancer deaths in her family's past. The disease killed her father at
the age of 32. Her grandparents succumbed to it, as did four paternal aunts and
uncles. She wonders whether she carries a gene for colon cancer. Will she pass
it on?

   Researchers at the School of Medicine at Case Western Reserve University
uncovered the gene that caused colon cancer in her family and many other
families. Soon, a simple blood test under development will allow her to learn
whether she carries the defective gene and what her options may be. In addition,
the research holds hope of a genetic cure.

   CWRU's School of Medicine has more than 1,300 physicians and scientists who
offer Northeast Ohio the best in medical research, patient care, medical
education and marketplace development.

   CWRU's prominence has steadily risen, and today it is among the top 10
medical schools in the nation for research funding from the National Institutes
of Health. Recently released figures show that the our medical school received
$113.6 million from the NIH, which is the largest source of medical funding in
the nation. NIH's growing support is a reflection of the high-caliber research
ongoing at the medical school.

   What kinds of breakthroughs are CWRU faculty making?

   Scientists have found that a molecule called brain-derived neurotrophic
factor is required for the development of normal breathing after birth, a
discovery that may provide important insights into the causes of sudden infant
death syndrome.

   A new treatment that clears blockages in the brain's blood vessels allows
many people to avoid debilitating effects that follow strokes.

   New discoveries into the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms
involved in neurodegenerative diseases contribute to a greater understanding of
Alzheimer's disease. Someday, this work may prevent people from being robbed of
their cherished memories.

   Many students from the CWRU School of Medicine go on to become leaders in
their fields. Dr. David Satcher directs the Center for Disease Control in
Atlanta. Dr. June Osborn directed the President's Commission on AIDS, and Dr.
Alfred Gilman won the Nobel Prize for Medicine in Physiology for his discovery
of cellular signaling mechanisms.

   The NIH awards to the faculty of the medical school bring federal funds to
Cleveland, create jobs and develop Cleveland's expertise in the fast-growing
health care industry. In addition, these funds support research that leads to
the formation of biotechnology companies, which promise to strengthen and
diversify Cleveland's economy for the 21st century.

   Biotech companies germinated from research at the School of Medicine have the
potential for worldwide impact. For example, based on discoveries in
neuroscience research by Dr. Jerry Silver, Cleveland-based Gliatech Corp. is
testing a new compound to prevent scarring after surgery on the nervous system.

   The laboratory of Dr. Richard Hanson, chairman of biochemistry, has developed
genetic engineering technology that targets genes to cells in the liver with the
potential for curing such problems as elevated cholesterol or blood-clotting
disorders. These discoveries served as the basis for development of Cleveland's
Copernicus Gene Systems Inc., which plans to make this technology available
worldwide.

   Athersys Inc. is another new Cleveland biotech company developing two
technologies derived from medical school research: a form of gene therapy to
introduce chromosomes into cells to correct for missing or defective genes and
an ultrasensitive test for the immune system, which will assist with the
treatment of autoimmune diseases like multiple sclerosis.

   The success of the medical school is a great tribute to the community, in
part because the community has helped make it happen. Ten years ago, the medical
school set out on a course to revitalize its science programs, first in the
basic sciences, then in the clinical sciences. Spearheaded by the vision and
generous support from the Cleveland Foundation and from many other friends,
foundations, governmental agencies and representatives, the CWRU School of
Medicine has been able to build state-of-the-art facilities and attract some of
the world's best scientists to work in Cleveland.

   University Hospitals of Cleveland, the medical school's primary affiliated
hospital, has been essential to these research efforts. CWRU faculty on the UHC
staff realized more than $50 million in NIH research dollars - more funding than
half of the research institutions in the nation receive, and more than twice the
amount granted to any other hospital in the state.

   At the threshold of a new millennium, this region has an opportunity to focus
its resources to achieve international recognition in biotechnology. The medical
school will strive to further enrich medical education and research and help to
build the biotech industry for a truly greater Cleveland and Ohio.

COLUMN: A FORUM OF OPINION & IDEAS

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1997


                             2497 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      March 7, 1997, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: Ariad, Hoechst Marion in $ 85m deal to study biological role, function
of genes;
Five-year venture one of the largest of its kind

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge yesterday said it signed a joint
venture agreement with Hoechst Marion Roussel, which has committed to spending $
85 million to pursue functional genomics research over the next five years.

    The accord marked one of the largest genomics deals ever between biotech and
pharmaceuticals firms.  Both companies are focused on functional genomics, a
growing field in which scientists look to determine the function of genes and
their biological role, which are important in the process of discovering new
drugs.

   The venture calls for Hoechst, the large drugmaker based in Frankfurt, to
initially spend $ 24 million to acquire a 12 percent stake in Ariad at $ 9.50 a
share. Hoechst Marion Roussel will then spend $ 36 million to fund the venture,
to be called the Hoechst Ariad Genomics Center, LLC, located at Ariad's research
facilities in Cambridge. Finally, Hoechst is expected to pay an another $ 25
million for additional preferred stock in Ariad over the next five years.

   Ariad will provide proprietary research on intracellular signaling. It has
developed protein-based drugs that block the signal pathways within cells
responsible for osteoporosis and immune and inflammatory diseases.

   "This is the most important transaction the company has ever undertaken, and
it is the most strategic," said Dr. Harvey J. Berger, Ariad chairman and chief
executive, who formed the company nearly six years ago.

    Ariad shares closed at 8, up 1 1/4 in very heavy trading on Nasdaq as more
than 1.4 million shares changed hands. The American Depositary receipts of
Hoechst A.G., the parent company of Hoechst Marion Roussel, did not trade
yesterday.

    Yesterday's announcement eclipses the $ 70 million genomics agreement
between Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge and Hoffmann-La Roche Inc.
of Nutley, N.J., signed in 1995.

    The Hoechst Ariad Genomics Center will be staffed with 60 researchers Ariad
will hire plus 15 visiting scientists from Hoechst, said Berger. He said they
will work separately from Ariad's 90-person work force.

   The initial focus will be on osteoporosis, the disorder that causes a gradual
decrease in both the amount and strength of bone tissue. Osteoporosis affects 25
million people in the United States. About 80 percent of those afflicted are
women, according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation.

   The new center will also do genomics research on rheumatoid arthritis,
cardiovascular diseases and certain brain disorders.

   Berger said the agreement is separate from a $ 40 million deal Ariad has with
a European division of Hoechst Marion Roussel, signed in Nov. 1995, to develop
drugs to treat osteoporosis and other bone diseases.

   In the latest venture, Ariad and Hoechst will use molecular and cellular
genetics technology and a genetic information database from Incyte
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif. Hoechst has used the Incyte technology
and now Ariad will license the Incyte genetic information database for the
Hoechst Ariad Genomics Center.

   Berger explained that operating costs of the joint venture and the rights to
any drug targets will be divided equally between Hoechst and Ariad. If either
company then seeks a partner to further develop and commercialize a drug
candidate, it must first offer to negotiate with the other partner of the joint
venture.

   Yesterday's announcement follows Ariad's agreement with Genovo Inc. of
Philadelphia last month to develop and commercialize gene therapy products for
the estimated $ 11 billion therapeutic protein market.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF FILE PHOTO / Ariad chief Harvey J. Berger: "This is
the most important transaction the company has ever undertaken, and it is the
most strategic."

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1997


                             2498 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              March 7, 1997 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 164 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   NTN warns of write-offs Carlsbad-based NTN Communications said it will take a
"substantial" writeoff for reserves in its fourth quarter ended Dec. 31. Results
for the quarter have not been reported.

   The reserves, expected to top $5 million, will include employment contract
settlements with departing executives Patrick and Dan Downs, as well as reserves
for other items. IRC to develop nerve treatments Carlsbad-based Immune Response
Corp. and Vyrex Corp. signed a letter of intent to develop treatments for
injuries to the human nervous system. Terms were not disclosed.

   The companies said they intend to use La Jolla-based Vyrex's CD-Tagging
genomics technology with Immune Response's research capabilities and knowledge
in molecular biology and gene therapy. Mitek to sell intranet fax program Mitek
Systems Inc. of San Diego signed an agreement with privately held Black Ice
Software Inc. of Amherst, N.H., to sell INTRAfax, an intranet fax program
jointly developed by the companies.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2499 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    March 6, 1997, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: Natural antibiotic found in lungs' fluid

BYLINE: SUSAN OKIE; Washington Post

BODY:

   Ten years ago, scientist Michael Zasloff decided to
investigate why the surgical wounds of his laboratory frogs
never became infected, and he discovered that frog skin
contained a new class of natural antibiotics.

   Zasloff, then a researcher at the National Institutes of
Health, predicted that similar antibiotics might someday be
found in humans and that a defect in such a defense system
might help explain why people with cystic fibrosis, an
inherited disease, are vulnerable to lung infections.

   It appears his hunch may be right.

   A team of Pennsylvania researchers reported last month that
they have identified a natural antibiotic in the fluid that
lines the airways of the lung.  In normal human airway fluid,
it is highly active against bacteria such as pseudomonas, a
major cause of infections in cystic-fibrosis patients.  But
when the fluid lining the respiratory tract is too high in
salt - as it is in people with cystic fibrosis - the
antibiotic is inactivated.

   ""It's about as beautiful as it can be,'' said Zasloff, who
founded a drug company to develop the frog-skin antibiotics
and who collaborated with other scientists on the new
research.

   The study, published in a recent issue of the journal Cell,
offers the first persuasive explanation of how the genetic
defect implicated in cystic fibrosis - which primarily affects
salt balance - leads to the lung infections seen in patients.

   ""To me the fascinating issue was, what is the relationship
between the defect in this gene and the disease? '' said James
M. Wilson of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, a
prominent gene-therapy researcher and lead author of the new
report.  ""This, I think, is the first model that makes logical
sense and is based on experimental data. ''

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal genetic disease in
the United States, affecting an estimated 30,000 children and
young adults.  In addition to increased vulnerability to lung
infections, people with cystic fibrosis have complications
involving the pancreas and intestines that often make it
difficult for them to digest and absorb nutrients, and males
with the disease are usually infertile.  Lung damage caused by
repeated infections is the cause of death in 95 percent of CF
victims.

   The disease is caused by mutations in the gene for a specific
protein called the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator
(CFTR), a molecule found on cell surfaces that helps regulate
salt balance by transporting chloride ions, a component of
salt, into cells.

   Despite having identified the gene in 1989, researchers still
do not fully understand how having a defective CFTR gene
produces the disease, Wilson said.  The respiratory tract of CF
patients contains thick, sticky mucus and is colonized by
species of bacteria, such as pseudomonas, not normally found
in the bronchi and lungs of healthy people.  CF researchers
have never been sure whether the thick mucus or the presence
of unusual bacteria is the trigger for the recurrent lung
infections.

   In recent years, evidence has mounted that the defective CFTR
gene is somehow linked to patients' vulnerability to
infections, said William B. Guggino, a professor of pediatrics
and physiology at Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine.

   Guggino said the most important clue was the discovery last
year by Michael Welsh and his co-workers at the University of
Iowa that the fluid lining the respiratory tract in healthy
people kills bacteria, while respiratory-tract fluid from CF
patients does not.  Furthermore, Welsh's team showed that
adding salt to normal fluid abolishes its antibacterial
activity, while diluting fluid from CF patients (to lower the
salt concentration) enables it to kill bacteria.

   Wilson, Zasloff and their co-workers set out to find the
antibiotic substance in the fluid.  Zasloff's discovery a
decade ago of magainins, the frog-skin antibiotics, had
prompted many other researchers to search for similar
substances in other animal species and in humans.  One type of
natural antibiotic, a family of chemicals dubbed
beta-defensins, cropped up in many animal species.

   Zasloff's original frog antibiotic is now in the final stages
of testing as an antibacterial cream for skin ulcers in
diabetics.

   He predicts that other antibiotic substances will be found in
humans, lending support to his theory that the body has an
alternative immune system based on antibiotics.

   ""The story of the frog is really duplicated here,'' he said.

   ""Probably each place in the body has got its own little
environment,'' with its own local defense system.  ""It's a
different niche in the rain forest. ''

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1997


                             2500 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 4, 1997 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: N.O. RESEARCH ALTERS CYSTIC FIBROSIS CELLS

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   Using gene therapy on mouse fetuses, a group of New Orleans scientists say
they have achieved the first cure of an inherited disease by correcting an
intestinal blockage similar to one found in people with cystic fibrosis.

   Cystic fibrosis, a fatal disease characterized by gooey fluids that clog the
lungs and intestines, is inherited when both parents carry the defective gene
that causes the disease. Between 5 percent and 10 percent of the approximately
30,000 U.S. cystic-fibrosis patients have the obstruction.

   In their experiment, described in Saturday's issue of the British journal The
Lancet, the New Orleans researchers injected a minuscule amount of the correct
gene into the amniotic fluid of 13 pregnant mice when they were 16 or 17 days
pregnant, said Dr. Janet E. Larson, a staff scientist at Alton Ochsner Medical
Foundation. A mouse pregnancy lasts three weeks.

   At that point, she said, "the lungs and gut are lined with stem cells that
have the potential to become different types of cells. . . . By putting that
gene into that cell at that time, it switched and permanently made different
types of cells that allowed those animals to live."

   The mice in the experiment were genetically programmed to mimic the
intestinal blockage of cystic-fibrosis patients. The mice that received the
so-called switch gene survived and were cured; 13 mice that did not receive the
gene died, said J. Craig Cohen, a professor of genetics at Louisiana State
University Medical Center.

   It wasn't a question of the one good gene overpowering two defective genes,
he said. "The two bad genes weren't doing anything bad. They just weren't
working. They were like a faulty light switch. If we can put in a good switch to
get the light on, once it's on, it's fine."

   And after that gene did its work, it disappeared because it was no longer
needed, Larson said. The mice retained the two defective genes, but they had no
effect, Cohen said, because the blockage appears to be a defect that occurs
during fetal development.

   Attempts at gene therapy in people with cystic fibrosis have been thwarted by
the body's immune system. But that problem did not arise when the injection was
made into the amniotic fluid surrounding the fetus, Larson said.

   The next step, the researchers said, is to try this experiment on monkeys,
which are closer to humans on the evolutionary ladder.

   Other participants were Lee Happel of LSU Medical Center's neurology
department and Susan L. Morrow of Tulane University Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1997


                             2501 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              March 3, 1997 Monday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 981 words

HEADLINE: MONKEY DUO PRIMES THE DEBATE ON CLONING

BYLINE: ALICIA DI RADO, of the Oregonian Staff Foste

DATELINE: BEAVERTON

BODY:

   Monday, March 3, 1997 MONKEY DUO PRIMES THE DEBATE ON CLONING

   Summary: The infant primates produced at a Beaverton research center  by a
process called nuclear transfer scamper into the national spotlight

   They went from unknown infants to science celebrities in a matter of  hours.

   Two baby rhesus monkeys cowered and clung to each other Sunday in the  corner
of a lab at the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, staring  wide-eyed
toward the gaggle of strangers who gawked at them.

   For about 230 days, they had led the life of average infant lab monkeys:
They ate Monkey Chow, played with dolls and screeched. But say goodbye to
obscurity.

   The brother and sister have scampered into a national spotlight because  they
weren't merely born -- they were created. Scientists generated the pair  from
cloned embryos, the first time such a method was used on a species so  close to
human beings. The technique has been used with mice, rats, cows and  sheep.

   ``The technology for producing genetically identical animals is available  to
us now,'' said Don Wolf, the scientist who directed the research.

   Oregon scientists had shied from announcing their work because it still is
being reviewed and has not been accepted yet by a scientific journal. Their
work also is not thought to be as technically significant as a breakthrough
Scottish scientists announced last week in cloning adult sheep. Since then,
debate has flared worldwide about the ethics of duplicating animals and
possibly human beings.

   Wolf, a professor at Oregon Health Sciences University, said the cloning
technology means researchers will have a new tool in seeking cures, fromheart
disease to AIDS. Also, it will enable them to use fewer animals for more
accurate experimentation.

   The Oregon group's discovery was a smaller step than the Scottish
scientists' work because simpler cells were copied, rather than those of an
adult animal.

   Moreover, the monkeys are not genetically identical because they were
produced from different embryos. But they demonstrate that the technique can  be
used to make identical monkeys.

   The Oregon group's technique is similar to that of the Scottish scientists,
who took genetic material from a mammary cell of an adult sheep, inserted into
an egg stripped of its DNA to create an embryo and then implanted the embryo
into a surrogate mother. The result: A genetically identical sheep.

   Oregon scientists used a technique called nuclear transfer to produce the
two monkeys. They are not clones of an adult monkey but were developed using
the same methods it would take to create as many as eight identical monkeys at
once.

   First, researchers fertilized eggs from a donor monkey and separated cells
from each of those embryos. Next, they removed the genetic materials from
within the eggs of a second monkey.

   They put cells from the donor monkey's embryos inside eggs of the second
monkey, then placed the embryos into surrogate mothers.

   ``The downside is that this is one step in the direction of suggesting that
nuclear transfer can be done in human beings,'' Wolf said. ``We have  absolutely
no interest in even cloning an adult rhesus monkey, let alone be  involved in
the cloning of humans.''

   The experiments raise questions about the possibility -- and ethics -- of
cloning human beings.

   With about 300 human in vitro fertilization centers in the United States,
Wolf said, ``It's not totally ridiculous to think it could be done in the time
frame of a few months to a few years.''

   But Wolf and his team aren't looking to that. They simply want to create
identical animals for use in research.

   In animal studies, it's possible that differences in testing data might
result from differences in subjects' genetic makeups instead of the factors
scientists are examining. Using identical animals takes away that  uncertainty.

   M. Susan Smith, the primate center's director, said that having identical
test subjects could lead to breakthroughs in the debate about the effect
environmental factors have on diseases, compared with genetic predisposition.
Scientists might use them to better understand alcoholism or depression, or to
conduct gene therapy research. Such research could help infertile women.

   Researchers wondered about other possibilities.

   ``It is interesting to use the monkeys because the technique shows one of
the more important and useful applications of cloning,'' said Arthur Caplan, a
bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania. ``In a species that is going
extinct or in a species that we are trying to study and use as a laboratory
model that is hard to breed naturally, these kinds of genetic engineering and
cloning techniques are valuable.''

   The center's two monkeys resulted from three initial pregnancies. One  monkey
mother failed to carry an embryo to term.

   Scientists said the infants are indistinguishable from other monkeys in the
center's colony. Although they have no official names, Wolf's daughter and her
friend call them ``Nettie'' and ``Ditto.''

   The monkeys, part of research financed by two arms of the National
Institutes of Health, are expected to live 15 to 20 years. They will become
part of various experiments at the center, which houses about 2,300 primates.

   Foster Church of The Oregonian staff contributed to this report.

   ILLUSTRATION: Color Photo by ROBERT BACH of The Oregonian staff

   Graphic -- Chart and illustration -- THE DIFFERENCE FROM DOLLY - 5 STEPS:
Researchers at the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center created two rhesus
monkeys using genetic material from a monkey embryo. The same process already
had been used with other mammals, and it differs from the more revolutionary
cloning of a sheep named Dolly by a Scottish scientist

   Sidebar photo and text -- CLONING MONKEYS   Q&A

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = of the Oregonian Staff

   Foster Church of The Oregonian staff contributed to this report. <

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2502 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      March 2, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 3H

LENGTH: 615 words

HEADLINE: NO LYING DOWN ON THE JOB

BYLINE: James J. Kilpatrick

BODY:


   A few weeks ago, such are the vicissitudes of advancing age, I spent two
uneventful days in a hospital while a doctor checked my valves. The experience
confirmed an impression that has been developing for years: The two most abused
verbs in the English language are "lie" and "lay."

   Nurses came and went by night and day. They gave firm instructions:

   "Lay down," ordered the first angel of mercy.

   "Lie down," I said.

   "That's what I said," she said. "You lay down and just stay there."

   "Lie down," I croaked.

   "That's right," said her aide de camp. "You'll have to lay like that all
night."

   Five nurses popped in and out. Every one of them insisted that I lay down. So
I did. I lay down, using the simple past tense of "to lie," and in time the
senior cardiac mechanic decreed that all my valves were humming and I went home.

   Why do presumably well-educated people mess up so constantly on "lie" and
"lay"? It beats me, but it happens all the time.

   The Los Angeles Times covered the funeral of former Commerce Secretary Ron
Brown: "Brown had laid in repose at the Commerce Department for 24 hours
Tuesday." LAIN in repose!

   In Myrtle Beach, S.C., the Sun News warned that "you can catch more than rays
when you lay out in the sun." LIE out in the sun!

   USA Today recalled the traumatic scene last year when Nebraska's star running
back fumbled on Arizona State's five-yard line. There he was, "laying face
down," his face mask gouged into the grass. The poor fellow was LYING face down!

   Even The Wall Street Journal errs. "Republican Arlen Specter laid down on the
tracks to preserve the federal subsidy ..." The senator LAY down for his
constituents.

   The New York Times is not beyond reproach: "Ms. Paulsen testified that as the
sergeant tried to make her lay down, she pushed him away and he let her go."
Nurse! Nurse! The sergeant's foul intention was to make her LIE down.

   Let it go for now. Keep this much in mind: "Lay" takes an object, "lie" never
does. Thus today we lay bricks, bets and eggs; yesterday we laid them; we have
laid them for years. And today we lie down; yesterday we lay down; we have lain
down long enough.

   Some remarkable examples have accumulated of verbs in the past tense. "Police
kill man, 18, who slayed 3." It may be colloquially said of a comedian that "he
slayed 'em," but in serious writing the murderer slew three.

   The Chicago Tribune reported a breakthrough in genetic research: "Gene
therapy shrunk tumors in lung-cancer patients." An obituary in the Wake Forest
University Magazine noted that writer Harold Hayes "never shrinked from any
cause that would help Wake Forest."

   None of my dictionaries acknowledges the existence of "shrinked" as a past
tense of "shrink." All of them give "shrunk" as an optional alternative for the
more familiar "shrank," but R.W. Burchfield in the New Fowler's terms "shrunk"
nonstandard. I would leave the choice to a writer's ear. Just as "sneaked"
sounds sneakier than "snuck," to my ear "shrank" sounds shrinkier than "shrunk."
At least it sounds that way to me today.

   What is the preferred past participle of "to show"? Writing in U.S. News &
World Report last May, editor Mortimer B. Zuckerman said that U.N.
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali "has showed a hostility toward Israel
that disqualifies him as an impartial monitor." I would have used "has shown"
instead of "has showed," but it's a close call.

   Last word: Unless we are writing slang, let us not write that the police
"busted in." The police burst in, and when they were through with their raid
they had completed a bust. The noun is in good repute, even if the verb is not.
Universal Press Syndicate

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1997


                             2503 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                March 2, 1997, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SHOW; THE WRITER'S ART; Pg. 17; NC

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Want to lay down? Lie down until the feeling goes away

BYLINE: BY JAMES J. KILPATRICK

BODY:


   A few weeks ago I spent two uneventful days in a hospital while a doctor
checked my valves. The experience confirmed an impression that has been
developing for years: The two most abused verbs in the English language are
"lie" and "lay."

   Nurses came and went by night and day, each lovelier and more solicitous than
the one before. They gave firm instructions:

   "Lay down," ordered the first angel of mercy.

   "Lie down," I said.

   "That's what I said," she said. "You lay down and just stay there."

   "Lie down," I croaked.

   "That's right," said her aide-de-camp. "You'll have to lay like that all
night."

   Five nurses popped in and out. Every one of them insisted that I lay down. So
I did. I lay down, using the simple past tense of "to lie," and in time the
senior cardiac mechanic decreed that all my valves were humming and I went home.

   Why do presumably well-educated people mess up so constantly on "lie" and
"lay"? It beats me, but it happens all the time.

   The Los Angeles Times covered the funeral of former Commerce Secretary Ron
Brown: "Brown had laid in repose at the Commerce Department for 24 hours
Tuesday." Lain in repose!

   In Myrtle Beach, S.C., the Sun News warned that "you can catch more than rays
when you lay out in the sun." Lie out in the sun!

   USA Today recalled the traumatic scene last year when Nebraska's star running
back fumbled on Arizona State's five-yard line. There he was, "laying face
down," his face mask gouged into the grass. The poor fellow was lying face down!

   Even the Wall Street Journal errs. "Republican Arlen Specter laid down on the
tracks to preserve the federal subsidy . . ." The senator lay down for his
constituents.

   The New York Times is not beyond reproach: "Ms. Paulsen testified that as the
sergeant tried to make her lay down, she pushed him away and he let her go."
Nurse! Nurse! The sergeant's foul intention was to make her lie down.

   Let it go for now. Keep this much in mind: "Lay" takes an object, "lie" never
does. Thus today we lay bricks, bets and eggs; yesterday we laid them; we have
laid them for years. And today we lie down; yesterday we lay down; we have lain
down long enough.

   Some examples of verbs in the past tense have accumulated. "Police kill man,
18, who slayed 3." It may be colloquially said of a comedian that "he slayed
'em," but in serious writing the murderer slew three.

   The Chicago Tribune reported a breakthrough in genetic research: "Gene
therapy shrunk tumors in lung-cancer patients." An obituary in the Wake Forest
University magazine noted that writer Harold Hayes "never shrinked from any
cause that would help Wake Forest."

   None of my dictionaries acknowledges the existence of "shrinked" as a past
tense of "shrink." All of them give "shrunk" as an optional alternative for the
more familiar "shrank," but R. W. Burchfield in the New Fowler's terms "shrunk"
nonstandard. I would leave the choice to a writer's ear. Just as "sneaked"
sounds sneakier than "snuck," to my ear "shrank" sounds shrinkier than "shrunk."
At least it sounds that way to me today.

   What is the preferred past participle of "to show"? Writing in U.S. News &
World Report last May, editor Mortimer B. Zuckerman said that UN
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali "has showed a hostility toward Israel
that disqualifies him as an impartial monitor." I would have used "has shown"
instead of "has showed," but it's a close call.

   I can't give you much for "have drank," which turned up in an Associated
Press story from South Korea. A young woman had been buried for 19 days in the
rubble of a collapsed building. When at last she was found alive, doctors
marveled that she could have lived so long without water. "Others said Park may
have been semiconscious and could have drank rainwater." Let us stick with
"could have drunk."

   I can't give you anything for "shedded." In the Hickory (N.C.) Daily Record,
police received a tip "which shedded some light" on the identity of a badly
injured man. In the Birmingham (Ala.) News, a busy shopping mall "shedded"
Christmas shoppers with the start of the Iron Bowl. Just plain "shed" will
suffice.

   Last word: Unless we are writing slang, let us not write that the police
"busted in." The police burst in, and when they were through with their raid
they had completed a bust. The noun is in good repute, even if the verb is not.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1997


                             2504 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 2, 1997, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; AMONG FRIENDS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1245 words

HEADLINE: Heroism paved a way for other cancer sufferers

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE; Staff

BODY:

   She would have hated being called a hero.  But she was one.

   Earlene Scruggs, whose battle against ovarian cancer was
detailed in the Houston Chronicle over a two-year period, died
on the last day of 1996 in her home in Lowell, Ark.

   She was only 49, a very private person whose life revolved
around her community and her family.

   She was the first person to undergo a form of gene therapy at
the University of Texas M.D.Anderson Cancer Center here.  But
Earlene's heroism began before she came to Houston and before
she developed cancer.

   She was an advocate for children and their needs even before
it became trendy.  She championed sports for women and children
in her hometown of Lowell.

   When the local high school girls' softball team needed a
coach, Earlene stepped in.  Her team went to nationals one
year.  But even when their skills were not up to that level,
they were always winners because she insisted that they be
sportswomen and ladies on the field.

   She played softball herself until the last two years of her
life, when she had to devote her time to fighting cancer.  But
she continued to coach.

   I remember best the cool July evening in 1995 when I watched
her coach her last girls' team through a double-header.

   The only sign of her illness was the loss of her long, glossy
hair touched at the temples with curving gray wings.  She wore
a jaunty straw hat.  If she winced when she walked, she tried
to cover it with a grin.  The drugs she was taking left her
feet numb.  They ached with cold in the winter, but she did not
coach then.

   Two of the girls had gone canoeing earlier in the day and were
worn out.  She frowned but told them to do their best.

   When her girls were at bat, she shouted encouragement.  When
they were in the field, she paced the line at third base.

   She knew when they should come in and when they should cover
the far outfield.  She was not shy about telling them.

   Girls deserved a chance to play, and Earlene made sure they
got it - at least where she lived.  In 1993, the town named its
youth center the Earlene Scruggs Activity Center, a large
metal structure abutting the ballfield where she cut the grass
when no one else would.

   She did not talk about herself.  Her husband, Tommy, would tell
you things if she was not around.  But she would get mad if she
caught him.

   Sometimes he called her ""Indian,'' a reference to the Pawnee
heritage of which she was so proud.  But outside her hearing,
he talked of her courage and her strength.

   He knew that if the Houston treatment did not work, he would
not convince her to go anywhere else.  ""I'm not going all over
looking for a cure,'' she said.

   She tried not to place much faith in the ""iffy'' promise of
gene therapy, but everyone got excited when she did so well,
so quickly.  But it was not a cure.

   When she knew it would not work, she was accepting, even as
big fat tears rolled down her face and mine.  But she hoped
that what she had done had contributed.

   ""I'd like to know what they learned from it,'' she said.

   I don't think she ever found out.  But we learned a lot from
her.

   We learned that a person can live until the day he or she
dies.  And what she contributes can live after her.

   Earlene Scruggs did not put on airs.  But she chaired the
Lowell Park Committee and was junior commissioner of the
Amateur Junior Olympics Softball Association of Northwest
Arkansas.

   She was youth director for First Baptist Church of Lowell for
years and served on the advisory board of the city's First
National Bank.  She was a board member of the Roger/Lowell
United Way and had served on the Lowell City Council.

   With that, she was a mother and a grandmother.  She ran the
small video store next door to the garage that she and Tommy
owned.

   The trees are bare, skeletal fingers against the sky in
Arkansas as one year dies and another begins.

   The air can be bitterly cold and the roads treacherous with
ice in the rural areas outside Fayettteville where Earlene and
Tommy lived.

   Earlene hated the cold, and I feel sorrow that she did not
live to see the pale green leaves bud from the hardwoods and
the flowers bloom.

   When I met Earlene in the fall of 1994, she thought that time
had already run out.  Her Arkansas doctors had urged her to
come to Houston's M.D. Anderson after their best efforts to
cure her had failed.

   In nearly 20 years of medical writing, I have met many kinds
of patients.  Some whine and give up.  Others fight the disease,
the doctors and anyone who gets in their way.

   Some expect miracles.  Others expect nothing.

   But never before had I ever met an Earlene Scruggs.

   She and Tommy looked small and scared when I first sat down
next to them in the waiting area outside Anderson's Station
82.  They were.

   But it became clear that they had big hearts.  They were the
kind of people who size you up and decide right then whether
you are friend or foe.  If they accept you, they take you into
their hearts.  And they begin to occupy a prominent place in
yours.  Earlene did that early.

   Drs.  John Kavanagh and Albert Deisseroth said gene therapy was
the only hope they could offer.  But she did not jump to take
it.  She went home.  Throughout her ordeal, home was where she
found her strength.

   She talked to Tommy, her sweetheart and best friend.  She
talked to her daughter, Tammy Todd.  She held her grandchildren
close.  She sought the counsel of her many brothers and
sisters.  She prayed.

   Finally she decided to try.

   I remember visiting her in her hotel room.  Her eyes were
swollen and red.  She was anxious and tired from lack of sleep.

   But she had made up her mind, and she accepted the
consequences without complaint.

   The first round of chemotherapy was tough.  Even with potent
anti-nausea drugs, she could not eat.  She slept most of the
time.

   It got easier when she was able to return to the hotel,
because she had more freedom.

   But she chafed at being away from the Arkansas home she loved
so much.

   She covered her bare head with bright scarves.  She laughed,
sitting on her bed with her legs curled up under her.  She
seemed young and carefree.

   But underneath, she was worried.  She worried about Tommy, her
family, her brothers and sisters, her friends and her girls on
the team.  She was an older sister.  Older sisters worry.

   They worried about her as well.  I remember when we all baked
cookies before Christmas 1994.  The kids sang with a new
karaoke machine and scattered decorations and sugar
everywhere.

   Earlene, excited to be home, had her finger in every piece of
pastry.  But her sister Cherry followed her around, trying to
get her to light somewhere.  Friends dropped by as though by
chance.  But there was nothing chance about it.  They were there
to see Earlene.

   Now we will see her only in photographs and our memories.  But
those memories are strong.

   I will never again walk in the front door of M.D.Anderson
Cancer Center without remembering Earlene's brave face and
bright scarves.

   I will not drive past a late-night softball game and hear the
crack of a bat without thinking of her.

   And someday, when we are able to cure ovarian cancer, I hope I
am around to write about it.  It will be a medical
breakthrough, and it will be Earlene's triumph, shared with
all the brave women who, like her, volunteered so that doctors
might learn something that would help someone else.


GRAPHIC: Mug: Ruth SoRelle

TYPE: Biography

NOTES: Ruth SoRelle is the Houston Chronicle's medical writer.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1997


                             2505 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     March 1, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 816 words

HEADLINE: Star in sheep's clothing; Clone: At last, science offers animals a
chance to break from the herd. But loserdom may be dyed in the wool.

BYLINE: Charles Salter Jr., SPECIAL TO THE SUN

BODY:


   It was an important week for science, but when all is said and done, a bigger
week for sheep.

   All of a sudden, sheep are everywhere -- on radio, TV and the front page.
Dolly, the first higher mammal clone, has become an instant celebrity, a shoo-in
for Ricki Lake and "Nightline," and perhaps the cover of Newsweek.

   Maybe Dolly will become the next hot name instead of Chelsea. Maybe Dolly
will land a role as Ross' pet sheep on "Friends," or a potato chip ad campaign
with supermodels.

   Anything could happen. Is it mere coincidence that today, March came in like
a lamb?

   Before, it was other animals that got the attention, other animals that
contributed to science. A pig's liver or a baboon's heart can save someone's
life. Monkeys and rats are the key to researchers learning more about countless
diseases, and mice are used to test new drugs. But not a peep about sheep.

   Cloning changed that. The silence of the lambs has been broken.

   The muttonheads finally made history. For once, they led instead of followed.
Now this extraordinary experiment could raise their stock, and boy, do they need
it.

   Sheep are about the only creatures on Earth with more image problems than
O.J. Simpson. They're meek, timid and stupid. The dictionary says so.

   You know anyone who wants to be seen as sheepish? Other animals are more
charismatic, heroic and clever. We grew up watching Lassie rescue Timmy from a
burning barn, Flipper save Bud from drowning, and Mr. Ed get the last laugh on
Wilbur. Now we see Eddie outsmarting Frasier, Murray upstaging Paul and Jamie
and a pig named "Babe" going to the Oscars.

   Consider this: The best known sheep around isn't even a real sheep. It's a
hand puppet. A has-been. A leftover.

   In 1993, Larry King interviewed Lambchop, Shari Lewis' sidekick since the
1950s.

   Lambchop: Where do generals keep their armies?

   King: I don't know. Where do generals keep their armies?

   Lambchop: Up their sleevies!

   When it comes to brains, sheep are definitely batting ninth. They're docile,
simple and gullible. Turn on the Cartoon Network. After all these years, they
still fall for the old wolf-in-sheep's-clothing trick.

   Seems the joke's always on sheep. Take Nancy Shaw's series of children's
books, like "Sheep in a Jeep." The sheep are always lovable losers. They
accidentally pour pepper on their dessert and practically sneeze a restaurant to
pieces. They fall asleep sailing and get shipwrecked. They lose their compass on
a hike and do what sheep do best: Get lost.

   Gary Larson constantly skewered them in "The Far Side." In one cartoon, they
even fell for a wolf in tacky clothing. Another panel showed a particularly
enlightened sheep bravely standing up and telling the flock, "Wait! Wait! Listen
to me! ... We don't HAVE to be just sheep!" Of course, sheep being sheep,
wouldn't get the joke.

   It's the old herd mentality. Sheep just seem to need a shepherd or a sheep
dog to tell them where to go and what to do. Sheep don't ask questions. They
don't have that much initiative or curiosity. They're just along for the ride.

   In "Babe," a sheep dog explains to the little pig that, "Sheep are stupid.
Sheep are inferior." They can't save themselves from sheep thieves. Babe has to.
Turns out, the sheep are a secret society, with their own password and mantra:
"Baa-ram-ewe. To your breed, your fleece, your clan be true. Sheep be true." But
it turns out sheep aren't good at keeping secrets, either. Babe learns the
mantra, the flock does whatever he asks, and the national sheep herding title is
in the bag.

   No matter how hard they try, sheep can't win. The St. Louis Rams? An
embarrassment. They finished 6-10 last season while the Carolina Panthers and
the Jacksonville Jaguars advanced to the playoffs.

   Sheep, of course, do have one thing going for them: their looks. They look
like waddling marshmallows -- oblong, puffy clouds with legs. They make cuddly
stuffed animals, cute pot holders and soft, warm sweaters. Kids love sheep.

   But looks don't last. After a good shearing, they look as naked as new
recruits.

   So now sheep have cutting-edge cloning going for them. But is it really going
to help their image?

   Will Dolly be seen as a genetic wonder representing all the possibilities of
gene therapy, or some kind of Frankenstein-like freak of nature, a walking
bioethical debate? And what was the sheep's role in the cloning anyway? Were
they bravely helping to advance science, or simply going along, ever the
sacrificial lamb?

   Sheep don't need this kind of ambiguity. They have enough problems already.
They need something simple and heroic:

   "Sheep's eyes restore National Geographic photographer's vision!"

   "Sheep experimentation cures common cold!"

   Better yet, they need to get the better of some brainy pig or dolphin for a
change. Or at least get Lambchop some new material.

   Pub Date: 3/01/97

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, Baaad jokes: Hey, Shari and Lambchop, put a sock in it.
It's respect time.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1997


                             2506 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 1, 1997, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: Rules to Cover Human Tissue In Products

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration announced a new system today for regulating
medical products made from human tissues that the agency says addresses safety
issues while reducing barriers to new therapies.

   The agency said its new framework for overseeing human tissue products
ranging from corneal transplants to cells used for gene therapy would allow for
more consistent regulation based on the degree of risk to patients being
treated.

    "This is a framework to replace a patchwork system of regulation we've
developed over the years," Dr. David A. Kessler, the retiring Commissioner of
Food and Drugs, said in an interview. "This is a road map for the regulation not
only of therapies that exist today, but therapies that will be invented in the
future."

   Under the plan, which Dr. Kessler said would not require new legislation,
therapies made of human cells or tissues would have to follow certain safety
rules according to the risk of infection they pose and, when necessary, prove to
the Government that they work. The proposal calls for easing regulation of some
tissue, like heart valves, while increasing testing and safety requirements on
others, like sperm and eggs. Sperm banks, for instance, which have followed
state law or voluntary guidelines in testing for hepatitis or the virus that
causes AIDS, would now be covered by Federal testing requirements, Dr. Kessler
said.

   The system covers medical products derived from human cells and tissues,
including skin used to treat burns, tendons and ligaments for repairing muscle
injury, corneas transplanted to restore vision and cells for gene therapy. The
new regulations would not apply to blood and blood products, or animal-derived
tissues, which the drug agency oversees under different statutes, or to whole
organs and other products that are supervised by other agencies.

   The agency said the goals of the changes were to protect against accidental
use of contaminated tissue that could transmit disease, to guard against
improper handling that could damage or contaminate the tissue and to insure that
the product was proved safe and effective.

   The use of human tissue is one of the fastest-growing areas in medical
research. Novel tissue-based approaches to treating disease include injecting
gene-altered cells into patients to combat inherited illnesses and using blood
from umbilical cords to strengthen the immune system. Industrial groups have
complained that progress in this area is hampered by inconsistent regulation.

   Alan Goldhammer of the Biotechnology Industry Organization said the agency's
new approach included many suggestions for streamlining regulations that
industry had been advocating for years. "We think this is the right approach,"
he said. "Safety is the critical issue in regulation, regardless of the origin
of the tissue or how it is processed."

   Under the new approach, most tissues -- except those removed and transplanted
back into the same patient in the same surgery, like a skin graft -- must be
tested for infections and follow "good handling practices" to prevent
contamination and to preserve quality.

   Other tissue would require controlled clinical trials and pre-market
approval, like that which is extensively processed so that its biological or
functional characteristics are altered, or tissue that is combined with other
biological products or drugs, or used in medical devices.

   The drug agency said it would hold a public meeting on March 17 at its
headquarters in Rockville, Md., to get comments on the plan before putting it
into effect.



LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1997


                             2507 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    March 01, 1997, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: FDA Sets Safety Framework For Cell and Tissue Therapies; Rules Would
Cover Attempted Human Cloning

BYLINE: John Schwartz, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration yesterday announced a new plan to ensure the
safety of human cells and other tissues used in artificial insemination, some
transplants and other medical therapies.

   The new regulatory framework "will allow greater flexibility and innovation
in this promising field of medicine," while protecting patients, said Vice
President Gore in a statement.

   Research in tissue-derived therapies is booming, including skin replacement
for burn victims and techniques that turn human cells into tiny pharmaceutical
factories. But such tissue-based therapies carry the risk that they might
transmit infectious diseases. Also, novel therapies have to be proved safe and
effective. So the FDA looked for ways to impose rigorous requirements when
necessary -- but reduce regulations in cases where they are not warranted, said
FDA Commissioner David A. Kessler.

   The regulatory framework "is intended as a road map -- not only of therapies
that exist today, but for those that will be invented in the future," Kessler
said.

   The rules would even cover, potentially, attempts to clone humans. FDA Deputy
Commissioner Mary K. Pendergast was quick to point out, however, that the FDA
rules would only govern the medical and scientific issues surrounding that
thorny area. "It would not address the ethical issues," which would fall under
the purview of the president's commission on bioethics, she said.

   Despite the complexity of the underlying issues, the new process comes down
to asking a few questions about the risks inherent in each new product. Tissues
that would be removed from and transplanted into the same person in a single
surgical procedure, for example, bear a very low probability of transmitting
infection, and so the FDA would not regulate those tissues, the agency said.

   Similarly, conventional tissues used in conventional ways, such as standard
forms of artificial insemination or skin grafts, would require minimal standards
to ensure that the tissues are handled properly and are free of infection, the
FDA said.

   In cases where conventional tissues would be transferred between people who
are already sexually intimate, such screening would be recommended but not
required. But in tissues transplanted between strangers, the risk of unintended
infection increases and so the FDA would require donor screening and tissue
screening.

   The FDA reserved a still higher standard of regulation for those tissues that
undergo manipulation to alter their function, such as gene therapy cells
injected into patients to supply missing or malfunctioning DNA. One of the most
promising frontiers in biotechnology, this and other therapies would require the
same kinds of controlled clinical trials that all makers of new drugs and
medical devices go through under the new FDA plan.

   The guidelines would not affect tissues from other species used in humans,
known as xenotransplantation. They also will not cover tissues that are already
subject to extensive regulations, such as whole organs for transplant.

   The new approach is a marked departure from the usual way that the FDA
handles advances in therapies. Normally the FDA waits for manufacturers to
present the agency with applications for specific treatments. The agency then
rules on the applications on a case-by-case basis. The agency will generally
come up with policy guidelines after seeing a number of similar applications.
"We really had a patchwork system that didn't have underlying scientific and
public health rationale," Kessler said.

   Representatives of high-tech medical companies expressed enthusiasm for the
new approach. "They've gotten it right," said Carl B. Feldbaum, president of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization. Feldbaum called the move "a continuing sign
that the agency is serious" about adapting to the changing regulatory needs of
high-tech research.

   "It shows new and innovative thinking by the FDA," said Cynthia Fisher, CEO
of Boston-based Viacord, a company that banks blood from the umbilical cords of
newborns for therapeutic uses. Fisher said that her company already exceeds the
disease screening requirements under the FDA plan.

   The plan was developed at the FDA after extensive discussions with the
affected industries, as well as industry and research scientists.

   The FDA will hold a public hearing later this month to discuss the plan and
will later issue a proposal. A final rule could be in place within two or three
years, Pendergast said.

LOAD-DATE: March 01, 1997


                             2508 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    February 28, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: British company to buy Md. firm; Deal for Pharmavene may bring $ 160
million

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   In one of the largest deals for a Maryland biotechnology company, a British
pharmaceutical firm yesterday announced it will pay as much as $ 160 million for
Rockville's Pharmavene Inc., which has never turned a profit.

   The deal with Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC indicates how potentially
lucrative is Pharmavene's "drug delivery technology," which manipulates a drug's
molecules to better target diseases.

   If the merger is approved by shareholders of both companies, Shire initially
will pay $ 25 million in cash and about $ 65 million in Shire stock for
privately held Pharmavene.

   But the price could reach $ 160 million if certain contingencies are met.

   Those include Food and Drug Administration approval for Carbatrol, a drug
developed by privately held Pharmavene for epilepsy, and successful development
of drugs for cardiovascular disease.

   If successful, Carbatrol and the cardiovascular drugs alone would trigger an
additional $ 70 million payment from Shire, said James D. Russo, chief financial
officer at Pharmavene.

   FDA approval of Carbatrol would trigger $ 2 million from Shire to Pharmavene.
The Rockville company also would get an $ 8 million payment from Athena
Neurosciences Inc., of San Francisco, which licensed Carbatrol for marketing
prior to the Shire deal.

   The merger agreement is a big financial success for Healthcare Ventures, the
Edison, N.J.,venture capital firm, which is Pharmavene's principal stockholder
and largest investment backer.

   The most ever paid for a Maryland biotechnology company was the $ 295 million
spent in 1995 by the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Sandoz for Genetic Therapy Inc.,
of Gaithersburg.

   Reformulating drugs

   Pharmavene's strategy has been to select drugs with large potential
commercial value that are no longer covered by patents, and to attempt to
molecularly reformulate them so they will have a more predictable and lasting
effect.

   The field has grown enormously competitive in recent years and many major
pharmaceutical companies have teams devoted to it. By some estimates the market
for drugs improved by the technology will grow to $ 18 billion worldwide by
2000.

   Publicly held Shire Pharmaceuticals specializes in developing treatments for
diseases associated with aging, such as osteoporosis and Alzheimer's disease.

   "The Pharmavene acquisition will provide us with the advantages of
flexibility and refinement for our own product line," said John Fletcher,
corporate communications director at Shire's headquarters in Andover, England.
"It also gives us an important foothold in the U.S. market."

   Shire's biggest purchase

   The purchase is considered the largest and most important for 11-year-old
Shire, said Fletcher.

   The company made two previous acquisitions, in 1993 and 1995, as part of its
growth strategy. Both were British companies.

   Shire expects Pharmavene's drug delivery technology to add a marketing edge
for its products, said Fletcher.

   As for Pharmavene, it gains a parent with a growing marketing arm and
experience with the regulatory approval process in two big markets, the United
Kingdom and the rest of Europe, said Krystyna Belendiuk, senior vice president
for business development at Pharmavene.

   "We are very, very complementary companies," said Belendiuk. "We both seek to
develop products that can be brought to the market quickly. We are low-risk,
big-market oriented."

   The Rockville company's drug development pipeline will add significantly to
Shire's.

   Together, the companies will have 30 prospective products. Pharmavene has 12
drugs in development, including treatments for epilepsy, diabetes, and viral
infections.

   FDA approval expected

   It has no approved products, though Carbatrol, the epilepsy treatment
licensed to Athena Neurosciences, a subsidiary of Elan PLC of Ireland, is
expected to receive FDA approval this year. The company also is working on drugs
for osteoporosis.

   Shire's product pipeline also includes hormone replacement therapies and the
Alzheimer's treatment, which it is co-developing with a subsidiary of Johnson &
Johnson.

   Fletcher said Shire intends to keep Pharmavene in Rockville, though its name
will change to Shire Laboratories Inc.

   The acquisition should mean staff growth on both sides of the Atlantic,
executives at both companies said.

   Shire employs 123 people, 40 of them in sales and marketing -- services
7-year-old Pharmavene lacks.

   Pharmavene is primarily a research and development company with about 60
employees.

   The company canceled a public offering of 2.2 million shares last summer
because of a sudden market downturn, said Russo.

   Pub Date: 2/28/97

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1997


                             2509 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  February 26, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Scientists who cloned sheep try to allay fear they've raised; Human
doubles, animals oddities among worries

SOURCE: REUTERS

BODY:


   LONDON -- As British scientists who cloned a sheep tried yesterday to dispel
suspicions that they had brought science to the brink of creating human clones,
the alarm provoked by their creation was spreading worldwide.

   France's farm minister conjured up horror movie visions of "six-legged
chickens" and a Nobel Peace Prize winner compared the breakthrough with the
creation of the atom bomb.

   President Clinton ordered the U.S. National Bioethics Advisory Panel to
report within 90 days on the legal and ethical ramifications of cloning,
especially its implications for humans.

   Ian Wilmut, who headed the team that created Dolly, the first animal to be
successfully cloned from an adult cell, said he was untroubled by nightmares and
that, anyway, genetic science was nowhere near reproducing humans.

   "We have made it clear -- we can't see a clinical reason why you would do
it," Wilmut told reporters who came to see Dolly at the Roslin Institute near
Edinburgh, Scotland, where she was created.

   Ron James, managing director of PPL Pharmaceuticals, which sponsored and is
patenting the work, agreed.

   "In big capital letters, it is not immediately possible," he said. "And I
hope it never happens."

   But Joseph Rotblat, a British nuclear physicist who won the 1995 Nobel prize
for his campaign against the atom bomb he helped create, was not convinced.

   "My worry is that other advances in human science may lead to other means of
mass destruction more readily available than nuclear weapons. Genetic
engineering is quite a possible area because of its frightful potentiality," he
told BBC radio.

   He urged the creation of ethical committees that could put a stop to
scientific projects that could threaten humankind.

   French Farm Minister Philippe Vasseur speculated that the development might
one day spawn the science needed to make farmyard freaks.

   "Even if countries like France, Italy, Spain, Germany and others have
rigorous rules about using science, what you can and cannot do, tomorrow someone
could well invent sheep with eight feet or chickens with six legs," Vasseur
said.

   Germany's Science and Research Minister Juergen Ruettgers said scientists
must never be allowed to make a human clone.

   The general public worried that all kinds of evil developments were the
logical extension of the breakthrough, speculating that mad scientists could use
genetic engineering to make copies of dictators like Stalin and Hitler.

   Commentators said it would be possible for a woman to clone her dead father.
People with serious diseases could have themselves cloned for spare body parts.

   But scientists expressed excitement that the cloning might lead to a myriad
of new ways to help the human race. Herds of transgenic animals could be farmed
for proteins, blood and organs.

   Gene therapy, with its ability to manipulate the core of human and animal
life, could provide cures for killer diseases, and give hope to the crippled,
they said.

   Pub Date: 2/26/97

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1997


                             2510 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 25, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words

HEADLINE: Success in Cloning Hardly Insures Profit

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Shares in PPL Therapeutics P.L.C. soared on the London Stock Exchange
yesterday, following the news over the weekend that scientists in the tiny
Scottish biotechnology company, in collaboration with researchers at the Roslin
Institute in Edinburgh, had successfully cloned a sheep. Its shares rose 16.4
percent yesterday, closing at £3.875, up 52.5 pence.

   But despite investors' enthusiasm, there is often a vast gulf between a
scientific breakthrough and a marketable product. Analysts note that the
biotechnology industry's short history is littered with the remains of companies
that shined in the laboratory, but came up short on the route to sales success.

    PPL has the rights to use the jointly developed cloning technology to create
genetically altered animals that would produce pharmacologically useful proteins
in their milk. The company has applied for, but not yet received, patents on
this technology.

   The analysts warn that an investment in PPL is subject to technology risk,
because the use of genetically altered animals may not be the best way to make
drugs. There is patent risk, as well, plus all the other caveats that apply to a
young company.

   Despite yesterday's run-up in PPL's stock, the shares remain below the £4.50
price of the initial public offering last June. PPL sold 7.8 million shares at
that time, raising £33 million, which it said it would use for the development
of its leading product candidates. With 22.4 million shares, the offering gave
PPL a market capitalization of £100.6 million. It PPL said at the time of the
offering that it expected no earnings from operations for at least five years.
Indeed, it said that directors estimated that net cash outflows over the next
two years, taking interest receivables into account, would be £17 million to £22
million. At the time, the company reported 1995 revenue of £4.47 million and an
operating loss of £1.73 million plus carry-forward losses of £7.16 million.

   PPL does not have American depository receipts, but investors can buy its
shares through many full-service brokers.

   The company has already produced genetically altered animals for drug
production using an older technology, and has one drug in the first phase of
clinical trials in association with its corporate partner, Bayer of Germany. The
most comparable company, the Genzyme Transgenics Corporation of Framingham,
Mass., which is 48 percent owned by the Genzyme Corporation, has one drug that
has completed first-phase trials, in partnership with Hoechst Marion Roussel and
Sumitomo Metal Industries. But that is a long way from market, too; three phases
are required. Genzyme Transgenics closed yesterday at $9.625, up $1, in Nasdaq
trading.

   While it is easy for investors to be attracted by scientific advances, most
drug candidates -- 9 out of 10 by some counts -- fail. Short of failure,
companies with stellar science can otherwise prove disappointing.

   Two years ago, Athena Neurosciences of South San Francisco achieved a
breakthrough when it developed a genetically engineered mouse that could be
given Alzheimer's disease, providing the long-sought animal model for studying
the disease and for measuring the efficacy of possible drugs. But Alzheimer's
was a distant target, and Athena had a difficult time raising capital for
nearer-term projects, so last year it agreed to be acquired by the Elan
Corporation of Ireland, which specialized in drug-delivery technology.

   Whole categories of genetic engineering have been slow to pan out.
Researchers at the National Institutes of Health, under the direction of Dr. W.
French Anderson, performed gene therapy in 1990 on two girls, 4 and 9, who
lacked a critical immune-system enzyme, adenosine deaminase, a deficiency that
gave rise to "the boy in the bubble" syndrome. The girls now lead relatively
healthy lives, but there are still no commercially available gene-therapy
products, nor is any expected soon.

   Although PPL's scientists had published reports in peer-reviewed journals of
their work cloning mammals at earlier stages in the process, these received
scant attention from financial analysts, perhaps because of the remote
likelihood of economic success. The company's June 1996 prospectus makes only
passing reference to this work, dwelling instead on PPL's current process for
expressing therapeutic proteins in the milk of genetically altered animals, and
its purported advantages in relation to alternatives.

   James McCamant, editor of the Agbiotech stock letter, had written on PPL
before last weekend, but he does not recommend buying the stock. "This
announcement doesn't increase the value of the company significantly; it just
attracts attention," he said. Even if one believes PPL is a worthy investment,
"now is not the time to buy it, when the stock's up on the announcement."

   And Mr. McCamant is not sure that PPL's business strategy is ever likely to
create large returns. "They are clearly a pioneer, but what they are doing is
basically being a production house for other companies," he said. "The profits
you can make in doing that are constrained by the fact that there are lots of
other ways to make drugs. You're not going to get monumental profits producing
proteins in milk because there are so many other ways to do it."

   Today's big biotechnology drugs, like Amgen Inc.'s Epogen, or Activase from
Genentech, are genetically engineered copies of naturally occurring proteins,
which are produced in yeast, bacteria or mammal cells that are cultivated in
huge fermenters. Genetically altered animals hold the promise of producing
greater amounts of protein for less cost, but this is by no means a sure thing.
The fermentation process has come down in cost as it has become more common. In
addition, experiments have shown that genetically altered plants can also
produce therapeutic proteins, and plants are far less costly to produce than
sheep or goats.

   It is also not clear that PPL's cloning technique, breakthrough though it is,
gives the company an equally clear competitive advantage. Genzyme Transgenics
has already produced more than 25 different proteins in genetically altered
animals, and has a broad array of partnerships with major pharmaceutical
companies. Pharming Inc., a privately held company in the Netherlands, has used
altered cows to produce human lactoferrin, a natural antibiotic, as well as
human collagen, a structural protein used in cosmetic and surgical processes.

   "PPL will have a proprietary method that will give it an advantage," said
Carl Gordon, an analyst with Mehta & Isaly, noting that the cloning technique
should lead to more consistent protein production than existing processes. "But
its competitors are still making good progress, and it's not clear, a priori,
that doing it PPL's way is necessary," he said. "It's not like PPL has a
monopoly."



LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1997


                             2511 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   February 25, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z07

LENGTH: 1219 words

HEADLINE: Natural Antibiotic Found in Lungs' Fluid; Substance Is Clue to
Explaining Why Cystic Fibrosis Patients Get Lung Infections

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Ten years ago, scientist Michael Zasloff decided to investigate why the
surgical wounds of his laboratory frogs never became infected, and he discovered
that frog skin contained a new class of natural antibiotics.

   Zasloff, who was then a researcher at the National Institutes of Health,
predicted that similar antibiotics might someday be found in humans, and that a
defect in such a defense system might help explain why people with cystic
fibrosis, an inherited disease, are vulnerable to lung infections.

   It appears his hunch may be right.

   A team of Pennsylvania researchers reported last week that they have
identified a natural antibiotic in the fluid that lines the airways of the lung.
In normal human airway fluid, it is highly active against bacteria such as
Pseudomonas, a major cause of infections in cystic fibrosis patients. But when
the fluid lining the respiratory tract is too high in salt -- as it is in people
with cystic fibrosis -- the antibiotic is inactivated.

   "It's about as beautiful as it can be," said Zasloff, who founded a drug
company to develop the frog skin antibiotics, and who collaborated with other
scientists on the new research.

   The study, published in last week's issue of the journal Cell, offers the
first persuasive explanation of how the genetic defect implicated in cystic
fibrosis -- which primarily affects salt balance -- leads to the lung infections
seen in patients.

   "To me the fascinating issue was, what is the relationship between the defect
in this gene and the disease?" said James M. Wilson of the University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center, a prominent gene therapy researcher and lead author
of the new report. "This, I think, is the first model that makes logical sense
and is based on experimental data."

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal genetic disease in the United
States, affecting an estimated 30,000 children and young adults. In addition to
increased vulnerability to lung infections, people with cystic fibrosis have
complications involving the pancreas and intestines that often make it difficult
for them to digest and absorb nutrients, and males with the disease are usually
infertile. However, lung damage caused by repeated infections is the cause of
death in 95 percent of CF victims.

   The disease is caused by mutations in the gene for a specific protein called
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR), a molecule found on cell
surfaces that helps regulate salt balance by transporting chloride ions, a
component of salt, into cells.

   Even after identifying the gene in 1989, researchers still do not fully
understand how having a defective CFTR gene produces the disease, Wilson said.
The respiratory tract of CF patients contains thick, sticky mucus and is
colonized by species of bacteria, such as Pseudomonas, not normally found in the
bronchi and lungs of healthy people. CF researchers have never been sure whether
the thick mucus or the presence of unusual bacteria is the initial trigger for
the recurrent lung infections.

   In recent years, evidence has mounted that the defective CFTR gene is somehow
linked to patients' vulnerability to infections, said William B. Guggino, a
professor of pediatrics and physiology at Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine. Guggino said the most important clue was the discovery last year by
Michael Welsh and his co-workers at the University of Iowa that the fluid lining
the respiratory tract in healthy people kills bacteria, while respiratory tract
fluid from CF patients does not. Furthermore, Welsh's team showed that adding
salt to normal fluid abolishes its antibacterial activity, while diluting fluid
from CF patients (to lower the salt concentration) enables it to kill bacteria.

   Wilson, Zasloff and their co-workers set out to find the antibiotic substance
in the fluid. Zasloff's discovery a decade ago of magainins, the frog skin
antibiotics, had prompted many other researchers to search for similar
substances in other animal species and in humans. One type of natural
antibiotic, a family of chemicals dubbed beta-defensins, cropped up in many
animal species.

   In 1995, a group of kidney researchers in Germany identified a defensin in
fluid filtered from the blood of dialysis patients. They named it human
beta-defensin-1. To Zasloff, Wilson and their team, it seemed like a promising
candidate.

   Human beta-defensin-1 is a peptide, a chainlike molecule constructed of 33
amino acids (the chemicals that make up proteins). The research team showed that
human beta-defensin-1 was being manufactured throughout the human respiratory
tract, from large bronchi to small air sacs.

   Zasloff's chemists next made a synthetic version of human beta-defensin-1 and
proved that it was a potent antibiotic that dramatically lost activity at high
salt concentrations. The research team then performed a crucial experiment. They
showed that, in mice whose respiratory tracts had been grafted with a lining of
normal human cells, the antibacterial activity present in respiratory fluid
could be eliminated by blocking the gene that makes human beta-defensin-1.
Stopping the healthy cells from making the antibiotic made the fluid powerless
against bacteria, just like the fluid found in CF patients.

   The discovery neatly ties together the salt-regulating functions of the CFTR
gene with patients' susceptibility to infection, Wilson said. "Patients with
cystic fibrosis are born with normal lungs. But within the first few months of
life, their lungs are colonized with Pseudomonas," he said. "Why? We think it's
because they're deficient in this innate immunity conferred by the defensin."

   The resulting cycle of inflammation and infection "ultimately leads to all of
the problems," he added.

   Researchers at Zasloff's company, Magainin Pharmaceuticals, are testing other
antibiotic peptides in animals, to find out whether they would be safe and
effective as inhalable drugs that might replace the inactive defensin in the
lungs of CF patients.

   Meanwhile, Wilson said the discovery of human beta-defensin-1 in the lungs
has given new impetus to gene therapy trials in such patients. The mouse studies
suggested that if researchers can manage to insert a normal CFTR gene into even
a small percentage of the cells lining the respiratory tract, it might suffice
to normalize salt balance and reactivate the natural antibiotic. He added that
measuring the innate activity of defensin in the respiratory fluid of CF
patients may prove a useful test for gauging the success of gene therapy.

   Zasloff, whose original frog antibiotic is now in the final stages of testing
as an antibacterial cream for skin ulcers in diabetics, said that researchers in
his laboratory have detected human beta-defensin-1 at other sites in the human
body. They include the inside of the eye and mouth, the intestines, the
prostate, the uterus and the vagina. He predicted that additional antibiotic
substances will be found in humans, lending support to his theory that the body
has an alternative immune system based on antibiotics.

   "The story of the frog is really duplicated here," he said. "Probably each
place in the body has got its own little environment," with its own local
defense system. "It's a different niche in the rain forest."


GRAPHIC: Photo, barbara johnson for The Washington Post, Scientist Michael
Zasloff, who discovered a class of antibiotics secreted by frog skin while
working for the National Institutes of Health, was part of the research team
that found similar material in human lungs.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1997


                             2512 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   February 25, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1022 words

HEADLINE: Send In The Clones; Some Scenarios In Which Humans Are Carbon Copies

BYLINE: Joel Achenbach, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Naturally the scientists decide that the first thing they will clone is a
sheep. A cloned sheep looks like a normal sheep. The sheep itself -- Dolly -- is
completely clueless. She, too, thinks she is just another sheep. She goes about
her business with a sheepish grin.

   But we know how these things work: First they clone a sheep, and then, before
you know it, we're surrounded by hordes of identical little jug-eared, crewcut,
twangy-voiced boys with an extremely eerie resemblance to Ross Perot.

   Scientists caution that there are both technical and ethical obstacles to the
cloning of a human being. But we also know that science always overcomes the
technical obstacles and someone always ignores the ethical ones. We know: Humans
will be cloned.

   President Clinton said he would convene a panel for more study. Press
Secretary Mike McCurry, when asked who in the White House would be most likely
to clone himself, did not hesitate:

   "Gore. He's into this kind of stuff. He's the high-tech guy."

   McCurry then attempted to plant the rumor that investigative journalists are
even now looking into the possibility that the vice president is already a
"second-generation Gore."

   Lorraine Voles, Gore's press secretary, shot back, "My boss is one of a
kind."

   The cloning story is precisely at that slippery stage when facts are rare,
knowledge flimsy and speculation rampant. It was clear that many people
yesterday were still stuck on the idea that if you cloned yourself you could
then start your life over and maybe get it right this time. There was confusion
about the nature of identity, personality, individuality.

   If only they could find a way to combine cloning with gene therapy -- you
could make a new version of yourself, only with thinner thighs!

   People started talking about cloning themselves so they could harvest the
clone's organs when they got old -- replacing your own heart, for example, with
a younger, throbbier but genetically identical version. Eventually you could
transplant the entire brain, or even just a digital readout of your memory and
personality, into a completely new organism.

   Obviously we would have to bring Elvis back again and again. Private
companies could rent them all out for parties. "Now coming into our studios . .
. the young Frank Sinatra!" If someone had a snippet of John Lennon it wouldn't
be too hard to bring back the Beatles, finally.

   "We could probably get the original Kool & the Gang back together," noted
forward-thinking humorist Dave Barry, reached in Miami. "That would be so much
better than a sheep."

   The permutations get more and more elaborate. Why should a successful man
with a midlife crisis leave his wife for a younger woman when he could leave her
for her younger clone? Isn't that a little less mean?

   Show her you'd do it all over again.

   Cloning raises constitutional issues. Does the 22nd Amendment, which limits a
president to two terms, permit additional terms to be served by a genetic
duplicate? If the first lady were indicted and convicted of perjury, could a
court allow her sentence to be served by the clone?

   Some people were deeply alarmed by the cloned sheep, no one more so than
biotechnology critic Jeremy Rifkin, speaking from a pay phone at the Atlanta
airport on his way to a conference in Toronto.

   "I think this is one of the seminal turning points in civilization," he said.

   Twenty years ago this spring, Rifkin co-wrote a book, "Who Should Play God?,"
that warned of such scientific developments as test tube babies, surrogate
parents, transgenic species and animal and human cloning. Now, he says, all have
come to pass. This is bad.

   "This technology allows us to move from procreation to replication. It means
that an individual can self-reproduce. This throws every convention, every
historical tradition, up for grabs," he said. "We're really talking about the
ability to move toward -- I use this word carefully -- a counterfeit culture."

   Fear of clones has one major irrational component. Clones already exist. It
turns out that identical twins are, in every significant regard, clones of each
other, and no one is particularly freaked out by identical twins. A person with
a twin does not for a second believe himself or herself to be simply one version
of the same individual.

   In fact, there's enough slop in the system so that even with the same genetic
blueprint and even raised in the same house under roughly the same environmental
conditions, monozygotic (identical) twins are not entirely identical. Even small
differences in the position in the womb can result in slight differences in
height and weight. A quick phone call to the Minnesota Center for Twin and
Adoption Research yields the hard data. Twins raised together have a height
correlation of .94, but when they're raised apart (as a clone would be,
obviously), the correlation drops to .86. There are yet lower correlations for
intelligence (about .70) and for personality (.50).

   The center's associate director, Margaret Keyes, explains:

   "If you cloned Bill Clinton he would probably be an extrovert, he would
probably have a pleasing personality, but would he become president of the
United States? Highly unlikely. There have been a million environmental events
that have contributed to President Clinton's ascendancy to the presidency."

   In other words, you could take a DNA sample from the remains of John F.
Kennedy, raise the clone at Hyannis Port, teach him to play touch football and
go sailing and run for the presidency, but would he really be "JFK" without
PT-109, the Bay of Pigs and Marilyn Monroe?

   Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine. . . . You're no Jack Kennedy.

   "Cloning is a good way of weeding out the well-known fallacy of
Lamarckianism," says Daniel Dennett, director of the Center for Cognitive
Studies at Tufts University. "Lamarckianism is the idea that characteristics you
acquire in your lifetime are passed on to your offspring. You can't. You can't
pass them on to your kids, and you can't pass them on to your clones."

   At least that's what the experts say now.


GRAPHIC: Illustration, dudley m. brooks, Vice President Gore: A natural for
artificial replication?

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1997


                             2513 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 23, 1997, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. D5

LENGTH: 1209 words

HEADLINE: IPOs: 62 firms in N.E. raised over $ 2b last year;
VENTURE CAPITAL REPORT

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Nineteen New England companies in fields ranging from medical bandage
distribution to bomb-detection equipment raised $ 434 million through initial
public offerings in the fourth quarter of 1996, according to the Price
Waterhouse/Boston Globe Venture Capital Report.

   For all of last year, 62 New England companies debuted on Wall Street,
raising $ 2.248 billion, the Price Waterhouse survey showed. That was well ahead
of the $ 1.791 billion raised by 38 New England firms in 1995.

   Overall, 1996 was the second strongest year for initial public offerings,
both in New England and nationally, since the record-setting 1993, according to
the IPO Reporter, a New York publication. That year, 819 companies nationwide
raised $ 57.4 billion in initial offerings, the publication said. Last year,
according to the IPO Reporter, investors opened their wallets for a record 868
companies, spending $ 49.8 billion.

   But a closer look shows that investors' robust appetite for the stocks of
young companies waned in the second half of 1996. The summer stock market
correction that sent high-tech stocks plunging scared some companies from going
public. Others were forced to lower their pricing expectations. Companies that
hoped to sell their first public shares in the $ 12 to $ 15 range wound up
selling stock in the neighborhood of $ 8 to $ 9.  The overall average for New
England companies was just over $ 10 a share, compared to the last three months
of 1995 when the IPO stock price averaged $ 14.35 a share, according to the
survey.

   Lower stock prices meant less money went into company coffers. In the fourth
quarter, according to the survey, the average New England IPO generated $ 22.8
million - significantly less than in each of the previous three quarters and
sharply down from 1995 levels.

   By the October-to-December quarter, companies desperate for cash that had
postponed their IPOs rushed in, often selling their stock at lower-than-expected
prices.

   Now, venture capitalists - who cash out on their investments when their
portfolio companies go public - are biting their fingernails over whether the
IPO boom will continue. Some industry watchers maintain that the early signs
show 1997 is close to matching 1996's records.

   "If the surging Dow is any indication, then 1997 may be another bellwether
year for venture IPOs," noted the Venture Capital Journal in its February issue.

   Allyn C. Woodward Jr., president of Adams Harkness and Hill, a regional
investment and brokerage company in Boston, noted that 21 companies nationwide
sold their first shares at $ 7 or higher last month, compared to 23 companies in
January 1996. He expects the current trend of 100 IPOs per quarter to continue.

    "At least for the next quarter or so, I see things going along comparable to
last year. As long as corporate earnings are reasonably strong, I see nothing on
the horizon that will materially impact the IPO market, absent something on a
global scale," said Woodward. "But our crystal ball doesn't go very far. This is
still a volatile time for IPOs."

 Initial public offerings, 4th quarter '96

    Venture investors generally make their money when a young company first
sells stock to the public. In the fourth quarter of 1996, 19 New England
companies made initial public offerings. Company/location raised Business
description
Accent Color Sciences Inc. E. Hartford, Conn. $ 24M Designs, manufactures and
sells innovative, high-speed, spot color printing systems for integration with
digital, high-speed, black-on-white printers, and sells related consumables.
Access Solutions International Inc. N. Kingstown, R.I. $ 8M Develops, assembles,
sells and services optical data storage systems consisting of integrated
computer hardware and software for the archival storage and retrieval of massive
quantities of computer-generated information.
ArQule Inc. Medford $ 30M Conducts drug discovery programs primarily with
partners in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries.
Bitstream Inc. Cambridge $ 12.6M Develops and markets software products and
technologies to enhance the creation, transport, viewing and printing of
electronic documents.
Boston Biomedica Inc. West Bridgewater $ 13.6M Provider of proprietary quality
control products for use with in vitro diagnostic test kits for the detection,
analysis and monitoring of infectious diseases.
Control Devices Inc. Standish, Maine $ 18M Designs, manufactures and markets
circuit breakers, electronic sensors and electronic ceramic component parts used
by original equipment manufacturers in the automotive, appliance and
telecommunications markets.
Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. Cambridge $ 15M Engaged in research, development and
commercialization of novel anti-infective drugs to treat infectious diseases
caused by bacteria and fungi.
Forrester Research Inc. Cambridge Independent research firm offering products
and services that help its clients assess the effect of technology on their
businesses.
GeoTel Communications Corp. Littleton $ 26.4M Provider of telecommunications
software solutions focused on enhanced call routing technology that enables
customer-oriented companies to deliver responsive and cost-effective customer
service.
QC Optics Inc. Burlington $ 5.795M Designs, manufactures and markets laser-based
defect detection systems for the semiconductor, flat-panel display and computer
hard disk markets.
Seachange International Maynard $ 30M Provides software-based products to
manage, store and distribute digital video for cable television operators and
telecommunications companies.
Specialty Catalog Corp. South Easton $ 9.75M Direct marketer targeting niche
consumer product categories.
Suburban Ostomy Supply Co. Inc. Holliston $ 46.8M Direct marketing wholesaler of
medical supplies and related products to the home health-care industry.
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. Cambridge $ 37.5M Engaged in the development and
commercialization of therapeutic human proteins and gene therapy products
designed for the long-term treatment of a broad range of chronic human diseases.

United Natural Foods Inc. Dayville, Conn. $ 39.15M Distributor of national,
regional and private-label natural products in six categories consisting of
groceries and general merchandise, nutritional supplements, bulk and
food-service products, personal-care items, perishables and frozen foods.
Viisage Technology Inc. Acton $ 26.25M Designs, sells and implements turnkey
digital identification systems intended to deter fraud and to reduce customers'
identification program costs.
Vivid Technologies Inc. Woburn $ 24M Developer, manufacturer and marketer of
automated inspection systems that detect plastic and other explosives in airline
baggage.
Websecure Inc. Saugus $ 8.2M Internet service provider that offers Internet
access and support services to businesses for secure commercial transactions and
communications over the Internet.
White Pine Software Inc. Nashua $ 27M Develops, markets and supports
multiplatform desktop connectivity software that facilitates worldwide video and
audio communication and data collaboration across the Internet, intranets and
other networks that use the Internet Protocol. Globe staff chart

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Netcore Systems' Kwabena Akufo (left), Kenneth Virgil, Steven
Dunston and Ashraf Dahod. Netcore received $ 5.5 million in first-round
financing. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / TOM HERDE

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1997


                             2514 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  February 22, 1997, Saturday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Scientists expand study of 'suicide gene' therapy;
A new treatment for prostate cancer

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Charles Z. Hanks, Hyrum B.Mullikin and Dan Tindall belong to
an exclusive club.

   They are three of 11 men in the country who have undergone a
new gene therapy as a treatment for prostate cancer.

   But their numbers are to grow soon as the study at Baylor
College of Medicine and Methodist Hospital expands to as many
as 25.  The new patients will also receive higher dosages of
the virus that carries the gene.

   The first patient was Tindall, 71, who underwent the treatment
in August.  It is too soon to say whether the treatment is a
cure or even effective, said Dr. James R. Herman, a member of
the Baylor urology faculty.

   However, it has caused no toxic side effects, he said.  In
addition, the prostate specific antigen - a measure of whether
the disease is progressing - has remained the same or dropped
for all the patients, he said.

   The treatment the men have undergone is called ""suicide gene''
therapy.

   The ""suicide gene'' is actually a gene found in a herpes virus.

   It causes cells to produce an enzyme called thymidine kinase -
known in biological shorthand as TK.

   When thymidine kinase combines with the drug ganciclovir, the
drug changes and actually stops cells from dividing.  That can
kill the cancer.

   Whether it has killed all the cancers in these patients
remains to be seen.

   This study is designed to determine whether prostate cancer
can be successfully treated by this form of gene therapy and
whether the adenovirus used to take the thymidine kinase gene
into the cell's nucleus is effective.

   Adenoviruses are highly infective and doctors hope they will
spread to most cells of the tumor, killing them in the
process.

   Each patient had undergone radiation treatment for his cancer,
but it had come back.

   Tindall, who lives in Bayview, said he chose the gene therapy
because he did not like the alternatives.

   Hanks, 75, said his physician found the gene therapy treatment
on the Internet and suggested that he try it.  His cancer,
first diagnosed five years ago, showed up again this year.

   The Odessa resident said he has had no problems from the
treatment.  He is retired but does some inspections for the
Federal Housing Administration in his hometown.

   He had hoped to get together with Mullikin, 72.  But the
Enterprise, Utah, resident had to fly out after a morning full
of tests to determine if the treatment was working.

   Herman is unwilling to say whether he thinks the treatment is
working.  Ultrasound measurements of some tumors seem to
indicate that they are smaller, but he said those are
inexact.

   He is hoping the study finds the best dose of the virus-gene
combination.  Then, he said, studies can be done that will
determine the effectiveness of the treatment.

   Hermann hopes more patients will try the new treatment.  Those
who think they meet the criteria can call 798-5050.


LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1997


                             2515 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        February 20, 1997 Thursday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 7

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: STUDY INVOLVED UW
 Infertility may be tied to defect in chromosome
 Blood test is being developed to tell whether men lack gene segments

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Doctors who have been unable to find a cause for two-thirds of male
infertility cases now have a new culprit tiny missing segments of the male
chromosome, according to a report in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   The finding is spurring rapid development of a simple blood test to diagnose
such genetic defects, said Wolfram Nolten, a University of Wisconsin Medical
School infertility expert who participated in the study.

   Promega Corp., a Madison biotechnology firm, also participated and is close
to bringing such a test to market, Nolten said Wednesday.

   "The black box is shrinking," he said. "There will be an explanation for a
substantial number of infertility cases."

   The study may continue the controversy in some medical circles over whether
to help men with infertility problems to become fathers via in-vitro
fertilization or other advanced reproductive techniques. Some believe that such
men shouldn't be helped to have children because they could pass reproductive
defects to any male offspring.

   But Nolten said, "we also do appendectomies we don't let nature take its way.
Thirty years down the way, there might be gene therapy" to help the son.

   About 15% of couples have infertility problems, and men are responsible for
half, according to the report. But no cause can be found in up to two-thirds of
such cases.

   Researchers from UW, Promega and the University of Minnesota Medical School
studied 200 men with infertility problems and first evaluated them for known
causes, such as varicose veins of the scrotum, blocked sperm ducts and other
structural or physiological problems. Their chromosomes then were analyzed by
sophisticated genetic techniques, as were those of 200 men with normal sperm.

   Tiny missing sections of the Y, or male, chromosome were found in 2% of men
with normal sperm, 7% of the 200 men in the study with fertility problems, 16%
of the men who had either no or very little sperm, and 23% of the men with no
sperm at all.

   The fathers of six of the infertile men with genetic abnormalities also were
analyzed. Two had the same deletions as their sons and four had no deletions,
suggesting that the abnormalities aren't always inherited and may be "acquired"
by environmental factors such as smoking, alcohol consumption, exposure to
certain toxins or pesticides or other such factors.

   "I would assume the vast majority are acquired rather than inherited," Nolten
said. If all or most genetic abnormalities were inherited, relatively few such
men would be born because their fathers would have been unable to conceive them,
he explained.

   Missing chromosome segments "does not preclude the presence of viable sperm
and possible conception," the authors write, noting that some men with healthy
sperm also had such genetic defects.

   In one case in which genetic deletions were found, the man had fathered two
healthy children. In another case in which a chromosomal deletion was found, the
man fathered a child through an assisted reproductive technique.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1997


                             2516 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 19, 1997, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: Biotechnology;
Ariad, Genovo team up on protein treatment;
FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge is expected to announce today the
creation of a joint venture with Genovo Inc., a Philadelphia-based gene therapy
company, to develop a combination of drugs that enables the body to produce
critically needed proteins to treat a variety of major medical problems.

   The goal is to give patients a once- or twice-a-year intramuscular injection
that prepares the body to produce a naturally occurring protein, such as
erythropoietin, to treat anemia. Patients would then swallow a pill every day to
regulate its production, essentially turning the gene responsible for
erythropoietin production on and off to supply the protein as needed.

   "The holy grail of the whole biotechnology industry is the regulation of gene
expression and the production of natural proteins," said Dr. Harvey J. Berger,
chairman and chief executive of Ariad. "We propose using certain muscles as
protein production factories to treat a variety of medical problems."

   Currently, genetically engineered proteins are administered by injection
several times a week. But patients would rather take a single injection in the
arm and swallow a pill, he added.

   Berger explained that Genovo has developed the injectable portion of the
therapy while Ariad's expertise is the control mechanism of the oral pill. He
said both companies have independently done small-animal testing in their
respective portions of the project. Together they plan to expand testing to
larger animals, such as monkeys.

   Both companies have a total of 20 US patents covering the combined
technologies, said Berger.

   The first testing in humans is expected to start early next year with human
growth hormone, a protein used to treat AIDS and certain cancers. Genovo has
also experimented with blood proteins, known as Factor VIII and Factor IX, that
are missing in hemophilia A and hemophilia B patients.

   In choosing human growth hormone, Berger acknowledged it was one of the
"easier" proteins to work with. The toughest is human insulin, he added, citing
the need for tight control and monitoring of blood glucose levels.

   Berger acknowledged that one current drawback is the daily pill requirement,
adding that Ariad is talking to companies about developing longer-lasting pills
that might be taken less frequently.

   Both Genovo and Ariad have shown their unproven concept to two pharmaceutical
companies as potential marketing and distribution partners. "There's
considerable interest in it," he said, although he declined to name the two
companies.

Medical Blue Cross approves Cytyc's new Pap test

    Cytyc Corp., which has developed an improved but more costly method of
cervical cancer screening called the Thinprep Pap Test, said Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Massachusetts has approved insurance coverage of the test.

   "Following a careful comparison of Thinprep to existing cervical cancer
screening technology, we've decided that the Thinprep Pap Test clearly
represents a better choice for our members," said Dr. Anne L. Meneghetti,
associate medical director at Blue Cross.

   The Boxborough company received US Food and Drug Administration approval for
its test last May as a replacement to the conventional Pap smear preparation in
which a doctor smears cells scraped from a woman's cervix onto a glass slide.
About 5 percent of the 50 million Pap tests performed annually are considered
inconclusive because blood and mucus still cling to the cervical cells on the
glass slide and block the cytopathologist's view of the cells.

   Cytyc's Thinprep differs in that the collected cervical cells are first
rinsed in a vial of preservative and then sent to a laboratory that removes
blood, mucus, and inflammation, so that the cervical cells are more easily
viewed under a microscope by the cytopathologist.

   This process is designed to avoid the problems of inaccuracy that sometimes
lead to misdiagnosis, undetected cancers, and avoidable deaths, the company
says. Last fall, Cytyc got a major boost from the FDA when the agency allowed
the company to claim that its Thinprep test could be marketed as "significantly
more effective" than the traditional Pap smear.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1997


                             2517 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 15, 1997, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: Biogen engineers leadership change;
Biogen engineers change in leadership of company

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Biogen Inc. yesterday formally transferred the leadership mantle to James
Tobin, the hand-picked successor of the former top executive, James Vincent, who
is credited with rescuing the Cambridge biotechnology company.

   The anticipated change comes as Biogen is experiencing success of its
multiple sclerosis drug, Avonex, and a steady stream of royalty revenue from
major cancer drugs and hepatitis vaccine products licensed to several large
pharmaceutical firms.

   Tobin, 52, becomes chief executive and retains the title of president,
effective immediately. Tobin's previous post as chief operating officer will be
eliminated.

   Vincent, 57, who joined Biogen nearly 12 years ago, will remain chairman of
the 752-employee firm.

    Biogen's shares closed yesterday up 5/8 to 49 3/4 on Nasdaq.

   Last year, Biogen reported record profits of $ 40.53 million on revenues of
nearly $ 277.1 million, making it one of the nation's largest - and most
successful - independent biotechnology companies.

    "CEOs are not too good at picking their successors, but Jim Tobin and I have
worked together for the past three years and things have worked out as planned,"
said Vincent, who will continue to guide the company's corporate strategy and
management development.

    Industry watchers say the change reflects style differences between the
tough, acerbic Vincent - who in recent years has lost some scientific and
business talent at Biogen - and the more amenable Tobin.

    "Their styles may be very different, but the successful, fundamental
strategy that Vincent created for Biogen will continue, with Tobin reaching out
to the biotechnology industry more," said Dr. Harvey J. Berger, chairman and
chief executive of Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge.

   In 1985, Vincent took over a demoralized, nearly bankrupt company that was
founded and run by Walter H. Gilbert, an outgoing Nobel Prize-winning biologist
who had problems halting the simmering rivalries within various parts of the
company.

   Arriving 10 months after Gilbert's abrupt departure, Vincent rebuilt Biogen's
patent portfolio by buying back the rights to some of its inventions, including
beta interferon - now Avonex. Vincent also renegotiated pacts with various firms
to enable Biogen to gain income from royalties on products it licensed to major
drug makers. He also closed some of the company's European research operations.

    Those strategic changes in the late 1980s have enabled Biogen to prosper in
the 1990s, as the company used the stream of royalty revenue to fund its own
drug development. Along the way, Biogen had one disappointment: Hirulog. The
drug was designed to replace heparin, a blood thinner. But that didn't happen.

   Yesterday, Vincent said Biogen will sell its rights to hirulog by June. He
declined to name the buyer.

   Tobin, who joined Biogen in 1994 after a 22-year executive career at Baxter
International Inc., is expected to bolster Biogen's drug pipeline by acquiring
hot, early-stage products. In December, Tobin was instrumental in a
Biogen/Creative BioMolecules Inc. deal to develop a kidney disease drug.

   In 1995, he got Biogen to collaborate with Genovo Inc., a Philadelphia gene
therapy firm, in a $ 35 million deal that calls for exploring possible
treatments of cystic fibrosis and high cholesterol.

   "At Baxter, I was involved in merging the company and closing things, taking
people off the payroll and squeezing earnings out of a consolidation effort,"
recalled Tobin. "At Biogen, it's completely different in trying to solve
problems."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, James Vincent, left, will remain with Biogen as chairman, while
James Tobin becomes chief executive and retains the title of president. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO/DAVID RYAN

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1997


                             2518 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  February 15, 1997, Saturday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Wrap-up; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: Heart center named for Bush

BYLINE: RUTH SORELLE, Houston Chronicle medical writer; Staff

BODY:

   FORMER President George Bush has, for the first time, put his
name on a Texas Medical Center facility - the President Bush
Center for Cardiovascular Health at Hermann Hospital.

   The center unites Hermann's patient treatment, research and
education activities for adults and children. It will stress
prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, education and genetic
research.

   Dr. Ward Casscells, chief of cardiology at Hermann and the
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, said Hermann
ranks at the top of heart institutions in Houston, Texas and
the nation.  To back up his contention, he listed the ""firsts''
at the hospital: demonstrating that atherosclerosis (hardening
or narrowing of the arteries) can be reversed; using postitron
emission tomography as a sensitive indicator of coronary
artery disease; use of clot-busters to treat heart attacks in
Houston; first preventive cardiology training program in the
city; first cloning of the sentrin gene that protects against
premature atherosclerosis and death, among others.

   He and Dr. James Willerson, chairman of UT's department of
medicine and an internationally known cardiologist, are
working on programs to develop gene therapies that will stop a
heart attack before it even starts.

   The creation of the center was announced at a luncheon this
week.  Both former President Bush and wife Barbara attended.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Former President George Bush speaks at announcement of center.;
E. Joseph Deering / Chronicle

TYPE: Editorial Opinion

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1997


                             2519 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   February 10, 1997, Monday, HOWARD EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL (NEWS), Pg. 3B, Neighbors

LENGTH: 969 words

HEADLINE: Adults share their work with students on Career Day

BYLINE: Jean Leslie, SPECIAL TO THE SUN

BODY:


   CENTENNIAL LANE Elementary School held its Career Day on Jan. 31 as adults
from the community visited classes to describe their careers.

   According to my sources -- press releases written by student reporters from
the school's Gifted and Talented Program -- the day was totally successful.

   For example, according to Emi DiStefano, computer graphics Professor Russell
Turner explained to the children how the movie "Toy Story" was created.

   "A person was connected to wires which were connected to the computer. Every
time the person moved, the character on the computer screen would copy the
person's motion. I never knew all the neat things a computer can do," she wrote.

   Fifth-grader Jacquie Chamberlain was impressed by FBI Agent Jim Ellis'
lecture.

   According to her press release, "One of his most interesting cases happened
in New York. Bank robbers broke into a vault and stole 441 thousand dollars out
of the bank. Every student's jaw fell to their laps."

   Fourth-grader Chris Hilchey described musician Dave Geigerich's guitar
demonstration for first-graders.

   "As Mr. Geigerich played a blues song faster, turning it into rock and roll,
the first-graders all got up and danced."

   Erin Compton reported that when engineer Debra Richmond told the children
that "if there were no engineers, there would be no cars, televisions, phones,
computers, bridges, toys or Nintendo, all the children acted very surprised."

   Kendra Norris went to a talk by Virginia and David Evans, both of whom work
in the courts.

   She was particularly interested in how the couple got their educations.

   "Mrs. Evans went to law school and got a job as a clerk, then decided she
wanted to be a prosecutor. Mr. Evans went to law school too and during the
summer he worked in a Finger Print Lab."

   Fifth-grader Vincent Cino listened to a talk by Stephen Dudley, a sergeant in
the National Guard who "during the 1996 blizzard drove [Humvees] to help doctors
and firemen get to their jobs."

   Fifth-grader Sara Siegel reported on an Army orthopedic doctor's
presentation.

   "Dr. [Nick] Grosso brought some materials to make a cast took those materials
and put a real cast on a student."

   She continued, "If you were to be an army doctor, you would have to go to
school for 25 years," a long time in her estimation.

   Other speakers at the event included podiatrist Rick Adams, dancer Soon Hee
Ahn, college dean Scott Angle, nurses Susan Arneson and Sheila Suhrstedt,
teachers Fiona Henderson and Marcela Aviles, CPA George Bayless, social worker
Amanda Bayless, landscape architect Ken Berg, adoption worker Esther Best, FBI
Agent Melanie Betz, mathematician Antonia Bluher, engineer Susan Burgess, and
physicians Coleene Cooke, Craig Hendrix, Paul Noble, Leonard Raucher, Anuradha
Reddy, Marcia Wolf Chalfin and Vincent Yang.

   Other speakers were audiologist Maribeth Eckenrode, businessmen Gary Eller
and Mike Lockett, computer specialist Chip Galloway, salesman Randy Gartner,
Judge Connie Gordon, critic John Harding, lawyer Bruce Plaxen, biotechnological
genetic therapists John Powers and Joseph Swales, journalist Bill Reinhard,
government administrator Lisa Stello, museum administrator Michael Storey, clown
Marjorie Strasburger, and environmentalist Barbara Watson.

   Esther Best demonstrated the blessings of adoption by bringing as guests
adoptive parents and their children.

   Genetic therapists John Powers and Joseph Swales taught the children in their
group how "germy" our environment is.

   The students touched something in their immediate environment, then collected
and cultured the germs in a petri dish.

   Clown Marjorie Strasburger discussed clown school with a fascinated group of
kids.

   Student reporters also included Grace Chioie, Ashley Virtue, Lisa Koo, and
Mandy Maurer.

   Seeking a show house

   Historic Ellicott City's search for next year's show house has netted good
ideas from residents across Howard County.

   Ruth Hoke has suggested that the show house be Montrose Mansion on Brighton
Dam Road -- a 20-room farmhouse that has been in the Randle family for more than
100 years. (A Randle family member was the writer of the classic children's book
"Maryland, My Maryland.")

   Montrose is one of several properties under consideration.

   A prospective show house must be fairly sizable, in good structural repair
and have facilities for parking.

   If you have suggestions, call Janet Kusterer at 461-6908 and leave a message.

   Kudos to Deep Run

   Deep Run Elementary School was one of nine schools in Howard County to
receive an award for increased Parent-Teacher Organization enrollment.

   Deep Run continues its commitment to a strong PTA with its Founders' Day
celebration Thursday.

   That night, the school community will celebrate the PTA's 100th birthday with
an evening of ice cream and Valentine craft workshops.

   Howard High's musical

   Howard High School has announced its cast for its spring musical, "Little
Shop of Horrors," to be presented March 13, 14 and 15.

   The cast includes Don Chiarella as Seymour, Megan Holmes as Audrey, Stefan
Lasker as Mr. Mushnik, Kenny Fisher as Orin, and Korey Jackson as the voice of
Audrey II.

   Korey Jackson is also the student director.

   Other cast members include Maya Cook, Renee Gissentanger, Takiyah Omar,
Jessica Binder, Jevne Reid, Daisy Tillman, Ashly Walton, Charisse Ferrer, Amy
Singer, James Maravetz, Vashali Dharmadhikari, Omar Bradford and Robert Knorr.

   Judging projects

   Here's a great way for the local scientific community to give to county
schools: make yourselves available to judge science projects on March 5 at
Elkridge Landing Middle School.

   This will relieve school staff of the task of judging.

   Call the school at 313-5040, and ask for Debbie Batzer or Sue Williams.

   Pub Date: 2/10/97

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1997


                             2520 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   February 7, 1997, Friday, ARUNDEL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy holds promise for Parkinson's

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- A gene injected into laboratory rats stopped the death of brain
cells and demonstrated how medical science may one day control Parkinson's
disease, researchers say.

   Scientists at the University of Rochester in New York used a modified cold
virus to transfer genes into the brains of rats that had been given a disorder
that mimics Parkinson's. The genes produced a protein that protected brain nerve
cells from the disorder, the researchers said.

   "This is proof that if you put a gene into the brain and produce a protein at
very low levels, there is a possibility of using this as a therapy to prevent a
progression of disease," said Martha C. Bohn, senior author of a study published
today in the journal Science.

   "If this works in humans, it would mean that we could prevent dopamine
neurons from continuing to die in the Parkinson's brain and possibly allow the
neurons to regrow," said Bohn.

   In Parkinson's disease, nerve cells in a pea-size section of the brain stop
producing dopamine, a neurotransmitter chemical important in controlling muscle
movement. The dopamine-producing cells slowly degenerate, and the disease
progressively worsens.

   Patients with Parkinson's develop uncontrollable hand trembling, a stooped
posture, a shuffling walk and other symptoms. About 400,000 Americans have
Parkinson's.

   The disease is often treated with the drug levodopa, which replaces the
missing natural dopamine, but response to levodopa declines over time.

   Experimental treatments have included the transplantation of brain tissue
from aborted fetuses and therapy in which genes that make dopamine are injected
into the brain. Those treatments were designed to replace the missing dopamine
and not to stop the disease, said Derek Choi-Lundberg, lead author of the
University of Rochester study.

   Pub Date: 2/07/97

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1997


                             2521 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                       FEBRUARY 7, 1997 Friday PM EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: PROGRESS ON PARKINSON'S DISEASE?

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In a development that could one day lead to new therapies for Parkinson's
disease, scientists said yesterday they have used gene therapy in rat brains to
protect nerve cells that make a crucial chemical.

   A University of Rochester team used a modified version of the common cold
virus to deliver into rat brains a gene that produces a protein messenger needed
to protect nerve cells that make dopamine.

   Parkinson's patients' lack of dopamine, a neurotransmitter, leads to gradual
deterioration of motor abilities, including tremors and difficulty in moving.

   Rochester neurobiologist Martha Bohn said experiments with rats, reported in
today's edition of the journal Science, did not hold out any immediate hopes for
human patients but were a step toward gene therapy.

   "It's an excellent first step," she said in a telephone interview.

   Bohn is now working on other versions of viral delivery systems, and will
also test the approach in monkeys, who provide a better model of Parkinson's.

   Parkinson's targets a tiny area deep in the brain stem, where nerve cells
produce dopamine.

   The virus served as a shuttle, called a vector, to introduce into the brain a
gene that controls glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, known as GDNF.

   Introducing this gene enabled damaged brain cells to start producing GDNF.
Nerve cells need GDNF to stay healthy and produce dopamine.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2522 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    February 7, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 373 words

HEADLINE: REAGAN TURNS 86

BYLINE: Compiled from Tribune wires

BODY:


   Jelly beans atop cake

   LOS ANGELES - Ronald Reagan celebrated his 86th birthday on Thursday in the
same low-key, private way he has lived since being diagnosed with Alzheimer's
three years ago.

   Brownie Troop 313 from Redondo Beach delivered cookies and a children's choir
from San Fernando's Glen Oaks Primary Center sang "Happy Birthday" and "Battle
Hymn of the Republic" at a party at his Century City office.

   Entering the building, the nation's 40th chief executive looked much the same
as he did as president - the thick patch of dark hair, the confident gait, the
friendly wave - flashing his famous aw-shucks grin after spotting red, white and
blue balloons, said a spokeswoman, Joanne Drake.

   After blowing out the candles on a cake decorated with jelly beans, Reagan
unwrapped a gift from his staff: golf shoes, in khaki and green suede in honor
of his Irish roots.

   Later, he headed off to a golf range to drive a few balls before returning to
his Bel-Air home for a private dinner with wife Nancy.  INDIAN VICTORY  Judge
OKs suit against U.S.

   WASHINGTON - In a major victory for Indian tribes, a judge ruled Thursday
that American Indians can collectively sue the federal government for
mishandling hundreds of millions of their dollars.

   The ruling means that any Indian owed money by the government for past land
and natural resource claims automatically is part of a lawsuit already filed at
the federal court.

   Indian attorneys estimate as many as 300,000 people now are included in the
suit, which makes it the largest class action brought by American Indians
against the government. U.S. District Court Judge Royce C. Lamberth also ruled
that the descendants of Indians who had claims can join the lawsuit.  GENE
THERAPY  Fight against Parkinson's

   WASHINGTON - A gene injected into laboratory rats stopped the death of brain
cells and demonstrated how medical science may one day control Parkinson's
disease, researchers say.

   Scientists at the University of Rochester used a modified cold virus to
transfer genes into the brains of rats that had been given a disorder that
mimics Parkinson's. The genes produced a protein that protected brain nerve
cells from the disorder, the researchers said.

NOTES: IN BRIEF NEWS OF THE NATION NATION WORLD WATCH

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1997


                             2523 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1997, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words

HEADLINE: Chiron Corp.(CHIR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31

BODY:
                       ** COMPANY REPORTS **
                      Chiron Corp.(CHIR,NNM)
Qtr to Dec 31                             1996                 1995

Revenue                            369,809,000          325,897,000
Net inc                             15,269,000          c17,592,000
Share earns                                .09                  .10
Shares outst                       176,621,000          175,783,000
Yr rev                           1,312,844,000        1,100,582,000
Net inc                            b55,145,000         d512,463,000
Share earns                                .31               (3.15)
Shares outst                       177,052,000          162,442,000




b-Included a $12.2 million pretax gain arising from the sale of its 50 percent
interest in a generic chemotherapeutics business in May 1996.

c-Included a write-off of purchased in-process technologies of $335,000 and
$1,000 in restructuring and reorganization charges.

d-Net loss, which included charges totaling $509.8 million primarily resulting
from a strategic partnership transaction with Novartis; Chiron's acquisition of
the Iolab Surgical division from Johnson & Johnson and its integration into the
operations of Chiron Vision; certain restructuring charges; and charges related
to the acquisition of Viagene Inc., a gene therapy company.

Results for the year-ago periods have been restated for the company's 4-for-1
common stock split on Aug. 2, 1996.

(Loss)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1997


                             2524 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 4, 1997, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme plans to buy N.J. firm;
Will combine cancer research operations to form new division

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp.'s General Division yesterday said it will acquire Pharmagenics
Inc., a small privately held New Jersey cancer drug research firm and combine it
with Genzyme's existing cancer operations.

   The new division will be known as Genzyme Molecular Oncology and its shares
will be offered to the public this spring.

   Financial terms of the agreement call for no cash to change hands.
Pharmagenics Inc., a 7-year-old genomics research firm based in Allendale, N.J.,
and Genzyme's gene therapy, genetic testing and small molecule chemistry groups
will form the new division with Genzyme's General Division owning about 60
percent.

   The remaining 40 percent will be sold as shares to the public in an initial
public offering, at which point, share prices will be determined.

   Sources close to both firms estimate the Pharmagenics purchase at about $ 28
million.

   "Because cancer is such a diverse group of diseases and affects so many
people, we believe it will be one of the earliest disease areas in which
gene-based medicine is commercialized," said Henri A. Termeer, Genzyme chairman
and chief executive.

   Genzyme's General Division shares closed at 27 1/8, down 7/8 on Nasdaq.

   "We see a lot of changes ahead in treating cancer, developing diagnostics and
targeted therapeutics to treat the genetic mutations in cancer," said Gail
Maderis, Genzyme's vice president of gene therapy, who will become president of
Genzyme Molecular Oncology.

   Pharmagenics, she added, has technology that can measure and quantify, for
example, the level of abnormally expressed genes in cancerous tumor cells
compared with healthy tissue. She said the 36-employee company also has genomics
technology that will enable Genzyme to develop drugs from gene identification to
commercialization of therapeutic drugs.

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology will also develop certain cancer screening tests
with Genzyme's testing laboratories, said Maderis, stressing the companies
expect any drug will still take about 10 years to develop and commercialize.

   The new division will be headquartered in Framingham with 75 full-time
positions; another 45 part-time employees - mostly from other Genzyme divisions
and groups - will also work at the new company, said Maderis. Of the 36
Pharmagenics employees, about a dozen or more, mainly scientific staff, will be
asked to relocate to Boston.

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology will be financially structured like Genzyme Tissue
Repair, also a division of Genzyme General Division. The stock of Genzyme Tissue
Repair, which grows cartilage cells to treat knee damage, is traded separately
from the General Division shares.

   Last fall, Genzyme said it was launching clinical trials for a cancer tumor
vaccine with the National Cancer Institute.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1997


                             2525 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   February 1, 1997, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COULD AID WAR ON PROSTATE CANCER

BYLINE: ANDREW ORR, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:


   Researchers have discovered a highly precise and potent way to target
prostate cancer that could lead to a new treatment that is safer and more
effective than chemotherapy, a new study reported yesterday.

   The treatment would work by injecting genes into the prostate that kill the
cancer cell while sparing the surrounding healthy cells - a method the author of
the study likens to a ''smart bomb.''

   The study of this genetically engineered attack on prostate cancer was
conducted at the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA. The findings are
published in the Feb. 1 issue of the journal ''Cancer Research.''

   ''Chemotherapy cannot differentiate between the good and the bad cells,''
said Dr. Arie Belldegrum, principal investigator for the study and chief of
Urologic Oncology at the UCLA School of Medicine. ''We are attempting to create
a smart bomb.''

   While the concept of gene therapy to treat cancer is not new, Belldegrum's
team has discovered a delivery system that transports a genetically-altered,
cancer-killing gene 1,000 times more effectively than previously known methods.

   Prostate cancer is the most common form of cancer in men, and kills about
40,000 men in the U.S. each year.

   But unlike most other forms of cancer, prostate cancer is also the ideal
target for gene therapy because it is almost always associated with a substance
in the blood stream, known as the protein specific antigen, or PSA.

   All people have PSA genes but only the presence of prostate cancer activates
them to produce the protein specific antigen. For this reason, doctors can
usually detect prostate cancer with a simple blood test.

   ''With colon or breast cancer we don't have such specific markers,''
Belldegrum said.

   Recognizing the value of this specific marker, researchers have often focused
their gene therapy experiments on prostate cancer, using the promoter, or driver
region of the PSA gene to direct a so-called suicide gene to the targeted cancer
cells.

   But while the concept worked in theory, the activity has in the past been too
weak to work on patients.

   What the UCLA research team discovered to make it more practicable is the
enhancer region on the PSA gene, which they say makes the treatment 1,000 times
more effective by boosting the effectiveness of the delivery system.

   In tests, the genetically engineered PSA genes have been shown to attack
human prostate cancer cells growing in mice. Belldegrum said the researchers are
now preparing to apply for Food and Drug Administration approval to begin
experimenting with the therapy on people within a year or two.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1997


                             2526 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   JANUARY 30, 1997, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 492 words

HEADLINE: Chiron President Quits Post
 Emeryville biotech firm had disappointing year

BYLINE: Peter Sinton, Chronicle Senior Writer

BODY:

    Chiron, the second-largest biotech company, announced yesterday that co-
founder Edward Penhoet plans to step down as president and chief executive.

   Last year was not a banner year for the Emeryville-based company. There were
both product and profit disappointments and Chiron shares lost about a third of
their value. But Penhoet, said that it was his decision to relinquish the CEO
post.

   ''I came to the conclusion that I've been doing two full-time jobs,'' said
Penhoet, 56. In addition to the normal executive duties of running the business,
he increasingly has become an industry spokesman, serving on a dozen scientific
boards and committees.

   Chiron hopes to hire a new CEO within three to six months and it is looking
both inside and beyond the health sciences field for an executive with plenty of
experience running efficient organizations and maximizing the commercial
potential of research and development.

   Penhoet will become vice chairman, responsible for developing policies,
dealing with government and industry groups and overseeing research
collaborations.

   Chiron also announced that co-founder William Rutter, 69, will remain
chairman but will give up some day-to-day responsibilities to focus on strategic
planning.

   ''The company has grown nicely with these two guys at the helm,'' said
Hambrecht & Quist analyst Richard Van den Broek. ''They've done a great job
creating a well-diversified, one-stop shop for investors interested in all the
key areas of the industry, including diagnostics, vaccines and gene therapy. The
next step is growing earnings and that's a more difficult nut to crack.''

   Over the past 16 years, Chiron has grown from a research outfit with 15
employees into a $ 1.3 billion company with four commercial businesses and
significant research operations that together employ 7,400 people in 30
countries.

   Chiron's stock soared in 1995 as clinical trials of seven potential drugs all
turned out positive. In addition the company made four acquisitions that added
more than 4,000 employees and more than doubled revenues to $ 1.1 billion.

   Last year's results were just the contrary. There were some problems
integrating the company's expanded operations, while sales of some Chiron
products, such as the multiple sclerosis drug Betaseron, were confronted by
competing drugs.

   In one of the worst blows, Chiron's stock lost 18 percent of its value
November 25 after the company scrapped development of a potential vaccine
against genital herpes. ''That was a big setback,'' said Van den Broek.
Yesterday Chiron's stock dipped 38 cents to $ 18.63.

   Chiron is 47-percent owned by Novartis Ag, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant
that resulted from the combination of Ciba Geigy and Sandoz last month.
Although Novartis looks to Chiron as a tool for discovering technology and
developing new therapeutic products, some analysts suggest that Chiron also may
be feeling pressure to be more profitable.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Co-founder, chief executive and president, Edward Penhoet

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1997


                             2527 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      January 28, 1997 Tuesday, STATEWIDE
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1719 words

HEADLINE: PARTS OF CELLS PRODUCE ENERGY AND, IF FLAWED, INFIRMITY AND DISEASE;
MIGHTY MITOCHONDRIA

BYLINE: DELTHIA RICKS

BODY:

   Inside our cells, tiny bean-shaped powerhouses -- known as mitochondria --
link us to a misty, primordial past.

   Biologists believe the mitrochondria to be descendants of ancient,
air-breathing bacteria that insinuated themselves -- DNA and all -- into early
mammalian and plant cells.

      That was 1.5 billion years ago. And many scientists think the true
ramifications of that evolutionary invasion are only now being understood.
   Through their microscopes, these scientists see two forms of DNA in human
cells -- one form in the nucleus and one in the mitochrondria.
   And they're concluding that not all genetic disorders occur as a result of
defects in the elegant and spiraling DNA of a cell's nucleus, its control
center. This form of DNA contains 100,000 genes which are the basis for life.
   Sometimes, DNA defects in the stumpy little mitochrondria, which are made
up of only 35 genes, can be profound -- even fatal.
   As a result of a number of ongoing studies, scientists are beginning to
believe that flaws or deterioration in the mitochondria's DNAmay be a
long-overlooked cause of aging, neurological disorders, heart conditions and
rare hereditary diseases.
   These discoveries are forcing scientists to reconsider long-held beliefs
about genetic diseases and how they should be treated.
   For example, mitochondrial geneticists hope to develop new technologies
that can ameliorate some of the problems that come with growing old.
   Theory holds that mitochondria probably once were so-called purple
bacteria, which possessed a superior ability to utilize oxygen in an ancient
stew where more complex cells -- those that eventually produced plants and
animals -- were struggling.
   Now they are in us, huffing and puffing in an energy-producing process
called oxidative phosphorylation. Of all the cellular particles with special
functions -- and there are many -- only the mitochrondria come with their own
DNA.
   "If you look at mitochondria they sort of look like bacteria," said
geneticist Michael D. Brown of Emory University in Atlanta. "And there are
even more similarities when you look at the genetics of bacteria: The DNA in a
mitochondrion is the circular form -- just like that in a bacterium."
   Their loops of DNA are like microscopic blueprints, containing their plans
and instructions for producing energy.
   Some mitochondria lose power over time, producing energy less efficiently
-- browning out, some even burning out.
   A growing number of scientists, Brown included, say the power shortages are
what most people would recognize as the ravages of age: poor vision, faulty
memory and legs that are   less spry.
   "We're interested in any condition involving the eyes, central nervous
system, muscles, heart and even the pancreas," said Brown, because cells in
these systems are packed with energy-producing mitochondria.
   These systems are severely affected by the debilities of age, Emory
geneticists say, because the ability to see, react and move are most dependent
on an abundance of mitochondria.
   A single muscle cell can contain 5,000 or more mitochondria, as can a
fragile nerve cell, or a tiny insulin-producing cell in the pancreas.
   When mitochondrial power shortages affect a vast number of muscle cells,
Brown and his colleagues theorize, it shows up as middle-age sag. Power
problems in nerve cells may result in faulty memory. When the factories
sputter and fail in the pancreas, the result can be Type II diabetes, a
condition of middle and older age.
   Brown, co-director of Emory's Mitomap Project, and his colleagues are
trying to find links between mutations in mitochondrial DNA and specific human
conditions.
   He is working with maverick Emory geneticist Douglas Wallace, who
discovered that only females transmit a single mitochondrion at the moment of
conception.
   So far, their laboratory work suggests the culprits behind the destruction
of mitochrondrial DNA are aberrant oxygen molecules called free radicals.
   The radicals are highly unstable because they're missing a vital electron.
They also are abundant byproducts of mitochondrial energy production.
Unfortunately, free radicals are toxic to genes.
   Mitochondrial genes, strung around the double-stranded DNA loop like
infinitesimal beads, contain the instructions for cellular energy production.
When attacked by free radicals, the genes become damaged and their messages
indecipherable.  These mutations are retained on a mitochondrion's DNA loop
and accumulate throughout life -- or so the Emory theory goes. That causes
energy production to slow or cease.
   Dozens of theories on human aging have emerged in recent years, some as
tantalizingly plausible as the concept of mutated mitochondrial DNA.
   Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, is the idea of cells being
annihilated. Once killed, they are vacuumed out of the body by debris-sucking
cells called macrophages. Evidence of this self-destruction is seen in
wrinkled skin, slowed gait and foggy mind.
   Yet another theory of aging involves chromosomes in the nuclei of cells,
the tips of which are protected by molecules called telomeres. As people age,
according to proponents of this idea, the tips wear away. Without telomere
protection, chromosomes become hopelessly unstable and cells die.
   But damaged mitochrondria as the cause of aging is an idea gaining converts
who are providing some of the evidence that Emory's geneticists are seeking.
   Josef Mueller-Hocker, a molecular geneticist at the Pathologisches Institut
der Universitat Munchen in Germany, found in a study of 140 elderly hearts
obtained from autopsies that a key mitochondrial enzyme could not be produced
inside those patients. All of them had died of heart disease and sustained
significant mitochondrial damage. The mutations interferred with the
mitochrondria's ability to maintain the heart's oxygen supply.
   Still other research teams have found a precipitous decline in the number
of functioning mitochondria in nervous system cells as people age.
   Such findings are inspiring a new look at Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and
Huntington's diseases, all devastating neurological conditions that strike in
middle and older years.
   Laboratory studies at Emory suggest that Alzheimer's patients possess only
a sprinkling of energy-rich mitochondria in their damaged neurons, the major
cell-type that makes up nervous tissue in the brain.
   Similarily, Parkinson's patients lack a healthy supply of mitochondria in
the brain's dopamine-producing region, which promotes fluid body motion and
smooth central nervous system activity. And Huntington's patients, who are
plagued by mental impairment and progressive jerking movements of the
extremities, have virtually no functioning mitochondria in the brain's basal
ganglia, which controls the body's motor activity.
   "The mitochondria are full of disease-related problems," Brown said. What
he and his Emory colleagues have yet to prove is whether damaged mitochondria
are causing these diseases, or are simply coincidental features of them. Genes
in the nuclei already have been linked to each of those disorders.
   Emory's geneticists are no strangers to controversy or headlines when it
comes to advancing new ideas about mitochondria.
   Wallace created a stir a decade ago when he announced, with the late Allan
Wilson of the University of California at Berkeley, that all modern humans are
descended from one woman who lived in Africa 200,000 years ago.
   By studying mitochondrial mutations in an ancient female fossil, Wallace
and Wilson were able to make the claim.
   Wallace and Brown made history in 1988 when they were among the first in
the world to definitively identify a mitochondrial disease, one that is passed
from mothers to sons.
   Known as Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, or LHON, the condition is
marked by rapid vision loss, heart rhythm abnormalities, dementia, epilepsy
and intermittant spasticity of the muscles. It strikes males between the ages
of 20 and 24 and is invariably fatal.
   Going into the studies, Emory geneticists were aware the disease was
transmitted by females. There was no evidence, however, of the disease being
caused by a defect on the female X chromosome.
   Because Wallace had already discovered that only females transmit a
mitochondrion at conception (mitochrondria are too fat to fit inside the head
of a sperm), the team searched the mitochondrial loop for specific LHON
defects -- and found them.
   LHON is a classic mitochondrial disease, Brown said, because it has all of
the hallmarks of mutated mitochondria. The eyes, heart, brain, nerves and
muscles carry cells that are full of mitochondria.
   Affected boys inherit the defect at birth. It takes about two decades for
the mutations to become so overwhelming that they result in death.
   Since LHON's surprising discovery, other mitochondrial diseases transmitted
by women have been identified. The commonalities among them are tendencies to
cause a spectrum of symptoms in areas of the body that are rich in
mitochondria.
   Giuseppe Attardi, a geneticist at the California Insitute of Technology, is
convinced that mitochondrial damage underlies diseases that are passed along
at conception as well as those springing from genetic mutations.
   He is proposing a novel type of gene therapy as a way to treat virtually
any mitochondrial disease.
   In his Pasadena laboratory, Attardi has been able to infuse healthy
mitochondria into cells bearing mitochondrial defects. "We found them [the
transplanted mitochondra] replicating more actively than the mutated ones. But
this is a complicated situation. These are experimental models and we can't
predict what will happen in every case."
   The idea behind Attardi's experiments is to override the ill effects of the
mutations.
   "This is an unusual kind of therapy, to be sure," said Attardi, who
identified the sequence of human mitochondrial genes in 1986. "But we are
confident about it."

CORRECTION:
Correction published January 29, 1997.
An inner part of the cell nucleus is the nucleolus. The part was incorrectly
identified in an illustration on the front page of the Health/Science section
Tuesday.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: (color), Chris Moore / The Hartford Courant
Sources: Moleculor Biology of the Gene, 4th Edition;
Dorland's Medical Dictionary; KRT
; Hidden DNA
* Most of our genes are housed in the nuclei of our cells. However,
scientists believe that because the energy-producers in our cells,
the mitochondria, are descended from free-living bacteria, they
retained their own genes and their own special DNA. Geneticists are
now looking at mitchondrial DNA for clues to why we age and develop
certain disease.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1997


                             2528 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              January 26, 1997, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Unlocking genetic secrets

BYLINE: BY JAMES TOBIN

BODY:


   In a small office just inside the front door of a Detroit hospital, a healthy
40-year-old woman recently was offered a chance to see the future -- her own and
ours.

   Her name won't be used in this story. Too much is at stake -- family
relationships, medical insurance, perhaps her future marriage -- for her to go
public with her genetic secrets.

   She knows only that her family has a history of breast cancer, one of the
first diseases to yield a few of its secrets to genetic medicine. She might get
it; she might not.

   At her say-so, a $ 420 blood test would reveal whether her breast cells hide
the broken gene that could cause cancer. But if she has the gene, science cannot
yet fix it.

   Now she must decide.

   "I've always wanted to look into the future and know what's going to happen,"
the woman said. "But in this case, I don't know."

   Discoveries about the human genetic code are allowing doctors to predict some
diseases, yet science is still far away from being able to cure those diseases
with gene therapy.

   In the meantime, the new genetics forces people such as the Detroit woman to
choose between equally vexing options of ignorance and knowledge.

   Genetic ignorance may keep them from taking measures to lower their risks.
But genetic knowledge invites stress, strained family relations, difficult
decisions, even the risk of losing health insurance.

   This woman's mother had breast cancer. So did her mother's sister, two of her
father's cousins and other relatives.

   The family is Ashkenazi-Jewish -- the Eastern European Jews who comprise the
majority of American Jews. The Ashkenazi are believed to have an unusually high
incidence of the flawed gene known as BRCA-1, for "breast cancer number one."
She believed she would be next.

   At Harper Hospital in Detroit, the advances in genetic testing were
explained.

   The key discovery came in 1994, when researchers identified the BRCA-1 gene
that, when damaged, ignites the fuse that leads to the inherited form of breast
cancer. Genetic inheritance accounts for only 5 percent to 10 percent of all
breast cancer cases, but it seemed that at least one major disease had given up
a key genetic secret.

   The woman learned that if she tests positive for the BRCA-1 mutation:

   She has an 80 percent chance of contracting breast cancer, compared with a 12
percent risk for women in the general population. In other words, she would
probably -- but not certainly -- get the disease.

   She must decide whether to inform her two sisters, who do not want to be
tested, about her results. If she has the flawed gene, there's a 50-50 chance
they do, too.

   She must decide whether to inform her boyfriend, whom she may marry, about
the 50-50 risk that she'll pass the gene to any child they have.

   She's not safe from breast cancer if her genes do not contain the inherited
flaw. She'll still be at risk of getting breast cancer the way most victims do
-- through accidental or environmentally caused mutations.

   Women who get bad news about BRCA-1 can move aggressively to lower their risk
through exercise, a better diet, and most important, frequent breast exams --
though as she pointed out, "You can do those things anyway."

   Or they can choose a preemptive double-mastectomy.

   There was one thing the doctors couldn't tell her -- how long it would be
before anyone will be able to repair or replace a broken breast gene. Cancer's
puzzles are legion, and even the breakthrough on BRCA-1 just raised new
questions.

   A normal BRCA-1 gene suppresses the growth of tumors, so when the gene is
knocked out, a tumor can advance.

   But in some cases of breast cancer, the BRCA-1 gene is fine. Something else,
something unknown, accounts for the cancer.

   Week after week, the woman's choice hung over her -- to get the test and
learn an uncertain truth, or leave her genetic secrets alone.

   In the end, she simply could not decide. So the choice remains in a corner of
her mind, unwanted and unresolved.

GRAPHIC: GANNETT NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1997


                             2529 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              January 26, 1997, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: Unlocking genetic secrets

BYLINE: BY JAMES TOBIN

BODY:


   In a small office just inside the front door of a Detroit hospital, a healthy
40-year-old woman recently was offered a chance to see the future -- her own and
ours.

   Her name won't be used in this story. Too much is at stake -- family
relationships, medical insurance, perhaps her future marriage -- for her to go
public with her genetic secrets.

   She knows only that her family has a history of breast cancer, one of the
first diseases to yield a few of its secrets to genetic medicine. She might get
it; she might not.

   At her say-so, a $ 420 blood test would reveal whether her breast cells hide
the broken gene that could cause cancer. But if she has the gene, science cannot
yet fix it.

   Now she must decide.

   "I've always wanted to look into the future and know what's going to happen,"
the woman said. "But in this case, I don't know."

   Discoveries about the human genetic code are allowing doctors to predict some
diseases, yet science is still far away from being able to cure those diseases
with gene therapy.

   In the meantime, the new genetics forces people such as the Detroit woman to
choose between equally vexing options of ignorance and knowledge.

   Genetic ignorance may keep them from taking measures to lower their risks.
But genetic knowledge invites stress, strained family relations, difficult
decisions, even the risk of losing health insurance.

   This woman's mother had breast cancer. So did her mother's sister, two of her
father's cousins and other relatives.

   The family is Ashkenazi-Jewish -- the Eastern European Jews who account for
the majority of American Jews. The Ashkenazi are believed to have an unusually
high incidence of the flawed gene known as BRCA-1, for "breast cancer number
one." She believed she would be next.

   At Harper Hospital in Detroit, the advances in genetic testing were
explained.

   The key discovery came in 1994, when researchers identified the BRCA-1 gene
that, when damaged, ignites the fuse that leads to the inherited form of breast
cancer. Genetic inheritance accounts for only 5 percent to 10 percent of all
breast cancer cases, but it seemed that at least one major disease had given up
a key genetic secret.

   The woman learned that if she tests positive for the BRCA-1 mutation:

   She has an 80 percent chance of contracting breast cancer, compared with a 12
percent risk for women in the general population. In other words, she would
probably -- but not certainly -- get the disease.

   She must decide whether to inform her two sisters, who do not want to be
tested, about her results. If she has the flawed gene, there's a 50-50 chance
they do, too.

   She must decide whether to inform her boyfriend, whom she may marry, about
the 50-50 risk that she'll pass the gene to any child they have.

   She's not safe from breast cancer if her genes do not contain the inherited
flaw. She'll still be at risk of getting breast cancer the way most victims do
-- through accidental or environmentally caused mutations.

   Women who get bad news about BRCA-1 can move aggressively to lower their risk
through exercise, a better diet, and most important, frequent breast exams --
though as she pointed out, "You can do those things anyway."

   Or they can choose a preemptive double-mastectomy.

   There was one thing the doctors couldn't tell her -- how long it would be
before anyone will be able to repair or replace a broken breast gene. Cancer's
puzzles are legion, and even the breakthrough on BRCA-1 just raised new
questions.

   A normal BRCA-1 gene suppresses the growth of tumors, so when the gene is
knocked out, a tumor can advance.

   But in some cases of breast cancer, the BRCA-1 gene is fine. Something else,
something unknown, accounts for the cancer.

   Week after week, the woman's choice hung over her -- to get the test and
learn an uncertain truth, or leave her genetic secrets alone.

   In the end, she simply could not decide. So the choice remains in a corner of
her mind, unwanted and unresolved.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; See roll microfilm. CHART; See roll microfilm.; GANNETT
NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1997


                             2530 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   January 21, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: NICOTINE MAY GIVE SHORT-LIVED RELIEF OF SYMPTOMS.;
GENE DEFECT LINKED TO SCHIZOPHRENICS' HEAVY SMOKING

BYLINE: LEE BOWMAN, SCRIPPS HOWARD NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   Researchers have found that an inherited defect on a ''nicotine receptor''
gene is linked to schizophrenia and may help explain why many people suffering
from the illness are heavy smokers.

   The discovery by scientists of a neurological deficit common in nine
families, each of which had several members with schizophrenia, marks the first
time researchers have used genetic technology to document malfunctioning nerve
cells as a culprit for the disease.

   And the study also demonstrates for the first time ''that a group which
smokes heavily has a specific genetic predisposition that alters their brain's
biological response to nicotine,'' said Dr. Robert Freedman of the Denver VA
Medical Center's Schizophrenia Research and the University of Colorado Medical
School, who led the study team.

   Their work was published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   The team developed a test to measure how well patients are able to filter out
irrelevant distractions from their environment, like a persistent noise, which
is a common physical symptom of schizophrenia.

   Chemical receptors called acetylcholine, very similar to nicotine, activate
receptors in the brain which serve as the brain's ''gatekeepers'' against
distraction, Freedman said.

   They help the brain decide what stimulus to pay attention to at a given time
and what to ignore, constantly running messages between different nerve centers
to a central control region called the hippocampus.

   But when the receptors malfunction, all sorts of ''noise'' enters the brain
without being filtered or prioritized, leaving to information overload.

   ''Normally, the brain adapts to a repeating sound, like a rattling air
conditioner,'' Freedman explained. ''You still hear it, but you no longer notice
it. A schizophrenic can't shut that noise out.''

   The defect is a major contributor to the major symptoms of schizophrenia, a
disorder that affects about 4 million Americans. People with the disease
typically suffer from numbed emotions, delusions, the hearing of voices and
sometimes bizarre behavior.

   Phillip Holtzman, a professor of psychology at Harvard University, said the
new gene discovery is especially important because it gives a new way to define
the disease with a physical measurement of a defect, ''beyond the presence of
the psychosis of the disease.''

   Freedman said his team eventually realized that schizophrenics might actually
be attempting to stimulate their defective filtering systems by smoking.

   ''We had viewed the excessive use of nicotine as just a bad habit or a means
for dealing with boredom,'' Freedman said, ''but in fact, it was an attempt to
specifically target what was going wrong with this defect.''

   Other researchers had suspected that schizophrenics smoked because it helped
alleviate symptoms, and at least one found that a drug used to treat the disease
also led to a reduction in smoking in some patients. Some mental health
institutions had adopted permissive policies on smoking because of the possible
therapeutic benefit.

   And other researchers have found other gene flaws with links to
schizophrenia, but none have been so widespread in family studies.

   By studying reactions to noise patterns in nine large families in Colorado
and Utah, Freedman and his colleagues were able to trace the link to a specific
gene for a specific nicotine receptor, which was present in many family members
who are not schizophrenic as well as most of those who do have the disease.

   Freedman stressed that most people with a defective receptor don't get
schizophrenia but that it is apparently a pre-condition for developing the
disorder in many people.

   While the researchers did note a calming, soothing effect from nicotine on
schizophrenics exposed to noise patterns, it was too short-lived to have any
real treatment value. However, some synthetic derivative of nicotine might be
better able to target the defect, or a gene therapy might be devised to actually
repair the flaw directly, Freedman said.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1997


                             2531 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     January 21, 1997 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EVERYWOMAN; Pg. 4E

LENGTH: 900 words

HEADLINE: DAMAGED GENES KEY TO CANCER CAUSES

BYLINE: By RICHARD SALTUS; BOSTON GLOBE

BODY:

   Is cancer a "genetic disease?"

   Yes, but that doesn't mean what a lot of people think it does.

   It doesn't mean that most cancer is inherited from your parents or forebears,
the way cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy is. In fact, probably only a small
fraction of all cancers are the result of an inherited genetic defect, and only
about 10 percent of breast cancers.

   What "genetic disease" does mean is that cancer develops when crucial genes
are damaged in ways that cause one or more cells to escape their normal
controls, growing and dividing chaotically.

   In some cases, women do indeed inherit a damaged gene that predisposes them
to breast or ovarian cancer. But in many more, the genetic damage occurs during
a lifetime of exposure to a wide array of factors - including errors in copying
genetic material, the stimulating effects of estrogen or other hormones, or
exposure to certain chemicals.

   The two genes specifically linked so far to inherited breast cancer
predisposition have been named BRCA1 and BRCA2, and scientists believe both are
"tumor suppressor" genes that normally regulate the cell's cycle of growth and
division.

   Even when a woman does inherit a mutated form of one these genes, that alone
does not trigger cancer. But it makes all her breast cells much more vulnerable
to further damage that may disable their genetic controls completely.

   Researchers now think the remaining 90 percent of breast cancers, called
"sporadic" cancers, occur when crucial genes in breast cells, initially normal,
accumulate so many assaults, or "hits," that they break down.

   "Whether this happens as a consequence of something you inherited plus
something in the environment that sets it off, or whether it's something that
happens as a consequence of your lifestyle, it's still a genetic disease," says
Susan Sieber, deputy director of the division of epidemiology and genetics at
the National Cancer Institute.

   Genetics, environment

   Breast cancer activists have frequently criticized the government's emphasis
on cancer genes, saying this slights much-needed research into environmental
causes. But scientists say genetics and environment are not opposing facets of
the breast cancer enigma; in fact, they are inextricably linked.

   "I think one of the most important areas that we'll be looking at is the
whole area of gene-environment interactions," said Sieber in a recent interview.

   Using new techniques to study changes in the genetic material in cells,
scientists now can identify damage done to DNA - and in some cases, even detect
the "fingerprint" of the chemical that caused the damage.

   These fingerprints "can be detected in small samples of blood, showing what
people have been exposed to and how much has gotten to key targets" in the DNA,
says Frederica Perera, co-chair of environmental carcinogenesis at the Columbia
University School of Public Health.

   Perera has been a leader over the past decade in tracing the effects of
environmental exposures on DNA. Ultimately, she says, it should be possible to
study the profile of the DNA damage in a woman's cells and predict how likely
she is to develop particular kinds of cancer - but not yet.

   Studying DNA damage at such a detailed level requires sophisticated equipment
and powerful computers, like those used by Donald C. Malins, a researcher at the
Pacific Northwest Research Foundation. Malins said in an interview that by
looking at the DNA of breast tissue taken in biopsies, it's possible to see
whether a woman has accumulated much damage, or a little. This may explain why
women who would seem to have similar risks of breast cancer may actually be in
very different situations.

   "We have looked at some women's DNA where they have a very small degree of
damage, and you get DNA from another person, supposedly normal, and who has
extremely damaged DNA in tissues that are still normal, but which might soon
develop a malignancy. It's almost as if you get a certain amount of damage and a
switch is turned," says Malins, who hopes to find ways to monitor a woman's DNA
and, using drugs or diet, to halt or reverse the damage.

   A new view of things

   What has emerged from the molecular research is a new way of looking at
individual susceptibility - which may fill in a critical part of the breast
cancer puzzle. Among other things, says Perera, inherited traits cause
individuals to process toxic chemicals differently, those absorbed from the
environment and others produced when food is metabolized. Different ethnic
groups may vary in these same mechanisms. What this would mean is that genetic
variations - much more subtle than a mutant BRCA1 gene - could make one person
more vulnerable to the cancer-causing substances. Even if two women had the same
risk factors for breast cancer, one might develop the disease while the other
would not.

   "It's not the exposure, but the way that our body responds to those
exposures" that leads to breast cancer in some, says Robert Smith,
epidemiologist at the American Cancer Society in Atlanta. Understanding these
differences "may allow us to identify women who are at much higher risk."

   Perera says the next logical step is to develop ways, as Malins hopes to do,
to halt or undo damage to the genes of breast cancer cells, perhaps with gene
therapy or drugs, at the point "when cells are trembling on the brink between
normality and malignancy."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1997


                             2532 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      January 19, 1997 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: OSU FINDS DIRECTOR FOR NEW HEART AND LUNG RESEARCH CENTER

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: COLUMBUS

BODY:

   Ohio State University said it has hired a Johns Hopkins researcher to run the
$14.4 million heart and lung institute it will begin building next year.

   The university said it has hired Dr. Paschal Goldschmidt, 42, who was
director of the Bernard Vascular Biology Laboratory at Johns Hopkins Hospitals
in Baltimore and co-director of the Henry Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of
Heart Disease and the hospitals' Thrombosis Center.

   The new institute will be complete by 1999. The university will pay about a
third of the bill and the state will kick in the rest.

   Dr. Bernadine Healy, dean of the OSU College of Medicine, said the center,
which will house research and patient care, has been planned for six years.

   About 45 percent of the building will house labs. It also will contain a
220-seat auditorium and space for 120 researchers and support workers.

   Goldschmidt said he has focused his research on the molecular mechanisms
responsible for damaging blood vessels that supply blood to the heart and brain.

   He said he hopes that one day, gene therapy can repair damaged genes and
prevent the cells that line blood vessel walls from being destroyed.

   "Over the last 20 to 25 years, we have learned a large amount of information
about the environmental factors that lead to heart and lung diseases,"
Goldschmidt said. "What is less clear is the genetic factors that can lead to
these diseases."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1997


                             2533 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 19, 1997 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Novartis hires new chief for drug division

BYLINE: Edward R. Silverman, Star-Ledger staff

BODY:

   Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. aren't wasting any time remaking their
operations now that federal regulators have finally approved their $27 billion
merger. The most significant move occurred late last week, when the two
companies hired a new executive to run their U.S. drug business, a spot that had
been vacant since September.

    Days earlier, Novartis put up for sale 14 over-the-counter products,
including Allerest, Eucalyptamint and Acutrim. Industry sources suggest the
high-profile auction could fetch tens of millions of dollars. And Novartis also
bid $76 million for the 27 percent stake in SyStemix Inc., a gene therapy
company, that it didn't already own.

    The flurry of activity follows the long-awaited decision last month by the
Federal Trade Commission to allow the merger to proceed. Once the deal is
completed, Novartis will be the world's second-largest drug maker, behind Glaxo
Wellcome plc. As part of the agreement, the FTC is requiring Novartis to sell
various divisions and license some key biotech products.

   Of last week's developments, the most closely watched will be the Feb. 1
arrival of Wayne Yetter, who will oversee the drug division. A Union native, the
51-year-old Yetter has been chief executive of Astra-Merck Inc., a joint venture
between Merck & Co. and Sweden's Astra AB, since 1994 and was among those who
started the operation five years ago.

    Yetter replaces James Callahan, who resigned four months ago after clashing
with Ciba- Geigy and Sandoz officials in Switzerland over organizational
matters. Sources say that for Yetter to succeed, he'll have to work overtime to
placate his Swiss bosses. Novartis managers in Switzerland are still sorting out
turf wars that have frustrated many U.S. executives.

    In part, that reflects the revolving-door reputation of the executive suite
at Sandoz' U.S. drug division, where four managers occupied the top spot over
the past four years. Already, Daniel Vasella, a former Sandoz official who is
now the Novartis president, has expressed impatience with the number and pace of
U.S. layoffs and cost-cutting, according to sources.

    Moreover, Yetter jumps from a $2 billion company with 1,300 employees and
only one noteworthy product - the Prilosec ulcer medicine - to a much larger
player. Novartis Pharmaceutical Corp., which is based in East Hanover in the
former Sandoz U.S. headquarters building, has about 7,000 employees, nearly $3
billion in revenues and a big drug portfolio.

    But sources suggest that Yetter is well-suited for his new assignment,
because he's spent the past few years serving two masters, including executives
who are based overseas. Those who know him say that Astra-Merck experience
equipped him with the necessary skills to juggle and finesse the demands imposed
by conflicting cultures.

    Yetter, who was approached last November, is non-plussed. In a telephone
interview, he quickly stressed that he'll be part of "a team effort. I'm not
coming in with just my ideas." But he said he feels comfortable with the level
of autonomy promised. "I'll be allowed to grow this business to its potential,"
he said. "I wouldn't have taken this job unless I felt that way."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2534 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    January 19, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 4K

LENGTH: 1144 words

HEADLINE: Cancer, AIDS inoculations among goals; Promising: This is the year
that a shot may cure more ills than ever before. Watch for new drugs to treat
nerve damage and prevent organ transplant rejection.

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   This year promises to be a busy one for Maryland's growing biotechnology
industry. A wealth of venturesome science is in the works, from groundbreaking
vaccines for cancers and AIDS to a pioneering gene therapy to treat brain
cancer.

   Among the promising biotechnology companies in Maryland and their work to
watch:

   Cel-Sci Corp. - Expect news from this small biotechnology firm about its
development-stage drug Multikine. It is being tested this year for use as an
anti-cancer drug and as a possible therapy for treating HIV.

   The company, which has its research and development offices in Baltimore,
also will be furthering research on HGP-30, its promising experimental AIDS
vaccine.

   EntreMed Inc. - Remember thalidomide, the sedative banned decades ago because
it causes birth defects? This Rockville-based company is hoping to show in
clinical trials this year that the drug, or related compounds, is an effective
treatment for macular degeneration, an eye disease, and some cancers. The
company also hopes to forge ahead with its laboratory work on Angiostatin, a
naturally occurring compound that may also have applications in treating cancer.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. - The big goal for this Gaithersburg company is a
pivotal, large-scale clinical trial of its gene therapy to treat an incurable
form of brain cancer.

   The company, owned by pharmaceutical giant Novartis, targeted brain cancer in
hopes of proving the effectiveness of its gene therapy but has an eye on
expanding its use into larger disease markets. Rachel King, GTI's chief
executive officer, says the company also hopes to upgrade a facility to
manufacture its gene treatment for brain tumors and break ground on a new R&D
facility. GTI, King said, will also begin tapping the considerable disease
expertise at Novartis.

   Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. - The Baltimore-based company has a packed
agenda. First, the commercial launch in the next two months of its big success
in 1996, its Food and Drug Administration approved polymer-based wafer to
prevent the recurrence of brain cancer.

   Nick Langekic, vice president for business development, said Guilford has set
at least three other big goals for the year. These include launching a
late-stage human clinical trial of Doposcan, its promising diagnostic test for
Parkinson's disease, and identifying a drug compound to develop as a treatment
for nerve damage, such as that seen with Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's
disease and stroke. "This is a very important step for us in 1997," said
Langekic.

   The company may also file for FDA approval to make the drug compound
available on an "investigational new drug" basis. The company also wants to
identify a compound to develop as a therapy to prevent glutamate levels in the
body from building up and triggering a stroke.

   With all this activity, it's perhaps no surprise that the company plans to
add 50 to 75 laboratory and manufacturing technicians this year.

   Human Genome Sciences Inc. - The Gaithersburg-based genomics company won't
have finances to fret over this year, bolstered by the millions in the pipeline
from R&D alliance deals it struck in 1996 with several major pharmaceutical
companies. With this worry behind it, the company's focus in 1997 will be on
efforts to develop therapeutics from its huge storehouse of genetic information,
said Elizabeth Silverman, genomics analyst at Punk, Ziegal & Knoell.

   Also, Silverman said, Human Genome may file an application with the FDA to
make available an investigational new drug developed using its genetic
information bank.

   This would be a significant milestone for the company - and the field of
genomics.

   Lion Pharmaceuticals - The launch of this privately held venture by the Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine last year to capitalize on faculty
biomedical research was one of the big biotechnology stories of the year. Don't
expect any major research or product target announcements from Lion this year.

   Instead, it will be a formative year for the start-up as it looks to sign on
venture financing and lease R&D facilities in Baltimore.

   Martek Biosciences Corp. - A focus of the company, which is developing
products from microalgae, will be broadening the marketing of its Neuromins
dietary supplement tablets, which contain DHA, a fatty acid needed for proper
brain and eye functions. The company has landed three major marketing partners
for the capsules.

   Also on the Columbia-based company's agenda this year, said Steve Dubin,
chief financial officer: furthering research on fluorescent pigments, which may
have applications in medical diagnostics, and identifying other types of
nutritional oils that have marketing promise.

   MedImmune Inc. - The Gaithersburg-based biotechnology company has a busy year
ahead. R&D work is under way on at least 20 new drugs and disease treatments,
from a Lyme disease vaccine to a treatment to prevent organ transplant
rejection.

   The company will be focused on getting FDA approval this year to launch a
clinical trial of its vaccine to prevent the human papillomavirus, which is
responsible for triggering cervical cancer.

   Also on its priority list are a large-scale clinical trial to assess the
effectiveness of its second-generation drug in preventing serious respiratory
infections in infants, and a human trial to assess the safety and effectiveness
of a treatment to prevent a major disease complication in organ transplantation.
The treatment may have applications in the future use of pig organs in human
transplant medicine.

   North American Vaccine Inc. - The big story this year for this developer of
vaccines for infectious diseases should be its first FDA approval to market a
product in the United States. Stephen Keith, NAV's vice president for sales,
said the company is hopeful that FDA approval for Certiva, its child whooping
cough vaccine, will come in the next three months.

   The company also will be focused on moving three other top product candidates
into early- and late-stage clinical trials, including vaccines for specific
strains of meningitis, strep infection and adult pertussis, Keith said.

   NAV will also be looking to strike additional research and marketing
collaborations, like the one it has with Abbott Laboratories.

   Oncor Inc. - The Gaithersburg-based developer of gene-based tests will be
hoping to land FDA approval for its HER-2/neu gene-based test system, the first
genomic test to detect the recurrence of breast cancer, said Stephen Turner, the
company's chief executive officer. Look for the company to also launch a
clinical trial for a genetic test for lung cancer.

   A 50 percent-owned subsidiary spun out late last year, Codon, will focus on
advancing R&D in the pioneering field of "gene correction," which involves
chemically correcting genetic defects.

   Pub date: 01/19/97

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JOHN MAKELY : SUN STAFF, Rachel King, chief executive officer of
Genetic Therapy Inc.; COLOR PHOTO, JOHN MAKELY : SUN STAFF, Biotechology:
Michele Rollence of genetic Therapy Inc. examines a DNA sequence in the
Rockville company's laboratory.

TYPE: THE OUTLOOK, MARYLAND'S 1997 ECONOMY

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1997


                             2535 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     January 15, 1997 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-01

LENGTH: 498 words

HEADLINE: New test bolsters cancer battle Early detection chances improved

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:
 A new technology using fluorescent light to pinpoint pre-cancerous lung cells
holds hope for improving early detection and treatment of lung cancer, a disease
that has a dismal survival rate.

   Called fluorescence bronchoscopy, the procedure is offered at Columbia
Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center. The center is only one of 10 U.S.
facilities with the capability, made possible by a National Cancer Institute
grant for a University of Colorado Cancer Center study.

   The procedure is similar to a conventional bronchoscopy. After the patient is
sedated, the major airways of the lung are examined with a flexible fiberoptic
tube for diagnosis, biopsy or treatment.

   However, instead of white light, fluorescent light is used so abnormal areas
are more apparent. Under fluorescence, pre-cancerous tissue appears dark red
while healthy tissue is green.

   The American Cancer Society estimates there will be 1,600 new cases of lung
cancer this year in Colorado. An estimated 1,500 Coloradans also will die of
lung cancer this year.

   Lung cancer carries a death sentence of about 85 percent, a rate that hasn't
changed much in 10 to 15 years, said Dr. Tim Kennedy, co-director of the Lung
Cancer Institute of Colorado.

   "It is the largest cancer epidemic in men and women and has no early
detection strategy," Kennedy noted .

   Kennedy said early detection would spur development of ways to combat lung
cancer, such as possibly inhaled gene therapy, burning off lesions with laser, a
vitamin A regimen or photodynamic therapy delivered through an endoscope.

   "The future is exciting," Kennedy said. "But we have to get people doing
sputum tests and bronchoscopies" to identify patients most at risk of developing
lung cancer so interventions can be developed.

   In September, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the technology
after clinical tests by a group of facilities, including the CU Cancer Center.
The studies show the procedure is 171 percent more sensitive in detecting
abnormal tissue than white-light technology.

   Through a NCI grant recently renewed for five years, CU will "continue to
study the abnormalities and changes in lung cancer cell growth across time,
evaluate current and new treatments and investigate innovative strategies to
reduce tobacco use," said Dr. Paul Bunn, CU Cancer Center's director.

   Vernon Johns, 76, will undergo the procedure today at P/SL, as have more than
other 100 patients. The retired Denver police officer quit smoking in 1991 when
a doctor said there was nothing more he could do unless his two-pack-a-day
habit, begun at 15, was snuffed.

   The CU Cancer Center is seeking more patients as it continues the NCI
studies. Criteria include: a smoking history of 30 pack years (one pack per day
for 30 years or two packs per day for 15 years); lung function screens of 70
percent or less, and no history of diagnosed cancer.

   For information, call the Lung Cancer Institute, (303) 869-2597, or the CU
Cancer Center, 329-3066.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1997


                             2536 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           January 14, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 452 words

HEADLINE: OSU HIRES TOP SCIENTIST TO LEAD HEART, LUNG CENTER

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Although Ohio State University won't break ground for a $ 14.4 million heart
and lung institute until 1998, it already has laid the center's foundation by
hiring a top scientist to direct the research.

   OSU announced yesterday that it has lured Dr. Pascal Goldschmidt away from
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore to direct the institute, to be built next
to the OSU Medical Center.

   The university will tear down Upham Hall on W. 12th Avenue to make room for
the six-story building. The institute will use the first four floors - about
80,000 square feet. The top two floors will provide office space for other OSU
employees.

   The building will cost $ 20.7 million, with the university kicking in $ 6.3
million and the state funding the rest.

   The institute, which will house both research and patient care, is to be
completed in 1999. Although both heart and lung research are being conducted on
campus, the center will tie the two together in one building.

   Dr. Bernadine Healy, dean of the OSU College of Medicine, said the center has
been planned for six years and that Goldschmidt was her first choice to direct
research.

   ''A building doesn't mean anything until it is filled with talented people,''
Healy said, but world-class facilities are needed to attract those people.

   About 45 percent of the building will house labs.  It also will contain a
220-seat auditorium and space for 120 researchers and support workers.

   OSU President Gordon Gee introduced Goldschmidt yesterday at a news
conference and said his hiring is a ''victory'' for the university.

   Goldschmidt, 42, was director of the Bernard Vascular Biology Laboratory at
Johns Hopkins Hospitals and co-director of the Henry Ciccarone Center for the
Prevention of Heart Disease and the hospitals' Thrombosis Center.

   Uniting heart and lung research makes sense, he said. ''More people suffer
and die of these diseases than any other diseases. Finding a cure is absolutely
essential.''

   Goldschmidt said he has focused a lot of his research on the molecular
mechanisms responsible for damaging blood vessels that supply blood to the heart
and brain.

   His hope is that one day gene therapy can repair damaged genes and prevent
the cells that line blood vessel walls from being destroyed.

   ''Over the last 20 to 25 years, we have learned a large amount of information
about the environmental factors that lead to heart and lung diseases,''
Goldschmidt said. ''What is less clear is the genetic factors that can lead to
these diseases.''

   The heart and lungs have more in common than researchers know, he said.
''There is an amazing amount of interaction between these two. A concurrent
approach will be very useful.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO map, New home for research Heart and lung research, as well as
patient care, will be united in a six-story building that is to be completed in
1999 on the Ohio State University campus on the site of what is now Upham Hall.
Architect's rendering of proposed new building Dr. Pascal goldschmidt will
direct the new center.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1997


                             2537 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    January 14, 1997, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: THE STATE;
CALIFORNIA;
 BIOTECHNOLOGY;
 Cell Genesys to Buy Somatix Therapy

BYLINE: Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:


   Cell Genesys Inc. agreed to acquire Somatix Therapy Corp. for stock valued at
$ 82.8 million, or $ 3.39 a share, a deal that would create one of the largest
developers of gene therapies. The companies said they plan to fire about 20% of
their combined work force after they close Alameda-based Somatix's site there
and consolidate research and development. Cell Genesys has about 145 employees
and Somatix has about 85. Foster City-based Cell Genesys focuses its research on
treating AIDS and cancer, whereas Somatix is seeking treatments for cancer and
central nervous system diseases. The companies expect the transaction to be
completed in April. Somatix shares fell 62.5 cents to close at $ 3.19, and Cell
Genesys shares fell 31.25 cents to close at $ 8.81, both in Nasdaq trading.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2538 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 14, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: Two Deals Extend the Financial Frontiers of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   A consolidation of the nascent gene-therapy industry advanced yesterday with
two deals.

   Novartis A.G. of Switzerland, formed by the merger last year of Sandoz and
Ciba-Ceigy, said it would buy the 26.8 percent it did not already own of
Systemix Inc. for $75.8 million, or $19.50 a share.

    And Cell Genesys Inc. said it would acquire the Somatix Therapy Corporation
in a stock swap valued around $80 million.

   Although gene therapies have yet to produce any products or profit, and may
not for a decade, the potential power of the technology makes it a strategic
asset for any major pharmaceutical or biotechnology company. The revolutionary
concept of using the body's own genetic material as a drug has vast potential to
correct genetic defects and, in theory at least, treat almost every known
disease.

   The shares of Systemix rose $4, or 26 percent, to $19.3125, in Nasdaq trading
yesterday. Shares in Cell Genesys closed at $8.8125, down 31.25 cents, while
those of Somatix closed at $3.1875, down 62.5 cents.

   Analysts said the deals announced yesterday could focus attention on Vical
Inc., Gene Medicine Inc. and Targeted Genetics Inc., the three most prominent
remaining independent gene-therapy companies, although none of the three
registered any significant gain yesterday.

   "Gene therapy is going to take longer to be profitable than the euphoria of
the last couple of years might have suggested," said Viren Mehta, an analyst
with Mehta & Isaly, foreseeing the likelihood of more mergers with deep-pocket
partners.

   Novartis has emerged as a gene-therapy powerhouse. Sandoz originally
purchased a 60 percent stake in Systemix in 1991 for $391.8 million, or about
$65 a share. In October, Systemix rejected an offer of $17 a share from
Novartis, Sandoz's successor, as inadequate. Systemix has done pioneering work
in isolating stem cells, but the share price of the company has declined over
the years as it failed to produce drugs.

   In addition to its stake in Systemix, Sandoz had already acquired Genetic
Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md. Ciba-Geigy, through its 49 percent stake in
the Chiron Corporation, gained access to technology developed at Viagene, which
Chiron acquired in 1995, and Progenitor, a privately held company.

   Indeed, the Federal Trade Commission, estimating that the market for gene
therapy could reach $45 billion by 2010, required Ciba and Sandoz to share two
dozen essential gene-therapy patents with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, a major
competitor, before approving the merger. The commission's action was
unprecedented in a field with no existing sales, but officials said they wanted
to insure competition in gene therapy.

   "We will now have complete access to some very interesting enabling
technology, which we wanted to have control of," Daniel Vasella, Novartis's
president, said in a telephone interview. "It's a good end to the long
Sandoz-Systemix history. From our perspective, once we see something of
strategic value, it doesn't make sense to half-own it."

   Like Systemix, Somatix has been known as a company with leading-edge
scientists but which has had trouble turning research into real results. Unlike
Systemix, which had been able to draw on Sandoz's financial resources, Somatix
has lived from one stock offering to another, often flirting with bankruptcy,
and has been quietly for sale for some time, analysts said. For Cell Genesys,
with ample cash and strong management, Somatix's strong science and patents make
it attractive.

   "There is tremendous value in the science and in the gene-delivery technology
and intellectual property that go with it," Stephen A. Sherwin, the chairman and
chief executive of Cell Genesys, said in a telephone interview. "The way
companies at our stage create value is to put technology and patents together,
and to enlist corporate partners," he said, noting his company's partnership
with Hoechst Marion Roussel in the development of a gene-therapy treatment for
AIDS.

   And Elizabeth Silverman, an analyst with Punk Ziegel & Knoell, said:
"Somatix, among all the gene-therapy companies, probably had the most
substantial technology assets,but was able to accomplish the least with them.
Cell Genesys has a lot of money and has handled it very carefully. This is one
of those ideal combinations that are so rare in biotech."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1997


                             2539 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 14, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Stock Funds' Record Year Ends With Strong Growth
Mutual funds that buy stocks received a record $223 billion in net investment
last year, including $13.5 billion in net inflows in December. The 1996 total
was more than 70 percent above the previous high, set in 1993, and the level of
1995.
 Bond funds did not fare as well, though the December inflow of $3.5 billion was
the most since January. Market Place. [Page D10.].

Stocks edged higher yesterday as cautious investors waited for reports on retail
sales and consumer prices. The Dow Jones industrials rose 5.39 points to close
at 6,709.18. [D10.]

In Japan, after a sharp morning plunge, the stock market was reassured after
remarks by the Finance Minister. The Nikkei index closed at 18,093.13, down
25.66 points. [D9.]

F.D.A. Seeks Ban on Seldane
The F.D.A. proposed to ban Seldane, an antihistamine whose chief maker is
Hoechst Marion Roussel. Seldane can cause fatal heart rhythm abnormalities,
particularly when taken with other drugs, the agency said. [A1.]

Bank Earnings Rise Sharply
Profits rose strongly in the fourth quarter at J. P. Morgan and several other
large bank companies, including Nationsbank. Morgan said its profits rose 14
percent on strength in nonlending activities like securities underwriting and
trading. [D2.]

Fidelity Tries to Mend Image
Fidelity Investments, stung by criticism over the performance of its mutual
funds, is sending executives out on the road to meet with retail customers and
representatives of companies whose employees invest in Fidelity retirement
programs. [D2.]

Big Hedge Fund to Close Down
Two of the principals in Odyssey Partners, a $3 billion hedge fund, have written
their investors that they plan to shut the fund. [D5.]

Perelman's Marvel Plan Opposed
A group of Marvel Entertainment bondholders, including Carl C. Icahn, asked a
bankruptcy court to effectively allow them to seize control of Marvel from
Ronald O. Perelman, before Mr. Perelman can complete a plan that would leave the
bondholders with little to show for their investment. [D20.]

German Bidder Gets Pharmacies
Gehe of Germany has won a yearlong battle for Lloyds Chemists, a British
pharmacy chain, after a competing bidder, Unichem, dropped out of the process.
[D9.]

2 Gene-Therapy Deals
A consolidation of the gene-therapy industry advanced, as Novartis said it would
buy the 26.8 percent of Systemix that it did not already own and Cell Genesys
said it would acquire Somatix Therapy. [D5.]

NCR Plans Alliance for Software
NCR and Computer Associates plan to encourage customers to use Computer
Associates software to manage NCR computer systems. [D4.]

Enron Seeks More Visibility
An Enron ad campaign will feature people from around the world, like a worker at
a plant in the Philippines that is an Enron customer. The company is trying to
persuade Americans to demand faster electricity deregulation, teach them the
Enron name and win them as customers. Advertising. [D6.]

GRAPHIC: Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow Industrials -- 6,709,18, up 5.39
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 6.85%, up 0.01
The Dollar -- 116.44 yen, up 0.38

Graph: "TODAY"

Consumer Price Index
 December figures due at 8:30 A.M. Eastern.
 Expected: +0.3%

Retail Sales
 December figures due at 8:30 A.M. Eastern.
Expected: +0.4%

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1997


                             2540 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    JANUARY 14, 1997, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 615 words

HEADLINE: Cell Genesys to Acquire Somatix for $ 83 Million

BYLINE: Peter Sinton, Chronicle Senior Writer

BODY:

    Cell Genesys of Foster City yesterday announced plans to acquire Somatix
Therapy of Alameda in a stock swap valued at about $ 83 million.

   In a separate, similar-sized deal, SyStemix of Palo Alto disclosed that
Swiss-based Novartis will acquire the remaining 27 percent of the company that
it does not already own for more than $ 76 million.

   All three Bay Area companies are pioneers in the burgeoning field of gene and
cell therapy, which aims to modify cells and use them to treat diseases.

   Cell Genesys is focused on developing treatments for AIDS and cancer while
Somatix is targeting cancer, central nervous system diseases and other
disorders.

   ''Bringing these two companies together creates a gene therapy powerhouse
that has critical mass in terms of people, programs and patents,'' said Dr.
Stephen Sherwin, chairman and chief executive of Cell Genesys, which has about
150 employees and will be the surviving company.

   Somatix's headquarters will be closed and about half its 90 employees will
lose their jobs.

   Somatix shareholders will end up owning about 31 percent of the combined
company. They will receive 0.385 share of Cell Genesys stock for each of their
24.4 million shares.

   With the first gene therapy treatments not expected to hit the market before
the year 2000, mergers are seen as a way to guarantee plenty of capital as well
as promising products.

   Six-year-old Somatix has one of the leading patent portfolios in the
business. But it has no revenues and has been burning through cash at a
prodigious rate, losing more than $ 130 million over the past five years.

   Cell Genesys, by contrast, has $ 85 million in cash reserves as a result of
contract research for companies such as Hoechst Marion Roessel and Japan
Tobacco. Last year these partnerships generated $ 22 million in revenues.

   ''The combined company should be a lot stronger than either company alone,''
said Elizabeth Silverman, an analyst with Punk, Ziegel & Knoell.  ''Somatix has
a tremendous amount of technology but was unable to capitalize on it; Cell
Genesys has cash and needed something good to use it on.''

   One of Cell Genesys' leading product developments is a gene therapy for AIDS,
but Silverman notes that investors are not terribly excited by this since
simpler oral drugs have shown considerable promise.

   By combining research and other operations in Foster City, Cell Genesys
anticipates that it will be able to reduce expenditures from about $ 35 million
for the two companies last year to $ 20 million in 1997.

   Somatix Chairman David Carter said that combining with Cell Genesys helps
accomplish his goal of ''building the leading gene therapy company through a
combination of mergers, acquisitions and internal development.'' Previously,
Somatix made several acquisitions, including Merlin Pharmaceuticals in New York.

   Drug giants also are jumping into the gene therapy field, which ultimately
could generate billions of dollars from new cures and treatments.

   * -----------------------------

   CHART:

 .
  MERGER AT-A-GLANCE
 .
 Companies:     Cell Genesys Inc.      Somatix Therapy Corp.
   Headquarters:  Foster City             Alameda
   Employees:     150                     90
   Business:   ''Gene Therapy'' --  modification of cells for treatment
                                  of disease
   Terms: Cell Geneysis swaps 0.385 shares of its own stock for each
        share of Somatix in a deal worth about $83 million
   Stock price:  $8.81, -31 cents              $3.19, -63 cents
 EC:


GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE END

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1997


                             2541 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                 January 10, 1997, Friday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 04F

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Positive earnings outlook pumps up the oil industry

BYLINE: FROM OUR NEWS SERVICES

BODY:


   Shares of companies in the oil business were among the best performers in the
market Thursday, as investors focused on optimism for strong fourth-quarter
earnings and continued strength in oil and gas prices.

   "I think what you're seeing today is a broad rotation (of investment money)
into energy," said John Lovoi, who follows oil services stocks for Morgan
Stanley.

   Oil drillers were the best-performing sectors, led by Marine Drilling (ticker
symbol MDCO), up $ 2.12 1/2 to $ 22, and Rowan (RDC), up $ 1.50 to $ 25.87 1/2.

   Integrated oil companies also were up noticeably. Among the companies that
hit 52-week highs were Exxon (XON), which added $ 3.37 1/2 to $ 102.87 1/2, and
Mobil (MOB), which climbed $ 2.50 to $ 128.62 1/2.

   Oil stocks rose on expectations about fourth-quarter earnings, which some
Wall Street observers believe will exceed analysts' projections. Also, oil and
gas prices have hit post-Gulf War highs in recent weeks.

   Months ago, experts were expecting crude oil to drop to $ 20 to $ 22 a barrel
by now; instead, oil is selling for more than $ 26.

In other trading:

   Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals (RZYM) rose $ 2.37 1/2 to $ 15 and Chiron (CHIR) 37
1/2 cents to $ 19.87 1/2. The Food and Drug Administration approved their
application to begin human testing of a gene therapy to fight AIDS.

   Seagate Technology (SEG) climbed $ 1.37 1/2 to $ 45. Late Wednesday, the
computer storage products company reported better-than-expected earnings for its
second quarter ended Dec. 27.

   Shiva (SHVA), which was the most active U.S. stock on Wednesday after warning
that fourth-quarter earnings would be below expectations, was the second most
active Thursday, behind Intel. Shiva, a computer network equipment company,
regained $ 1.25 to $ 20.50.

GRAPHIC:  Line graph: TRACKING THE DOW
 Closing Dow Jones industrial average for last 21 trading days
 Thursday's close: 6625.67
 Change: Up 76.19

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1997


                             2542 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           January 9, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: OU SEES HOPE IN PATENTED GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   If gene therapy hasn't lived up to its early promise, it's because current
techniques work better in the laboratory than they do in the body, says Ohio
University molecular biologist Thomas E. Wagner.

   That problem may now have been solved with development of a new gene therapy
technique that, following animal tests at OU's Edison Biotechnology Institute,
reportedly has the potential of improving the treatment of cancer as well as
diseases of the heart and lung.

   The technique still has to be tested in human trials and approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, according to a spokeswoman for Progenitor, 1507
Chambers Rd., the biotechnology company that holds development rights on the
research.

   Nevertheless, Wagner yesterday described the breakthrough as one of the first
by the center - best known for its work on genetically engineered livestock -
that contributes to effective gene therapy for humans.

   ''This has been our goal since Day One,'' said Wagner, who organized the
Edison Center in the early 1980s.

   Gene therapy is a way of fighting disease or correcting body function through
the introduction of protein-producing genes that are otherwise missing,
defective or deficient in the body.

   The new technique, patented to OU this week as T7 vector gene therapy, is
unique in that it works through the direct injection of a package of genetic
materials into the cytoplasm that surrounds the cell nucleus rather than into
the nucleus itself.

   This package includes not only the corrective DNA coding that the cells need
but also the associated materials - proteins and enhancers - necessary for these
genes to function in the cell.

   Up until now, said Wagner, corrective genes had to be inserted in the nucleus
- where such proteins and enhancers existed - before they could function.

   Targeting the cytoplasm is better, Wagner said, because corrective genes
implanted in the nucleus work only after the cell divides.

   That's no problem with most cancer cells, which divide rapidly, but it is a
problem with cells, including some cancer cells, that divide slowly if at all,
or divide at different times.

   ''This is the single largest barrier to gene transfer,'' said Wagner.

   Forcing cell division ''works beautifully in a tissue culture (outside the
body), but it doesn't work in a real patient,'' he explained.

   Removing cells from the body, culturing them and returning them to the
patient's body can take weeks, he said. Using the new technique, the new genes
start functioning within a few minutes.

   Vector gene therapy is a refinement of gene therapy techniques used in animal
testing since the mid-1980s. Wagner said he was not aware of similar research
elsewhere.

   The new patent was issued Tuesday to Wagner, OU research scientist Yun Sheng
Li and Progenitor researcher Xiao Zhuo Chen.

   The objective in treating disease is not to permanently change the patient's
genetic makeup, since that could have injurious consequences, Wagner said.

   However, the new procedure introduces genes that continue to function up to
several months, long enough to kill off those slow-dividing cancer cells.

   ''I think personally it will be most valuable in treating brain tumors, which
are the most difficult to treat, because it's hard to get drugs into the
brain,'' he said.

   Carrie Wick, manager of corporate development for Progenitor, said the
California-based Chiron Corp. will, under a sublicensing agreement, help develop
at least 11 products to treat cancer, cardiovascular disorders and infectious
diseases.

   Chiron has paid Progenitor $ 3 million for marketing rights and could
eventually pay up to $ 50 million, she said. Progenitor, set up in 1992 to
commercialize Wagner's work, supports research at OU and would pay royalties on
sales.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Ohio University, Ohio University molecular biologist Thomas E.
Wagner, left, and Progenitor scientist Xiao Zhuo Chen are inventors of a new
gene therapy technique.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1997


                             2543 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 8, 1997, Wednesday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Mumps vaccine halted a heart disease

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   The mumps vaccine has wiped out one form of heart muscle
disease and raises the issue of whether viral vaccines could
so affect other devastating heart infections, Houston
researchers said in a report.

   The work confirms a theory about the link between the disease
called endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE) and the mumps virus
that was first proposed by Minneapolis pediatrician Dr.George
Noren in the 1960s, said Dr. Jeffrey A.Towbin, associate
cardiology professor at Baylor College of Medicine and Texas
Children's Hospital.

   Towbin published his study this week in the Houston-based
journal Circulation.

   Noren's theory at the time was met with considerable
resistance, and the issue became moot when the disease
disappeared about the time the mumps vaccine was approved and
mumps itself ceased to be a major issue.

   Towbin studied the tissue of 29 infants who died between 1955
and 1992.  Twenty-one of the infants, all of whom had died of
EFE, tested positive for the mumps virus, Towbin said.

   Until it disappeared, EFE was a major cause of infant
mortality, he said.  Towbin's studies show the disease
disappeared because the mumps vaccine significantly reduced
that disease in children.

   It's the first time a vaccine has been shown to eradicate a
form of heart disease, Towbin said.  That information may be
applied to heart inflammations caused by adenoviruses, which
most commonly cause eye and upper-respiratory infections such
as pneumonia.

   ""It is a leap of faith,'' Towbin said.  But vaccinating people
against adenoviruses might help them avoid some kinds of heart
disease.

   Adenoviruses play a major part in the common causes of heart
muscle inflammation (myocarditis).

   No adenovirus vaccines are available to the public, he said,
although one has been produced for military members.

   When a certain subtype of virus is identified as a common
player in a disease, medical scientists should consider
developing a vaccine, Towbin said.

   Adenovirus also is involved in certain diseases that infect
and kill fetuses, he said, and it is a common cause of
rejection in transplantation.

   Questions also have been raised about using adenoviruses to
take genes into cells as part of gene therapy, he said.

   Even though such viruses are treated so they cannot replicate,
Towbin said, that may not affect the virulence of the virus
and may not prevent it from causing myocarditis or diseases of
the lung.

   However, Dr. Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova, a Baylor researcher
involved in development of such viruses, said studies of
cotton rats, which can be infected by adenoviruses, showed
that any heart-related effects were mild.

   He said researchers injected such gene-carrying viruses
directly into the hearts of the cotton rats.  While there was
mild inflammation of the heart muscle tissue, he said, it was
unlikely to lead to myocarditis.


LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1997


                             2544 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            January 7, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 376 words

HEADLINE: LICENSING MAY REVIVE PROGENITOR IPO

BYLINE: Debbie Gebolys<Dispatch Business Reporter

BODY:


   A licensing deal worth a potential $ 42 million for Progenitor Inc.'s
weight-reduction technology may generate enough interest to restart the
company's delayed initial stock offering.

   Progenitor announced the licensing deal yesterday, allowing Thousand Oaks,
Calif.-based Amgen Inc. to develop and sell Progenitor's leptin receptor
technology. The product enables the body to absorb leptin, a natural hormone
thought to help control body fat.

   Amgen began human clinical trials of leptin last May, attempting to evaluate
the safety and tolerability of the hormone in people. Public reaction was swift,
as more than 2,000 people a week volunteered to test leptin's weight-loss
potential.

   About a third of Americans are overweight and spend $ 30 billion a year on
shedding pounds.

   Weight-loss medications have enjoyed a resurgence recently as leptin and
other medications have been developed. The new generations of drugs don't have
the potential for addiction that amphetamines had a generation earlier.

   Progenitor President Dr. Douglass B. Given said the Amgen license is ''the
first corporate validation'' of the company's new approach to biomedical
research.

   ''An initial public offering is the next important event for us,'' Given
said. That could happen before mid-year, if market conditions are right.

   Progenitor said in June that it would seek to raise more than $ 37 million
from a stock offering of 2.5 million shares. The company, a subsidiary of
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals of Lexington, Ky., would have used proceeds of the
stock offering to expand the company. But market investors soured on
biotechnology companies by late summer, and the company postponed the offering.

   The Amgen deal includes a promise to purchase $ 5.5 million of Progenitor
stock in the event of an offering.

   The agreement also includes a $ 500,000 licensing fee and up to $ 36 million
in other payments, based on the development and sale of products that use the
leptin receptor technology.

   Founded in 1992, the company has two other licensing agreements, each valued
at $ 50 million. One is for gene therapy with Chiron Corp. of Emeryville,
Calif., and the other is for blood-disorder treatments with Novo Nordisc AS of
Copenhagen, Denmark.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1997


                             2545 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  January 7, 1997 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: OBT; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: BIOLOGY PROFESSOR WAS EXPERT ON GENETICS

BYLINE: MATT HELMS Free Press Staff Writer

BODY:

   Dr. Robert H. Rownd had a positive outlook that might have begun, his family
says, on the day he was born.

   "He was born on July the 4th, and he always told people the fireworks were
because he was born that day," said his daughter, Jennifer Schade.

   She said she couldn't help but think that his outlook helped her father, who
spent his life studying genetics and molecular biology, fight an inspiring
battle against pancreatic cancer.

   Dr. Rownd, who was a Wayne State University biochemistry professor and
director of the school's Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, died of the
disease Saturday at his St. Clair Shores home. He was 59.

   Professor George Dambach, associate dean of Wayne State's School of Medicine,
said Dr. Rownd was particularly interested in researching plasmids, which are
genetic materials that live outside the nuclei of cells and reproduce
independently.

   Dambach said plasmids frequently cause bacteria to become resistant to
medicines, and Dr. Rownd "really spent his career studying plasmids or those
kinds of nonnuclear genetic material" hoping to find ways to make them useful in
gene therapy.

   "Knowing that, then you could concoct a beneficial plasmid artificially," he
said. "Then the trick is to get it into the right sort of cells."

   Dr. Rownd had published more than 100 articles in scientific journals on the
subject.

   The Chicago native received a bachelor's degree in chemistry from Missouri's
St. Louis University in 1959, a master's in medical sciences from Harvard
University in 1961 and a doctorate in biophysics from Harvard in 1963.

   He was professor and chairman of molecular biology at the University of
Wisconsin at Madison from 1966-81 and a professor and chairman of molecular
biology and biochemistry at Northwestern University from 1981-90. He began
working for Wayne State in 1990.

   His daughter recalled that her father had done some of his graduate studies
in Cambridge, England, and Paris, and had studied Russian. He had an affinity
for other cultures, and throughout the years many of his international students
and colleagues, unable to make their way home for holidays, found themselves
invited to the Rownd home.

   "They were always international holidays, and we always had a lot of fun,"
his daughter said.

   Also surviving are his wife of 37 years, Rosalie; two sons, Robert and David,
and two grandchildren.

   Funeral services will begin at 10 a.m. today, leading up to a mass at 11 a.m.
at St. Ambrose Church, 15020 Hampton, Grosse Pointe Park. Burial will be
Wednesday in Chicago.

GRAPHIC: Photo;

Dr. Robert H. Rownd
***

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2546 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 5, 1997, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3891 words

HEADLINE: Women's frim question: Why?
As breast cancer cases rise, researchers press for causes, cure;
BREAST CANCER / SEARCHING FOR ANSWERS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Last March, in the middle of the night, Elizabeth Ann King rolled over in
bed and noticed what every woman fears - a lump in her breast.

   At age 35, with no family history of the disease, she saw no reason to worry
unduly. But 11 days later, the surgeon called with the biopsy results:

   Cancer.

   "I said, 'You've got to be kidding!' " recalls Rev. King, minister of the
Tabernacle Congregational Church in Salem. "The disease is just as random as a
tornado dropping out of the sky and ripping your life apart."

   Nine months later, her emotions have not lost their edge.

   "I feel enraged about the losses I've suffered and what it's doing not only
to me but to millions of women. I feel very sad; it's unfair - but isn't life
unfair?"

   In 1997, about 186,000 American women will be told that they, too, have
breast cancer. For most, there will be the same feeling of being assaulted by an
unpredictable yet ever more common menace.

   Though death rates started to dip slightly last year, the rate of new cases
has risen implacably for decades. A woman's lifetime risk is now 1 in 8, or 12
1/2 percent, if she lives past 85 - one of today's most frightening health
statistics. In Massachusetts, the toll this year will be some 4,500 cases and
1,100 deaths.

   Almost everyone knows a woman whose life has been threatened - or who has
died. More women between the ages of 40 and 55 die of breast cancer than of any
other cause.

   And no one knows why.

   "Breast cancer is the biggest unsolved health problem in the United States,"
says Walter Willett of the Harvard School of Public Health, one of the nation's
leading epidemiologists, who has spent years studying the risk factors for
breast cancer.

   In the last three years, the grim statistics, and lobbying by a vocal breast
cancer activist community, have shaken loose a massive increase in government
money for research. After decades of relative neglect, grassroots efforts have
given breast cancer a high public and political profile. And increasingly,
advocates are pushing the funding toward new targets: prevention, and looking
for possible environmental causes.

   "Something has to be going on, and it's not surprising that women are
beginning to look to the environment," says Dr. Susan Troyan, a cancer surgeon
at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

   Adds Joan Berns, who was diagnosed in 1992 at age 43: "With all the chemicals
having been introduced since World War II, there's a great deal about which to
be suspicious."

   Despite the lack of answers, there is new energy and optimism in the research
community, largely prompted by the discovery two years ago of a pair of mutant
genes that can raise the risk of breast cancer to terrifying heights in women
born with them.

   The discovery that these genes, and presumably others, play a critical role
in some breast tumors has opened a new avenue of attack. Even if breast cancer's
roots ultimately turn out to be a variable mix of inheritance, lifestyle choices
and environmental factors, many scientists now feel the common pathway is damage
to some of the thousands of genes in breast cells that cause those cells to grow
out of control.

   After the gene discoveries, biotech companies moved swiftly to introduce
tests that can tell a woman if she has the mutated BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene, as they
are called, and President Clinton has climbed aboard the bandwagon, with a $ 30
million funding increase for breast cancer gene research.

   "We now know that there are two genes that cause breast cancer, and if we can
figure out how they do it we'll be able to cure virtually all cases and maybe
even prevent all cases," said Clinton - in a vast oversimplification.

   Such enthusiasm has riled many breast cancer activists and some researchers,
who warn of an overemphasis on genes.

   "Genetics is a very exciting frontier and it is what people get the Nobel
Prize for. But only one out of every 10 women who get breast cancer" can trace
it to an inherited gene, says Devra Lee Davis, a former government researcher
who is now a program director at the World Resources Institute in Washington.

   "Nine out of 10 women were born with healthy genes that something happened
to," says Davis, who, along with other researchers, suspects that the
"something" may be chemicals with estrogen-like effects that are found in DDT
and other pesticides, PCBs, plastics and other compounds.

   "I don't think the answer is in genetics," agrees Jan Platner, the executive
director of the Massachusetts Breast Cancer Coalition. "One of my biggest
concerns about it is that a lot of other issues are getting placed on the back
burner."

   Officials at the National Cancer Institute - which activists suspect of
having tunnel vision focused on genetics alone - say they have heard the
message, but they defend their course.

   "It's just that it was so exciting to find breast cancer-specific genes that
it captured everyone's imagination," says Susan Sieber, the deputy director of
the NCI's division of epidemiology and genetics.  "It received a lot of
attention, which was justified because it gave us a whole new pathway to follow,
but it hasn't supplanted a lot of other work on non-genetic factors." She points
out that environmental factors, if they are important, probably do their
mischief by damaging genes in breast cells, and that both need continuing study.

   It is in the Northeast, with some of the country's highest breast cancer
rates, that the first environmental studies have been launched.

   On Cape Cod, researchers with the state-funded Silent Spring Institute last
year began mapping patterns of pollution to see if they fit the distribution of
breast cancer cases. They are also sampling waste water and drinking water in a
search for possible contamination by estrogen-like or other chemicals that might
play a role.

   In the Berkshire mountains of western Massachusetts, scientists from the
state Department of Public Health are comparing the levels of pesticide residues
and PBCs in the blood of breast cancer patients and healthy women.

   And on Long Island in New York, another breast cancer hot spot, a large
federally mandated study is trying to determine if there is a link to chemical
plants, pesticides or pollution from planes and autos.

   Results won't be in for a few years. Researchers warn that it is going to be
extremely difficult to sort out any one specific effect from the soup of
chemicals that has poured into the environment over decades. With 70,000
chemicals in commercial use, the challenge is enormous. "It's hard for the lay
community to understand this," says Marilie Gammon, a Columbia University
epidemiologist who heads the main part of the Long Island study.

   Whatever the reasons, it is a fact that breast cancer rates have been
climbing steadily, leading many activists and, in 1991, the state of
Massachusetts, to proclaim it an "epidemic." Many scientists don't agree with
that use of the term, though they understand the emotion behind it.

   "It's clearly an epidemic," says Enid Shapiro, 71, of Brookline, who last
year was diagnosed with a recurrence of the breast cancer she first was treated
for 12 years ago.  "I can't go anyplace that I don't meet someone with a new
diagnosis or a recurrence," she adds. "It's striking how prevalent it is. And
it's younger women, too: That's just dreadful."

   Barbara Brenner, the director of Breast Cancer Action in San Francisco
agrees. "Breast cancer rates are just too damn high," she says. "It's clear
we've been doing something over the past 30 years that has caused the rates to
go up."

   While the incidence has risen, deaths have long been stable, and now show
signs of declining for the first time.

   "There has been a real rise in breast cancer incidence, while mortality has
been essentially flat," says Harvard's Willett. "There has been a 50 percent
increase in incidence in the last 30 years. We have improved treatment just
about enough to balance off the increased incidence."

   Federal cancer officials say the dip signals the payoff of wider screening
with mammography to detect tumors earlier and of the chemotherapy now routinely
given after most breast surgery.

   The drop in mortality "is the good news," says Amy Langer, director of the
National Association of Breast Cancer Organizations in New York. But, she notes,
"it's not true for black women," who had a 1 percent increase in mortality from
1989 to 1993, even as the death rate for white women dropped. "What we need to
find out is if there is something going on in that population other than lack of
access in the health care system."

   "Fear and religious and cultural beliefs" inhibit some black women from doing
breast self-exams or seeking mammography, says Stephanie Harriston-Diggs, an MIT
development officer who does volunteer work for the American Cancer Society.
"Some women believe they're not supposed to touch their own bodies," she adds.

   The slight improvement in overall death rates, however, does little to ease
the fear. The rate of new cases has climbed about 1 percent a year since
national record-keeping began in 1973 and now stands at 109 new cases a year per
100,000 population. Statistical projections from some state registries indicate
the increase began long before 1973 - perhaps as far back as 1940.

   The relentless attention to the breast cancer "epidemic" now causes some
women to overestimate their risks, or become needlessly fatalistic, surveys
show.

   "Some of my friends and I just assume we'll get it," says Nikki Meredith, a
writer who lives north of San Francisco in Marin County, where breast cancer
rates are among the nation's highest.

   The gradual climb steepened to 4 percent a year betweeen 1980 and 1987, then
leveled off. The temporary upturn, scientists say, was most likely the result of
expanded use of mammography - X-ray examination of the breasts - beginning in
the late 1970s.

   As mammograms came into wider use, they detected many tumors at an earlier
stage, when they are more treatable, "that otherwise would have shown up some
years in the future," says Robert Smith, an epidemiologist with the American
Cancer Society. That left fewer cancers to be detected in the next several
years, causing rates to level off again later.

   But detection doesn't explain the long-term rise, Smith wrote last year:
"Analyses have also concluded that the recent increase in breast cancer
incidence is not due solely to an increase in case detection."

   There is "an underlying trend" that must be explained, Smith argues, adding
that in his view "presumably some steady and gradual increase in lifestyle
factors accounts for it."

   Some remain highly suspicious that environmental chemicals must have
something to do with the rising toll, though no one has been able to produce
scientific evidence to make the link. In the scientific community, however,
theirs is a minority view.

   Some epidemiologists believe that "lifestyle factors" reflecting broad social
changes since World War II have fueled the upward trend. These include women
delaying childbirth to pursue education and careers; smaller families;
higher-calorie diets leading to earlier menstruation; and, possibly, birth
control pills and estrogen replacement therapy.

   All these factors increase a woman's lifetime exposure to her own
reproductive hormones, chiefly estrogen. Estrogen stimulates the breast cells to
divide and proliferate, and with every additional cell division comes a chance
for errors to creep into the geneth as China where women perform a lot of manual
labor.

   American women, too, are more likely to have fewer children and to be older
when they have their first child, delaying the biological changes in breast
tissue that occur after a first pregnancy and make the breast less susceptible
to later malignancy.

   That interval from the beginning of menstruation, or menarche, to first
pregnancy is critical to a woman's risk of breast cancer, researchers have
found, because the number of ovulatory and menstrual cycles she has determines
her total exposure to estrogen. And it is during that interval that breast
tissue has its most rapid cell division and growth.

   "Breast cancer incidence is a function of 'tissue age,' " and breast tissue
ages most rapidly between menarche and the birth of a first child, says Graham
A. Colditz, an epidemiologist at the Harvard School of Public Health.

   Pregnancy stimulates breast cells into such rapid proliferation that the risk
of cancer actually rises slightly for five or 10 years. After that, however, the
risk drops significantly, because pregnancy and lactation have made structural
changes that appear to protect the breast from estrogen and DNA damage. "And
each additional pregnancy lowers that rate further," Colditz says.

   The Harvard researcher, who used data from a long-running study of nearly
60,000 nurses to create a mathematical model of breast cancer risk, says the
incidence of breast cancer rises 1.9 percent for every year that a woman's first
birth is delayed past age 20.

   Such increments are too small to mean much to any one individual, but they
affect overall rates measurably. "If the mean age at first birth was earlier by
five years, there would be an 11 percent drop in breast cancer," he says. And
if, on average, "each woman had one more child, there would be a 5 percent drop
in breast cancer."

   All this may be true, but the steady rise in breast cancer incidence can't be
explained away by these demographic changes, said Janet Daling, an
epidemiologist at the University of Washington, where researchers studied the
effect of later first births and found "that didn't explain a major part of it."

   Smith, the Cancer Society epidemiologist, notes that the risk factors
associated with child-bearing "may not increase the risk five- or tenfold, but
they apply to a lot of people. So something that even doubles or triples your
risk, when applied to such a large population, has a big impact."

   Other factors that have been found to drive up the risk are obesity -
particularly after menopause - alcohol, lack of exercise and perhaps some
aspects of diet, though these have been difficult to pin down.

   It's no wonder women feel confused and threatened. The list of known risk
factors is long, but most of the important ones are difficult or impossible for
an individual to change.

   "For an individual woman, I don't find the risk factor estimates that
useful," says Dr. Judy Garber, director of the cancer risk and prevention clinic
at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. "You can't change most of them, like the age at
first birth."

   In addition, women may interpret a given numerical risk in very different
ways. "I had a woman who thought her risk of breast cancer was 100 percent say
she was relieved to find out it was 50 percent," says Garber. "I said, 'That's
big,' and she said, 'It's a lot better than I thought.' "

   Smith, the cancer society epidemiologist, argues that "with the exception of
family history and age, none of the identified risk factors is particularly
strong, either alone or in combination."

   "Genetic susceptibility results in highly elevated risk, but is rare," he
wrote in a breast disease textbook published last year.

   Smith, Garber and others say that though women are often desperate to do
something to control their risks, the frustrating reality is that in 1997,
science doesn't offer much that can make a difference.

   That could change - if research on genes involved in breast cancer identifies
new strategies to prevent cells from becoming malignant, for example, or to keep
tumors from metastasizing.  Or if it becomes possible to modify risk factors in
ways that aren't now known.

   In the meantime, says activist Langer, "we advise women to eat a diet low in
fat, drink alcohol in moderation, don't smoke and exercise regularly.

   "We say that none of these activities has been confirmed to lower your breast
cancer risk, but we tell women to do these things - and very possibly, it might
help."

 1: In younger women, it's no longer a rare event

    For many women and those who love them, perhaps no aspect of breast cancer
is more frightening than the sense that the disease is striking women at younger
and younger ages. Everyone talks of hearing more and more tragic cases of women
in their 50s, 40s, even 30s being stricken.

   "I've been in this job for almost 20 years, and the increase in numbers of
women in their 30s and 40s - and not so rarely in their 20s - is appalling to
me," says Hester Hill, a social work supervisor at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center who runs breast cancer support groups.

   "In the early years, it was rare to have someone 35 or younger" with breast
cancer in her groups, she says, "but now we always have one."

   There are good reasons for that perception, but "in statistical terms, there
has been virtually no increase in the incidence rate in women under the age of
40," says epidemiologist Robert Smith of the American Cancer Society.

   What has increased is the sheer number of women at the vulnerable ages, he
explains. Consequently, there are many more cancer cases at those ages, even if
the rate hasn't changed much.

   In 1970 there were 11.5 million women in the 30-39 age group; by 1990 that
number had nearly doubled to 21 million. There's almost twice the chance you'll
know someone under 40 with breast cancer today.

   The overall increase in breast cancer rates is due mainly to rising incidence
in women over 40, especially in the 60-79 age group. "Increased mammography
probably accounts for some, but not all, of the change" in that group, says Dr.
Judy Garber, director of the cancer risk and prevention clinic at Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute.

 2:

    Is cancer a "genetic disease?"

   Yes, but that doesn't mean what a of people think it does.

   It doesn't mean that most cancer is inherited from your parents or forebears,
the way cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy is. In fact, probably only a small
fraction of all cancers are the result of an inherited genetic defect, and only
about 10 percent of breast cancers.

   What "genetic disease" does mean is that cancer develops when crucial genes
are damaged in ways that cause one or more cells to escape their normal
controls, growing and dividing chaotically.

   In some cases, women do indeed inherit a damaged gene that predisposes them
to breast or ovarian cancer. But in many more, the genetic damage occurs during
a lifetime of exposure to a wide array of factors - including errors in copying
genetic material, the stimulating effects of estrogen or other hormones, or
exposure to certain chemicals.

   The two genes specifically linked so far to inherited breast cancer
predisposition have been named BRCA1 and BRCA2, and scientists believe both are
"tumor suppressor" genes that normally regulate the cell's cycle of growth and
division.

   Even when a woman does inherit a mutated form of one these genes, that alone
does not trigger cancer. But it makes all her breast cells much more vulnerable
to further damage that may disable their genetic controls completely.

   Researchers now think the remaining 90 percent of breast cancers, called
"sporadic" cancers, occur when crucial genes in breast cells, initially normal,
accumulate so many assaults, or "hits," that they break down.

   "Whether this happens as a consequence of something you inherited plus
something in the environment that sets it off, or whether it's something that
happens as a consequence of your lifestyle, it's still a genetic disease," says
Susan Sieber, deputy director of the division of epidemiology and genetics at
the National Cancer Institute.

   Breast cancer activists have frequently criticized the government's emphasis
on cancer genes, saying this slights much-needed research into environmental
causes. But scientists say genetics and environment are not opposing facets of
the breast cancer enigma; in fact, they are inextricably linked.

   "I think one of the most important areas that we'll be looking at is the
whole area of gene-environment interactions," said Sieber in a recent interview.

   Using new techniques to study changes in the genetic material in cells,
scientists now can identify damage done to DNA - and in some cases, even detect
the "fingerprint" of the chemical that caused the damage.

   These fingerprints "can be detected in small samples of blood, showing what
people have been exposed to and how much has gotten to key targets" in the DNA,
says Frederica Perera, co-chair of environmental carcinogenesis at the Columbia
University School of Public Health.

   Perera has been a leader over the past decade in tracing the effects of
environmental exposures on DNA. Ultimately, she says, it should be possible to
study the profile of the DNA damage in a woman's cells and predict how likely
she is to develop particular kinds of cancer - but not yet.

   Studying DNA damage at such a detailed level requires sophisticated equipment
and powerful computers, like those used by Donald C. Malins, a researcher at the
Pacific Northwest Research Foundation. Malins said in an interview that by
looking at the DNA of breast tissue taken in biopsies, it's possible to see
whether a woman has accumulated much damage, or a little. This may explain why
women who would seem to have similar risks of breast cancer may actually be in
very different situations.

   "We have looked at some women's DNA where they have a very small degree of
damage, and you get DNA from another person, supposedly normal, and who has
extremely damaged DNA in tissues that are still normal, but which might soon
develop a malignancy. It's almost as if you get a certain amount of damage and a
switch is turned," says Malins, who hopes to find ways to monitor a woman's DNA
and, using drugs or diet, to halt or reverse the damage.

   What has emerged from the molecular research is a new way of looking at
individual susceptibility - which may fill in a critical part of the breast
cancer puzzle. Among other things, says Perera, inherited traits cause
individuals to process toxic chemicals differently, those absorbed from the
environment and others produced when food is metabolized. Different ethnic
groups may vary in these same mechanisms.

   What this would mean is that genetic variations - much more subtle than a
mutant BRCA1 gene - could make one person more vulnerable to the cancer-causing
substances. Even if two women had the same risk factors for breast cancer, one
might develop the disease while the other would not.

   "It's not the exposure, but the way that our body responds to those
exposures" that leads to breast cancer in some, says Robert Smith,
epidemiologist at the American Cancer Society in Atlanta. Understanding these
differences "may allow us to identify women who are at much higher risk."

   Perera says the next logical step is to develop ways, as Malins hopes to do,
to halt or undo damage to the genes of breast cancer cells, perhaps with gene
therapy or drugs, at the point "when cells are trembling on the brink between
normality and malignancy."
Tomorrow In the Health/Science section: Part 2 - The focus is on the search for
an environmental factor.
This series, extensive breast cancer resources, discussion forums and a chat
schedule are available on Globe Online at http://www.boston.com. The keywords
are breast cancer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART GRAPH, 1. Diagnosed last March, Rev. Elizabeth Ann King of
Salem says breast cancer is "as random as a tornado. . . ripping your life
apart." / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / PAM BERRY 2. "With all the chemicals having been
introduced since World War II, there's a great deal about which to be
suspicious," says Joan Berns, above, diagnosed in 1992 at age 43. / GLOBE STAFF
PHOTO / PAM BERRY 3. GRAHAM COLDITZ / Harvard School of Public Health 4. WALTER
WILLETT / Harvard School of Public Health 5. AMY LANGER / Director of the
National Association of Breast Cancer Organizations 6. HESTER HILL / Social work
suprvisor Beth Israel/Deaconess Medical Center / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / TOM HERDE

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1997


                             2547 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            January 2, 1997 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 1895 words

HEADLINE: 1997: A BLACKBUSTER YEAR IN SCIENCE

BYLINE: RICHARD L. HILL, of the Oregonian Staff<

BODY:

   Thursday, January 2, 1997 1997: A BLACKBUSTER YEAR IN SCIENCE

   Summary:

   Advances made in 1996 could lead to more breakthroughs this year

   If you don't like change, forget science. The dynamic process is never
constant, with research bubbling over in new discoveries each year.

   Each discovery serves as a building block for further discovery. And if
1997 builds on the breakthroughs of 1996, it's going to be a blockbuster   year.

   Mars, the origins of life, genes, advances against AIDS, climate change,
ancient humans and the brain captured most of the headlines in 1996 and will
continue to draw attention this year.

   Here are a few of the scientific adventures to look for this year, along
with a look at an assortment of the major significant achievements of 1996.

   SPACE: Carl Sagan would have loved it. We'll be back to Mars this year, 20
years after the late astronomer worked on the Viking I and II missions that
placed spacecraft on another planet for the first time.

   Mars Global Surveyor was launched in November, and the Mars Pathfinder
began its journey in December. The Surveyor will rendezvous with Mars in
September 1997 and will spend four months dipping into Mars' atmosphere using  a
technique called ``aerobraking.'' The instrument-loaded spacecraft will   begin
compiling a database in 1998 as it orbits over the Martian landscape.

   Mars Pathfinder will reach the Red Planet first, parachuting in for a
landing on July 4. The lander will transmit science data back to Earth, then
will deploy a rover named Sojourner that will send images from its
exploration.

   Before Mars takes center stage in the celestial spotlight, Comet Hale-Bopp
will perform in the eastern sky beginning in late January. The comet will come
closest to Earth in late March. Astronomers are hoping it will rival or
surpass the spectacular sight Comet Hyakutake provided in its swing by Earth
in last March 1996.

   Seven space-shuttle launches are planned for 1997, including a mission in
mid-February to place new instruments on the Hubble Space Telescope. In
December, NASA the National Aeronautics and Space Administration hopes to
place the first module of the international space station in orbit.

   ORIGINS OF LIFE: The Mars missions may might provide clues as to whether
life exists in other worlds.

   Mars was the source for one of the most sensational and controversial
stories of 1996. when a A NASA-led team of scientists announced in August that a
meteorite from Mars strongly suggested that primitive life might have   existed
on the planet 3 billion years ago. Other studies, however, question   whether
the microscopic structures found in the potato-sized rock are actually fossils
of primitive, bacterialike organisms.

   While Although that tantalizing possibility of life on Mars will continue
to be a focus of inquiry in 1997, other scientists will continue the
exploration for the origins of life on our planet.

   In November, researchers from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in
California reported in the journal Nature that they had found the earliest
signs of life on Earth in 3.85 billion-year-old rocks from Greenland. The
discovery pushed the date for the emergence of terrestrial life backward in
time by nearly 400 million years. Traces of carbon isotopes in heavily
weathered rocks from western Greenland suggest that microorganisms capable of
carrying on photosynthesis thrived in oceans eons earlier than previously
thought.

   AIDS: The past year marked a turning point in the frustrating 15-year
battle against the AIDS epidemic. The editors of the journal Science selected
two new weapons against HIV as their ``Breakthrough of the Year.''

   New drugs called protease inhibitors were introduced that can virtually
eradicate HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, from the blood.

   The other major big advance was the finding that natural substances called
chemokines -- chemicals used by the immune system as part of an inflammatory
response -- could protect cells from infection. The discovery has spurred
laboratories to accelerate the search for new drugs and vaccines.

   Although the discoveries generated optimism about treating AIDS,
researchers' ultimate goal is prevention. Look for advances in 1997 toward
developing an effective HIV vaccine.

   GENES: Hardly a week went by last year without reports of advances in
genetics. Expect the same in 1997.

   In October, the journal Science published a map pinpointing the locations
of 16,000 human genes. Doctors only know what only about one-fourth of these
genes actually do, and they're still hunting for the rest of the body's 80,000
to 100,000 genes. But the map, created by 104 scientists on three continents
and placed on the Internet, will help researchers hunting the genetic cause of a
particular disease to find the culprit faster.more quickly.

   Scientists also completed sequencing the 6,000 genes of baker's yeast, the
most complex organism yet deciphered.

   Two research groups discovered a gene that goes awry in basal cell
carcinoma, the most common of all human cancers. The skin cancer strikes about
750,000 people a year in the United States.

   Genes also were linked to a variety of diseases, including prostate cancer,
premature aging, Parkinson's disease, adult-onset diabetes and a
brain-destroying disease known as spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. Scientists
also narrowed the hunt for the genes that predispose some people to multiple
sclerosis.

   In addition, research also found that conditions such as obesity, anxiety
and depression may might be influenced by genes.

   Research at Oregon State University and three other universities found that
sex is controlled by a single gene -- at least in male fruit flies. Scientists
said it's possible that human sexual behavior also may might have a genetic
component.

   Medical researchers are continuing to work on developing gene therapy,
which involves repairing or replacing defective genes that cause disease.
Early results from gene-therapy attempts have been disappointing. But progress
is being made with a variety of afflictions, such as cystic fibrosis, ovarian
cancer, sickle-cell anemia and Fanconi anemia.

   PHYSICS: More breakthroughs in particle physics are on the horizon.

   Physicists at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN) announced
last in January 1996 that they had succeeded in creating atoms of antimatter,
the mirror image of matter. They created atoms of antihydrogen for
40-billionths of a second. Antielectrons, or positrons, were discovered in
1933 and are used in Pet scans for medical diagnoses. Antiprotons were
discovered in 1955. Now they've been combined to make atoms.

   The Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois is making atoms of
antihydrogen. Researchers would like to use the hydrogen antiatoms to test
theories of the universe. For example, why is the universe dominated by matter
when equal amounts of antimatter and matter are thought to have existed in the
universe's earliest moments? When the two particles meet, they annihilate each
other in a burst of energy.

   The journal Science predicts that CERN's the European laboratory's large
electron-positron collider will turn up elusive supersymmetric, subatomic
particles called squarks and selectrons.

   Other major significant achievements in physics in 1996 will lead to major
further discoveries this year. The first directed beams of femtosecond X-rays
were produced by scientists at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Lasting only a few hundred millionths of a billionth of a second, the
strobelike pulses of X-ray light will be used to study the motion of atoms
during ultrafast physical and chemical process.

   The $1 billion advanced photon source at the Argonne National Laboratory is
operating after 15 years in development. The most brilliant source of
high-energy X-rays will reveal the structure of complex proteins and what
happens the happenings in chemical reactions.

   HUMAN ORIGINS: Scientists gained more understanding about our ancient
ancestors in 1996. An upper jaw found in the Hadar badlands of northern
Ethiopia was hailed as the most convincing and earliest definitively dated
fossil of the genus Homo, to which living humans belong.

   The 2.33 million-year-old jaw extends the established age of the human
family line by 400,000 years, closer to the time of the first evidence of
tool-making and to environmental upheavals that may might have been decisive
in human evolution.

   EARTH SCIENCE: Plate tectonics has been an accepted geologic principle for
only 30 years, so it's not surprising that each year brings new discoveries
about the planet's inner workings. After years of work, scientists put a new
spin on Earth's core, which they found rotates faster than the rest of the
planet.

   Seismologists are continuing to search for their holy grail: how to predict
earthquakes. Dapeng Zhao, a seismologist at Washington University in St.
Louis, identified the structure of the hypocenter of the 1995 quake that
killed 6,000 people in Kobe, Japan. Using his own computer-aided technique to
make three-dimensional images of the hypocenter -- the point of the quake's
major impact -- Zhao discovered that high fluid content and high pressure
within the fault zone initiated the massive quake. The findings could provide
scientists with better clues about quake possibilities.

   ENVIRONMENT: Scientists will continue to investigate and monitor Earth's
ailing environment. The good news in 1996 was the decrease in chemicals called
chlorofluorcarbons chlorofluorocarbons that have thinned the planet's
protective ozone layer. But the bad news was that the ozone hole over
Antarctica was nearly as large as the record-breakers of recent years.

   A year ago, the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a worldwide
network of 2,500 scientists, announced that the evidence of human-caused
global warming was undeniable. Next December, negotiators from the United
States and other nations are scheduled to produce a U.N.-sponsored
climate-change treaty in Kyoto, Japan.

   BRAIN: This is the Decade of the Brain, and advances in molecular biology
and imaging technology -- Pet scans and MRIs -- are enabling scientists to
inspect the inner workings of the brain in action.

   For example, researchers at Harvard University used Pet scans to monitor
people as they retrieved memories. They found the medial temporal lobe is
active during both true and false memories, but only true memories show
activity in the temporal parietal region.

   Recent studies also have found that the brain has more than one pain
center, which will help researchers develop therapies that selectively
alleviate the pain felt by more than 97 million Americans. The new insights
will allow researchers to come up with new treatments for brain disorders such
as strokes and Alzheimer's disease.

   COMPUTERS: Supercomputers will help scientists crunch numbers in solving
complex problems, such as global warming and deciphering the human genetic
blueprint. Two weeks ago, Intel Corp. unveiled the world's fastest computer,
which sustained speeds of 1.06 trillion operations a per second during
testing.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo by Bob Ellis - of The Oregonian staff

   Photo - 3 by NASA

   Photo - courtesy of Jet Propulsion Laboratory

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2548 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 1, 1997, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words

HEADLINE: Psychiatric Research

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   Your Dec. 27 front-page article describing the New York State ruling on
research in psychiatric patients who lack the capacity to consent misses a
crucial point. By definition, all children lack the capacity to consent, whether
or not they suffer from a mental disorder. Therefore, in the case of children,
this ruling can be extended to all medical research.

    If this occurs, a large number of important studies -- for example, the
testing of experimental medications in children with leukemia and the evaluation
of genetic therapies for inherited childhood disorders -- would be banned. Such
an outcome would have a devastating impact on medical research in this country,
which has been the envy of the world.

D. P. DEVANAND, M.D.
New York, Dec. 27, 1996

The writer is an associate professor of clinical psychiatry, Columbia Univ.
College of Physicians & Surgeons.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1997


                             2549 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 31, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01; BIZ: BIOTECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: New Drug Products Made '96 Healthy Year for Industry

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Biotechnology, like the technology sector as a whole, has had its ups and
downs in recent years as investors became smitten with an idea and then
impatient when scientists took longer than expected to turn a theory into a
product.

   The industry isn't exactly on easy street, but a recent survey of the
nation's 1,287 biotech companies, including 108 in the Washington region,
suggests that growth in the number of biotech products that have hit the market
is renewing investor enthusiasm.

   There's good reason for this optimism: Pharmaceutical industry analysts and
executives say that a majority of breakthrough drugs over the next decade will
come from biotech, an industry that uses knowledge of hereditary materials to
understand diseases and new ways to treat them.

   In a report on its 11th annual biotech survey, released this month, Ernst &
Young, the accounting and consulting firm, said the industry had an unusually
good year in the 12 months ended June 30, 1996, and that the experience of the
industry in the Mid-Atlantic region was no exception.

   Regulatory approval of new biotech drugs during the period rose to a record
20, about 25 percent of all biotech drugs on the market. One of those approved
was a new medicine to prevent a common respiratory infection in children made by
MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg. Wall Street is also closely watching two other
local companies for potential product sales over the next year.

   Martek Biosciences Corp. of Columbia has a proprietary infant formula
ingredient that contains compounds that many health experts believe are
essential to brain and eye development. The product already is on the market in
Europe and the company hopes it will bring in cash to finance a pipeline of
pharmaceuticals based on its library of microalgae. North American Vaccine Inc.
of Beltsville also is working to win regulatory approval for a new generation of
an infant vaccine against whooping cough.

   Investors also voiced confidence in the industry during the survey period:
Initial public offerings of biotech companies were the most active in the
industry's history, with 61 new stock issues raising $ 1.8 billion, up from 14
offerings raising $ 274 million in the previous 12-month period. Two local
biotech companies had successful IPOs. Fuisz Technologies Ltd. of Chantilly,
which is creating new drug delivery methods, raised $ 33 million. EntreMed Inc.
of Rockville, which focuses on the role of blood and blood vessels in disease,
raised $ 48 million.

   In secondary stock offerings during the survey period, Human Genome Sciences
Inc. of Rockville raised $ 60 million, OncorMed Inc. of Gaithersburg raised $ 16
million and MedImmune raised $ 62 million.

   The interest of major drug companies in biotech was underscored locally
during the period by the purchase of Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg by
Swiss giant Sandoz AG for $ 295 million.

   The survey found that as a whole, the industry's product sales increased 26
percent to $ 8.5 billion for public companies, the only firms in the industry
that sell products. Product sales increased 20 percent to $ 532 million for the
Mid-Atlantic region.

   The region is defined by Ernst & Young as extending south from the southern
border of Pennsylvania and New Jersey to the northern border of North Carolina,
said Ken Lee, co-chairman of Ernst & Young's biotech practice. But most of the
companies in the region lie in the stretch between Washington and Baltimore,
particularly along the I-270 corridor in Montgomery County, he said.

   "A big theme is that products are now breaking out and coming to market, and
now the industry is delivering on some expectations," he said.

   And the Washington area is holding its own as the fourth-largest
concentration of companies in the industry, after Northern California,
Massachusetts and the New York-New Jersey area.

   "It's an area that's critical, not only because of the companies that are
headquartered there, but also because of the regulatory agencies and industry
associations there," he said. But Lee cautions that plenty of financial hurdles
remain. Although IPOs and other forms of financing pushed the average survival
rate for biotech companies to 21 months from 16 months in the previous period,
one-third of all biotech firms have less than "12 months of cash on hand," he
said. That means that more than 400 companies nationally, or about 35 locally,
may be forced to merge or close by the time the 12th survey comes out.

   Other highlights from the survey include:

   Public companies in the biotech industry number 294 and employ 73,000 people,
up 22 percent from the previous 12-month period. The Mid-Atlantic region has 20
public biotech companies with 4,450 employees.

   Total assets of publicly traded biotech companies came to $ 20.1 billion, up
20 percent from the previous period. In the Mid-Atlantic region, public company
assets grew 16 percent from the previous period to $ 775 million.

   Cash and other short-term investments grew 24 percent at public biotech firms
nationally, to $ 8.84 billion. The number in the Mid-Atlantic region was $ 341
million, up 53 percent.

   Losses at public firms industry-wide grew 5 percent to $ 2.2 billion. In this
region, they were up 85 percent to $ 133 million.

   Public companies spent $ 4.7 billion on research and development -- the
industry's lifeline -- an increase of 10 percent from the previous 12 months.
Mid-Atlantic public companies spent $ 150 million, a 24 percent increase.


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post, BIOTECHNOLOGY: A SNAPSHOT (This chart was
not available)

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1996


                             2550 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           December 26, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 1683 words

HEADLINE: THE AGONIZING SEARCH FOR A NEW DRUG

BYLINE: DONALD C. DRAKE, Knight-Ridder News Service <

BODY:

   Thursday, December 26, 1996 THE AGONIZING SEARCH FOR A NEW DRUG

   Scientists find that it's hard to produce enough viruses to conduct  gene
therapy tests on cystic fibrosis patients

   None of the half-dozen people gathered around the conference table at the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy dared say a word. They just looked at
institute director James M. Wilson and waited.

   Wilson said nothing at first. He took off his glasses, closed his eyes and
pinched the bridge of his nose.

   The body language was unmistakable to Colleen Baker, the 26-year-old  manager
of the institute's Human Applications Laboratory. Wilson never did  this unless
he was very displeased.

   Wilson had just asked her how work on a new gene drug was progressing, and
she said  was having trouble making it.

   It was Aug. 15.

   Trials with cystic fibrosis patients were supposed to start in a month at
the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, and this was the first he had
heard that the drug would not be ready.

   Wilson put his glasses back on and said quietly, ``I can't believe that.''

   It was devastating news. This not only jeopardized the cystic fibrosis
trials but the development of gene drugs for several other diseases.

   Wilson was stunned and angry.

   He had overcome other obstacles in his quest for the drug. Could he  surmount
this one?

   For six years, researchers throughout the world had been conducting human
trials trying to develop the first effective gene drug, a breakthrough that
could revolutionize medical care by correcting the genetic defects that cause
some diseases.

   But so far no one had succeeded, as one research problem after another
cropped up in the unexplored territory of gene therapy research.

   By last August, Wilson thought he had solved the most vexing problems
preventing successful therapy and was anxious to test this new drug his
laboratory had developed.

   But now production problems were thwarting him.

   At stake was a drug that might prolong or save the lives of patients with
cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic defect. In the United States
alone, 30,000 people have the lung disease, which kills most victims by their
30s.

   Racing to be the first with a successful gene therapy, Wilson started
testing a first-generation cystic fibrosis drug in 1993. But he stopped the
trial in the spring of 1994 when animal studies indicated that the drug would
be toxic at high doses.

   Though it had been given in increasingly larger doses to eight adult cystic
fibrosis patients, without side effects, Wilson decided to wait for a
second-generation drug, on which they were running final tests.

   He had expected to resume the trials within six months, but the
second-generation drug also was abandoned when an even better drug looked
possible. As the months dragged on, Wilson began to think that he was being
overly demanding in trying to find the perfect gene drug before resuming
trials.

   Patients were desperate for effective treatment, a gene drug that could
produce the protein they needed to help thin the mucus choking their lungs.

   Other laboratories conducting human trials for a host of other diseases  were
pushing ahead with first-generation drugs, such as the one Wilson had
abandoned.

   He was concerned that they would make discoveries he could have made sooner
if he had continued the cystic fibrosis trial. But as time passed and no
significant discoveries were reported, he was reassured that he had made the
right decision to wait.

   Baker felt terrible after leaving the early morning meeting.

   She thought of her grandmother, about to undergo gene therapy for cancer at
the National Cancer Institute, and she wondered what it would be like if her
institute counterpart had failed to come through.

   ``There are patients out there waiting for my virus,'' she said. ``They're
not just people. They're my grandmother.''

   Wilson was not angry with Baker. He was angry at himself for  underestimating
how difficult it was to grow viruses in the large quantities  needed for human
trials.

   Armed with the gene that cystic fibrosis patients lack, the viruses (called
vectors) are, in fact, the drug. They deliver the missing cystic fibrosis  genes
to the patient's lung cells by infecting them.

   The viruses are grown in cell lines, composed of human cells that have been
engineered to provide a special protein the vectors need for growth.

   Scientists needed a million cells to make the billion vectors required for
animal studies. But for human trials, a trillion vectors would be needed.

   Wilson was discovering that it was a lot harder to scale up production than
he had thought.

   A few hours after learning that they couldn't make the cystic fibrosis
vector in large enough quantities, Wilson dropped in on Guangping Gao, a
39-year-old molecular biologist, who was particularly gifted in making cell
lines. He had discovered the cell line for the cystic fibrosis vector but
wasn't involved in its production, which was done in the Human Applications
Laboratory.

   Wilson asked Gao if he thought he could solve the production problems. Gao
said yes.

   He was certain of it.

   After talking with Gao about producing the vector, Wilson went home
convinced that the Human Applications Laboratory had to be restructured. With
only four people working there, it was clearly overwhelmed by more than a  dozen
different projects, each requiring a different gene drug. The problem  with the
cystic fibrosis drug had not been the lab's first.

   And with so many unknowns in this emerging field, he now felt the lab  should
be headed by a hands-on research scientist.

   He resolved to hire two more lab technicians, increase space by 30 percent
and put the best vector grower he could find in charge. He picked Guangping
Gao.

   The next day Gao reported to the Human Applications Laboratory, a  collection
of super-sterile rooms in the University of Pennsylvania hospital  across the
street from the Wistar Institute, where Wilson's labs were  located.

   Donning a sterile gown, booties and cap, Gao started from scratch, making
the cell line to grow the virus.

   It wasn't until Sept. 11, 34 days after Baker had given Wilson the
disturbing news at the operating committee meeting, that Gao was ready to
harvest the virus.

   Not until he had finished the harvest would he know if all his work had  been
worthwhile.

   Gao was so excited on the day of the harvest that he woke up at 5:30 a.m.,
well ahead of his alarm.

   Even though he had slept only four hours -- having stayed late in the lab
the night before -- Gao got up and headed for the lab.

   All night long, the viruses had been spinning at 20,000 revolutions per
minute, as a centrifuge separated them from broken up bits of cells and other
debris.

   Even at that speed, it took a long time to extract the virus, and Gao knew
he had to wait several hours for the process to be completed. It wasn't until
lunchtime, when the digital timer on the centrifuge indicated that 15 hours  and
24 minutes had elapsed, that he and lab technician Ryan Engdahl stopped  it.

   Inside the centrifuge, which looked like a top-loading washing machine,  were
six plastic tubes, each filled with a whitish fluid and a thin band of  bluish
material in the center. The bands were about as thick as the width of a
matchstick. This was the concentration of viruses the centrifuge had separated
from other material in the tube.

   There would have been no blue line if no virus had been produced or the  line
would have been much thinner if only small amounts had been made.

   ``I like the color, Ryan,'' Gao said. ``I like it.''

   Engdahl smiled as Gao looked at the tubes and their blue lines, almost in
awe of what had been created.

   ``After all that work,'' Gao said, ``we've got it.''

   Using a spectrometer, a device that counts viruses, Gao determined that  more
than a trillion viruses had been made -- more than enough to restart the  human
cystic fibrosis trial.

   One hour later, Gao was sitting at the small wooden table in Wilson's
office. Before him was the printout of all the numbers generated by the
spectrometer.

   ``You believe these figures?'' Wilson said, looking at Gao's printout.
``Yes,'' Gao said.

   ``They're awfully high. They're 100-fold more than they were getting,''
Wilson said, referring to the failed production attempt Baker had reported at
the meeting.

   Gao said he thought that the first attempts had failed because the cells
were either too tightly or loosely packed in the lab dishes when they were
infected with the virus.

   Wilson continued staring at the numbers on the sheet, leaning his chin on
his folded hands.

   ``So we're swimming in the stuff,'' he said finally, smiling for the first
time. ``That's fantastic.''

   Gao spent the next four weeks going through the final stages of preparing
the drug for the federal approval needed to resume the trials on volunteers.

   Toxicology studies were done on mice to make sure that the drug was safe.

   Other studies were done to show that the viruses did deliver the cystic
fibrosis genes to the cells and that the infected cells produced the protein
needed by patients.

   And samples from the first lot of viruses were sent to an independent
laboratory to make sure that it was not contaminated.

   Finally, on Oct. 7, the data were sent to the Food and Drug  Administration.

   Approval was given 16 days later.

   The word immediately went out to cystic fibrosis patients for volunteers to
restart the trial.

   Wilson hoped to sign up 15 patients over the next year for the toxicity
trial. If the drug proved safe, a second trial would be undertaken to see if  it
could control cystic fibrosis.

   Several weeks ago, the first volunteer, Christopher Manzi, signed up.

   The 19-year-old college student from Burlington, N.J., received the new
vector on Dec. 9 -- two years and eight months after the trial was stopped.

   It would be another year before Wilson would know if he had something that
might work.

   ILLUSTRATION: B/W Photo by VICKI VALERIO/KRTN Photo ServiceGraphics Chart by
Knight-Ridder Tribune and Source: National Heart, Lung and  blood Institute;
Howard Hughrs Medical Institute, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation  -- WHAT IS CYSTIC
FIBROSIS

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2551 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           December 26, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: Pg. A24

HEADLINE: YIPING YANG

GRAPHIC: PICTURE CAPTION, Thursday, December 26, 1996 YIPING YANG ILLUSTRATION:
BW photo by VICKI VALERIO/KRTN Photo Service Researcher Yiping Yang made the
immune system discovery that spurred a new phase in gene therapy research at the
University of Pennsylvania. Cystic fibrosis could be the first disease conquered
by gene therapy. Status: Not Found

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2552 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  December 25, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 2A, Sun Journal

LENGTH: 1197 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy work races clock; Research: A long-awaited trial drug for
cystic fibrosis patients nearly failed this year. Only 11th-hour changes avoided
a delay in testing.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   PHILADELPHIA -- None of the half-dozen people gathered around the conference
table at the Institute for Human Gene Therapy dared say a word. They just looked
at institute director Dr. James M. Wilson and waited.

   Wilson took off his glasses, closed his eyes and pinched the bridge of his
nose. Wilson never did this unless he was very displeased. Wilson had just asked
Colleen Baker, the manager of the institute's Human Applications Laboratory, how
her work on a new gene drug was progressing, and she said the laboratory was
having trouble making it.

   It was mid-August. Trials with cystic fibrosis (CF) patients were supposed to
start in a month at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, and this was
the first he had heard that the drug would not be ready. Wilson put his glasses
back on and said quietly, "I can't believe that."

   For six years, researchers throughout the world had been conducting human
trials trying to develop the first effective gene drug, a breakthrough that
could revolutionize medical care by correcting the genetic defects that cause
some diseases. But so far no one had succeeded, as one research problem after
another cropped up in the unexplored territory of gene therapy research.

   But this latest news jeopardized the cystic fibrosis trials as well as the
development of gene drugs for several other diseases.

   By August, Wilson thought he had solved the most vexing problems preventing
successful therapy and was anxious to test this new drug his laboratory had
developed. But now production problems were thwarting him.

   At stake was a drug that might prolong or save the lives of patients with
cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic defect. In the United States,
30,000 people have the lung disease, which kills most victims by their 30s.

   Racing to be the first with a successful gene therapy, Wilson started testing
a first-generation CF drug in 1993. But he stopped the trial in the spring of
1994 when animal studies indicated that the drug would be toxic at high doses.

   Wilson decided to wait for a second-generation drug on which they were
running final tests. But the second-generation drug was also abandoned when an
even better drug looked possible.

   Patients were desperate for effective treatment -- a gene drug that could
produce the protein they needed to help thin the mucus choking their lungs. And
other laboratories conducting human trials for a host of other diseases were
pushing ahead with first-generation drugs, like the one Wilson had abandoned.

   He was concerned that they would make discoveries he could have made sooner
if he had continued the CF trial. But as time passed and no significant
discoveries were reported, he was reassured that he had made the right decision
to wait.

   Wilson was angry at himself for underestimating how difficult it was to grow
viruses in the quantities needed for human trials.

   Armed with the gene that CF patients lack, the viruses (called vectors) are,
in fact, the drug. They deliver the missing CF genes to the patient's lung cells
by infecting them.

   The viruses are grown in cell lines, composed of human cells that have been
engineered to provide special protein the vectors need for growth. Scientists
needed a million cells to make the billion vectors required for animal studies.
But for human trials, a trillion vectors would be needed.

   A few hours after learning that the laboratory couldn't make the CF vector in
large enough quantities, Wilson dropped by the lab bench of Guangping Gao, a
39-year-old molecular biologist, who was particularly gifted in making cell
lines. He had discovered the cell line for the CF vector, but he wasn't involved
in its production.

   Wilson asked Gao if he thought he could solve the production problems. Gao
said yes.

   After talking with Gao about producing the vector, Wilson went home convinced
that the laboratory had to be restructured. With only four people working there,
it was clearly overwhelmed by more than a dozen different projects, each
requiring a different gene drug. He resolved to hire two more lab technicians,
increase the space of HAL, and put the best vector grower he could find in
charge: Guangping Gao.

   The next day Gao reported to the laboratory, a collection of super-sterile
rooms in the University of Pennsylvania hospital.

   Donning a sterile gown, booties and cap, Gao started from scratch, making the
cell line to grow the virus.

   That day, he thawed cells stored in a freezer, distributed them among five
covered plates, and waited for the 10 million cells to multiply. Four days
later, he distributed the cells that now filled the five plates, to 25 plates.

   He waited another three days and redistributed the cells to 100 plates. By
Day 10, he had a billion cells.

   On Day 11, after the cells had multiplied until they covered precisely 90
percent of the surface of each plate, Gao infected them with adenoviruses.
Normally, adenoviruses cause colds, but these had been disabled and armed with
the gene that cystic fibrosis patients lack.

   Not until Gao had harvested the virus would he know if all his work had been
worthwhile.

   Gao was so excited on the day of the harvest that he woke up at 5: 30 a.m.,
well ahead of his alarm. All night long, the viruses had been spinning at 20,000
revolutions per minute, as a centrifuge separated them from broken up bits of
cells and other debris.

   Inside the centrifuge, which looked like a top-loading washing machine, were
six plastic tubes, each filled with a whitish fluid and a thin band of bluish
material in the center. The bands were about as thick as the width of a
matchstick. This was the concentration of viruses the centrifuge had separated
from other material in the tube.

   There would have been no blue line if no virus had been produced or the line
would have been much thinner if only small amounts had been made.

   Using a spectrometer, Gao determined that more than a trillion viruses had
been made -- more than enough to restart the human cystic fibrosis trial.

   One hour later, Gao was sitting at the small wooden table in Wilson's office.
Before him was the printout of all the numbers generated by the spectrometer.

   "You believe these figures?" Wilson asked, looking at Gao's printout.

   Gao said he thought that the first attempts had failed because the cells were
either too tightly or loosely packed in the lab dishes when they were infected
with the virus.

   "So we're swimming in the stuff," Wilson said finally. "That's fantastic."

   Gao spent the next four weeks going through the final stages of preparing the
drug for the federal approval needed to resume the trials on volunteers.

   Finally, on Oct. 7, the data were sent to the Food and Drug Administration.

   Approval was given in 16 days.

   The word immediately went out to cystic fibrosis patients for volunteers to
restart the trial.

   Wilson hoped to sign up 15 patients over the next year for the toxicity
trial. If the drug proved safe, a second trial would be undertaken to see if it
could control cystic fibrosis. It will be another year before Wilson knows if he
has something that might work.

   Pub Date: 12/25/96

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 1, KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWS SERVICE PHOTOS, Pathfinder: Researcher
Yiping Yang made the immune system discovery that spurred a new phase in
gene-therapy work at the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of
Pennsylvania.; PHOTO 2, KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWS SERVICE PHOTOS, Visonary: Dr. James
M. Wilson, institute director, sees gene therapy as a gateway to treatment of
many diseases.

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1996


                             2553 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          December 23, 1996 Monday All

SECTION: Health Pg. 1 Body Language

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: '96 was a year of medical milestones

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

BODY:

   It was a year of fake fat and real progress against AIDS, of legal victories
for new mothers and defeats for assisted suicide opponents. Here are some
medical milestones from 1996:

   Obesity. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved two groundbreaking
products: olestra, the first no-calorie fat substitute, and dexfenfluramine
(brand name Redux), a new type of weight-loss medication that researchers hope
will be the first that patients can take long-term to maintain weight loss.

   Drive-through deliveries. President Clinton signed a bill requiring health
plans to cover hospital stays of at least 48 hours for women who give birth
naturally, and up to four days for those who deliver by Caesarean section. A
similar bill failed to pass the Wisconsin Legislature.

   Right to die. Jack Kevorkian was acquitted of assisted suicide charges for
the third time in two years. The retired Michigan pathologist says he's attended
more than 30 deaths since 1990.

   Abortion. A Milwaukee Planned Parenthood clinic and 16 others around the
country said they'll offer abortions induced by a combination of two drugs as an
alternative to surgical abortions, allowing women to end pregnancies in the
privacy of their homes and potentially changing the nature of the anti-abortion
movement. The new method will be available in January.

   Transplants. Bone-marrow transplants grew in popularity and success and
became more common for breast cancer. The nationwide system for how livers are
allocated was revised. Locally, researchers at the Medical College of Wisconsin
in Wauwatosa performed the state's first bone marrow transplant to try to cure
multiple sclerosis, and the University of Wisconsin Medical School successfully
used two pig livers to keep a 17-year-old girl alive for two days until a human
liver could be found.

   Cancer. Mortality from cancer declined in the United States for the first
time since statistics have been kept. The overall cancer death rate dropped 3%
from 1991 through 1995; in the previous two decades, it had climbed 6.4%, two
major federal and American Cancer Society studies showed.

   AIDS. Triple therapy using two older classes of drugs and a new type,
protease inhibitors, can reduce levels of the HIV virus to undetectable levels,
in some cases for as long as 10 months after starting treatment, researchers
reported at the International AIDS Conference in Vancouver. The FDA approved two
home HIV tests for nationwide sale. And Wisconsin recorded its 2,000th death
from AIDS.

   Locally, 1996 also saw:

   A split between Primecare, the state's largest HMO and Aurora, the largest
hospital/health care system. Thousands of people have been forced to choose
between the two or to foot more of the bill for health care if they want to stay
with Primecare and still use Aurora hospitals and physicians.

   The return of Paul Nannis as Milwaukee health commissioner after a brief
stint with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in New York.

   The first case in Milwaukee of multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis. The
discovery of it in a woman who died of AIDS sparked a public health effort to
find and test people who had been in close contact with her.

   The first year of Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital's operation of what
had been Doyne Hospital, the old Milwaukee County Medical Complex.

   The resolution of the Tiffany Miller Fund, the largest fund-raising drive in
Milwaukee history. More than $180,000 remaining after the little girl's death
was donated to Children's Hospital of Wisconsin.

   The announcement by UW-Madison that it would try the state's first test of
human gene therapy, using a "gene gun" to shoot DNA-coated gold pellets into the
tumor cells of certain patients with the deadly skin cancer melanoma or cancers
called soft-tissue sarcomas.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1996


                             2554 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 22, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5420 words

HEADLINE: Charity Begins at ... The Marketing Meeting, The Gala Event, The
Product Tie-In

BYLINE: By Lisa Belkin;  Lisa Belkin, a contributing writer for the Magazine,
wrote a profile of Paul Ellwood earlier this month.

BODY:

   THE 2,100 GUESTS AT THE SUSAN G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation's charity
gala in Dallas in October expected a luncheon. What they got was an
extravaganza.

   First, the chandeliers in the huge ballroom dimmed, leaving the spotlighted
dais looking like an oversize movie screen. Then the trumpets of the 14th Marine
Naval Air Station color guard blared, and a local R.O.T.C. Saber Corp. snapped
to attention, weapons aloft in an arc over the steps leading from the stage.

    As an announcer boomed their names, representatives of corporate America
marched under those crossed swords to their tables. J. C. Penney. Pier 1
Imports. Tiffany. Ford. Each stared solemnly ahead. A few looked slightly
mortified. Most wore a small pink ribbon pin on their blouse or lapel.

   New Balance Athletic Shoes -- which stitches a pink ribbon into the tongue of
some of its footwear. Lifetime Television -- which used the pink ribbon as part
of its logo during Breast Cancer Awareness Month, in October. American Airlines
-- its ribbon can be found on its luggage tags. Titleist and Foot-Joy Worldwide
-- its version is imprinted on the golf balls of two of its lines. Later in the
program many of those executives would bow their heads slightly, as medals of
appreciation were placed around their necks.

   A bit much? Perhaps. But all part of what it takes to become the cause in the
competitive world of causes; to remain the disease in an era when everyone,
particularly during this season of giving, is trying to get attention for his or
her disease. It is what it takes to elbow aside the previous hot crusade and
find yourself being stared at and scrutinized by those who are blatantly waiting
their turn to elbow you. Just yesterday, or so it seems, the ribbons were red
and the cause was AIDS. Now, although money and empathy still flow to the AIDS
cause, the pink team has pulled ahead in the philanthropic color war, and the
cause is breast cancer.

   "This is our moment, and we have to make it work for us," says Nancy Brinker,
founder of the Komen Foundation, which has raised more than $65 million for
breast cancer research, education, screening and treatment since 1982, most of
it during the last five years. "It didn't happen overnight, and it didn't happen
by itself."

   How it did happen says a lot about the disease, which will be diagnosed in
184,300 women this year and will kill 44,300. But the fact that breast cancer is
not the country's biggest killer (heart attacks will take nearly 500,000 lives
this year) and that it is not its most hopeless (of the 177,000 cases of lung
cancer diagnosed this year, 158,000 will be fatal) mean that the passion for
this cause is about more than the disease itself.

   It is about women, those who have breast cancer and those (can you hear them
knocking wood right now?) who do not. To some extent it may be about their
choices -- later childbearing, fewer children -- and their guilt-laced anger
over those choices, which felt like progress at the time but might have made
them more likely victims.

   More than anything, it is about their fears. Heart disease and lung cancer --
those bring fear of death, yes, but breast cancer carries an even weightier
load. To women, it is not only about mortality, it is about intimacy,
femininity, sexuality and sense of self. Since the single greatest risk factor
for breast cancer is not family history or environment or behavior, but simply
being female, it makes women feel as if they are under attack just because they
are women. The new visibility of breast cancer, therefore, is about rallying
that fear and that anger, using it for ballast in the sophisticated tug of war
for donations. Illness has always been about marketing -- long before there were
ribbons, there were Jerry Lewis telethons and March of Dimes walk-a-thons. That
is even more true today as Federal research funds shrink and diseases must
compete with other needy realms, like poverty, education and the arts.

   There was no single plan that brought breast cancer to the place it is now.
But neither did it arrive by pure happenstance. Like most other things that
work, it was a mix of serendipity and sweat -- the effort of a passionate few
who found themselves in positions of influence at a sympathetic point in time.
What they have done to shape those times provides a textbook in the new
realities of American charity. What they do next will determine whether they can
make the ephemera last.


   T THE BEGINNING, THERE WAS only Nancy Brinker, and things did not go well.
The low point, she recalls, was being thrown out of one bra manufacturer's
office for suggesting that bras be sold with tags reminding women to get
mammograms. "She said, 'It's negative advertising, and I'm in the business to
make money,' " Brinker says.

   That was in 1984, two years after Brinker created the Komen Foundation as a
promise kept to her sister, Susan Komen, who died of breast cancer at 36. By
1984, when Brinker's own cancer was diagnosed, breast cancer was still "a silent
epidemic," she says.  Despite small flurries of attention when Shirley Temple
Black, Betty Ford and Happy Rockefeller had mastectomies in the 70's, it was
still "the rare exception when it was publicly talked about."

   Brinker started her foundation with little in-depth knowledge of what she was
getting into. What she did have was a wealthy, supportive husband -- Norman
Brinker, chairman of what is now Brinker International, which owns, among other
things, several restaurant chains. His first wife died of ovarian cancer in
1966, and he and Nancy were married in 1981. She cringes when his money is
mentioned.

   "I am not just some rich society lady," she says, displaying the fear of many
wealthy Texas women of being dismissed as nothing but big hair and a slow drawl.
"This is not about manicures and going out to lunch. I think a lot of people
thought I'd do this, and do it for two years and then get tired of it. It took
them a long time to understand the depth of my passion."

   But though mentioning her husband's money may raise her hackles, she knows it
also raises more money -- paying for her podium, making it more likely that
she'll get her foot in the door.  Her first Komen fund-raising event was held at
Norman's polo club. Her first huge event came about when a friend of her
husband's, the Texas real-estate magnate Trammel Crow, called Betty Ford and
asked her to be the guest of honor at the first annual Komen luncheon. (Ford has
been at nearly every Komen luncheon since then.)

   And one of her defining breaks came in 1988 when Vice President Dan Quayle
and his wife agreed to be honorary chairmen for the five-kilometer Race for the
Cure in Washington, an event created by Komen. (Norman Brinker is a loyal
Republican, and his personal political donations along with his corporations'
totaled nearly $100,000 last year; Marilyn Quayle lost her mother to breast
cancer.) That made Washington one of the first cities to be the host of a Race
for the Cure, and from there the numbers grew. This year there were 63 races,
with more than 324,000 runners, and Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper,
were the honorary chairmen of the Washington race. Next year there will be 77
races.

   Growth attracts attention, and attention breeds company, so although Nancy
Brinker was the first, she was not alone for long. As the 80's ended, and the
decade of excess gave way to its backlash, a measure of worth became not how
much you earned, nor how much you spent, but how much you could raise. One at a
time, a handful of powerful businesspeople, with more resources than Brinker
dared dream, tried to make her cause their own.

   One of the first was Ralph Lauren, who in 1989 teamed up with Katherine
Graham, the former publisher of The Washington Post, and founded the Nina Hyde
Center for Breast Cancer Research at Georgetown University Medical Center. "I
thought I could save her," Lauren says of Hyde, a longtime fashion editor at The
Post who died shortly after the center opened. "I told Nina I would try my
best."

   Like countless other people around the country, Lauren was personally touched
by the disease, but when wealthy people are touched, amazing things can start to
happen. In the years since Hyde's death, Lauren has spent millions of his own
dollars and raised millions more to support the center. He designed a T-shirt --
no pink ribbon, thank you very much, but rather a bull's-eye logo and the slogan
"Fashion Targets Breast Cancer" -- which has raised $2 million.

   And he is the honorary chairman of the annual Nina Hyde Super Sale, where
impeccably dressed celebrities get to paw through racks of donated designer
clothing, knowing that the proceeds go to breast cancer research. This year one
of the 1,100 shoppers was the Princess of Wales, and the $500 tickets were the
most sought after items in town.

   Friendship also brought Ronald O. Perelman of Revlon into the breast cancer
fight. In 1990, he founded the Revlon-U.C.L.A. Women's Cancer Research Program,
after the disease entered the lives of his friends Lilly and Brandon Tartikoff.
Lilly did not have breast cancer -- it was more complicated than that. Her
husband, then the head of network programming at NBC, had been successfully
treated for Hodgkin's disease by a U.C.L.A. doctor who was also deeply involved
in breast cancer research.

   The Tartikoff-Perelman expression of gratitude for that care now totals $20
million. Revlon's support of breast cancer research has become a mini-industry
of sorts, including its own fund-raising runs and the seventh annual Fire and
Ice Ball. When the Hyde Center upped the stakes and snared Lady Diana for their
big event, Revlon presented a gleeful Bette Midler, fresh from her triumph in
"The First Wives Club."

   At about the same time that Perelman was becoming involved, another cosmetics
giant, Evelyn Lauder, senior corporate vice president of the company that
carries her mother-in-law's name, joined and therefore strengthened the trend.
Estee Lauder Companies manufactures the Estee Lauder, Clinique, Aramis,
Prescriptives and Origins lines; the advertising budgets of those companies give
her influence in certain circles. She openly -- and successfully -- used it.

   "By being fortunate enough to be an advertiser in all the big fashion
magazines," she says, "I could go to all my friends who were editors in chief
and persuade them" to run articles about breast cancer.

   During a 1991 lunch with Alexandra Penney, then editor of Self magazine,
Lauder says: "I started to tell her what I wanted to see if I had my dream come
true. What articles should run, what information, what was important. She got
all excited, and that fall they ran 10 pages." It was the first of what would
become an annual special report by Self. A year after the first special report,
Lauder remembers, "Alexandra had the idea to take the loop pin, from AIDS, and
to make it in pink. I said, 'We could give away these pink ribbons at all the
Estee Lauder counters all over the country.' "

   The small fabric ribbons were in stores by the end of 1992 and are now in 40
countries. A fancier bright pink enamel pin is available in a gold boxed gift
set, along with a Burning Rose lipstick and a bottle of Pleasures perfume.
Proceeds from the gift sets, and from "The Seasons Observed," a book of Lauder's
photographs, go to the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, which she founded in
1993.

   What Evelyn Lauder has done is measurable. Why she has done it is more
elusive. Although friends and breast cancer advocates all describe her as a
breast cancer survivor, she has never publicly described herself that way. She
is as uncomfortable talking about her health as Brinker is talking about her
money.

   "It's of no consequence," Lauder says, politely refusing to say whether she
has had the disease. "I once listened to a woman at an event who was spilling
out her heart and telling people about her own situation, and everybody was
eating and talking. It was very painful for me to watch.

   "So, it's of no consequence. This is about breast cancer, not about me."

    WEALTH AND PERSISTENCE CAN create a stirring, but not a sensation. (If they
could, Steve Forbes might be President.) The reason breast cancer the cause
seems to be everywhere, is that breast cancer the disease has hit a social
nerve. Breast cancer is not hot just because Nancy Brinker, Ralph Lauren, Ronald
Perelman and Evelyn Lauder willed it to be hot. Breast cancer is hot because it
resonates.

   "There's something about breast cancer that makes it very different from foot
cancer or, for that matter, any other disease," says Amy Langer, executive
director of the National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations, known as
Nabco. "It's about body image, it's about nurturing -- it certainly is about
femininity. It is loaded for women in ways that other health threats are not."

   For decades that meant that people talked about it less. But as the world
changed around the disease, the same things that once made it unspeakable became
the very reasons people spoke about it more.

   The 80's were the years when baby boomers, who had reshaped society around
all their generational milestones, began getting breast cancer. Theirs was a
generation of women proud of breaking taboos, recreating both family and
workplace. They were more comfortable talking about sex, transforming "Our
Bodies, Ourselves" into a self-help bible. And they were not cowed by authority.

   "We grew up in the women's movement and the consumer movement, and to us
doctors are not God," Langer says. "We don't need permission to speak out about
something that we see as a threat to our lives. And when the women in their 30's
and 40's spoke out, we gave permission to breast cancer survivors who are in
their 50's and 60's."

   Perhaps most important, the baby boomers came to assume that science would
serve them. "It's a generation that is used to having a medical solution to its
problems," says Karen Stabiner, whose book about breast cancer, "To Dance With
the Devil," will be published in May. "The polio vaccine. Birth control pills.
Then, when their needs were reversed, fertility drugs. Now they're getting
something that for the first time has no cure."

   Taking a lesson from their activist past, breast cancer patients began to
organize. Nabco, for instance, was founded in 1986 as a network of breast cancer
organizations whose goal is to educate the public about the disease.

   But it was the lessons learned during the past decade that have made all the
difference. If the disease of the moment is breast cancer, it is because the
disease of a different moment was AIDS. Victims of that disease, and those who
loved them, proved, and are still proving, that patients have to make it clear
that they are also voters, and hell-raising consumers.

   "We are absolutely following in the footsteps of the AIDS movement, where
we've seen motivated patients and their families move mountains and change the
face of the disease," says Langer. "We've learned that if you want your disease
to be dealt with, you go and you talk about it and you market it and you visit
and you stomp and you write letters and you do it."

   In 1989, AIDS was killing an estimated 22,000 a year and receiving $1.6
billion in research funds from the Federal Government. Breast cancer was killing
about 43,000 each year, and receiving only $74.5 million.

   "Our message was never, Give us more money because you give AIDS more money,"
says Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, founded in
1991 to increase the financing for, and the political clout of, breast cancer.
"We were emboldened by their success, by how successful a grass-roots advocacy
could be."

   The coalition's first campaign, in 1991, resulted in 600,000 letters to
Congress and an additional $50 million for breast cancer research. In 1991,
Visco testified before the Senate that "women had declared war on breast cancer,
and they'd better find a way to fund that war." The next Federal budget included
$430 million for research and one resulting Government program had an
unprecedented stipulation that "consumers," which meant breast cancer survivors,
could have a seat at the table when those funds were allocated. Federal
financing is now more than $550 million annually. Every year, says Visco, "we go
back and fight to keep that funding," with active lobbying and additional letter
campaigns. One National Breast Cancer Coalition petition campaign, which
received a corporate grant from Revlon, resulted in 2.6 million signatures sent
to the White House, representing the number of women in the United States who
are living with breast cancer.

   With the gender gap larger than ever, breast cancer has understandably caught
the attention of the country's most prominent politicians. During the last weeks
of the '96 campaign, President Clinton, whose mother died of the disease,
invited leading breast cancer advocates to the Rose Garden, where he pledged his
continued support. Brinker was asked to speak at the Republican National
Convention last summer. On the afternoon before her speech, she says, she
learned that the five minutes she and several other speakers had been promised
were being cut to one minute. She was allowed to practice the abbreviated
version of her speech at the podium and, she says, was sternly told that "the
green light meant talk, the yellow light meant wind things up, and when the red
light went on that meant the mike would go dead in six seconds."

   Leaving the podium after rehearsal, she was approached by a woman who
introduced herself as a volunteer for the Race for the Cure in Kentucky. "And,"
the woman added, "I'm also the podium timer."

   "The red light," Brinker says, "never went on."

    LIKE MANY A TALENTED PUPIL, BREAST cancer learned from AIDS and then did its
teacher one better. In the last few years it has become what AIDS could not --
the darling of corporate America, which does not simply want to donate to the
cause, but wants to embrace it completely.

   Breast cancer could do this because it has an advantage over AIDS. From a
marketing perspective, it comes with none of the potential baggage that support
for AIDS may bring.

   "There was no concern that you might actually turn off your audience because
of the life style or sexual connotations that AIDS has," Langer says. "That
gives corporations a certain freedom and a certain relief in supporting this
cause." (Even the bra manufacturers have come around. When the intimate-apparel
industry held its annual fund-raising dinner last year, it raised more than
$197,000 for the Komen Foundation.)

   If the first wave of corporate interest in breast cancer was personal and
came about by happenstance -- Perelman's friendship with Tartikoff, Lauren's
friendship with Nina Hyde -- the second wave of interest was more calculated. It
came at a time when charity held new allure for corporations, which were
attracted to the concept that customers will be loyal to companies that do good.

   Called many things -- cause-related marketing, strategic philanthropy,
social-issues marketing, passion branding -- the idea of doing well while doing
good is not new. One of its first proponents was Ray Kroc, the founder of
McDonald's, who created a corporate ethos that still stresses things like local
scholarships, environmental clean-up programs and Ronald McDonald House, where
families of hospitalized children can stay while a child is being treated.

   More recently, cause-related marketing is the theory behind American
Express's Charge Against Hunger program, under which the company donates 3 cents
to Share Our Strength every time an American Express credit card is used, with a
maximum donation of $5 million. It is why Pizza Hut developed its Book It!
program, giving a free pizza to a student who brings in a certificate from a
teacher saying that the student read a required number of books. And it is the
reason Home Depot has been involved in building more than 100 houses for Habitat
for Humanity, donating the materials and encouraging employees to provide the
labor.

   Consumers say they like it. According to a recently released study by Cone
Communications, which specializes in such campaigns, when quality and price are
perceived as equal, 76 percent of consumers are more likely to switch to a brand
associated with a good cause, a 10 percent increase over a similar 1993 survey.

   If customers like it, businesses are willing to try it. Avon is one of them.
Four years ago, Joanne L. Mazurki, a member of the marketing staff, was asked to
develop a cause-related program. "We had done some cause-directed marketing,"
Mazurki says. "A little Statue of Liberty, a little something else. But nothing
long-term or focused."

   The only directions she was given was "to make it a women's issue" and make
it something that would be linked to Avon in customers' minds. She turned to
Avon marketing research, which included the results of a four-hour survey that
Avon had conducted with 1,000 women. "When we asked, 'What health issues are you
concerned about?' " she remembers, "breast cancer was No. 1."

   A slightly different chain of events led the Lee Apparel Company in the same
direction. Lee found that other jean companies were gaining market share, says
Ellen Rohde, Lee's vice president for advertising and strategic planning, adding
that since 85 percent of all jeans are purchased by women, "we made a major
strategic initiative for 1996 that we wanted to focus a lot of attention on our
female customers."

   To decide the specifics of that attention, Rohde assembled two dozen women
from around the country, most of whom had nothing to do with Lee business and
marketing, and invited them to a health spa outside Tucson, Ariz. Between
massages and exercise classes the women discussed what was on their minds.

   When asked by a Lee board member, "What do you respect about companies?" the
women said "they would be more loyal to a company that was helping women's
lives," Rohde says. Breast cancer was ultimately chosen as a cause, she says,
when it became clear that more than half of the company's core marketing
committee members had had a personal brush with breast cancer. They either had
the disease themselves or knew someone who did.

   The company's search for a marketing tool resulted in Lee National Denim Day.
Lee enrolled 650,000 employees from 3,000 companies in their "day," and for a
donation of $5, each of those employees was allowed to wear denim to work on
Oct. 25. Lee's goal had been $1 million, Rohde says. It raised $3.5 million in
pledges.

   Market-driven research fomented Avon's Breast Cancer Awareness Crusade, one
of the largest cause-related marketing programs in history, which has already
spent $20 million to finance community-based programs that make screening
mammograms available to medically underserved women. The company has estimated
that publicity about the campaign has created "700 million media impressions" --
opportunities for people to read, watch or hear about Avon's good works.

   "That is what this is all about," Mazurki says, "making a good and a lasting
impression for our company."

    DR. MARY-CLAIRE King, whose days in the lab are often too busy to allow time
for lunch, sat among the well-dressed crowd at the Breast Cancer Research
Foundation awards luncheon in late October in Manhattan. The menu included
pounded paillard of turkey (no butter and almost no oil), accompanied by
mango-and-papaya chutney. Her tablemates at the Metropolitan Club included
Evelyn Lauder's husband, Leonard, the chairman and C.E.O. of the Estee Lauder
Companies; Betsy McCaughey Ross, Lieutenant Governor of New York, and editors
from Cosmopolitan, Mademoiselle and Vogue.

   King is one of the world's pre-eminent cancer researchers. She was the first
to prove that some breast cancers are inherited, leading to the discovery -- by
a rival lab -- in 1994, of two genes linked to the disease. (The research that
led to those discoveries was financed in part, Brinker boasts, by Komen funds.)
The next step is to develop treatments based on those discoveries, and her
life's goal, she says, is to eliminate breast cancer as a cause of death.

   Looking around the ballroom, where a striking number of bare-breasted nymphs
peered down from the ceiling murals, she understood the absurdity of being a
scientist in a world of philanthropists. "I truly do not know how to put on
makeup, and do not wear any," she says with a laugh. "Evelyn offered to help. I
think next time I'll let her."

   The growing corporate interest in breast cancer has changed the nature of
breast cancer research. Before the surge, money for the disease was available
mostly from huge, prestigious central givers like the National Institutes of
Health and the American Cancer Society, or smaller corporate givers, like
pharmaceutical companies, whose money some scientists feel uncomfortable
accepting.

   The new math, in which companies donate with the hope of making money by
boasting of their donations, is fine with her, says King, who accepts no money
from pharmaceutical companies. Grants from foundations like Brinker's and
Lauder's are peer-reviewed -- screened by a panel of scientists -- she says, and
the donors, whatever their motives, do not plan to profit directly from her
results.

   Where the new foundation money works best, scientists say, is as a first step
toward larger Federal grants. A reality of medical research is that you can't
get a grant without results, but you can't get results without a grant. Even for
projects that qualify for Federal funds, the time between when the grant
application is made and when the money is available can be months or years.

   A small but immediate grant, therefore, can kick-start a project or keep it
going until the heftier checks arrive. James T. Conroy, a senior vice president
and special counsel of the company that owns Revlon, calls it "charitable risk
capital."

   When he and Ronald Perelman first met Dr. Dennis Slamon of U.C.L.A., Conroy
says, the doctor was in the early stages of an attempt to apply gene therapy to
breast and ovarian cancer. It was promising research, and was likely to receive
Federal funds, but "the doctors made the case to us that turnaround to the
National Cancer Institute meant they were two years away from advancing the
research, and in those intervening two years, 100,000 women would die."

   Revlon's initial donation of $2.5 million helped finance that research, among
other projects. Now, six years later, Slamon's approach is being tested on
patients, with the help of N.C.I. grants.

   Even moderately small commitments, at a crucial time, can make an enormous
difference, scientists say. King was at the Lauder luncheon to receive $25,000
that would allow her to start an epidemiologic study to determine what
percentage of women who carry the breast cancer gene mutation actually develop
breast cancer. The check Evelyn Lauder handed to King and her collaborator will
allow her to start nearly a year earlier than she would have been able to if she
had to wait for expected N.C.I. funds. "It will tide us over during a gap of
several months," she says.

   Research is not the only area in which the new corporate largess is showing
results. Boston Market had no interest in financing research because too many
companies were already doing it. So they supported a hot line instead. "We
wanted to find a void that no one else was touching," says Robin Showkeir, a
spokesman for the company.

   Since 1978, the Y-Me hot line -- (800) 221-2141 -- has provided information
and counseling not only for women with breast cancer but also for their
families. Boston Market's commitment of $1 million worth of cash, goods and
services in 1996 means that they can now provide a 24-hour computerized system
that can match women all over the country with the support groups closest to
where they live. Boston Market also created public service announcements with
the hot line's number, along with business-card-size "Take One" displays at the
chain's 1,100 stores.

   This ability to spread the word is what Langer describes as the major benefit
of a corporate partnership. "There's no way we could have put millions of
brochures in the hands of women like they can through their sales force" of
500,000, she says of her group's affiliation with Avon.

   The growing reliance on corporate money does cause some discomfort, Langer
and others say. "There is concern of exploitation, that some motives might not
be what we would hope."

   Also of concern is the slippery subject of taste. There has been some biting
of tongues lately among breast cancer advocates, as their benefactors come up
with promotions that they might not have come up with themselves.

    MOST CONTROVERSIAL IS the billboard, sponsored by Kenar Enterprises, of a
nude Linda Evangelista, one arm draped across her chest. A toll-free number on
the billboard allows callers to make donations to the Breast Cancer Research
Foundation. "We got some negative letters," says Kenar's president and C.E.O.,
Kenneth Zimmerman. "We wanted to wake people up, and we did."

   Several breast cancer advocates interviewed for this article said their
discomfort was not with the nudity, but with yet another image of a perfect
female body. Fear of imperfection is what keeps too many women from getting
mammograms, the advocates say, because they worry that the treatment for breast
cancer will leave them imperfect or sexually unappealing.

   The ad certainly has its defenders, among them Evelyn Lauder, whose
foundation received about $50,000 when the ad appeared on 60 billboards across
the country last fall, including one, 20 feet by 40 feet, that all but stopped
traffic in Times Square.

   "I loved it," Lauder says. "Linda Evangelista had never posed in the nude
before," she says, and only did so because her fiance's mother has breast
cancer.

   It is that practicality that overrides nearly all the nagging worries and
niggling differences. The fact is, most of the money would not be there without
the marketing programs that raise it.

   "I don't care why they're doing it," says Betty Rollin, whose book "First You
Cry," about her own mastectomy in 1975, has made her an unofficial spokesman for
the movement. "It's a great thing to do. That they benefit is wildly beside the
point."

   What is of deep concern, therefore, is what happens when companies no longer
see that benefit. What happens when the money stops?

   Although most of the benefactors describe this as a long-term alliance ("It's
a lifetime commitment," Showkeir says), and although most of the relationships
are based not only on promises but also on contracts (Avon's is for five years;
all Race for the Cure sponsors sign on for one year), this is, nonetheless, the
world of marketing. And that is a realm without guarantees.

   "There is something fragile about a corporate commitment to a cause," Langer
says. "It does worry you that they will change their minds or find something
different, or find that it becomes old news. It's like a new product
introduction. At some point it looks very appealing to have a fresh new cause."

   The new causes, to no one's surprise, are already out there, elbowing in the
wings, watching breast cancer as breast cancer once watched AIDS.

   Michael Milken, who founded Cap Cure (the Association for the Cure of Cancer
of the Prostate), met with breast cancer advocates to ask for advice on how to
bring a disease into the forefront. Similarly, Parkinson's disease was recently
shown to have a genetic link, and advocates for that cause are hoping to use the
resulting scientific excitement to motivate corporate givers.

   And some of the most vocal heirs apparent hope to tap into the unity among
women that gives the breast cancer cause its power. One of the countless events
during Breast Cancer Awareness Month was a cocktail party at Mikimoto pearls on
Fifth Avenue, of which Harper's Bazaar was the host. As representatives from the
Breast Cancer Research Foundation and the Nina Hyde Center stood at the front of
the store preparing to accept checks, Liz Tilberis, the magazine's editor in
chief, stood at the back of the room discussing her own battle with ovarian
cancer.

   "I'm fighting for the same recognition," she said of that disease. "Its time
will come. We've not exposed it enough. We've not marketed the problem yet.
These things take a little while."


CORRECTION-DATE: December 22, 1996, Sunday

CORRECTION:
A picture credit is omitted on page 52 of The Times Magazine today for a
photograph of Evelyn Lauder. It should read: Karen Kuehn/Matrix, for The New
York Times.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pink has elbowed out red in the ribbon wars: Getting pinned at
the Breast Cancer Research Foundation awards. (Mark Peterson/SABA for The New
York Times); A Komen Foundation version. (JODY DOLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.
40-41); Nancy Brinker has been there from the beginning. (Laura Wilson for The
New York Times); Let the buyer be aware: Kenar's Madison Avenue window, above;
Carolee Jewelry pin. (Mark Peterson/SABA for The New York Times) (pg. 42); Fram
Visco increased the disease's political clout. Amy Langer learned from the AIDS
movement how to spread the word. Pin pals: The civic leader Linda Janklow,
Barbara Walters and Lieut. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross. (Mark Peterson/SABA for
The New York Times) (pg. 45); Joanne Mazurki developed Avon's huge marketing
program. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KAREN KUEHN/MATRIX, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Liz
Tilberis wants ovarian cancer to be the hot cause tomorrow. (Mark Peterson/SABA,
for The New York Times); Titleist golf balls today. (pg. 46); Evelyn Lauder put
advertising muscle where her heart is. (pg. 52)

Charts: "Charity Winners and Losers" -- Americans gave $144 million last year,
or an average of just over $1,000 per contributing household, up 16 percent from
1993. More than $116 million of that came from individuals; the rest from
foundations, corporations and bequests. America is more generous than other
nations. One survey found that about 7 out of 10 Americans give, compared with
about 4 out of 10 Frenchmen or Germans. To help spur giving, charities mount
individual appeals, using personal solicitations, Salvation Army kettles,
tele-marketers and direct mail. November and December are the peak giving
months. With a healthy economy, people are increasingly likely to pull out a
checkbook. But while there were increases in education, health and the
environment last year, donations to human services and international aid were
down. "All of the talk of the undeserving poor appears to be bleeding over into
private giving," says Gordon Raley, executive director of the National Assembly
of National Voluntary Health and Social Welfare Organizations. "If the poor are
not worthy of paying taxes for, why give money personally?"   Karen W. Arenson

Charitable international-aid groups had the biggest decline in contributions
last year. The budget for Amnesty International U.S.A., the human rights group
slipped from $20.9 million to $20.4 million. Virtually all of its money comes
from individuals, mostly small donors, whose median gift is $35. It is working
to cultivate more big donors. "We're trying to do a better job with a more
narrow market," says an Amnesty spokesman, "rather than trying to widen the
net."

Even as welfare rules change, and the number of people in need of food aid is
expected to grow, donations to Second Harvest -- America's largest hunger-relief
charity -- have shrunk, its first downturn since 1989. Financial contributions
are up, but donations of food, which account for the bulk of its contributions,
are down as food companies improve their processing and distribution and have
less surplus to give away. Second Harvest is trying to find new ways to collect
food -- by, for example, wooing companies to give even when there is no surplus.


WGBH, which operates public television and radio stations in Boston, was able to
publicize the threat of Government proposals to cut Federal funds for public
broadcasting and translate it into higher private donations. Contributions
jumped 28 percent, to $35 million, in 1995, which the Chronicle of Philanthropy
called the biggest gain among public broadcasting systems. This year, they have
not managed another similar jump, but they have shown an increase of about 4
percent in membership fund raising.

The Republican takeover of Congress put new snap into environmental giving as
donors feared anti-environment action. Reflecting that trend, The Rainforest
Alliance, a small conservation organization that focuses on North American
forests as well as forests abroad, saw its individual donations jump to $352,000
last year from $276,000 the year before. Foundations and corporations also
raised their contributions to $835,000 from $538,000. (CHART FROM GIVING USA:
THE ANNUAL REPORT ON PHILANTHROPY FOR THE YEAR 1995. PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION OF FUND-RAISING COUNSEL TRUST FOR PHILANTHROPY.) (pg. 43)

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1996


                             2555 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    December 22, 1996, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1468 words

HEADLINE: Cancer 'war' called skirmish; Hopkins researcher demands more from 2nd
25 years of battle

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Twenty-five years after the United States launched an all-out "war on
cancer," the incoming president of America's top cancer research organization
asks, "What war?"

   His question comes despite recent evidence that cancer death rates have
finally started to decline after decades in which news from the battlefront was
usually discouraging.

   Nobody believes more fervently in the cause than Dr. Donald S. Coffey, a
Johns Hopkins researcher who decided to commit his life to cancer while
meditating beside a bread-wrapping machine in the Tennessee bakery where he once
worked.

   "See why I'm so excited about all the things happening in the field?" he
exclaimed recently, nearly leaping from his chair after describing experimental
gene therapies, cancer vaccines and molecular manipulations that might replace
the cruder treatments of today.

   But Coffey said efforts have been stymied by insufficient funding, leaving
many young researchers without the money to pursue imaginative strategies.

   "They're calling it a war when I say it's a skirmish," said Coffey, 64,
starting one of the impassioned, rhetorical rolls for which he is known.

   "I think one-tenth of a penny out of your tax dollar is not enough for
something that half the males and a third of the females are going to get and
one out of four people are going to die of.

   "You're going to have to die of something, but this is not one you want to
die from," Coffey said. "I don't want to frighten patients, but this is not
pleasant: Severe bone pain that can't always be controlled. Pathological
fractures."

   He went on, "I don't think we have to hang our heads in shame over the
progress that's been made. What we have to hang our heads in shame over is how
little money has been put into this.

   "I want a real war declared on cancer."

   In April, Coffey will start a one-year term as president of the American
Association for Cancer Research, an 8,000-member organization dedicated to the
exchange of new ideas.

   He said one of his primary missions will be to persuade the public -- and the
Congress -- that the $ 2.3 billion in federal money being spent this year on
cancer research is not nearly enough.

   Cancer is the No. 2 killer after heart disease, claiming more than a
half-million victims each year. After almost a century of steady increase,
cancer death rates fell between 1991 and 1995.

   The overall mortality rate, adjusted for age, dropped each year during the
period for a total decline of 2.6 percent.

   The largest reductions were among African-Americans, a group that has been
hit disproportionately hard by cancer. The decline was steepest among black men,
whose rate dropped 8.1 percent, compared with black women, whose rate declined
2.5 percent.

   But cancer mortality remains significantly higher among African-Americans
than whites. Dr. Richard Klausner, director of the National Cancer Institute,
blames the disparity on several factors, including poorer access to care and
less aggressive treatment.

   "One of the unacceptable facts of our nation's cancer burden is that it is
unevenly distributed among our population," Klausner said in this month's
Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

   Coffey's term comes as scientists and policy-makers are waiting to see
whether the decline represents a historical turning point, as Klausner contends,
or just a brief downturn.

   Tomorrow marks the anniversary of the day President Richard M. Nixon signed
legislation to increase federal oversight and funding for cancer research. He
promised "an unprecedented attack a great crusade." The president of the
American Cancer Society said it would be "the greatest thing ever done by the
United States."

   In 25 years, the nation has poured $ 28 billion into research. Half of the
money has been spent on basic science -- deciphering the inner workings of cells
-- while the rest has gone to treatments and prevention.

   Despite the assault, overall cancer deaths rose by 6.3 percent between 1973
and 1992. Huge strides were made against childhood cancers such as leukemia,
lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease and testicular cancer.

   But statistically, the improvements were overwhelmed by increased deaths from
lung and prostate cancers and many other malignancies that strike adults.

   The recent gains are modest, but Coffey said the quarter-century performance
is really better than one might think. If one sets aside lung cancer deaths -- a
big set-aside -- mortality from all other cancers declined 3.4 percent since
1976.

   He made that statistical leap for a reason: Lung cancer is, by far, the
largest cancer killer. Smoking accounts for nearly all cases but takes decades
to trigger the disease. And while the habit has been waning for many years,
society has only recently begun to see the reward that matters most -- fewer
deaths.

   There are several reasons for the progress against other cancers, he said.

   He credited better diagnostic procedures -- such as the PSA blood test for
prostate cancer -- that enable doctors to catch some tumors early enough to be
cured.

   He credited environmental and dietary improvements such as cleaner air and
the removal of nitrites from foods. And he credited new surgical techniques that
allow removal of diseased tissues with fewer side effects.

   In many cases, advances came not from breakthroughs but from new ways to use
old weapons. Doctors, for instance, have found safer and more effective
combinations of chemotherapy drugs long in use.

   Cancer is a relentless disease, triggered when genetic changes cause cells to
lose their shape and multiply out of control. The cells have an amazing capacity
to resist whatever therapy is thrown at them -- hormones, toxic chemotherapy,
even radiation. If only one cell is resistant, it can multiply and give a tumor
new life.

   "Traditional weapons against cancer are maddeningly indiscriminate, killing
not just cancer cells but healthy ones as well," he said.

   "We need tissue-specific and cancer-specific drugs. And that's what everybody
is working on. So you don't lose your hair and your bone marrow when you take
them.

   "We're trying to make them so they can be given in an outpatient setting, so
patients don't have to be hospitalized with all this big-time stuff that knocks
out all the systems of your body."

   Coffey, who heads the research arm of Hopkins' world-renowned urology
department, speaks with the folksy informality of Bristol, Tenn., where his
father ran a service station and Coffey could think of no higher goal than to
graduate with a business degree from East Tennessee State University.

   A dyslexic, he struggled through high school with C's. But Coffey worked
hard, earning a college chemistry degree in 1957 after his interests veered in a
new direction.

   Along the way, he worked in a bakery and a textile mill that made rayon tire
cord. It was in the bakery that he got the idea to determine his future through
meditation, a technique that he heard was practiced by Native Americans.

   "I didn't have anything else to do," he said. "I had to feed this machine
like a robot. It was not an easy thing to do. Thinking about not thinking is
thinking." But he resolved to meditate for two weeks.

   "All of a sudden, I got this overpowering feeling that I should work on
cancer. It was like this great big hunch. The thing that struck me was, 'You
egomaniac, that's like curing polio.' "

   At the state college, a chemistry teacher urged him to pursue graduate work
at John Hopkins University. There, he earned a doctorate in physiological
chemistry and rose through the faculty to win professorships in urology,
oncology and pharmacology.

   For all his brilliance, Coffey is comfortable explaining the principles of
cancer genetics with metaphors borrowed as often from pop culture as science.
When a cell turns cancerous, he said, it's like a juke box that is suddenly
wired to play the wrong record.

   "The normal cell is doing a minuet, and the cancer cell is doing the
jitterbug. It's really unstable. It's playing all sorts of crazy stuff. That's
what we're after."

   Scientists have made intellectual leaps in the past decade, he said, gaining
new understandings of the molecular underpinnings of cancer. They have found
genes that predispose people to six major cancers and, experimentally, are
trying to cure some cancers with gene therapies.

   Some are hoping to beat the disease with vaccines that would stimulate the
immune system to attack cancer from within.

   "This is one of the hardest biological and medical problems in the world, and
we're learning just how tough it is," said Coffey.

   "It isn't like we're short of things to do. Now, I'm going to roll up my
sleeves and really take after this war. We're going to have a real war on
cancer."

   Pub Date: 12/22/96

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, LLOYD FOX : SUN STAFF, Dr. Donald S. Coffeyzis president
of American Association for Cancer Research.; PHOTO, LLOYD FOX : SUN STAFF, In
the lab: Biology graduate student Alan Meeker works behind Dr. Donald S. Coffey
at Johns Hopkins Hospital.; GRAPH, National Cancer Institute/SUN STAFF, Cancer
death rates in 1991-'95 decline

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1996


                             2556 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    December 21, 1996 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 11B

LENGTH: 786 words

HEADLINE: MORE CANCER RESEARCH NEEDED

BYLINE: By Vincent T. DeVita Jr.

BODY:

   More than 10 million of our family members, friends, neighbors and co-workers
are alive today because of cancer research. Their survival is inextricably
linked to 25 years of advances in cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment
methods that have provided doctors with the information and tools necessary to
cure this complex constellation of diseases that have killed so many.

   It was 25 years ago - Dec. 23, 1971 - that Congress declared war on cancer,
approving the National Cancer Act. With the infusion of resources into cancer
research came an explosion in our ability to understand and manipulate the
cancer cell. Although a magic bullet for curing cancer is still not likely to be
found any time soon, the genetic revolution is providing for dramatic growth in
our knowledge about the disease. That knowledge, in turn, provides hope for
reducing the U.S. cancer burden.

   In 1971, only 38 percent of patients survived cancer. Today, more than half
of all people diagnosed with cancer will survive. New data released last month
indicate cause for even greater optimism. The figures show a drop in the overall
cancer death rate in the United States of nearly 3 percent between 1991 and
1995, the first sustained decline since national record keeping began in the
1930s.

   On several fronts:

   Death rates for children's cancers have declined by more than 60 percent
since the early 1970s. Because of advances in chemotherapy, radiotherapy and
bone-marrow transplantation, most cases of childhood leukemia are curable.

   Improvements in chemotherapy and hormonal treatments, as well as better
access to and greater use of mammography, finally has slowed breast cancer
mortality - down 6 percent since 1991.

   The mortality rate for prostate cancer also posted a 6 percent decline.

   Deaths from colon and rectal cancers were down as well - by 7 percent among
men and nearly 5 percent among women since 1991.

   And most cases of Hodgkin's disease - a blood cancer that strikes young
adults in the prime of their lives - and testicular cancer can be cured.

   We can expect even more advances from new approaches to cancer treatment.

   Yet, for all the progress we have made, more than one in four Americans still
will develop cancer, and more than one in five ultimately will die from it. At
the rate at which new cases are being detected, and because mortality from heart
disease is falling in the United States, cancer will, within five years, surpass
heart disease to become the leading cause of death in the United States.

   Despite these advances, progress until now largely is due to relatively crude
tools such as surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and some biologics. The real
promise in taming the outlaw cell that causes cancer lies in molecular medicine.

   New techniques, such as chemoprevention, coupled with genetic tests of
susceptibility, may help us treat high-risk patients with pre-malignant lesions,
stopping cancer before it develops.

   Gene therapy, in which defective cancer-causing genes are altered or
corrected, is here.

   Biological response modifiers can harness the body's own defenses in the
battle against cancer.

   It's time to renew our commitment - as a nation - to cancer research. During
the last decade, public support for cancer research rose only 18 percent, while
support for all biomedical research increased 33 percent.

   A recently released study by the Harvard School of Public Health, the World
Health Organization and the World Bank pointed out that governments, in their
view, are spending too many of their precious health dollars on infectious
diseases and too few on chronic conditions such as mental illness, heart disease
and cancer. The study predicts the biggest health problems of the next 25 years
to be those chronic conditions that largely affect the elderly. The changing
pattern is caused primarily by the aging of the world's population, as well as
by more deaths related to the growing use of tobacco. By the year 2020,
tobacco-related disease will become the world's greatest killer, causing one in
every 10 deaths, the study says.

   The implications are clear: Although AIDS has reminded us of the dangers of
infectious diseases and the need to remain vigilant in developed countries,
health resources need to be focused to prepare for this onslaught of
age-associated, chronic conditions - cancer chief among them. We stand on the
verge of dramatic breakthroughs in treatment and prevention.

   The 25th anniversary of the National Cancer Act is no time to sit back and
pat ourselves on the back. Rather, it is an opportunity to look ahead to all
that has yet to be accomplished. Let this anniversary renew national vigor and
support for cancer research.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING

COLUMN: A FORUM OF OPINION & IDEAS

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1996


                             2557 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1996 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     December 19, 1996 Thursday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D-01

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firms join forces on gene-therapy project Boulder, Calif.
companies seek speedier research

BYLINE: By David Algeo, Denver Post Business Writer

BODY:
 Boulder-based Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals Inc., a biotechnology company that is
commercializing the discoveries of Nobel laureate Tom Cech, is teaming up with a
California company to develop a machine that could speed the pace of
gene-therapy research.

   Through its new partnership with Palo Alto-based Protogene Laboratories Inc.,
Ribozyme should be able to increase the production of ribozymes, a form of
ribonucleic acid that can help identify disease-causing genes. Cech, a
biochemistry professor at the University of Colorado at Boulder, received the
Nobel Prize in 1989 for his work with RNA.

   Ribozymes are important in research because they can inhibit the functioning
of specific gene sequences. By shutting off select sequences, researchers can
determine which sequences play a causal role in genetic dis-eases.

   The Boulder company has shown that it can synthesize ribozymes in the
laboratory, said Ralph Christofferson, president and chief executive of
Ribozyme. "But making them fast enough and in large enough numbers     has been
a real roadblock," he said.

   "As a result of this relationship, we will be able to produce thousands of
ribozymes in a short period of time. That will allow us to use these ribozymes
for screening purposes," he said.

   Protogene already makes a machine that synthesizes DNA, or deoxyribonucleic
acid. The Boulder company will help Protogene modify the machine so it can
synthesize RNA. That shouldn't be an impossible leap, Christofferson said. A
fully operational machine should be ready within a year, he said.

   In connection with the deal, Ribozyme will buy an undisclosed amount of
Protogene's preferred shares. Ribozyme also will fund research. Additional
details about terms of the deal weren't released.

   Ribozyme stock closed yesterday at $ 11.625 a share, unchanged. For the
quarter that ended Sept. 30, the company reported a net loss of $ 3 million, or
44 cents a share, on revenues of $ 310,797. Ribozyme was founded in February
1992.

   The machine should prove a great asset for the fledgling company. Many large
drugmakers have invested heavily in genetic research but face difficulties in
determining which gene sequences cause health problems, Christofferson said.

   "A pharmaceutical company could say to us, 'We know 30 to 50 genes that are
implicated in a particular disease, but we don't know which are the important
ones. Can you help us decide which to attack?'

   "This is almost like a service business," he said. "We'll have opportunities
to work with any large pharmaceutical company that has sequences and wants to
know which are the best therapeutic targets."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Cech

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2558 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                   December 19, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 19

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: Renew the war on cancer

BYLINE: VINCENT T. DEVITA JR.

BODY:


   More than 10 million of our family members, friends, neighbors and co-workers
are alive today because of cancer research. Their survival is inextricably
linked to 25 years of advances in cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment
methods that have provided doctors with the information and tools necessary to
cure this complex constellation of diseases that have killed so many.

   It was 25 years ago - Dec. 23, 1971 - that Congress declared war on cancer,
approving the National Cancer Act. With the infusion of resources into cancer
research came an explosion in our ability to understand and manipulate the
cancer cell. Although a magic bullet for curing cancer is still not likely any
time soon, the genetic revolution is providing for dramatic growth in our
knowledge about the disease. That knowledge, in turn, provides hope for reducing
the United States' cancer burden.

   In 1971, only 38 percent of patients survived cancer. Today, more than half
of all people diagnosed with cancer will survive. New data released last month
indicate cause for even greater optimism - a virtual turning point in the war on
cancer. The figures show a drop in the overall cancer death rate in the United
States of nearly 3 percent between 1991 and 1995, the first sustained decline
since national record keeping began in the 1930s.

   On several fronts:  - Death rates for children's cancers have declined by
more than 60 percent since the early 1970s. Because of advances in chemotherapy,
radiotherapy and bone-marrow transplantation, most cases of childhood leukemia
are now curable.  - Improvements in chemotherapy and hormonal treatments, as
well as better access to and greater use of mammography, has finally slowed
breast cancer mortality - down 6 percent since 1991.  - The mortality rate for
prostate cancer also posted a 6 percent decline.  - Deaths from colon and rectal
cancers were down as well - by 7 percent among men and nearly 5 percent among
women since 1991.  - And most cases of Hodgkin's disease - a blood cancer that
strikes young adults in the prime of their lives - and testicular cancer can be
cured.

   Yet, for all the progress we have made, more than one in four Americans will
still develop cancer, and more than one in five will ultimately die from it. At
the rate at which new cases are being detected, and because mortality from heart
disease is falling, cancer will, within five years, surpass heart disease to
become the leading cause of death in the United States.

   Despite these advances, progress until now largely is due to relatively crude
tools such as surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and some biologics. The real
promise in taming the outlaw cell that causes cancer lies in molecular medicine.

   New techniques, such as chemoprevention, coupled with genetic tests of
susceptibility, may help us treat high-risk patients with pre-malignant lesions,
stopping cancer before it develops.

   Gene therapy, in which defective cancer-causing genes are altered or
corrected, is here.

   Biological response modifiers can harness the body's own defenses in the
battle against cancer.

   It's time to renew our commitment to cancer research. During the last decade,
public support for cancer research rose only 18 percent, while support for all
biomedical research increased 33 percent.

   A recently released study by the Harvard School of Public Health, the World
Health Organization and the World Bank pointed out that governments, in their
view, are spending too many of their precious health dollars on infectious
diseases and too few on chronic conditions such as mental illness, heart disease
and cancer.

   The study predicts the biggest health problems of the next 25 years to be
those chronic conditions which largely affect the elderly. The changing pattern
is caused primarily by the aging of the world's population, as well as by more
deaths related to the growing use of tobacco. By the year 2020, tobacco-related
disease will become the world's greatest killer, causing one in every 10 deaths,
the study says.

   The implications are clear: Although AIDS has reminded us of the dangers of
infectious diseases and the need to remain vigilant in developed countries,
health resources need to be focused to prepare for this onslaught of
age-associated, chronic conditions - cancer chief among them.  Vincent T. DeVita
Jr., director of the Yale Cancer Center and a former director of the National
Cancer Institute, wrote this for The Hartford Courant.

NOTES: COMMENTARY

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1996


                             2559 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  December 18, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: AT&T will cut rates on long-distance calls within Maryland 17%

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   AT&T Corp. said yesterday that it will cut rates on long-distance calls
within Maryland by an average of 17 percent for residential customers, effective
Jan. 1.

   The reduction will save AT&T customers $ 18 million annually, but does not
affect rates for interstate phone calls. Prices could drop up to 30 percent on
some calls, the Basking Ridge, N.J.-based long-distance giant said.

   The state Public Service Commission set the stage for the cut last month when
it ordered Bell Atlantic Corp. to cut $ 32 million in fees it charges
long-distance companies such as AT&T for connecting long-distance calls from
customers' phones to long-distance networks.

$ 348 Cleveland-to-Europe flight to connect at BWI

   Southwest Airlines and Icelandair, two carriers that have long specialized in
discount fares, have signed a joint marketing agreement for flights between
Cleveland and cities that Icelandair serves in Europe.

   Southwest will fly passengers from Cleveland to Baltimore-Washington
International Airport, where they can continue via Icelandair to Reykjavik and
then to the airline's European destinations. Under the test program,
reservations and ticketing will be handled by Icelandair, but the two airlines
will not share the same code when tickets are issued.

   Airline officials said a special, restricted round-trip fare of $ 348 from
Cleveland to Luxembourg would kick off the new program. The fare is good for
travel between Jan. 22 and Feb. 28. The marketing program ultimately may be
expanded to the other cities that Southwest serves from BWI.

Monarch Avalon's profits jump with sales

   A 41 percent increase in sales boosted the second-quarter fortunes of Monarch
Avalon Inc., the Baltimore game and printing firm, the company reported
yesterday.

   Monard Avalon said it made $ 112,000, or 7 cents a share, on sales of $ 2.5
million in the quarter ended Oct. 31. That compared with $ 4,000 profit on sales
of $ 1.77 million in the year-earlier quarter.

   For the six-month period, Monarch Avalon narrowed its loss to $ 66,000, or 4
cents a share, from $ 132,000, or 8 cents a share, a year ago. Sales were $ 3.7
million, up 11 percent from $ 3.3 million in the prior year.

Preliminary hearing delayed for former Texaco executive

   A preliminary hearing in the case of former Texaco Inc. executive Richard
Lundwall, who is charged with obstruction of justice in a racial discrimination
case, has been delayed until Jan. 15 while prosecutors negotiate with his
lawyer, according to court papers released yesterday. The documents said the
delay was sought by the government in the case because Lundwall's lawyer is
talking with prosecutors on certain issues, "including the possible disposition
of the case without trial."

   A spokesman for the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York would
not comment further.

FAA probing soundness of converted 727s

   Federal Aviation Administration officials are investigating potential
structural problems with converted Boeing Co. 727 freighters used throughout the
air cargo industry.

   FAA spokesman Mitch Barker said the problem did not affect 727s that were
originally delivered by Boeing as freighters, but he added that the FAA was
looking into passenger aircraft converted under agency-approved engineering
designs.

Romandetti is named president of Denny's

   Flagstar Cos. has named John Romandetti as president of Denny's, the nation's
largest full-service family restaurant chain, effective Jan. 6.

   Romandetti, who was president of Flagstar's El Pollo Loco restaurant unit, is
expected to help boost Denny's performance, which has foundered even as its
parent company has worked to improve its operations for two years. Revenue at
the 1,600-restaurant chain fell 18 percent to $ 305.7 million in its first
quarter.

   In 1994, Flagstar paid $ 54.7 million to settle racial discrimination
lawsuits against Denny's filed by hundreds of black customers, including one
suit involving its Annapolis store.

Smith named editor of National Journal

   Stephen G. Smith, editor of Civilization, yesterday was named editor of the
weekly magazine National Journal.

   Smith will assume his duties next month, said John Fox Sullivan, president
and publisher of the Journal, a unit of the Times Mirror Co. He will replace
Richard S. Frank, who is retiring. The magazine reports on political and public
affairs. Previously, Smith, 47, was Washington news editor for Knight-Ridder
newspapers, executive editor of Newsweek and national editor of Time. He also
was an editor and reporter at the Boston Globe and Philadelphia Inquirer.

No more major hurdles to birth of new drug giant

   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of
drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. yesterday, after winning an
agreement to ensure competition in development and commercialization of
gene-therapy treatments.

   The new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have major operations in
Europe and the United States, and would be the second largest pharmaceutical
company in the world. The merger of the two Swiss companies already has been
approved by Swiss and European Union authorities, and shareholders of both
corporations.

   Pub Date: 12/18/96

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2560 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



            December 18, 1996, WEDNESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; THE TICKER; WORLD; Pg. 70

LENGTH: 182 words

BODY:


   Japan boosts women's rights TOKYO -- Ten years after Japan passed an
equal-opportunity law for women, the government plans to add some teeth to it by
publicizing the names of violators and specifically barring sexual harassment. A
Labor Ministry panel recommended strengthening the protections against
discrimination, although the steps still fall far short of American or European
standards.

   FTC OKs merger of Sandoz, Ciba-Geigy WASHINGTON -- The Federal Trade
Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of drug giants Ciba-Geigy
Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd., after winning an agreement designed to ensure competition
in development of gene-therapy treatments. The new company, to be called
Novartis AG, will be based in Basel, Switzerland.

   Nissan expects sales increase TOKYO -- Nissan Motor Co., one of Japan's
leading automakers, said it expects domestic sales to increase to 1.16 million
units in 1997, up 3.7 percent from the 1.12 million units projected in 1996. The
company said it expects 1997 export sales to rise by 3.3 percent on the year to
600,000 units.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2561 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1996 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     December 18, 1996 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D-02

LENGTH: 1193 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFING

BODY:
 ATRIX SALES PACT AT $ 50 MILLION: Atrix Laboratories Inc., of Fort Collins, has
licensed its first three products for treating periodontal disease to Block Drug
Co. in an agreement that could generate more than $ 50 million. Block, which
makes Polident denture cleaner, Sensodyne toothpaste and professional dental
products, will market the Atrix products in North America and Europe. One of the
products is Atrisorb, a barrier that helps guide damaged tissue to regrow around
a tooth to prevent its loss. Another is Atridox, awaiting approval by the FDA, a
gel for treating periodontal infections. And a third product is still in
development. Atrix will receive milestone payments that could top $ 50 million
in the next three to five years, in addition to revenue from Block and royalties
on sales. Atrix will make the products, and Block will retail them. (Bloomberg)
STABLE INTEREST BOOSTS MARKET: Stocks rose yesterday, defying a drop in bond
prices, as investors got confirmation that the Federal Reserve was leaving
short-term interest rates unchanged and as IBM regained some lost ground. The
Dow Jones industrial average finished up 39.98 to close at 6,308.33. The
blue-chip index fell by 32 points at the open but climbed back into positive
territory by late morning, at one point rising more than 56 points in the
afternoon. Declining issues narrowly led advancers on the New York Stock
Exchange. NYSE volume was heavy at 519.84 million shares, up significantly from
Monday's pace. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 5.06 to 726.04, the
NYSE's composite index rose 1.92 to 382.77, and the Nasdaq composite index rose
5.34 to 1,266.32. But the American Stock Exchange's market value index declined
2.26 to 570.31. (AP) DAKOTA ENDS CANADA MERGER TALKS: Dakota Mining Corp., of
Denver, yesterday terminated merger discussions with Ariel Resources Ltd., a
Canadian company. Dakota Mining operations vice president Joe Kircher said the
gold mining company dropped Ariel based "on the results of the due diligence
process." Kircher said company executives are looking at other possible partners
in North and South America. The publicly held company operates gold mines in
South Dakota and Idaho. (The Denver Post) U.S. PAWN EYES NEVADA PURCHASES: U.S.
Pawn Inc. said yesterday that it has nonbinding letters of intent to acquire
total interest in two pawn shops in Las Vegas and Henderson, Nev., in exchange
for $ 1 million of U.S. Pawn Inc. common stock, valued on the date of the sale,
and $ 700,000 in cash. No closing date is set, and the sale depends on
overcoming several contingencies, such as approval by the directors of U.S. Pawn
and the shareholders of owners of the Nevada properties. (The Denver Post)
BUSINESS DEAN SETS RETIREMENT: The interim dean of Colorado's largest school of
business will retire in June 1997 after three years in the position. Michael
Brown has been with Metropolitan State College of Denver for 26 years, the last
three as acting dean in the business school. The school is composed of six
departments: accounting, computer information systems & management science,
economics, finance, management and marketing. A national search for a new dean
is under way. (The Denver Post) MAIL-WELL TO JOIN NYSE: Mail-Well Inc., based in
Englewood, said yesterday that it expects to list its common stock on the New
York Stock Exchange and begin trading by Thursday, using the stock symbol MWL.
Mail-Well specializes in customized envelopes and high-impact color printing and
was recently recognized by "American Printer" magazine - in it annual survey of
the top 100 printers - as the 16th-largest and fastest-growing printer in North
America. (The Denver Post) MAX IS BACK IN THE AIR: Mountain Air Express returned
to the air for a third day of operations yesterday after some of the commuter
airline's flights were delayed and grounded due to snow a day earlier. MAX, a
subsidiary of Western Pacific Airlines, launched commercial service to
Colorado's Western Slope on Sunday, with 16 flights out of the Colorado Springs
Municipal Airport to Gunnison and Aspen. The airline, which on Friday was
certified to fly by the Federal Aviation Administration after two delays,
expected to add four flights by Friday and six more by Dec. 26, company
officials said. The airline seeks to cash in on the lucrative ski industry by
offering low fares and frequent flights to Colorado ski resorts. (AP) TIGHTENING
OF BANKRUPTCY LAW URGED: Bankers urged a federal bankruptcy reform panel
yesterday to fix flaws in the law that allow consumers to wipe away their debts
even if they have the resources to repay some part of their obligations. Reform
supporters presented research that suggested a significant number of consumers
were being granted full relief of their debts under Chapter 7 bankruptcy
protection when they would have qualified for a repayment plan. Chapter 7 of the
bankruptcy code, which wipes out all debts, is used in 70 percent of personal
bankruptcies. (AP) DRUG GIANT MERGER GETS OK: The Federal Trade Commission
removed the last major hurdle to the merger of drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and
Sandoz Ltd. yesterday after winning an agreement designed to ensure competition
in development of gene-therapy treatments. The new company will be called
Novartis AG. (AP) FAA WEIGHS PAYLOAD LIMITS: In response to safety concerns, the
Federal Aviation Administration is examining payload limits for modified
aircraft flown by many air-freight carriers, an official said yesterday. The
concerns center on modifications made by third-party aviation companies to
convert passenger planes into cargo freighters. (AP) AUTO-TROL STOCK CLIMBS ON
NASDAQ : The stock of Auto-trol Technology Corp., of Denver, went up by nearly
42 percent yesterday on the Nasdaq Small-Cap Market System. The company's stock
closed at $ 4.25 yesterday, up from $ 3. Autro-trol, which trades under ATTC, is
a software developer and systems integrator of graphics and information
technology. (The Denver Post) TEXACO AIDE'S FATE IN QUESTION: The Texaco
executive who taped meetings where company managers belittled blacks and plotted
to destroy documents is cooperating with prosecutors and may get the charge
against him resolved without a trial, according to court papers. Richard
Lundwall "is and has been engaging in discussions with the government
including the possible disposition of the case without trial," according to
court papers filed Monday in U.S. District Court in White Plains, N.Y. (AP) GAS
RESERVES: St. Mary Land & Exploration Co., of Denver, said yesterday that it has
added 26.4 billion cubic feet of natural gas to its net proven reserves from its
Box Church Field in East Texas. Mark Hellerstein, president and CEO, said, "The
proved reserves added from Box Church alone during 1996 are equal to 35 percent
of our total company proved gas reserves as of Dec. 31, 1995." He added that
with the success in the Box Church field and other areas that "we expect record
production replacement in 1996." The company has diversified exploration and
production holdings throughout the U.S. (The Denver Post)

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2562 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   December 18, 1996, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

HEADLINE: NATION/WORLD;
HEALTH;
 Ciba-Geigy/Sandoz Deal Gets Initial FTC OK

BYLINE: Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:


   The Federal Trade Commission conditionally approved the merger of Swiss drug
giants Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, a deal that would create the world's
second-largest drug company, Novartis. The agency said it would require a record
$ 1-billion-plus in divestitures and licensing to preserve competition in key
areas. The agreement seeks to ensure a strong second player in the new field of
gene therapy, a market the U.S. government estimates will mushroom to $ 45
billion by 2010. Sandoz agreed to license some gene therapy technology to
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. so that firm could compete against the merged
companies. Novartis will probably come into being to challenge giant
Glaxo-Wellcome of Britain within three months, pending final FTC action after a
60-day comment period.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2563 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       December 18, 1996 Wednesday Final

SECTION: Business Pg. 1

LENGTH: 112 words

HEADLINE: FTC clears drug merger

BODY:

   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of
drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. on Tuesday, after winning an
agreement designed to ensure competition in development of gene-therapy
treatments. The new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have major
operations in Europe and the United States. The merger of the two Swiss
companies already has been approved by the Swiss and European Union authorities,
as well as shareholders of the two corporations. Analysts say Novartis, to be
based in Basel, Switzerland, would be the second-largest pharmaceutical company
in the world, with sales of more than $26 billion a year.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2564 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               December 18, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 7; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: F.T.C., Gaining Concessions, Approves Swiss Drug Merger

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 17

BODY:

   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle today to the
merger of the Swiss drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd., after winning
an agreement intended to insure competition in the development of gene therapy
treatments.

   The companies also agreed to the divestiture of two businesses.

    The merger, which will result in a company to be called Novartis A.G., has
already been approved by the Swiss and European Union authorities as well as by
shareholders of the two corporations.

   The agreement on gene therapy calls for the licensing of specified gene
therapy technology and patent rights to a French-American competitor,
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., so it would be in a position to compete against
Novartis.

   Gene therapy is generally expected to begin providing significant
improvements in the treatment of cancer and other diseases by 2000.

   "This case is about saving lives," said William J. Baer, director of the
commission's bureau of competition. "Today there are two firms racing to develop
new gene therapies to combat deadly diseases. This deal threatened to eliminate
that competition. Our order insures that this sprint to the finish line will
continue."

   In addition, Sandoz has agreed to sell its American and Canadian corn
herbicide business to the BASF Corporation for about $780 million, one of the
largest divestitures ever required by the F.T.C. Sandoz also agreed to sell its
flea control business to the Central Garden and Pet Company of Lafayette, Calif.

   The commission said the agreements had resolved its antitrust concerns about
the merger.

   As soon as the commission's approval became known, the two companies
announced from their separate headquarters in Basel, Switzerland, that they
planned to formally establish Novartis on Friday and that shares of the new
company would begin trading on the Swiss stock exchange on Monday.

   Analysts have said Novartis, which will be based in Basel, will be the
second-largest pharmaceutical company in the world, with annual sales of more
than $26 billion. The biggest is Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C., based in Britain.

   Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz have said that the merger will result in the
elimination of about 12,000 jobs worldwide, about 10 percent of the combined
payroll of the two companies. They said they expected the combination to create
new jobs over the long term. It was not known immediately how many of the 12,000
jobs to be eliminated would be in the United States.

   Ciba-Geigy is the largest of Switzerland's pharmaceutical companies, with
sales last year of $18 billion. Its American subsidiary is the Ciba-Geigy
Corporation, based in Tarrytown, N.Y. Sandoz, whose United States subsidiary is
the Sandoz Corporation, based in New York, had 1995 sales of $13.2 billion. The
two companies announced their merger plans last March.


LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2565 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               December 18, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Dow Up 39.98 Points As I.B.M. Rises
Stocks rose as the Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged. I.B.M. climbed
sharply, recouping some of its losses from a selloff in computer-related shares
that began last week and giving impetus to the Dow industrials, which finished
up 39.98 points, at 6,308.33.

   Though the broader market did not do as well as the blue chips -- declining
issues led advancers on the New York Stock Exchange -- the Nasdaq composite
managed to rise 5.34 points, closing at 1,266.32. [Page D8.]

The Frontier Corporation, stung by the loss of a big wholesale customer, warned
analysts that its long-distance telephone revenue would be well below analysts'
expectations. Its shares tumbled 21 percent in heavy trading. [D5.]

The prices of Treasury securities fell following a November housing report that
was stronger than expected. The 30-year bond yield rose to 6.65 percent from
6.62 percent. [D18.]

Conrail Shareholder Vote Ordered
A judge ordered Conrail to let shareholders vote on a crucial aspect of its $8.5
billion deal to merge with CSX. A group of investors questioned the merger's
fairness. [D2.]

Deadline Near in Prudential Case
The last opportunity for policyholders of Prudential Insurance to battle the
company on their own over whether they were cheated by agents is this week. A
lawyer said that by last week, about 9,000 policyholders had declared that they
were opting out of a class-action settlement, not nearly enough for the company
to withdraw from the settlement. [D4.]

LVMH Proceeding With DFS Deal
LVMH Moet-Hennessy Louis Vuitton, one of the world's leading purveyors of
high-priced perfume, liquor and other luxury goods, won the go-ahead for its
$2.47 billion deal for a controlling interest in the DFS Group, a chain of
duty-free shops that sells its wares. [D2.]

American Home Products in Deal
American Home Products said that it was exercising an option to buy 40 percent
of Genetics Institute that it does not already own for about $1 billion. Last
week an F.D.A. panel recommended approval of Genetics' blood clotting treatment
for hemophilia B. [D4.]

Goldman, Sachs Profits Surge
Goldman, Sachs said that its pretax earnings rose 69 percent in the fiscal
fourth quarter, to $743 million. Thanks to a boom in underwritings and mergers,
Wall Street is on track for record profits this year. [D2.]

With the lean times apparently over for now, employees on Wall Street are not
just busy making deals. They are partying, too. The champagne is flowing at
rates not seen since the 80's, and the current wave of consumption is no less
lavish. But it is intricately choreographed to seem less conspicuous. [B1.]

F.T.C. Clears Ciba-Sandoz Merger
The F.T.C. removed the last hurdle to the merger of Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, after
winning an agreement intended to insure competition in the development of gene
therapy treatments. The companies also agreed to sell two businesses. [D7.]

2d Flu Shot Urged for Some
Because 5.8 million of the 75 million doses of flu vaccine produced this season
were not full strength, Federal health officials advised doctors to consider
giving another shot to some people. The vaccine with some weakened doses was
Fluogen, made by Warner Lambert's Parke-Davis division. [A18.]


   Going Public in a New Tokyo Market
ATL Systems, a five-year-old Japanese software company that lost $230,000 on
sales of $120,000 last year, went public in Tokyo, where its shares closed up 51
percent. It is the first company to use a new over-the-counter market for
developing technology companies that want to go public. Market Place. [D8.]

The 240Z, New for '97
Nissan has been buying up 240Z sports cars from the early 1970's, intending to
sell them after they have been restored. Though the cars will lack amenities
like air bags and cup holders, one thing about them will be updated for the 90's
-- the price. Advertising. [D6.]

GRAPHIC: Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow Industrials -- 6,308.33 up 39.98
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 6.65% up 0.03
The Dollar -- 113.88 yen down 0.02

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2566 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     DECEMBER 18, 1996 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 1368 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   In the Region TRAVEL ONE ACQUIRES CLEVELAND AGENCY * Travel One, Mount
Laurel, said it had acquired Premier Travel Partners, Cleveland, a move that
would make Travel One the nation's seventh-largest travel agency. The agency
said it expected to sell $670 million worth of travel to clients in 1996 from
450 airline-ticketing locations. Premier has 80 ticketing locations in Ohio and
the Chicago area. Terms of the deal, set to close Dec. 29, weren't disclosed.

   LOCAL HOLIDAY INN INCLUDED IN PURCHASE * The Holiday Inn Select hotel at 1800
Market St. is part of an agreement by Bristol Hotel Co., Dallas, to buy 61 U.S.
and Canadian Holiday Inns owned or managed by Bass of the United Kingdom,
Britain's biggest pub operator. The 445-room Philadelphia hotel, which has been
owned by Bass, will be owned and managed by Bristol after the deal closes,
probably early next year.

   In the transaction, valued at $659 million, Bristol will issue to Bass 9.37
million shares of Bristol common stock, buy some hotel assets for $91 million,
and provide for the retirement of $300 million of existing debt to Bass, Bristol
said. Bristol added that it would become the largest owner-operator of
full-service hotels in North America and the world's largest Holiday Inn
franchisee.

   INTEGRA RECEIVES NERVE-REGENERATION GRANT * Integra LifeSciences Corp.,
Plainsboro, N.J., said it was awarded a Phase 1 research grant, the sixth
research grant in the last three months, bringing the company's grant total in
the third quarter of 1996 to more than $675,000. The most recent grant, awarded
by the National Institutes of Health, will allow the company to further develop
its peripheral nerve-regeneration product.

   SHAREHOLDERS APPROVE BANKING FIRMS' MERGER * Shareholders of Prime Bancorp
Inc., Fort Washington, and First Sterling Bancorp Inc., Devon, approved the
merger of the two institutions. The proposed combination is expected to be
completed Dec. 31. The merger has been approved by the Federal Reserve and the
Pennsylvania Department of Banking. The combined organizations will have assets
exceeding $900 million and branches at 23 locations in Philadelphia, Bucks,
Montgomery, Chester and Delaware Counties. Prime Bancorp Nasdaq close: $19.25,
down 25 cents.

   PENN MUTUAL PICKS CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT * The board of trustees of Penn Mutual
Life Insurance Co. has elected Robert E. Chappell chairman of the board and
Daniel J. Toran president. Both will assume their new duties on Jan. 1.
Chappell, 52, joined Penn Mutual as president in January 1994 and was appointed
chief executive officer in April 1995. He succeeds John E. Tait, who retired as
board chairman. Toran, 48, joined Penn Mutual in 1996 as executive vice
president.

   BUFFALO FIRM BUYS PARKING FIRM NEAR AIRPORT * SunPark Inc., Buffalo, has
bought Flying Carport Airport Valet Parking Service, 7060 Essington Ave., near
Philadelphia International Airport. Terms were not disclosed. SunPark also owns
and operates Park N' Go airport parking, One Scott Way, and other parking
facilities near airports in Buffalo; Columbus, Ohio; Boston; Washington; and
Memphis, Tenn.

   HUMAN-RESOURCES CONSULTANT TO BUY 2D FIRM * Raymond Karsan Associates, a
Wayne human-resource consultancy, will acquire SDA Corp., a similar firm in
Rolling Meadows, Ill., near Chicago. The combined firm will offer executive
search, recruiting, temporary staffing and other services nationwide and in
Britain and India. Karsan's strengths are on the East and West Coasts, while SDA
operates primarily in the Midwest and Southwest.

   Elsewhere FTC GIVES THE NOD TO CIBA-SANDOZ MERGER * The U.S. Federal Trade
Commission granted provisional approval to an agreement with Swiss
pharmaceutical companies Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, clearing the way for their
merger under a new name, Novartis. The new company, headquartered in
Switzerland, will be launched formally on Friday. The merger, announced in
March, is being conducted through an exchange of shares.

   Under a consent decree with the FTC, Novartis will divest Sandoz's
corn-herbicide and animal-health businesses, with combined 1996 sales of $390
million. Novartis also agreed to provide access to some of its gene-therapy
discoveries.

   SOUTHWEST AIRLINES HOOKS UP WITH ICELANDAIR * Southwest Airlines Co., Dallas,
has agreed to link one of its daily flights with Icelandair, Bloomberg Business
News reported. Passengers will, for example, be able to fly round-trip from
Cleveland to Luxembourg for $348 starting next month. The agreement calls for
Southwest to fly passengers from Cleveland to the Baltimore/Washington
International Airport. There, they will board an Icelandair flight to Iceland
and from there fly to destinations in Britain and continental Europe.

   GM IS DROPPING THE GEO NAME Seven years after General Motors Corp. created
the Geo brand to entice people who usually bought import cars, the automaker is
dropping the name but will continue to sell the Metro, Prizm and Tracker, which
made up the group, and call them Chevys. Chevrolet general manager John
Middlebrook said the Chevrolet image and products had improved to the point
where it no longer needed the Geo badge to bring in new buyers. The name change
will start with the 1998 model year vehicles.

   SIBLING RIVALRY BOOSTS VALUE LINE DIVIDEND * Value Line Inc. said it would
pay an extraordinary dividend of $15 a share as part of a settlement of a legal
dispute between the company's majority owners, who are siblings. Value Line, a
publisher of investment guides, said the total amount of the dividend would be
$149.7 million. The dividend will be paid Jan. 2 to shareholders of record Dec.
26.

   Eighty percent of Value Line, New York, is owned by Arnold Bernhard & Co.,
which is, in turn, controlled by Value Line chairman and chief executive Jean
Bernhard Buttner and her twin brother, Arnold Van Hoven Bernhard. Earlier this
year, Van Hoven Bernhard sued his sister and the holding company in New York,
alleging she failed to represent the interests of minority shareholders in the
holding company.

   SEC TO EASE RULES ON SECONDARY STOCK OFFERINGS * The Securities and Exchange
Commission today is expected to adopt a rule that would relax trading
restrictions on stocks and bonds in the days before companies sell new issues of
the securities to the public, SEC officials said. The new regulation, which, if
approved, would go into effect in two months, seeks to lift unnecessary burdens
on issuers and underwriters of secondary offerings while preserving safeguards
against price manipulation, Bloomberg Business News reported.

   SOON, 'FRESH' CHICKEN WILL HAVE WARMER MEANING * Starting next December,
supermarket chickens can carry the "fresh" label only if they have never been
chilled below 26 degrees, the Agriculture Department said in a final rule. It
ends a long dispute that pitted California poultry producers and consumer groups
against the majority of broiler makers in Arkansas and the rest of the South.
Before the rule, chickens could be labeled "fresh" even if they had been chilled
to nearly 0 degrees. Poultry below zero must be labeled "frozen."

   BOND TRADER JAILED AFTER TRYING TO CORNER MARKET * A federal judge sentenced
a former Chicago Board of Trade bond trader to 41 months in prison for trying to
corner the market on Treasury bills, a scheme that cost investment firms about
$8 million. Darrell Zimmerman, 36, had pleaded guilty in September to two counts
of wire fraud. U.S. District Judge William Hart also ordered Zimmerman to serve
three years of supervised release after he is released from prison and to be
deported to his native Canada. Zimmerman also must pay $10,000 in restitution.

   The Bottom Line The European Union's unemployment rate remained at 10.9
percent in October, the same as in each of the previous five months. . . .
American Home Products Corp., Madison, N.J., said it was exercising an option to
buy the 40 percent of Genetics Institute Inc., Cambridge, Mass., that it did not
already own for about $1 billion. . . . Commonwealth Bancorp Inc., Valley Forge,
said it would repurchase up to 394,886 shares of its stock.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2567 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 18, 1996, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. C-20

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: FTC OKS MERGER OF CIBA-GEIGY AND SANDOZ

BYLINE: MARCY GORDON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of
drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. yesterday, after winning an
agreement designed to ensure competition in development of gene-therapy
treatments.

The new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have major operations in Europe
and the United States. The merger of the two Swiss companies already has been
approved by the Swiss and European Union authorities as well as shareholders of
the two corporations.

   Analysts have said Novartis, to be based in Basel, Switzerland, would be the
second largest pharmaceutical company in the world, with annual sales of about $
26.5 billion. The biggest is Glaxo Wellcome Plc, based in Britain.

   As soon as the FTC's approval became known, the two companies announced from
their respective headquarters in Basel that they planned to formally establish
Novartis on Friday and that shares of the new company would begin trading on the
Swiss stock exchange Monday.

   Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz have said previously that the merger would eliminate
about 12,000 jobs worldwide, about 10 percent of the two companies' combined
payroll. They said they expected the combination to create new jobs over the
long term.

   Sheldon Jones, a spokesman for the new company, said yesterday that some
1,400 of the 12,000 jobs to be eliminated would be in the United States.

   Ciba-Geigy AG is the largest of Switzerland's pharmaceutical companies, with
sales last year of $ 18 billion. Its U.S. subsidiary is Ciba-Geigy Corp., based
in Tarrytown, N.Y. Sandoz AG, whose U.S. subsidiary is New York City-based
Sandoz Corp., had 1995 sales of $ 13.2 billion. The two companies announced
their merger plans last March.

   In announcing approval of the merger, the FTC said it had reached an
agreement with the two companies designed to protect competition in the
development and commercialization of gene-therapy treatments, a field in which
both are leaders.

   Gene therapy is generally expected to begin providing significant
improvements in the treatment of cancer and other diseases by 2000.

   The new agreement calls for the licensing of specified gene-therapy
technology and patent rights to a competitor, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., so that
the French-American company would be in a position to compete against Novartis.
The FTC said that would resolve its antitrust concerns about the merger.

   ''This case is about saving lives,'' said William J. Baer, director of the
FTC's bureau of competition. ''Today there are two firms racing to develop new
gene therapies to combat deadly diseases. This (merger) deal threatened to
eliminate that competition. Our order ensures that this sprint to the finish
line will continue.''

   In addition, Sandoz has agreed to sell its U.S. and Canadian corn herbicide
business to U.S. chemical company BASF Corp. for some $ 780 million - one of the
largest divestitures ever required by the FTC - and its flea-control business to
Central Garden & Pet Co., based in Lafayette, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2568 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    December 18, 1996 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BODY:

   INTERNATIONAL

   LESS OIL

   A new oil field in central Colombia billed by the government as the nation's
largest has less than a third of the predicted reserves. The Coporo field, about
60 miles east of Bogota, will yield 300 million to 350 million barrels of oil,
El Tiempo newspaper reported. President Ernesto Samper and Rodrigo Villamizar,
the energy and mines minister, said preliminary tests indicated the field had
reserves of 1.5 billion barrels. Coporo is a rich field, but drilling problems
make it hard to extract all the oil.

   NATIONAL

   DEAL OK'D

   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of
drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. yesterday, after winning an
agreement designed to ensure competition in development of gene-therapy
treatments. The merger of the two Swiss companies has been approved by the Swiss
and European Union authorities as well as shareholders of the two corporations.
Analysts have said Novartis AG, the name of the new company based in Basel,
Switzerland, would be the second largest pharmaceutical company in the world,
with annual sales of around $26.5 billion. The biggest is Glaxo Wellcome PLC in
Britain.

   CHICKEN FEED

   Boston Chicken Inc., operator of the Boston Market restaurant chain, said it
secured a $300 million line of credit to help finance its expansion. The
financing was provided by a group of U.S. and international financial companies,
led by Bank of America Corp. and General Electric Capital Corp., the Golden,
Colo., company said. In October, Boston Chicken said it planned to boost its
total restaurants to 4,000 in five to seven years from its current 1,030. It
expected to open 325 stores next year and have 2,000 in operation by 1999.

   PAYLOADS

   In response to safety concerns, the Federal Aviation Administration is
examining payload limits for modified aircraft flown by many air-freight
carriers. The concerns center on modifications made by third-party aviation
companies to convert passenger planes into cargo freighters. Among the planes
being reviewed are the modified Boeing 727-100, certain Boeing 737s, DC-8s and
A310s. Planes modified by Boeing are not being scrutinized.

   PAYDAY

   Savings and loans that won a Supreme Court battle for the right to sue the
U.S. government may soon find out whether that victory will produce a big
payoff. A federal judge is scheduled to hear arguments today on how much money
S&L operators can seek in dozens of lawsuits over a 1989 federal accounting rule
change that wiped billions of dollars in paper assets off the books of troubled
thrifts. The S&Ls, led by California's Glendale Federal Bank, say they should be
able to recover not only their direct losses from the rule change, but billions
of dollars in potential profits they lost because Congress outlawed an
accounting maneuver known as supervisory goodwill.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2569 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                  DECEMBER 18, 1996, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 803 words

HEADLINE: FDA Approves Anti-HIV Gene Testing
 Therapy trials to be used to bolster immune systems

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    Biotechnology researchers have won government approval to begin the first
human gene therapy trials against AIDS based on a discovery that Stanford
scientists made nearly a decade ago.

   The tests seek to supply AIDS patients with newly formed and fully
functioning cells of their own immune systems that are genetically capable of
preventing HIV, the AIDS virus, from reproducing after the virus has already
infected them.

   At a meeting last week of the American Society of Hematology in Orlando,
Fla., scientists reported that they had successfully tested their new anti-HIV
gene therapy concept in a remarkable colony of mice that were altered to carry
the entire immune systems of humans rather than their own.

   Now community-based physicians working with researchers at a Palo Alto
company called SyStemix are about to recruit 60 volunteers -- some only recently
infected with the AIDS virus, and others already ill with advanced HIV disease.
The volunteers are to start receiving the experimental therapy early next month.

   The team of physicians and molecular biologists intend to move slowly and
cautiously during their first human trials because they know that what seems to
work spectacularly in mice may well fail in humans, said Dr. Christopher
Juttner, chief of medical research at SyStemix.

   Some aspects of the effort to modify the immune system that does not involve
gene therapy have already begun in attempts to halt the spread of various forms
of cancer, and clinical trials of the work are under way in France and the
United States in clinical trials of new approaches to prevent the spread of
cancer, according to Juttner.

   In the first gene therapy trial, which starts next month, doctors will remove
bone marrow from the volunteers and separate out a crucial and highly
specialized class of cells called stem cells that lie deep within the marrow of
humans and animals.

    Stem cells are known as the ''mothers'' of every person's complete blood
supply. They are vitally important because within the marrow they continuously
reproduce themselves and serve as the unique progenitors of all the body's red
blood cells and platelets, as well as all the differentiated white cells that
comprise each individual's immune system. Among that system's cells are the
varied T-cells that are most often attacked by the invading AIDS virus and the
macrophages that normally scavenge and devour the invaders.

    After collecting each patient's purified stem cells, the researchers will
then use tricks of molecular biology to insert into each stem cell copies of a
single powerful gene known to AIDS scientists as the ''rev gene.'' In its normal
form, the rev gene makes a protein that regulates an essential early step that
the virus must take to reproduce and spread.

    In the trial, however, the scientists will use a harmless virus to insert a
genetically altered form of the rev gene into the stem cells of the volunteer
AIDS patients. That mutant gene, according to Juttner, should enable the
reproducing stem cells to generate a full array of new immune system cells --
genetically capable of preventing the invading AIDS viruses from reproducing.

    Hopefully, the transplanted mutant genes should provide each patient with a
reconstituted and fully functioning immune system whose succeeding generations
of stem cells, T-cells and macrophages will all be resistant to the AIDS virus.

    The story of this new effort began at Stanford in the late 1980s when Dr.
Irving Weissman, a pathologist and cancer biologist, first discovered how to
isolate stem cells from bone marrow and purify them -- an achievement that
scientists had been pursuing for 30 years.

    Weissman and his research team then transplanted purified human stem cells
from healthy humans into a specially bred strain of mice born with no immune
systems of their own -- thus providing the mice with precisely the same immune
systems that all healthy humans carry.

   Such mice, born with a hereditary condition called ''severe combined immune
deficiency,'' or SCID, are bred by the thousands in immunology research
laboratories around the world.

    Weissman continues to conduct his basic research at Stanford, but he is also
on SyStemix's board of scientific advisers, and has played a key role in
developing the wide range of anti-cancer efforts based on stem cell
transplantation that the company is developing in partnership with Sandoz, the
Swiss pharmaceutical firm.

    The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the new gene therapy trials
against AIDS two weeks ago. People with early HIV infections and late-stage
disease are being enrolled this month, and the trials are expected to begin in
early January and continue under careful monitoring throughout 1997 at AIDS
clinical centers in Redwood City and Alabama.


LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2570 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      December 18, 1996, Wednesday , FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2, Part E

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFS


BODY: - Apple plans to upgrade PC line in '97

   Cupertino, Calif.

   The first step was putting Apple Computer Inc.'s financial house in order.
Now Apple Chairman Gil Amelio wants to return the company to innovation and
growth.

   "The character of the year 1997 is going to be much more about remaking the
product line, coming out with lots of new stuff," Amelio says. "Virtually every
product in the lineup will be overhauled and changed in very significant ways."

   Among the new products he said Apple plans to release next year are a jazzy
new laptop computer, more powerful and affordable desktop models and new
Internet and multimedia features in its software.

   - FDA clears way for merger of Swiss giants

   Washington

   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of
drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. on Tuesday, after winning an
agreement designed to ensure competition in development of gene-therapy
treatments.

   The new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have major operations in
Europe and the United States. The merger of the two Swiss companies already has
been approved by the Swiss and European Union authorities as well as
shareholders of the two corporations.

   - Bankers urge reforms of bankruptcy law

   Washington

   Bankers urged a federal bankruptcy reform panel Tuesday to fix serious flaws
in the law that allow consumers to wipe away their debts even if they have the
resources to repay some part of their obligations.

   Reform supporters presented research that suggested a significant number of
consumers were being granted full relief of their debts under Chapter 7
bankruptcy protection when they would have qualified for a repayment plan.

   Chapter 7 of the bankruptcy code, which wipes out all debts, is used in 70
percent of personal bankruptcies. Consumers who seek to repay some of their
debts file for relief under Chapter 13 of the bankruptcy code.

   - Embraer jetliner cleared for U.S. service

   Washington

   Embraer of Brazil's 50-seat regional jetliner won federal approval for use in
the United States, and Continental Express, which has a standing order for at
least 25 of the new planes, said it will begin using them March 1.

   Routes for the new commuter jets, which would replace turboprop aircraft on
some routes, will be announced in the next three to four weeks, a Continental
Express official said. In South Texas the carrier serves Corpus Christi, Laredo,
Victoria, Harlingen, McAllen and Brownsville. It also serves Monterrey, Mexico,
from Houston.

   - American Eagle round-trip flight added

   American Eagle, the regional airline affiliate of American Airlines, will add
a fifth daily round-trip flight between Harlingen and Dallas-Fort Worth
International Airport starting Jan. 6, officials said.

   The airline began serving Harlingen's Valley International Airport Oct. 1
with 64-seat Super ATR turboprop airplanes. The new flight departs D-FW for
Harlingen at 2:40 p.m. and leaves Harlingen at 5:28 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2571 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             December 18, 1996, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: Nation

BODY:


   PROSECUTORS NEGOTIATING TEXACO CASE: Federal prosecutors and attorneys for a

 former executive of Texaco Inc. are negotiating to avoid trial on the first
criminal charges resulting from a company scandal stemming from a racial
discrimination case. Both sides agreed to postpone a deadline that had been  set
for today in which the government would have had either to indict the
executive, Richard Lundwall, or present evidence of its case in a hearing. The
two sides agreed to continue negotiating for 30 more days. Lundwall of  Danbury,
Conn., is a former senior coordinator of personnel services for  Texaco's
finance department who was charged last month with obstruction of  justice.

PENTAGON TO REVIEW DEAL: A senior Pentagon official will study the proposed
merger of Boeing and McDonnell Douglas and offer recommendations to the
antitrust agency that reviews the deal. John Goodman, deputy undersecretary of
defense for industrial affairs, is expected to assess "what national security
consequences it could have," a Pentagon spokesman said. A decision is  expected
within two weeks on whether the Federal Trade Commission or the  Justice
Department will be responsible for reviewing the deal, he said.

HOLIDAY SALES GAIN MODEST: Holiday retail sales are modestly ahead of last  year
as the season rolls toward its final week, according to TeleCheck  Services, a
Houston-based check verification service. Through Dec. 15 sales in  stores open
more than a year were running 5 percent ahead of Christmas 1995  nationally, 2.1
percent ahead in the Tampa Bay area. TeleCheck, which bases  its estimates on
check writing activity in about a third of all general  merchandise stores, is
one of several barometers of retail sales activity.

SMITHFIELD FACES FINES: The federal government is seeking up to $ 125-million
in fines from meatpacker Smithfield Foods Inc. for pollution of a Virginia
river. The fines stem from two suits the government filed this year against
Portsmouth, Va.-based Smithfield, claiming the company's slaughterhouse dumped
wastewater that exceeded limits on fecal coliform bacteria, nitrogen and other
pollutants into the Pagan River. Smithfield in September agreed to buy
Tampa-based Lykes Meat Group.

RAIL VOTE SET: A federal judge in Philadelphia said Tuesday that Conrail must
hold its scheduled special stockholders meeting next week on a proposed merger
with CSX Corp., even if it determines in advance that it might lose the vote.
The ruling was sought by Norfolk Southern Corp., which has been seeking to
block the Conrail-CSX merger on grounds it has a better offer. CSX is offering
$ 110 a share in cash for 40 percent of Conrail's stock, and CSX shares at a
later date for the remaining stock. Norfolk Southern is offering $ 110 in cash
for all Conrail stock. Its offer is valued at about $ 10-billion, while the CSX

 cash-and-stock offer is worth about $ 8.6-billion.

FTC CLEARS DRUG MERGER: The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major
hurdle to the merger of drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. on  Tuesday,
after winning an agreement designed to ensure competition in  development of
gene-therapy treatments. The new company, to be called Novartis  AG, would have
major operations in Europe and the United States. The merger of  the two Swiss
companies already has been approved by the Swiss and European  Union authorities
as well as shareholders of the two corporations.

Tampa Bay/State

   PAYORS ACQUIRES COMPANY: Tampa-based Payors Home Care Systems Inc. has
acquired Sunset Medical Inc., a St. Petersburg supplier of outpatient medical
equipment. As part of the deal, Sunset Medical will move its offices to Payors
headquarters in Tampa. Payors is a home-care infusion, nursing and
rehabilitation company.

STATE CHECKS SCANNERS: Electronic scanners rang up the wrong prices for 46 of
1,365 items on sale at 54 Florida stores checked last week, the state
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services said. Holiday shoppers were
urged to check their receipts against advertised sale prices. A majority of  the
errors, 26, were in the customer's favor.

DOW              DOLLAR              YIELD

30 INDUSTRIALS  VS. JAPANESE YEN   30-YEAR U.S. BOND

6308.33          113.88               6.65

+39.98            -0.02             +0.03

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2572 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1996 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          December 18, 1996 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: FTC approves Ciba-Sandoz merger

BYLINE: Edward R. Silverman, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   After weeks of delay, the Federal Trade Commission yesterday conditionally
approved the $27 billion merger between Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd., paving
the way for the creation of the world's second-largest drug maker.

    Starting Jan. 1, the two Swiss companies will be called Novartis AG, which
is expected to generate about $22 billion in sales and $3 billion in profits
next year. The new entity will trail only England's Glaxo Wellcome plc in the
race to dominate the global drug market.

    To consummate the deal, which was approved last July by the European Union,
the drug makers agreed to license cutting-edge biotechnology products that are
under development to competitors. They're also committed to selling herbicide
and animal healthcare businesses. The news was greeted with a mixture of
exuberance and relief by frazzled Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy executives, who've spent
months reorganizing their companies. "It's been like a game of Chinese
checkers," said Douglas Watson, who will oversee all U.S. operations.

    But the hard work is only beginning. To make the merger succeed, researchers
will be under pressure to discover a new cache of blockbuster drugs and,
simultaneously, shorten development time to less than seven years from more than
11.

    Moreover, Novartis will slash thousands of jobs, sell numerous businesses
and close several facilities in order to shave $1.5 billion in expenses over
three years. On a worldwide basis, 10,000 jobs, or 10 percent of their combined
work forces, will be cut.

    Nearly 600 jobs in New Jersey will eventually be eliminated, compared with
4,400 jobs before the merger was announced last March. Many other employees are
being transferred to different sites. And morale is low. Next week, most
employees will know whether they'll have a job.

    Another big issue is blending disparate corporate cultures while also
convincing headquarters in Switzerland to grant more autonomy, a flashpoint that
prompted James Callahan, who was to have run U.S. drug operations, to resign
three months ago. A replacement is being sought, but the search is going slowly,
according to Watson.

    Just to reach this point, Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy had to make significant
concessions. The most impor-

    tant requires them to license several gene therapy products, which would
target fatal or disabling diseases, such as cancer, for which there are
currently no effective treatments.

    The FTC worried that Novartis would dominate this growing field. Techniques
for modifying genes haven't yet come to market, but the agency estimates gene
therapy will be a $500 million business by 2002 and balloon to $45 billion by
2010.

    Over the past few years, both companies made sizeable investments to enter
this field. Ciba-Geigy, for instance, paid $2.1 billion for a 49 percent stake
in Chiron Corp., while Sandoz spent $295 million on Genetic Therapy Inc.,
another biotechnology leader.

    "This case is about saving lives," said William Baer, director of the FTC's
bureau of competition, in a statement. "Today, there are two firms racing to
develop new gene therapies to combat deadly diseases. This deal threatened to
eliminate that competition."

    There were other concerns. Novartis would control about 45 percent of the
$1.4 billion market for corn herbicides, which are used to kill weeds in corn
herbicides. So Sandoz has agreed to sell its North American corn herbicide
business to BASF for about $780 million.

    Sandoz has also struck a deal to sell it flea control business, which sells
pills, collars, shampoos and sprays for treating fleas in cats and dogs. The FTC
contends that the merger would otherwise result in higher prices and reduced
product innovation.

    The merger won't be finalized until after a 60-day waiting period, during
which time the FTC accepts comments on the deal. Sandoz shareholders receive 55
percent of new Novartis shares, while Ciba-Geigy shareholders will receive 45
percent.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                             2573 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       December 18, 1996 Wednesday, FIRST

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: AMOCO IS BOOMING

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Amoco Corp. said it will post record earnings for 1996, plans to repurchase
as much as $2 billion of its stock over the next two years and will raise its
quarterly dividend by nearly 8 percent. The oil company attributed the record
earnings to a restructuring and job cuts earlier in the 1990s. Amoco shares rose
1 5/8 to close at 77 1/2 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   Drug merger OK'd

   WASHINGTON - The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to
the merger of drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. on Tuesday after the
companies agreed to license gene-therapy technology and patent rights to a
competitor, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. The new company will be called Novartis AG.
Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz have said previously that the merger would eliminate about
12,000 jobs worldwide.

   Gas production stops

   Gasoline futures rose after Exxon Corp. said it stopped production at one of
the country's biggest gasoline-making units at its refinery in Baton Rouge.
Exxon closed one of its two 102,000-barrel-a-day catalytic cracking units at the
Baton Rouge refinery Monday for repairs after discovering a leak. The unit will
be down "a few days," an Exxon spokesman said.

   Reform urged

   WASHINGTON - Bankers told a federal panel that many of the record 1 million
people filing for bankruptcy this year have abused bankruptcy laws because they
had the money to repay some of their debts. The bankers urged reform of laws
governing bankruptcy.

   Natural gas to rise

   WASHINGTON - The American Gas Association said it expects record high natural
gas consumption next year. Usage could top 23.2 quadrillion British thermal
units, assuming normal weather in 1997, an economic growth rate of 2.5 percent
and average crude oil prices of $20.50 per barrel, association Chairman Tom
Fisher said.

   Hoffa files protest

   WASHINGTON - Questioning the integrity of a vote he appears to have lost,
James Hoffa asked a federal prosecutor to seize the ballots cast in the
Teamsters election and investigate alleged irregularities. Teamsters President
Ron Carey declared victory Saturday over Hoffa. Hoffa's attorney, Patrick
Szymanski, alleged that Barbara Zack Quindel, the election's federally appointed
overseer, had failed to account for thousands of ballots.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2574 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       December 18, 1996 Wednesday, THIRD

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: AMOCO IS BOOMING

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Amoco Corp. said it will post record earnings for 1996, plans to repurchase
as much as $2 billion of its stock over the next two years and will raise its
quarterly dividend by nearly 8 percent. The oil company attributed the record
earnings to a restructuring and job cuts earlier in the 1990s. Amoco shares rose
1 5/8 to close at 77 1/2 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   Talks on charges

   Federal prosecutors and lawyers for former Texaco executive Richard Lundwall
are negotiating to avoid trial on the first criminal charges resulting from a
racial discrimination case involving Texaco. Lundwall, a former senior
coordinator of personnel services for Texaco, was charged last month with
obstruction of justice in connection with the case.

   Drug merger OK'd

   WASHINGTON - The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to
the merger of drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. on Tuesday after the
companies agreed to license gene-therapy technology and patent rights to a
competitor, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. The new company will be called Novartis AG.
Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz have said previously that the merger would eliminate about
12,000 jobs worldwide.

   Hibernia dividend

   Hibernia Corp. on Tuesday declared a dividend of 87 cents a share on its
series A fixed/adjustable-rate noncumulative preferred stock, payable Jan. 2 to
shareholders of record Tuesday. It is the first dividend declared on the issue
by the New Orleans-based banking company since Hibernia completed an offering of
2 million shares Sept. 30.

   Natural gas to rise

   WASHINGTON - The American Gas Association said it expects record high natural
gas consumption next year. Usage could top 23.2 quadrillion British thermal
units, assuming normal weather in 1997, an economic growth rate of 2.5 percent
and average crude oil prices of $20.50 per barrel, association Chairman Tom
Fisher said.

   Hoffa files protest

   WASHINGTON - Questioning the integrity of a vote he appears to have lost,
James Hoffa asked a federal prosecutor to seize the ballots cast in the
Teamsters election and investigate alleged irregularities. Teamsters President
Ron Carey declared victory Saturday over Hoffa. Hoffa's attorney, Patrick
Szymanski, alleged that Barbara Zack Quindel, the election's federally appointed
overseer, had failed to account for thousands of ballots.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2575 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  December 18, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: DRUG DEAL APPROVAL

BYLINE: David Carrig

BODY:

   The Federal Trade Commission said Tuesday that it cleared a deal
by Swiss drug giants Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz to merge, after winning
an agreement designed to ensure competition in development of
gene-therapy treatments. The agreement requires the new company,
Novartis, to license specified gene-therapy technology and patent
rights to a competitor, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. Gene therapy has
the potential to significantly improve treatment of various hereditary
ailments, cancers and the rejection of organ transplants. . .
. Separately, American Home Products, the maker of Advil and Anacin,
said it would buy the 40% of Genetics Institute it does not already
own for more than $ 1 billion.


   AIR-BAG HEARINGS: Congress has scheduled two hearings on
the dangers of air bags, and is contemplating a third. Rep. Frank
Wolf, R-Va., chairman of the House transportation appropriations
subcommittee, will convene a hearing Thursday. John McCain, R-Ariz.,
chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, plans a hearing Jan.
9. And Rep. Thomas Bliley, R-Va., chairman of the House Commerce
Committee, is considering a January hearing. Since 1990, 32 children
and 20 adults have been killed by air bags. Regulators say bags
have saved some 1,500 lives.

   HOUSING STARTS: Housing starts rebounded in November, rising
9.2% to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.51 million from
1.39 million in October. November's gain in construction of single-family
homes and apartments is the best since July 1995. For the year
so far, 1.38 million single- and multifamily homes were started,
up 9.6% from the first 11 months of 1995.

   BRIEFLY: Ford Motor is planning a huge, luxury sport-utility
vehicle for its Lincoln luxury brand, powered by a high-tech V-10
engine and priced more than $ 50,000, according to the Dec. 23
AutoWeek. . . . Conrail must proceed with a shareholder
vote Monday the railroad said would be postponed if it appeared
it did not have the votes to approve its $ 8.5 billion merger with
CSX, a federal judged ruled.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2576 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  December 18, 1996, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C15

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: FTC Clears Way for Merger Of Swiss Drug Companies

BODY:


   The Federal Trade Commission removed the last major hurdle to the merger of
drug giants Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG yesterday, after winning an agreement
designed to ensure competition in developing gene therapy treatments.

   The new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have operations in Europe
and the United States. The merger of the two Swiss companies already has been
approved by Swiss and European Union authorities as well as shareholders of the
two corporations.

   Analysts have said Novartis, to be based in Basel, Switzerland, would be the
second-largest pharmaceutical company in the world, with annual sales of about $
26.5 billion. The biggest is Glaxo Wellcome, based in Britain.

   The two companies announced from their respective headquarters in Basel that
they planned to formally establish Novartis on Friday and that shares of the new
company would begin trading on the Swiss stock exchange Monday.

   Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz previously have said the merger would eliminate about
12,000 jobs worldwide. They said they expected the combination to create new
jobs in the future.

   Ciba-Geigy AG is the largest of Switzerland's pharmaceutical companies, with
sales last year of $ 18 billion. Sandoz AG, whose U.S. subsidiary is New
York-based Sandoz Corp., had 1995 sales of $ 13.2 billion.

   The FTC said it had reached an agreement with the two companies designed to
protect competition in the development and commercialization of gene therapy
treatments, a field in which both are leaders. Gene therapy is generally
expected to begin providing significant improvements in the treatment of cancer
and other diseases by 2000.

   The agreement calls for the licensing of specified gene therapy patents to a
competitor, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., so that the French-American company would
be in a position to compete with Novartis. More than 10 of the patents involved
are held by Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, which Sandoz bought last year
for $ 295 million.


GRAPHIC: Illustration, The Washington Post, THE COMPANIES IN PROFILE Ciba-Geigy
AG Business: Switzerland's largest pharmaceutical and chemical company and a
leader in gene therapy.  Headquarters: Basel, Switzerland 1995 sales: $18
billion Number of employees: 84,100 Sandoz AG Business: pharmaceutical and
chemical company; a leader in gene therapy; in 1994, bought Gerber baby foods to
establish itself in the area of nutrition.  Headquarters: Basel 1995 sales:
$13.2 billion Number of employees: 50,000 New company: Novartis AG will have
major operations in Europe and the United States; will be required to license
patent rights for a specific gene-therapy treatment to its competitor
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.  Headquarters: Basel Annual sales: $26.5 billion Number
of employees: 90,000 - 100,000 NOTE: Annual sales for Novartis figured after
spin-offs and other restructurings post-merger.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2577 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  December 18, 1996, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C14; DIGEST

LENGTH: 1050 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   The Treasury plans to use the existing consumer price index as the benchmark
for the first inflation-indexed notes it will sell next month, and may stick
with that formula even if the CPI is changed because the index overstates
consumer price increases. The Treasury, however, may cut the rate on bonds sold
later if the government changes the way it figures the CPI, Deputy Treasury
Secretary Roger Anderson said. The Treasury expects to begin selling the notes
-- U.S. government securities offering protection against inflation because
they're pegged to the CPI -- next month in denominations as small as $ 1,000.

   American Home Products, the maker of Advil and Anacin pain killers,
Robitussin cough remedies and a host of prescription drugs, said it will buy the
40 percent of Genetics Institute it does not already own for about $ 1 billion.
The move by Madison, N.J.-based American Home comes less than a week after an
FDA advisory panel recommended approval of Genetics Institute's blood clotting
therapy, known as BeneFix, for hemophilia B.

   Ciba-Geigy's and Sandoz's proposed merger has received clearance from the
Federal Trade Commission, after the two drug giants and government reached an
agreement designed to ensure competition in developing gene therapy treatments.
The new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have operations in Europe and
the United States. The merger of the two Swiss companies already has been
approved by Swiss and European Union authorities as well as shareholders of the
two corporations.

   Japan's global trade surplus, driven by auto exports, rose in November for
the first time in two years -- and the politically sensitive surplus with the
United States shot up 31 percent, the nation's Finance Ministry said. The global
trade surplus was $ 5.9 billion, while the surplus with the United States hit $
3.3 billion.

   Millions of Bell Atlantic customers were without 411 directory assistance for
several hours yesterday. Company officials blamed a software problem for the
shutdown, which prevented operators from using their computers in every service
center in the company's seven-state region. It was the second major failure of
the company's 411 service in a month, though a Bell Atlantic spokesman said the
two incidents were unrelated.

   The Navy selected a team of two shipyards -- General Dynamics' Bath Iron
Works in Maine and Avondale Industries of New Orleans -- to build 12 LPD-17
amphibious ships at a cost of $ 9.4 billion. The losing team was made up of
Newport News Shipbuilding in Virginia and Litton Industries' Mississippi-based
Ingalls Shipbuilding. The loss could endanger the future of Ingalls after its
current work tails off in a few years, industry officials said.

   Avondale of Louisiana also was awarded a $ 641 million contract by the Navy
for construction of its newest class of amphibious ships. The ship is designed
to give the Marine Corps added punch in putting combat forces ashore. The
contract covers the new ship, as well as an option to build two more, and could
reach a total value of $ 1.5 billion, the Navy said.

   Texaco executive Richard Lundwall, who taped meetings where company managers
belittled blacks and plotted to destroy documents, is cooperating with
prosecutors and may get the charge of obstructing justice against him resolved
without a trial. According to federal court papers filed in White Plains, N.Y.,
prosecutors originally had a deadline of today to file an indictment against
him, but a federal magistrate has given prosecutors another 30 days to
investigate while talks continue.

   James P. Hoffa protested a federal official's decision to move ballots cast
in the Teamsters election to another site before finishing a review of
challenges to the results. Teamsters President Ron Carey declared victory
Saturday over the son of labor legend Jimmy Hoffa. The official count had Carey
with 226,593 votes and Hoffa with 209,896, not counting 41,002 challenged
ballots. Hoffa also complained that he hadn't been informed of the total number
of votes cast, and his campaign suggested that the election officer failed to
account for thousands of ballots.

   Chase Manhattan awarded stock options to all of its 67,000 employees,
promising a potential windfall of hundreds of millions of dollars to workers if
the bank's shares surge in coming years. Chase plans to give all full-time
employees options to buy 450 shares of stock at a discount over the next three
years.

   The SEC said Timothy J. Forde, a senior attorney for the House Commerce
Committee's Democrats, has been hired as counsel to SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt
Jr. Forde, 39, played a pivotal role in crafting the National Securities Markets
Improvements Act of 1996, the bill that streamlined regulation of mutual funds
and eliminated redundant state and federal regulation of the markets.

   EARNINGS

   Goldman, Sachs, Wall Street's last surviving private partnership, said pretax
profit rose 68 percent in its fiscal fourth quarter, capping the second-best
year in its history. Pretax profit rose to $ 743 million in the quarter ended
Nov. 29, from $ 440 million a year earlier. For the full year, pretax profit
rose to $ 2.61 billion, from $ 1.37 billion.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   AES of Arlington and AES China Generating Co. were named in a lawsuit
challenging AES's plan to buy the rest of AES China that it doesn't already own
for about $ 107 million to $ 120 million in stock. The suit, filed in Delaware
Chancery Court by a holder of 750 shares of AES Chigen Class A stock, alleges
that AES breached its fiduciary duty as a controlling shareholder of AES Chingen
and questions the amount of money being paid to AES Chigen shareholders.

   EZ Communications's shareholders approved the Fairfax-based company's merger
with American Radio Systems. Shareholders will receive 0.9 American Radio
Systems class A common share and $ 11.75 in cash for each EZ Communications
share held. The merger is expected to close early next year.

   Investor Ronald Baron raised his stake in Silver Spring-based Choice Hotels
Holdings to 13.1 percent from 10.8 percent of the company's outstanding shares.
The investor bought 755,000 common shares at $ 15.53 to $ 16.06 a share between
Dec. 11 and Dec. 16, according to a filing with the SEC.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2578 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   December 17, 1996, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 25A

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: So what if there's a gay gene?

BYLINE: Mona Charen

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- There is a gay gene, and conservatives should learn to
capitalize on it. So announces Chandler Burr in the Weekly Standard.

   His argument proceeds as follows: Clinical research has discovered the
existence of a gene that makes people gay, so conservatives should stop arguing
that homosexuality is a chosen behavior or they will look silly. Moreover, the
discovery of the gene is not entirely bad news.

   Liberals like the idea of a gay gene because it bolsters the argument that
homosexuality is a condition, like skin color, rather than a choice. Thus, just
as we have ruled race discrimination to be invidious in all circumstances, so
should we treat discrimination based upon sexual orientation as mere unreasoning
prejudice.

   Pro-life logic

   But there are reasons for conservatives to embrace the gay gene as well, Mr.
Burr argues. It will make liberals squirm to consider that if homosexuality is
genetically determined, like cystic fibrosis, then it is but a short step to
testing for it in utero. Babies who carry the "gay gene" could, in theory, be
aborted. How would that bit of eugenics strike homosexual activists and other
liberals? Would they suddenly see the logic of the pro-life position?

   Moreover, Mr. Burr argues, if genes cause homosexuality, then, in time, gene
therapy can cure it. A shot of re-engineered genes in the arm and, presto, a
heterosexual.

   Conservatives should pause before climbing onto the bandwagon. In the first
place, it is far from scientifically settled that there is a gay gene, or even a
cluster of genes that "cause" homosexuality.

   "You have to be extremely cautious when you talk about genes causing complex
human behaviors like sexual orientation," explains Dr. Harvey Stern, a
geneticist at the Genetics and IVF Institute in Virginia. "That's a severe
oversimplification." Most human traits, but particularly behavioral ones, he
adds, are caused by a multiplicity of factors. There may be some genetic
component to homosexuality, but there is "no one gene," and genetic factors
combine with environmental factors.

   This is often the case in genetics. It is scientifically settled, for
example, that there is a genetic component to schizophrenia. But genetics
doesn't tell the whole story. Two identical twins will share a genetic
predisposition to schizophrenia, but one will get the disease and the other
won't. The individual's experience -- in other words, the environment -- plays a
key role as well.

   Scientists with axes to grind are busy looking for genetic keys to behaviors
like alcoholism, aggression, risk taking, even happiness. (Though the suggestion
that intelligence has a strong genetic component is met with outraged protests
from the same people who will assure us that alcoholism is all in the genes.)
Find the gene, goes the reasoning, and eliminate personal responsibility.

   "We are just in the infancy of understanding what role genes play in
determining behavior," Dr. Stern warns. "It is dangerous to assume that you can
deduce cause and effect."

   Chandler Burr notwithstanding, the discovery of a genetic component to human
traits like homosexuality is actually quite irrelevant to political and social
arguments about their status. There are prudential reasons to resist the
legitimization of homosexuality -- disease, instability of homosexual unions,
and the slippery slope (how do you forbid polygamy?) to name just three.

   Moreover, to say genetics plays a role proves less than it seems to. It is
widely accepted that we are also genetically predisposed to be promiscuous
(especially the men among us). Yet we are expected to resist our natural
(genetic) inclinations. Some scientists claim to have found a gene for
criminality. Shall we repeal the penal code for individuals who carry it?

   Nor is homosexuality a firm and immutable trait. Many people change from
homosexual to heterosexual, or vice versa. Some are bisexual. Some men behave as
homosexuals while in prison or on board a ship at sea, but revert to
heterosexuality when women are available.

   In the final analysis, scientific discoveries about genetic predispositions
to this or that behavior will always be interesting, but they do not affect our
judgment about whether a trait is good or bad. That is determined by religion
and morality.

   Mona Charen is a syndicated columnist.

   Pub Date: 12/17/96

TYPE: OP-ED, COMMENTARY

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2579 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    December 17, 1996, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 3B-

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: NATIONSBANK WINS APPROVAL TO BUY BOATMEN'S BANK

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   NationsBank won clearance from the Federal Reserve Board to complete a $ 9.6
billion purchase of Boatmen's Bancshares, creating the nation's fourth-largest
bank with branches in 16 states.

   The merger of NationsBank, based in Charlotte, N.C., with St. Louis,
Mo.-based Boatmen's forges a $ 228 billion giant with banks stretching from
North Carolina to New Mexico. The merger was announced Aug. 29 and is expected
to conclude in January, after shareholders for both banks meet Friday to vote on
the deal.

   NationsBank and Boatmen's competed in three markets in Tennessee and two in
Texas.

   As part of the agreement, NationsBank agreed to sell two Boatmen's branches
in El Paso, Texas as well as Boatmen's branches in Lawrence County, Tenn., about
70 miles southwest of Nashville.

 Hoffa reviewing ballot-counting

   WASHINGTON (Reuters) -- The apparently unsuccessful campaign of James Hoffa
for president of the Teamsters Union said Monday it is reviewing a "discrepancy"
in ballot-counting that gave incumbent President Ron Carey a narrow lead.

   After all eligible votes were tallied late Saturday, court-appointed Election
Officer Barbara Zack Quindel accounted for 485,605 ballots returned, including
41,002 uncounted ballots that are being checked for eligibility this week.

   But last week she said the total number of mail-in ballots received was
511,268, an estimate based on receipts from the U.S. Postal Service.

 Ciba-Geigy, Sandoz get FTC OK

   WASHINGTON (Reuters) -- The Federal Trade Commission today approved the
multi-billion dollar merger of Swiss drug giants Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz to become
Novartis, if they meet certain conditions.

   The FTC said the firms must license or divest several product areas -- gene
therapy, corn herbicides and flea-control markets. The merger would create the
world's second-largest pharmaceutical company after Britain's Glaxo-Wellcome.

 Firm gives $ 100 million in bonuses

   FOUNTAIN VALLEY, Calif. (AP) -- Employees of the world's largest maker of
computer memory products are having a green Christmas, thanks to a whopping $
100 million in holiday bonuses that in some cases will equal three times their
salary.

   Kingston Technology Corp. owners David Sun and John Tu sold 80 percent of the
company this year to Softbank Corp. of Japan for $ 1.5 billion and said their
workers should share the profit. Kingston's 523 employees will get $ 75,000
apiece on average.

 Circuit City profits drop

   RICHMOND, Va. (Reuters) -- Circuit City Stores Inc. said Monday that sales of
personal computers in its third quarter fell sharply while sales of most
consumer electronics products were weak, resulting in lower profits for the
period. Circuit City has stores in Amherst and Cheektowaga.

   Circuit City reported third-quarter earnings of $ 19.8 million, or 20 cents a
share, down from $ 31.5 million, or 32 cents a share a year ago. Overall sales
rose 5 percent to $ 1.86 billion from $ 1.78 billion but comparable-store sales
fell 10 percent.

 Yields mixed on Treasury bills

   WASHINGTON (AP) -- Interest rates on short-term Treasury securities were
mixed in Monday's auction with the rate on three-month bills falling to the
lowest level in more than two years.

   The Treasury Department sold $ 13 billion in three-month bills at an average
discount rate of 4.76 percent, down from 4.83 percent last week.

   The rate on six-month bills rose to 4.99 percent, up from 4.97 percent last
week with $ 13 billion sold.

   The Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury bills rose
to 5.46 percent last week from 5.42 percent the previous week.

 In other business new

   Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. and Softbank Corp., Japan's largest distributor
of personal computer software, today kicked off their JSkyB satellite
broadcasting venture. The new company, Japan Sky Broadcasting Co., will begin
full-scale broadcasts in Japan by April 1998.

   The Pentagon awarded United Technologies Corp. a $ 1.6 billion contract
Monday to build 320 engines for the Air Force's C-17 cargo plane. The engines
will be built by Pratt & Whitney, a subsidiary of UTC, in Middletown, Conn.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996


                             2580 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                   December 17, 1996, TUESDAY, FINAL MARKETS

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PLUS BUSINESS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 634 words

BODY:


   The Smithsonian Institution is going to seek more corporate sponsors for its
exhibits to avoid stagnation, its director said today.  I. Michael Heyman, the
secretary of the Smithsonian, told the National Press Club that he sees nothing
wrong with corporate logos being displayed beside exhibits financed by
companies' gifts.  For example, he defended the decision that allowed the Museum
of Natural History's Insect Zoo to be named after Otto Orkin, founder of the
pest control company that bears his name.  With government money scarce, Heyman
said, the Smithsonian is going to go after corporate funding more aggressively.

   Morgan Stanley seeks offering

   Morgan Stanley Group Inc. said today it filed with federal regulators to
offer $ 6 billion of bonds, preferred shares, warrants and other securities.
The New York investment bank said the securities will be added to about $ 540
million of those already registered for offering for a a total of $ 6.54
billion.  Morgan Stanley filed what is known as a shelf registration with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. The filing gives the company up to two years
to offer the securities.  Morgan Stanley said the proceeds will go toward
general purposes, including working capital, redemption of outstanding shares
and repayment of debt.

   Nissan expects sales increase

   Nissan Motor Co., one of Japan's leading automakers, said today it expects
domestic sales to increase to 1.16 million units in 1997, up 3.7 percent from
the 1.12 million units projected in 1996.  The company said it expects 1997
export sales to rise by 3.3 percent on the year to 600,000 units, rebounding
after falling an estimated 2.9 percent in 1996 to 581,000 units.  Nissan's sales
growth target for 1997, if achieved, would give it a bigger share of the
domestic market.

   FTC OKs Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz deal

   The Federal Trade Commission today removed the last major hurdle to the
merger of drug giants Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd. after winning agreement
designed to assure competition in development of gene-therapy treatments.  The
new company, to be called Novartis AG, would have major operations in Europe and
the United States. The merger of the two Swiss companies already has been
approved by the Swiss and European Union authorities as well as shareholders of
the two corporations.  Analysts have said Novartis, to be based in Basel,
Switzerland, would be the second-largest pharmaceutical company in the world,
with annual sales of around $ 26.5 billion. The biggest is Glaxo Wellcome PLC,
based in Britain.

   ADM sells stake in Rayonier

   Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. sold off its 7.22 percent stake in Rayonier Inc.,
a Stamford, Conn.-based forest products company.  In a recent filing with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Decatur, Ill.-based giant
grain-processing company said it sold about 2.2 million common shares between
Nov. 27 and Dec. 6 at prices ranging from $ 38 to $ 39.25 a share.

   Illinios unemployment level dips

   Illinois unemployment fell in November to 5.0 percent, its lowest level in 20
months, from 5.1 percent in October, as a record number of people went to work.
The Illinois Department of Employment Security reported that the state's
seasonally adjusted jobless level beat the U.S. figure of 5.4 percent for
November and the state's 5.2 percent rate of a year ago.

   Wheat futures mixed

   Wheat futures prices were mixed today on the Chicago Board of Trade. Nearby
contracts fell, but new crop months were supported by concerns about falling
temperatures in much of the winter wheat belt.  Wheat for March delivery fell 1
3/4 cents to $ 3.94 1/4 a bushel; March corn rose 2 cents to $ 2.65 1/2 a
bushel; March oats rose 1 cent to $ 1.56 1/2 a bushel; and January soybeans fell
5 cents to $ 7.06 1/2 a bushel.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1996


                             2581 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 15, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Arthur Caplan

SECTION: Section 6; Page 41; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4081 words

HEADLINE: Who gets the liver transplant? Which one's the mother? When do you
lie? (And those are the easy ones)

BYLINE: By Claudia Dreifus;  Claudia Dreifus is a contributing writer for the
Magazine. A collection of her interviews will be published in the spring by
Seven Stories Press.

BODY:

   ON A WARMISH AFTERNOON LAST MONTH, DR. Arthur Caplan, 46, PROFESSOR of
bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania, and the director of that
institution's Center for Bioethics, sat in his Philadelphia office, frantically
plowing through some 68, yes, 68, telephone messages from journalists littering
his desk.

   Among the messages was a call from a Chicago reporter seeking a comment on
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin's death from pancreatic cancer. CNN was sending over a
camera crew for footage on gulf war syndrome -- Dr. Caplan is a member of the
Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses, which had just
concluded hearings. A journalist from Southern California wanted Caplan's views
on the big local story out there: the indictment of Dr. Richardo Asch, a famed
fertility expert, for improprieties at his Orange County clinic. And oh, yes,
"Nightline" wanted to book an appearance.

    "Gosh, people are in the grip of bioethics fever today," said Caplan. A
burly, unprepossessing figure in rumpled, nothing-special clothes, he talks at
breakneck speed. "It used to be that I'd have to fight to get any coverage for
these kinds of issues. Nowadays, there's so much bioethics in the news that
there are times when I can't keep tabs on it all."

   This is a problem that Art -- as everyone calls him -- Caplan, Ph.D., has
made for himself. And one that wins him little sympathy from his academic peers.
In the booming specialty of bioethics -- an interdisciplinary splice of
philosophy, law and health policy planning -- Dr. Art Caplan, philosopher, is
both a serious scholar and a popularizer.

   Caplan's particular skill is an ability to identify, analyze and explain the
extremely complex moral questions that grow out of changes in health care,
science and medicine. At the Center for Bioethics, he runs a combination think
tank and ethics fire station for the university's vast system of hospitals and
research laboratories. He does what he calls "hands-on philosophy," which means
that he advises the university hospital on everyday bioethics problems on the
wards, teaches medical students about moral ambiguities in their work and helps
researchers design ethically consistent projects. He has been a health policy
adviser to the Clinton Administration, and he writes a syndicated newspaper
column, "A Question of Ethics," and produces a blizzard of professional
publications with titles like "Why the Problem of Reductionism in Biology Won't
Go Away" and "What Are the Morals of Our Treatment of Renal Failure?"

   "He's a very controversial figure in philosophy," says his wife of 25 years,
Jane Caplan, a psychologist. They have a 12-year-old son, Zach. "When he was a
student, he never really fit in with the rest of the Columbia philosophy
department. He was a guy who admitted it when he was wrong, who loved to argue
and thought it was fun. To this day, he loves showing how complicated an
argument is, and he believes the public is educable. A lot of people in his
field don't. To them, applied philosophy is second-rate."

   Actually, Caplan is a classically trained philosopher with all the right
credentials. He completed his master's and his Ph.D. at Columbia in the 1970's;
his mentors were Ernest Nagel and Sidney Morgenbesser, two giants in the
philosophy of science. In 1976, while still a graduate student, he took a
part-time job teaching ethics to medical students at the Columbia College of
Physicians and Surgeons and found himself hooked on the moral issues of the
medical world. That post led to Caplan's attending a national bioethics
conference, where he was spotted by the founder of the field, Daniel Callahan,
who asked him to work at the Hastings Institute, which was then and to some
extent still is the pre-eminent bioethics think tank. Caplan would eventually
become associate director at Hastings.

   Seven years later, Caplan was offered the chance to run a biomedical ethics
program at the University of Minnesota. Seven years after that, in 1994, he got
an unrefusable offer from the University of Pennsylvania: a $500,000 annual
budget, access to the cutting-edge research in genetics going on at the school
and an income of around $200,000.

   Caplan's center is located on a bleak Philadelphia avenue -- near the
University of Pennsylvania's medical school, but not within it. "I wanted to
say, 'We're new.' I didn't want to be located on the medical-school campus. I
wanted to be partners. Not beholden."


   What Is Bioethics?

Q: Give us the job description of a bioethicist.
A: I spend a lot of time trying to identify ethical issues in health care and
science and then thinking through ways of arguing about them to change behavior.
Or policy. Or both. Sometimes, I will come into a medical setting and suggest
changes in practices, simple things like, "Will you please stop interviewing
hospital patients while they are going to the bathroom." It can be as crude as
that. Or as elegant as, "Have we thought through how sperm-cell transplants
could be misused?" I've been laboring in the bioethics vineyards for more than
20 years, but my mother still has a hard time figuring out what I do for a
living.

Q: What are the roots of your bioethics obsession?
A: When I was 7, I had polio. Not a bad case, but I missed a good chunk of first
grade and went to rehab for many years after. That definitely got me interested
in ethics. You don't have to get Freudian, it's right there. I thought about
things like why the hospital didn't let your parents stay over. I wondered about
why such a bad thing had happened to me since I was such a good kid.
Truthfulness bothered me a lot. The doctors and nurses at Mass. General would
never tell you when a kid was going to die. And on my floor, a lot of kids died.
You couldn't get a straight answer. Johnny would be in the next bed, looking
terrible, and they were saying, "Johnny is going home now." And then, suddenly,
there'd be this empty bed.

   It has never ever left me, that not being truthful is a tricky thing in
medicine. That experience reminded me that people in health care situations get
a lot of information from other patients. So it's better for them to have good
information.

Q: How do you know what is moral?
A: Ask patients; they'll tell you. Also, I know what the law says and what the
customs of the tribe -- of the medical profession -- are. The good bioethicist
will get some help from looking at traditions, the norms of right and wrong, and
also from what the law says. If you're operating on someone without a signed
informed consent, there may be a good reason -- but you're probably doing
something wrong. If the law says that people are dead after their brains have
stopped functioning and you are still treating somebody after that, you may be
doing something wrong.

Q: Is it true that some academics see you as a charlatan?
A: They wouldn't go that far. But I have my critics. Mostly, they think I
shouldn't spend time yakking to the masses.

   What we do at my center is a kind of applied philosophy. For instance, right
now the center staff is looking at a gene therapy trial that is being conducted
at the medical school here. There's a gene therapy being developed to kill off
tumor cells in a fatal brain cancer called glioma. In order to test this stuff,
you have to try it out in low doses on people with the disease. The first people
who get it are never going to get cured.

   In fact, the goal of the first trials is to see whether you kill the subjects
by giving them the gene therapy as opposed to letting the brain cancer kill
them. The things we want to know when they sign up for these experiments
include: Do the patients really understand that no cure is being offered them?
Do they nevertheless come in with hope? And if they do, is it right to tell
them, "There's no hope"? No one wants to say it, and certainly no one wants to
hear it.

   So on one hand, we're looking at the way informed consent is given in this
particular experiment. But we are also in the trenches, doing real-world,
real-life ethics here. And that's what philosophy ought to be: about real
people, speaking to human concerns -- not armchair fantasies about right and
wrong.


   Q: Why didn't you become a doctor?
A: I loved thinking about medicine, but I didn't like doing it. I could never
adjust to the idea that you had to cause people pain in order to help them.

Right and Wrong

Q: Do you think science will be able to give people the ability to achieve a
kind of immortality in the near future?
A: Yeah, well, sort of. I can envision a situation where by transplanting your
heart, liver, spleen, lungs and bone marrow, you can be transformed into an
immortal-like thing.

   It will be done by excising diseased human body parts and by grafting on
human and animal parts. I don't see a problem with it. Now, a lot of people
might say, "It sounds intrinsically yucky to have 10 animal organs keeping me
alive." But we can adapt to that, much as we have to other kinds of
bioengineering. No one complains much nowadays about the unnaturalness of heart
transplants.

   I do think it has a social cost, though. The dollar price of pursuing an
extended life is big. We can wind up distorting the health care budget to add 5,
10, 20 years of life to those who can afford it. But to do that, we might be
pulling social resources away from people who won't get to live 50 years because
they were born in India or West Philadelphia.

Q: Do you fret about the ethics of using animals as an organ source for humans?
A: If you believe in animals' right to life, then you should begin at the
breakfast table, not the surgery table. The number of animals killed for bacon
is incredible.

Q: Well, pigs are not endangered. Chimpanzees are.
A: In the long run, nobody is going to use primates for transplantation. You
can't use a 60-pound-chimp's heart to support a 200-pound man.

   Oh, of course it's sad to have to kill an animal, but it's something I would
consider doing, even to the point of killing thousands of pigs to get parts for
people. I think these pigs will lead very happy lives, so that they will be
healthy when their organs are put into you. It is just a mistake to think that
the only way you can give moral worth to something is to equate it with us.
There are degrees of moral worth.

Q: How do the popular television doctor-dramas "E.R." and "Chicago Hope" cover
bioethics?
A: C plus, at best. They do a pretty good job at laying out clinical issues.
Should a drunken man get a liver transplant? Should we allow a baby who's been
through a lot to die? But there's never any attention to the economics of modern
medicine: "How do people pay for this?"

   Sometimes, the producers of these shows phone me for story ideas. I told one
a while ago about a case I'd worked on where I'd gotten a call from the
operating room and the doc was saying, "We've got a guy open on the table, on a
heart-lung machine, and we dropped the heart we were going to put into him on
the floor. There's no choice -- we've got to use this heart. When he wakes, do
we have to tell him about what happened?"

   "You've got to offer to tell him there was an accident," I said. "Because
people have a right to know if you're putting them at risk of infection and
death." That became one of those TV episodes.

Q: O.K., let me ask you an "E.R." question: Should a drunk be able to get a
liver transplant?
A: Yes. Sin does not belong in bedside rationing decisions.

Q: But the fact is that someone who's been drinking a lot -- Mickey Mantle for
instance -- is not going to give that liver the mileage it deserves.
A: Effectiveness certainly counts. If someone can't survive with a new liver,
there's no point in giving them one. And that was true of Mickey Mantle. But the
real test is: Will it work? Not: Is the person good enough?

On Eugenics

Q: What's your take on that eugenic sperm bank that opened in Southern
California a few years ago?
A: You mean the Nobel Sperm Bank? The Repository for Germinal Choice? It still
runs. It started out with Nobel Laureates. Then it became smart scientists. Now
it's business leaders, celebrity types, "people of achievement," athletes. O. J.
Simpson is a great athlete. He could be in the bank, for all I know.

   The whole thing is bonkers. Even if parents could select for eugenic
possibilities, you might be able to increase the odds of having a kid with
certain traits maybe just a little bit. But let's say you could do it. To what
extent should parents be allowed to put their tastes and values onto the
biological design of their kids? There's something weird about saying, "I had my
kids because I want them to be little exemplars of traits I value." You can
almost see the parents complaining, "I had you to be a violinist, and what's
this, you're tone-deaf!"

Q: But isn't it true that some of the new developments in genetics and
reproduction technologies really could get us there?
A: Oh yeah, definitely. I think that the eugenic dreams and biological
perfectionist aspirations of the Nazis and others were hindered, in part, by
their not having the science. Well, look out world: the science is coming! In
genetic testing, for instance, huge leaps are being made -- and they bring with
them big, big questions. Let me give you just a few: What will happen when we
can, with precision, tease apart the genetic contribution to violence,
aggression, mathematical ability? Will that mean that we'll start to have a lot
of public debate about social programs, arguments linked to the wisdom of the
genetic identification of the violent, the nasty and the mentally ill? People
are sure to be asking, "Should we step in early and do something about that?"
That will quickly lead to new arguments about "What is man?"

   I'm really interested in how the sale of genetic information and the sale of
genetic perfectionism is going to shape us. The early signs are not good. I
think that there will be an attempt to generate markets for people to feel bad
if they don't get genetic report cards for their embryos and reproductive mates.
Soon, it will be, "How dare you create a child with a known mental disorder?" In
a market society, notions of perfection will be sold. You can almost see the
shops at the mall: Genes "R" Us.

   We'll also be wondering what to do with virtual technology and pleasure
enhancement. Should everybody be allowed to go in a box and have all their
sexual fantasies acted out in their minds with what's called prio-perceptive or
feedback loops? Instead of getting genital stimuli, it will all be going on in
your brain. Now my question is, "Is there anything wrong with spending a lot of
your time doing that?" These issues are going to be real. Not for our
generation, but for the next one.

Dr. Death

Q: Why do you loathe Dr. Kevorkian?
A: How much tape do you have? I think he's a zealot and fanatic. You don't want
an advocate for the right to die to be the same person making the judgment on
who should die. If you watch his videotapes with people, there's no psychiatry,
no psychology, and he's not exactly the most warm and giving guy that's ever
been around.

   Part of the reason he troubles me so much is that he's so into his own
movement, which means he's the least likely person to be able to achieve a true
informed consent and to weed out the depressed, the despondent and the dingy
from those who truly do want to die. Some of the folks he's seen seem to me to
be just depressed, not necessarily in need of his services. I also don't trust
him because I think he's obsessed with death. I think he's obsessed with trying
to control death. He wants to make sure that it doesn't sneak up on him.

Q: Is medically assisted suicide a form of cowardice?
A: There's almost no one who can't find a way to kill themselves if they really
want to. What Kevorkian is asking for is different: assistance by doctors. And
that's troubling. People come to doctors and say, "I can't do this myself." But
what they mean is: "I can't do it because I might be cursed in the afterlife."
They have all sorts of religious baggage they bring to the subject of suicide.
It's just that no one likes to admit it.

   I think this is one thing for which a person ought to take personal
responsibility. It should not be made easy. Besides, medicine's job is to make
the case why you should stay here. How will people be able to trust doctors if
they know that the doctor can kill you? I can see nursing home patients
wondering: "When the doctor offered me assisted suicide, was it time for me to
go? Or was it my bill?"

   The bigger reason his movement disturbs me: We still don't have a national
system of health care. To have the right to die before you have the right to
treatment seems a little bit backward. We may end up saying: "We've got assisted
suicide -- we don't have to worry about fixing up the pathetic nursing home
system for the frail, old and disabled. They can kill themselves if they don't
like it."

Q: On his deathbed, the Archbishop of Chicago, Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, called
on the Supreme Court to reject physician-assisted suicide. What do you think of
the way he used his illness to make his bioethics point?
A: You know, I doubt his call against assisted suicide will be heard because
many will dismiss the source as a Roman Catholic cardinal. But that would be too
bad. His comments against assisted suicide had as much to do with fears of abuse
of the vulnerable and coercion of the poor as with any specific religious
belief.

Who's Who

Q: Let's move to the other end of the spectrum. Have you wondered about what all
the changes the birth and reproductive technologies do to traditional concepts
of parenthood?
A: Oh yeah, and a number of very serious things have already happened to
motherhood. With advances now available, the pregnant person might have no
genetic relationship to the baby. Right now, you can take sperm from one man,
put it in a dish with an egg from another woman and put that embryo into a third
woman. In a situation like this, it's not at all clear who is the mother and
why?

Q: Should licenses be issued for baby-making?
A: Maybe they should, but the licensing bureau would have to be in the bedroom,
making the job attractive for the prurient but impractical for anybody else. You
can't control birds-and-bees-style reproduction. Even the repressive Chinese
regime has failed. What you can control is artificial reproduction. Someone has
to look out for the interests of the desperately infertile -- as well as for the
well-being of children created outside the familiar context of sex and family.

   Here's an example that shows how much we need some controls. James Alan
Austin, a fertile single man from Pennsylvania in his late 20's, hired a
surrogate to be artificially inseminated with his sperm. Upon payment of the
fee, the child was delivered to him. A few weeks later, he murdered the baby. I
think he said, "It wouldn't stop crying," or something like that. The standard
excuse. Why a fertile man should be allowed to buy a baby with no screening or
check on his character or motives is not at all clear to me.

Q: What's the difference between pimping and surrogate-brokering?
A: Nothing. I think that buying babies is a practice that society should not
accept any more than it does paid exploitative middlemen dealing in sex. I've
talked with lawyers who broker surrogacy arrangements, and I've felt that the
distance between them and a kind of brothel arrangement was not all that far.
They sit there, sort of saying, "What type of surrogate do you want and these
are the women we have in our book and who would you select and here's the fee."

Q: One of the world's leading fertility experts, Dr. Richardo Asch of the
University of California at Irvine, was just recently indicted in Federal Court.
Though the charge was "mail fraud," his university and patients claimed he was
switching around frozen embryos at his fertility clinic. Is this the sort of
thing you think needs regulation?
A: He is the poster boy for regulation. Asch may have secretly removed embryos
from storage that couples had left behind in clinics and given them to other
couples who had no idea where he'd gotten them. This means that a lot of people
became parents without their consent. Or even participation. There are people
all over California with genetic children they didn't know about.

Politics

Q: You were an adviser to the Clinton Administration during the failed health
care reform effort of the first term. Any advice for the President this time
around?

A: He should go back to the plate, but he needs a more modest agenda. I would
say stress four things: managed care reform and children . . . children . . .
children. The American people know that taking care of our kids is morally the
right thing to do.

Q: In Oregon's Medicaid insurance program, the procedures the state will pay for
are clearly prioritized. Will all the states be following Oregon's example?
A: It was incredibly courageous what they did there. They took on the issue in a
public way that was unprecedented and hasn't been duplicated since. I admired
it, but . . . it also had a fatal flaw: the effort to think about rationing was
confined to the poor. In Oregon, they focused on Medicaid, which serves a
population politically unable to look out for itself. Oregon shows both what can
be done -- put the public on notice that it must grapple with hard choices --
and what should not be done: confine discussions of rationing to the weakest,
most vulnerable among us.

Tell Us About You

Q: What was the biggest moral crisis you've faced?
A: Going for a draft induction physical in 1971, in the middle of the Vietnam
War. Many people were going to Canada or not showing up. My wife, Jane, didn't
want me to go to the physical. She thought Canada looked better at the time, but
I reread Socrates' discussion in Plato's dialogues about why he was going to
take the hemlock. He argued that he'd accepted society's benefits, and so it was
wrong for him to reject society. This led me to decide, "I don't support this
war, I'm going to argue against it, but I'm going to go."

   As it happens, the doctor who gave me the induction exam was one of the guys
who was exempting anyone he could. When he heard that I'd had childhood polio,
he said, "You should not be going to Vietnam." But I never did anything to get
out. It wasn't patriotism. It was just a feeling that you shouldn't rip off the
system.

Q: Do you believe in the small lie?
A: Absolutely. One of the lubricants of social comity is . . . the small lie.
It's like learning to use any small sharp object -- you have to use it
carefully. I certainly don't have a problem with a small lie if I'm trying to
save a life.

   For instance, early in my career, I realized that by paying attention to the
ethics of what good informed consent is, I was missing something. Whenever I'd
been involved in a case of a Jehovah's Witness who was refusing a lifesaving
blood transfusion, the family and clergy were present. It occurred to me that
maybe they were pressuring the patient to say, "No, we don't want blood." So the
next time I had a Jehovah's Witness case, I got everyone out of the room and
talked to the patient alone: "Do you really want to refuse the blood? Because if
you don't, I am willing to make sure you get a blood transfusion and lie about
it."

   With kidney donations, I began having questions on the way we were counseling
family members who'd been called upon to donate live organs. I realized family
ties could be coercive. So I went in and talked to our transplant team and said:
"Before we accept any more live kidney donations, we'd better be prepared to
give people a medical excuse, lie for them -- so that they feel they don't have
to withstand the wrath of their family if they say 'no' to having someone cut
them up and take one of their kidneys." And I got a guy right away who, when
offered the chance, said no to donating to his brother.

Q: Was that the right to thing to do -- somebody probably died there?
A: It was, if you believe that to take organs from someone, they have to have a
truly free choice about it. The way bioethics works is that all the questions of
right and wrong aren't always all up for grabs at the same time.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Authur Caplan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FERGUS GREER/BOTAISH GROUP, FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. 43); (ANDY WHALE/TONY STONE IMAGES) (pg. 44); (TIM
DAVIS/TONY STONE IMAGES) (pg. 45)

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996


                             2582 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  December 12, 1996, Thursday, CARROL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL (NEWS), Pg. 9C

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: Westminster houses open for holiday tour Saturday; Belle Grove Square
homes, 2 churches to participate in 'Christmas in the Park'

BYLINE: Sheridan Lyons, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   For the first time -- and possibly the last -- the 19th-century homes around
Westminster's historic Belle Grove Square will be open for a holiday tour.

   Local florists have been busy this week decorating the six houses that will
be open Saturday, from 3 p.m. to 8 p.m., along with the two churches that anchor
the square. The tour will feature live seasonal music.

   "Christmas in the Park -- A Tour and More" has the support of the city's
Historic District Commission, its Department of Recreation and Parks, and
Greater Westminster Development Corp.

   The idea arose more than a year ago -- in August 1995 -- when East Middle
School librarian Laurie Walters was asked to include her Park Avenue home on
Carroll County's Harvest House Tour.

   "When I was asked to put my house on the Harvest Tour, I said, 'Oh no, no,
no,' but it got me thinking: If they wanted my house when there are ones that
are much prettier, we could do our own tour to share theses treasures that we're
a part of," Walters said.

   "These were in-town houses built for city living -- a little planned
community."

   The styles of the houses include Victorian, Queen Anne and Georgian. Two were
on previous tours, she said, but the other four never have been open to the
public.

   Belle Grove Square is bounded by Green Street, Bond Street, Park Place and
Park Avenue. The 30-lot parcel once was known as Matthew's Addition because it
was developed by George W. Matthews, who donated the acre park to the city in
1877, said Jay A. Graybeal, director of the Historical Society of Carroll
County.

   The tour will benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation of Maryland. Walters
said they chose the foundation as the beneficiary because a friend, Sandy Scott,
has two children with the disease.

   Scott, a former teacher, is co-owner of a nearby shop, the Hickory Stick.

   "I feel very loved and honored, to see the whole town take part," said Scott.
"I'm not the true recipient -- but this will benefit my children who both have
CF." No cure exists for the fatal hereditary disease -- a cellular condition
that is not contagious -- but the foundation is making strides in testing and a
possible gene therapy, she said.

   The $ 10 ticket includes a booklet with write-ups on the houses and line
drawings by art honors students at Westminster High School. To support the tour,
seven downtown restaurants are offering ticket holders a 10 percent discount on
meals Dec. 14 to Dec. 21.

   Entertainment in the park will include the Westminster Band, the Westminster
High School brass ensemble and carolers.

   St. Paul's United Church of Christ will have a choir and handbell chorus,
with light fare for sale by its youth group. Brownie Scouts will sell luminary
gift sets.

   Westminster Church of the Brethren will offer free cookies and punch to tour
participants.

   Both churches are on the square.

   The homes are being decorated by Dutterer's Flower Shop, Hock's Floral
Design, Flowers by Evelyn, the Flower Box, Kingsdene Nurseries and Bowman's
Christmas Shop.

   After Walters pitched the idea, "It just went from there," said Thomas B.
Beyard, the city director of planning and public works. "The city has done a lot
of work on it, the florists, the businesses. We hope it will be a success."

   Tickets are available at the participating florists' shops and restaurants,
the Hickory Stick and other downtown businesses, and will be sold at the two
churches the day of the tour. The City Hall information number is 848-7967.

   Pub Date: 12/12/96

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 1, ANDRE F. CHUNG: SUN STAFF PHOTOS, Decorated: Laurie Walters
(left), who had the idea for the Belle Grove Square house tour, and Sandy Scott
and her daughter, Lindsay, 11, look over the Christmas tree in Walters' home.
The tour will benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation of Maryland. At left, Doug
Walters, 11, talks to Sandy and Lindsay Scott on the porch.; PHOTO 2, ANDRE F.
CHUNG: SUN STAFF PHOTOS, SAME AS PHOTO 1

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1996


                             2583 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 11, 1996, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IN ARTHRITIS TREATMENT CALLED PROMISING

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Early results from the first attempt to treat rheumatoid arthritis using gene
therapy suggests scientists may be on the right track, University of Pittsburgh
researchers reported yesterday.

   Speaking yesterday at the Biochemical Society/British Society of Immunology
Meetings in Great Britain, Dr. Christopher Evans said tests showed that cells
containing an anti-arthritis gene had been successfully transferred into the
inflamed knuckle joints of Carlene Lauffer last summer.

   During the week they were in place, the cells produced proteins that would
ease pain and halt further deterioration of her joints, reported Evans, the
project's principal investigator.

   The anti-arthritis cells were transplanted into the Weirton, W.Va., woman's
left hand just a week before she was to have her arthritic knuckles replaced
with artificial joints. The cells were never intended to cure the autoimmune
disease. Rather, researchers simply wanted to prove that the beneficial genes
could be added to the cells and then made to work inside the body.

   As a safety precaution in that first experiment, only a small number of cells
were transferred into Lauffer's knuckles.

   ''The fact that we see anything (in subsequent tests of her knuckles) is very
encouraging,'' Paul Robbins, a molecular geneticist and co-principal
investigator, said last week.

   ''I'm extremely happy,'' said Lauffer, 69, a retired cook, ''and I'm happy
that I was the first to get (the gene therapy). People say to me, 'Weren't you
afraid?' I have never, ever been afraid.''

   Because Lauffer suffered no ill effects, Evans and Robbins will increase the
number of cells given to subsequent patients.

   Lauffer's arthritis had progressed so far that replacing her knuckle joints
with silicone rubber was her only hope of pain relief. She said she was pleased
with the results on her left hand and planned to have the joints in her right
hand replaced next year.

   A second patient has entered the study, undergoing surgery to remove cells
that can be modified with the anti-arthritis gene. Like Lauffer, the patient
eventually will have the cells returned to her knuckles a week before she
undergoes joint replacement. Two other patients have expressed interest; nine
patients in all will undergo the gene therapy.

   It will be years, however, before gene therapy is available for treating
arthritis. Robbins said injecting each joint with treated cells would not be
practical for routine treatment; researchers hope to use an inactivated virus
that could deliver the beneficial gene to all joints in the body with a single
injection.

   If results from this first series of patients continue to be encouraging, the
researchers probably will design future trials to look for clinical signs that
the transplanted cells are easing the arthritis. Robbins said they also might
try to treat patients whose arthritis has not progressed as far as Lauffer's.

   After the joint replacement, the researchers take the knuckles that were
removed from the patient and subject them to a number of tests, including
examining thin sections under a microscope.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1996


                             2584 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 10, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z06; SECOND OPINION

LENGTH: 925 words

HEADLINE: Ignoring the Gene

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford

BODY:


   She doesn't want to know the results of the test. She's a Nineties Power
Woman -- a lawyer and a mother -- and she doesn't want to be informed. This
sounds like heresy, a retreat into the paternalism of the past, when doctors
withheld information that they didn't think people could handle.

   Most of us have grown up believing that knowledge is power. Give us the
information, doctor, and we, the smart consumers, will make decisions about our
future.

   But in this case knowledge may cause more harm than good.

   This case is genetic testing for breast cancer.

   The headlines shout that scientists have identified two genes that increase a
woman's risk of developing breast cancer. Behind those headlines, however, lies
a medical marketplace eager to make genetic testing available to millions of
women. At relatively high expense -- one company charges $ 2,400 -- you can
undergo tests to see if you are at increased risk of breast cancer.

   Should you take the test?

   "What's the impact of knowing you have the gene?" asks law professor Karen H.
Rothenberg, director of the Law and Health Care Program at the University of
Maryland School of Law. "Is there a direct medical benefit? What does it mean to
your family?"

   Rothenberg is participating in a scientific study to find out how prevalent
the gene may be. But she's glad she won't be told the results of her gene test
because at this point she believes the potential harm of being tagged with a
breast cancer gene outweighs any benefits.

   To begin with, only about 10 percent of breast cancer cases have a strong
hereditary basis. Among those cases, scientists believe that about 80 percent
are linked to the two genes identified so far -- BRCA1 and BRCA2. But cancer is
a multi-step process, and it takes more than a single errant gene to develop the
disease. Researchers stress that most women with breast cancer do NOT have a
breast cancer gene. What's more, some people with the gene do NOT get cancer.

   Just how much a woman's risk is increased by having the gene is not clear.
According to one study of 217 families, about half of the women with the BRCA1
gene developed breast cancer by the age of 50. But the results of this study of
high-risk families may not translate to the general population. "This could
represent an overestimate," says Francis S. Collins, director of the Human
Genome Project at the National Institutes of Health.

   Second, what do you do with the information to prevent the cancer from
developing? Unfortunately, there are no proven preventive measures.

   A few women with the gene choose the drastic option of a double mastectomy on
the theory that without breasts, you can't get breast cancer. But there's no
data to support this. As Collins explains: "Women who have prophylactic
[preventive] mastectomy can get breast cancer in the epithelial tissue that is
left. It's incorrect to say this is a solution you can count on. It ought to
reduce the risk, but we don't know by how much."

   Frequent mammograms are also no guarantee. It may be, scientists caution,
that a gene-based cancer is different biologically from other types of breast
cancer, and more likely to spread before it can be picked up by a mammogram. In
addition, there is concern that the radiation from frequent mammograms could
increase the odds of developing a cancer in women with the gene. "We believe
mammograms ought to improve survival," says Collins, "but we don't know."

   At this point, there is no gene therapy to alter the breast cancer gene to
reduce the cancer risk. Nor has the discovery of the breast cancer genes led to
new treatments.

   Meanwhile, a positive test for the breast cancer gene becomes a fixture on
your medical record and opens the door to the risk of discrimination. Unlike
race and gender discrimination, genetic discrimination is less obvious. "They
can't look at you and tell you have a predisposition for breast cancer,"
Rothenberg explains. But the concern is great enough that 18 states have passed
legislation prohibiting genetic discrimination and several federal bills are
pending.

   More troubling may be the psychological consequences. How does a positive
test result affect a woman's sense of self? At what age should a woman be
tested? Men also can be carriers of the gene and can transmit it to their
daughters. Should couples be tested for the gene before getting married or
having children? In one extreme scenario, would a female fetus be aborted if it
had the culprit gene?

   "We are entering a new world of genetics, but there is no new world of
medicine," says psychiatrist Cathie Ragovin of the Massachusetts Breast Cancer
Coalition. In testing for the breast cancer gene, technology is way ahead of
medicine, and women could be left with a little piece of information, no direct
medical answers and a lot of anxiety.

   For now, most health experts recommend the genetic test only for those in
high-risk families where there is a very high death rate from breast and ovarian
cancers in relatively young women -- and only as part of a research study where
there is adequate counseling, follow-up support and medical services for all
family members.

   The idea of women walking in off the street to a doctor's office or clinic to
get tested makes the research community shudder. Even NIH's Collins, the most
ardent advocate for gene research is speaking in humbler tones -- ending his
talk at a recent genetics meeting with a quote from Sophocles: "It is but sorrow
to be wise/when wisdom profits not."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1996


                             2585 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    December 9, 1996, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Gene therapy testing targeting brain cancer

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   After more than three years of research, neurosurgeons at
Baylor College of Medicine are testing a new gene therapy for
brain cancer.

   Two patients with advanced forms of a brain tumor called
malignant glioma have begun the treatment at Methodist
Hospital, said Dr. Todd Trask, a neurosurgeon at Baylor and
Methodist.

   As many as 11,000 people in the United States are diagnosed
with a glioma each year.  In general, traditional treatment
with surgery, radiation and anti-cancer drugs adds only an
extra 10 months to the patient's life spans.

   This gene therapy would make an anti-viral drug a tumor
killer.

   In the laboratory, doctors have attached a form of adenovirus
(the kind that causes human respiratory diseases) to a gene
from a herpes virus.  This gene causes cells to make an enzyme
called thymidine kinase.

   The virus is highly infectious, spreading the gene throughout
the cells of the tumor.  Doctors then treat the patient with a
drug called ganciclovir, which is usually used in the
treatment of a form of herpes virus.

   However, because the tumor contains the thymidine kinase gene,
it attracts the ganciclovir to its cells.  In studies with
rats, the drug kills brain tumor cells.

   Tests of the gene therapy in baboons at the Southwest
Foundation for Biomedical Research in San Antonio helped Drs.

   Trask, Robert Grossman and David Shine to decide on the proper
dosage of the material.

   Two baboons who received extremely high doses died, causing
the trio to rethink how much patients should receive.

   Human patients will receive a much lower dosage.

   On Tuesday, the first patient, who asked not to be identified,
was fitted with a frame that allowed doctors to identify a
specific point in his brain using three coordinates.

   He then received a CT scan and a point in the brain was
identified.

   In the operating room, Trask drilled a hole into the patient's
skull and injected the gene-virus combination at the
pre-identified spot.

   The gene-virus combination (called a vector) was made in the
Texas Children's Hospital laboratory headed by Dr.Estuardo
Aguilar-Cordova.

   The patient will spend two weeks in the hospital, receiving
the drug ganciclovir.  He received his first dose Wednesday.

   The second patient underwent the treatment with the virus-gene
combination Wednesday and is also hospitalized for two weeks,
Trask said.

   In this first phase, the study is designed to determine if the
gene therapy is safe and at what dosage.  None of the
physicians involved can say whether they think it
significantly will affect the patients' tumors, although that
is what they hope.

   Six patients with advanced prostate cancer have received a
similar form of gene therapy at Methodist, but there are as
yet no complete results.


TYPE: Series

NOTES: One in an occasional series.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1996


                             2586 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 8, 1996, Sunday, FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. D-1, ANALYSIS

LENGTH: 1694 words

HEADLINE: BEARING THE INSULT, FEELING THE PAIN

BYLINE: ROBERT LIPSYTE, N.Y. TIMES NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: POLAND, Ohio

BODY:


   On the 52-inch television set in John Hirschbeck's living room, the moving
images seem unreal, a parody of Norman Rockwell's America. Almost nose to nose,
an umpire, a manager and a star baseball player are screaming as they jostle for
position near home plate. Suddenly, the player spits at the umpire, a hurricane
spray on this large screen.

   Two months ago, that picture became a symbol for many people of a nation and
its pastime losing civility, discipline and respect for authority. For the
umpire, Hirschbeck, being spat upon was also the beginning of a wrenching replay
of the past five years of emotional torment as an incurable disease attacked his
children.

   ''I was shocked when he spit on me, and when he wasn't suspended immediately
I was very disappointed,'' said Hirschbeck, watching that video clip yet again
last week. ''But I could deal with all that. It's when he dragged my family in,
when he stripped away my private life and talked about John, that he ripped my
heart out.''

   It was after the game on Sept. 27 in Toronto that the player, Roberto Alomar
of the Baltimore Orioles, declared that the reason Hirschbeck had called him out
on a third strike that looked wide and then ejected him for complaining had to
do with the umpire's turning ''bitter'' after the death of his young son three
years ago. The next day, when Hirschbeck first learned about the player's
comments from reporters asking for a response, he charged into the Orioles'
locker room. He was restrained from Alomar by a fellow umpire.

   Alomar was later reported as saying that he spat because Hirschbeck called
him ''names,'' including, in some accounts, an ethnic slur. The umpire denies
this, although he admits to using expletives of a more general nature right
after the spitting and during the locker-room episodes. The third man at the
plate, Orioles Manager Davey Johnson, has refused to offer his version. Last
week, Johnson said: ''Anything I say would just accelerate this thing. It does
no good to talk about umpires in the papers.'' He would not elaborate when he
said: ''I think they're both guilty.''

   There have been apologies and acceptances, mostly as statements delivered
through the news media. Because the Orioles didn't make the World Series and
Hirschbeck was not scheduled to work post-season games, that ugly moment in
Canada was soon obscured by a thrilling Yankees victory and Frank Torre's
transplanted heart.

   The Hirschbecks gratefully retreated into the protective cave of this small
town. They needed to conserve their strength; the rare brain disorder
adrenoleukodystrophy - that killed John at age 8, also affects his younger
brother, Michael, 10. Their sisters, Erin, 8, and Megan, 5, are genetic
carriers, like their mother and might affect them later in life.

   In ALD, a faulty gene is unable to produce the enzymes that clear away toxins
that destroy nerve cells in the brain.

   In the summer of 1991, when John was 6, his symptoms first appeared. He
seemed a little vague, unusually timid; there were brief brownouts of energy and
attention. Hirschbeck was away on his ninth season as an American League umpire
and Denise was pregnant, and busy with three preschoolers and a large house on
10 wooded acres. It would be the last time that she thought of herself living a
''charmed life, almost too perfect,'' in which a flight attendant and an umpire
fell in love on a Puerto Rico beach in 1980, and went on to ''have it all.''

   ''John was such a bright, lively boy, beyond his years,'' said Mrs.
Hirschbeck, sitting at the kitchen table. ''At the age of 1, he spoke in
complete sentences. At restaurants he pretended he could read the menu. He was
very adventuresome and outgoing.

   ''And then he changed. He was afraid to go trick-or-treating on Halloween. He
forgot how old he was. He had reading problems in first grade.''

   One doctor diagnosed attention deficit disorder and prescribed Ritalin, then
other drugs when the symptoms persisted. At spring training, a usually happy
family holiday, John became terrified of a dead bee. Always athletic, he was now
afraid to swim in the pool. The Hirschbecks quickly moved up the medical chain
and onto an emotional roller coaster of hope and dread and guilt.

   On April 7, 1992, just before he worked the season opener in Seattle,
Hirschbeck called home for the results of the magnetic resonance imaging test of
John's brain. Although there would have to be a second MRI, there did seem to be
suspicious gray spots on the fatty white myelin sheath. Hirschbeck flew home
after the game.

   He was in Akron, Ohio, two days later when the diagnosis was made, then on to
the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, a leading research center and
hospital for children with brain disorders. Dr. Hugo Moser, the ALD expert
featured in the film ''Lorenzo's Oil'' about another family struggling with the
disease, studied John and Michael and sent them on to Dr. William Krivit at the
University of Minnesota Hospital and Clinic for bone marrow transplants. The
only hope of halting the progress of the disease was to introduce a healthy gene
that could produce enzymes to stop the toxins before they tore though the sheath
to the axons that connect nerve cells to the rest of the body.

   For most of that summer, the Hirschbecks commuted to Minneapolis, often
living in a hotel for weeks at a time as the boys were prepped for their
transplants. Decisions were made over which the Hirschbecks still agonize.
Should they have opted for a shunt instead of steroids for John? Did they pick
the right donor for Michael? Were the girls getting enough attention?

   At the last moment, John's donor turned out to be infected with hepatitis. No
transplant. Megan, then 10 months old, became Michael's donor, even though it
would probably make him a carrier of the disease with an unknown effect.

   During this time, baseball allowed Hirschbeck to attend to his family without
worrying about salary or job. When medical bills overwhelmed their insurance,
friends in the game led by the managers Tony LaRussa and Gene Lamont raised $
250,000 at a celebrity dinner and auction.

   On March 7, 1993, during spring training in Florida, John died in his
parents' arms. It was sooner than expected, but they were prepared. The
Hirschbecks had bought six cemetery plots in Poland, and they picked out
headstones for themselves and for John. They visit his grave almost every day
and speak to his etched likeness on the light gray stone.

   ''We believe he is in heaven, listening,'' Hirschbeck said. ''We wouldn't
want him to think he's out of our lives.''

   John's bronzed Nike sneakers are on a shelf in the living room. He mugs and
grins out of family pictures on the refrigerator door.

   ''I miss him a lot,'' said Michael, a friendly boy who describes himself as
an ''awesome mathematician,'' but who has trouble reading because of ALD's
effect on his visual processing. ''He was a good brother, but he was always busy
following Dad around.''

   Dad, at the kitchen table with Megan on his lap, smiled. It was the family
''happy hour,'' Erin doing homework on the floor, Denise preparing dinner.

   ''John had this thing for John Deere tractors,'' Hirschbeck said. ''He could
tell you the model number from a distance.''

   He waited for his voice to clear, then pointed out the window at the barn.
''We spoiled him, I guess, got him a lawn tractor for his last Christmas,'' he
said. ''It's in there.''

   The spoiling goes on. Last Christmas, Michael got a regulation Las
Vegas-style slot machine and more quarters than most third-graders need.
Hirschbeck bought himself a beeper, in case Michael had another seizure at
school. Michael's prognosis is not clear. According to Dr. Gary Goldstein,
president of the Kennedy Krieger Institute, the bone marrow transplant cannot
reverse the effects of the disease; how well Michael does depends on exactly how
much damage has already occurred. The disease was only recognized in the 1980s,
and research is in an early stage. Any hope for a cure, Goldstein said, rests
with gene therapy.

   For Hirschbeck, it was only between the white lines that he could escape such
medical history and frail hope. At 42, in his 14th major league season, he is an
intense and aggressive umpire who likes to take early control of a game, to make
the hitters swing by calling strikes. It could be a reason for misjudging that
first-inning call on Alomar, which he admits is possible.

   ''You're killing me with that pitch,'' yelled Alomar, according to
Hirschbeck. Alomar kept complaining from the dugout, after three warnings and
even after the next batter had taken a pitch.

   ''That's when I ran him,'' recalled Hirschbeck, back in front of his
big-screen TV. ''And Dave Johnson ran out with him, yelling, 'This is a big
game,' and I told Davey, 'You tell him that.' ''

   After Alomar spit, Hirschbeck roared, ''He spit in my face,'' but the umpire
managed to restrain himself as Johnson dragged his player off the field.

   That image of a young, cocky, million-dollar ballplayer spitting on a $
150,000-a-year, middle-aged monitor was briefly the talk of the airwaves. Was
this how low the game had sunk? Was it excusable in the heat of pennant race?
Could the umpire have been as much perp as victim? The questions are still
unanswered, long after the image faded into Yankee pinstripes. Except for
Alomar, the three men at home plate have mostly avoided discussing their
confrontation.

   Alomar has pledged $ 50,000 to the institute, which the Orioles have offered
to match. Asked to attend a news conference announcing the donation, Denise
Hirschbeck declined, saying it wasn't ''appropriate.''

   Hirschbeck agreed with her decision; out of his own sense of rightfulness, he
turned down $ 50,000 for a motel commercial right after the spitting incident.
It didn't seem appropriate to profit from the indignity. But he does think that
good can come from bad.

   ''If that $ 100,000 is the research funding that finds a cure that saves
Michael,'' he said, with the intimidating bravado of an umpire, ''yeah, sure,
what the hell, Alomar can spit on me again.''

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1996


                             2587 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  December 8, 1996, Sunday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 7F

LENGTH: 1684 words

HEADLINE: FOR HIRSCHBECK, UMPIRE'S RAGE IS FATHER'S FIGHT

BYLINE: Robert Lipsyte 1996, New York Times News Service

DATELINE: POLAND, OHIO

BODY:


   On the 52-inch television set in John Hirschbeck's living room, the moving
images seem unreal, a parody of Norman Rockwell's America. Almost nose to nose,
an umpire, a manager and a star baseball player are screaming as they jostle for
position near home plate. Suddenly, the player spits at the umpire, a hurricane
spray on this large screen.

   Two months ago, that picture became a symbol for many people of a nation and
its pastime losing civility, discipline and respect for authority. For the
umpire, Hirschbeck, being spat upon was also the beginning of a wrenching replay
of the past five years of emotional torment as an incurable disease attacked his
children.

   "I was shocked when he spit on me, and when he wasn't suspended immediately I
was very disappointed," said Hirschbeck, watching that video clip yet again last
week. "But I could deal with all that. It's when he dragged my family in, when
he stripped away my private life and talked about John, that he ripped my heart
out."

   It was after the game on Sept. 27 in Toronto that the player, Roberto Alomar
of the Baltimore Orioles, declared that the reason Hirschbeck had called him out
on a third strike that looked wide and then ejected him for complaining had to
do with the umpire's turning "bitter" after the death of his young son three
years ago. The next day, when Hirschbeck first learned about the player's
comments from reporters asking for a response, he charged into the Orioles'
locker room. He was restrained from Alomar by a fellow umpire.

   Alomar was later reported as saying that he spat because Hirschbeck called
him "names," including, in some accounts, an ethnic slur. The umpire denies
this, although he admits to using expletives of a more general nature right
after the spitting and during the locker-room episodes. The third man at the
plate, Orioles Manager Davey Johnson, has refused to offer his version. Last
week, Johnson said: "Anything I say would just accelerate this thing. It does no
good to talk about umpires in the papers." He would not elaborate when he said:
"I think they're both guilty."

   There have been apologies and acceptances, mostly as statements delivered
through the news media. Because the Orioles didn't make the World Series and
Hirschbeck was not scheduled to work post-season games, that ugly moment in
Canada was soon obscured by a thrilling Yankee victory and Frank Torre's
transplanted heart.

   The Hirschbecks gratefully retreated into the protective cave of this small
town. They needed to conserve their strength; the rare brain disorder -
adrenoleukodystrophy - that killed John at age 8, also affects his younger
brother, Michael, 10. Their sisters, Erin, 8, and Megan, 5, are genetic
carriers, like their mother and might affect them later in life.

   In ALD, a faulty gene is unable to produce the enzymes that clear away toxins
that destroy nerve cells in the brain.

   In the summer of 1991, when John was 6, his symptoms first appeared. He
seemed a little vague, unusually timid; there were brief brownouts of energy and
attention. Hirschbeck was away on his ninth season as an American League umpire
and Denise was pregnant, and busy with three preschoolers and a large house on
10 wooded acres. It would be the last time that she thought of herself living a
"charmed life, almost too perfect," in which a flight attendant and an umpire
fell in love on a Puerto Rico beach in 1980, and went on to "have it all."

   "John was such a bright, lively boy, beyond his years," said Mrs. Hirschbeck,
sitting at the kitchen table. "At the age of 1, he spoke in complete sentences.
At restaurants he pretended he could read the menu. He was very adventuresome
and outgoing.

   "And then he changed. He was afraid to go trick-or-treating on Halloween. He
forgot how old he was. He had reading problems in first grade."

   One doctor diagnosed attention deficit disorder and prescribed Ritalin, then
other drugs when the symptoms persisted. At spring training, a usually happy
family holiday, John became terrified of a dead bee. Always athletic, he was now
afraid to swim in the pool. The Hirschbecks quickly moved up the medical chain
and onto an emotional roller coaster of hope and dread and guilt.

   On April 7, 1992, just before he worked the season opener in Seattle,
Hirschbeck called home for the results of the magnetic resonance imaging test of
John's brain. Although there would have to be a second MRI, there did seem to be
suspicious gray spots on the fatty white myelin sheath. Hirschbeck flew home
after the game.

   He was in Akron, Ohio, two days later when the diagnosis was made, then on to
the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, a leading research center and
hospital for children with brain disorders. Dr. Hugo Moser, the ALD expert
featured in the film "Lorenzo's Oil" about another family struggling with the
disease, studied John and Michael and sent them on to Dr. William Krivit at the
University of Minnesota Hospital and Clinic for bone marrow transplants. The
only hope of halting the progress of the disease was to introduce a healthy gene
that could produce enzymes to stop the toxins before they tore though the sheath
to the axons that connect nerve cells to the rest of the body.

   For most of that summer, the Hirschbecks commuted to Minneapolis, often
living in a hotel for weeks at a time as the boys were prepped for their
transplants. Decisions were made over which the Hirschbecks still agonize.
Should they have opted for a shunt instead of steroids for John? Did they pick
the right donor for Michael? Were the girls getting enough attention?

   At the last moment, John's donor turned out to be infected with hepatitis. No
transplant. Megan, then 10 months old, became Michael's donor, even though it
would probably make him a carrier of the disease with an unknown effect.

   During this time, baseball allowed Hirschbeck to attend to his family without
worrying about salary or job. When medical bills overwhelmed their insurance,
friends in the game led by the managers Tony LaRussa and Gene Lamont raised $
250,000 at a celebrity dinner and auction.

   On March 7, 1993, during spring training in Florida, John died in his
parents' arms. It was sooner than expected, but they were prepared. The
Hirschbecks had bought six cemetery plots in Poland, and they picked out
headstones for themselves and for John. They visit his grave almost every day
and speak to his etched likeness on the light gray stone.

   "We believe he is in heaven, listening," Hirschbeck said. "We wouldn't want
him to think he's out of our lives."

   John's bronzed Nike sneakers are on a shelf in the living room. He mugs and
grins out of family pictures on the refrigerator door.

   "I miss him a lot," said Michael, a friendly boy who describes himself as an
"awesome mathematician," but who has trouble reading because of ALD's effect on
his visual processing. "He was a good brother, but he was always busy following
Dad around."

   Dad, at the kitchen table with Megan on his lap, smiled. It was the family
"happy hour," Erin doing homework on the floor, Denise preparing dinner.

   "John had this thing for John Deere tractors," Hirschbeck said. "He could
tell you the model number from a distance."

   He waited for his voice to clear, then pointed out the window at the barn.
"We spoiled him, I guess, got him a lawn tractor for his last Christmas," he
said. "It's in there."

   The spoiling goes on. Last Christmas, Michael got a regulation Las
Vegas-style slot machine and more quarters than most third-graders need.
Hirschbeck bought himself a beeper, in case Michael had another seizure at
school. Michael's prognosis is not clear. According to Dr. Gary Goldstein,
president of the Kennedy Krieger Institute, the bone marrow transplant cannot
reverse the effects of the disease; how well Michael does depends on exactly how
much damage has already occurred. The disease was only recognized in the 1980s,
and research is in an early stage. Any hope for a cure, Goldstein said, rests
with gene therapy.

   For Hirschbeck, it was only between the white lines that he could escape such
medical history and frail hope. At 42, in his 14th major league season, he is an
intense and aggressive umpire who likes to take early control of a game, to make
the hitters swing by calling strikes. It could be a reason for misjudging that
first-inning call on Alomar, which he admits is possible.

   "You're killing me with that pitch," yelled Alomar, according to Hirschbeck.
Alomar kept complaining from the dugout, after three warnings and even after the
next batter had taken a pitch.

   "That's when I ran him," recalled Hirschbeck, back in front of his big-screen
TV. "And Dave Johnson ran out with him, yelling, 'This is a big game,' and I
told Davey, 'You tell him that.' "

   After Alomar spit, Hirschbeck roared, "He spit in my face," but the umpire
managed to restrain himself as Johnson dragged his player off the field.

   That image of a young, cocky, million-dollar ballplayer spitting on a $
150,000-a-year, middle-aged monitor was briefly the talk of the airwaves. Was
this how low the game had sunk? Was it excusable in the heat of pennan t race?
Could the umpire have been as much perp as victim? The questions are still
unanswered, long after the image faded into Yankee pinstripes. Except for
Alomar, the three men at home plate have mostly avoided discussing their
confrontation.

   Alomar has pledged $ 50,000 to the institute, which the Orioles have offered
to match. Asked to attend a news conference announcing the donation, Denise
Hirschbeck declined, saying it wasn't "appropriate."

   Hirschbeck agreed with her decision; out of his own sense of rightfulness, he
turned down $ 50,000 for a motel commercial right after the spitting incident.
It didn't seem appropriate to profit from the indignity. But he does think that
good can come from bad.

   "If that $ 100,000 is the research funding that finds a cure that saves
Michael," he said, with the intimidating bravado of an umpire, "yeah, sure, what
the hell, Alomar can spit on me again."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photo From AP - John Hirschbeck's brouhaha with Roberto Alomar
was not as mild as this one with then-Royals manager John Wathan.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1996


                             2588 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       DECEMBER 6, 1996 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2187 words

HEADLINE: AFTER YEARS OF WORK, PENN'S GENE THERAPY TRIALS WERE IN JEOPARDY AGAIN

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   None of the half-dozen people gathered around the conference table at the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy dared say a word. They just looked at institute
director James M. Wilson and waited.

   Wilson said nothing at first. He took off his glasses, closed his eyes, and
pinched the bridge of his nose.

   The body language was unmistakable to Colleen Baker, the 26-year-old manager
of the institute's Human Applications Laboratory (HAL). Wilson never did this
unless he was very displeased.

   Wilson had just asked her how work on a new gene drug was progressing, and
she said HAL was having trouble making it.

   It was Aug. 15. Trials with cystic fibrosis (CF) patients were supposed to
start in a month at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, and this was
the first he had heard that the drug would not be ready.

   Wilson put his glasses back on and said quietly, "I can't believe that."

   It was devastating news. This not only jeopardized the cystic fibrosis trials
but the development of gene drugs for several other diseases.

   Wilson was stunned and angry.

   He had overcome other obstacles in his quest for the drug. Could he surmount
this one?

   * For six years, researchers throughout the world had been conducting human
trials trying to develop the first effective gene drug, a breakthrough that
could revolutionize medical care by correcting the genetic defects that cause
some diseases.

   But so far no one had succeeded, as one research problem after another
cropped up in the unexplored territory of gene therapy research.

   By last August, Wilson thought he had solved the most vexing problems
preventing successful therapy and was anxious to test this new drug his
laboratory had developed.

   But now production problems were thwarting him.

   At stake was a drug that might prolong or save the lives of patients with
cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic defect. In the United States
alone, 30,000 people have the lung disease, which kills most victims by their
30s. Racing to be the first with a successful gene therapy, Wilson started
testing a first-generation CF drug in 1993. But he stopped the trial in the
spring of 1994 when animal studies indicated that the drug would be toxic at
high doses.

   Even though it had been given in increasingly larger doses to eight adult
cystic fibrosis patients, without side effects, Wilson decided to wait for a
second-generation drug, on which they were running final tests.

   He had expected to resume the trials within six months, but the
second-generation drug was also abandoned when an even better drug looked
possible. As the months dragged on, Wilson began to think that he was being
overly demanding in trying to find the perfect gene drug before resuming trials.

   Patients were desperate for effective treatment - a gene drug that could
produce the protein they needed to help thin the mucus choking their lungs.

   And, other laboratories conducting human trials for a host of other diseases
were pushing ahead with first-generation drugs, like the one Wilson had
abandoned.

   He was concerned that they would make discoveries he could have made sooner
if he had continued the CF trial. But as time passed and no significant
discoveries were reported, he was reassured that he had made the right decision
to wait.

   * Colleen Baker felt terrible after leaving the early morning meeting.

   She thought of her grandmother, about to undergo gene therapy for cancer at
the National Cancer Institute, and wondered what it would be like if her NCI
counterpart had failed to come through.

   "There are patients out there waiting for my virus," she said. "They're not
just people. They're my grandmother."

   Wilson was not angry with Baker. He was angry at himself for underestimating
how difficult it was to grow viruses in the large quantities needed for human
trials.

   Armed with the gene that CF patients lack, the viruses (called vectors) are,
in fact, the drug. They deliver the missing CF genes to the patient's lung cells
by infecting them.

   The viruses are grown in cell lines, composed of human cells that have been
engineered to provide special protein the vectors need for growth.

   Scientists needed a million cells to make the billion vectors required for
animal studies. But for human trials, a trillion vectors would be needed.

   Wilson was discovering that it was a lot harder to scale up production than
he had thought.

   A few hours after learning that HAL couldn't make the CF vector in large
enough quantities, Wilson dropped by the lab bench of Guangping Gao, a
39-year-old molecular biologist, who was particularly gifted in making cell
lines. He had discovered the cell line for the CF vector but wasn't involved in
its production, which was done in HAL.

   Wilson asked Gao if he thought he could solve the production problems. Gao
said yes.

   He was certain of it.

   * Since arriving at Penn in 1993 with the mandate to establish a world-class
gene therapy facility, Wilson has seen the institute grow from one person,
himself, and no budget, to an organization with 150 people funded by $18 million
a year in research grants.

   Wilson assembled a team of eager young scientists - most in the final stages
of formal training - and a few assistant professors. He had ended up with an
army of enlisted soldiers and a handful of lieutenants but few captains and
colonels.

   He estimated that lack of leadership and other organizational problems may
have cost the CF project six to nine months, which he found inexcusable.

   Not satisfied with only making basic research discoveries, he was driven by a
desire to move the knowledge from the laboratory to the bedside.

   "We move fast," Wilson said. "Industry doesn't move this fast." Still he
didn't think the institute was moving fast enough.

   "But what the hell," he said. "What are you going to do - beat yourself up or
just fix it?"

   Wilson spent much of this year trying to fix it.

   He reorganized several units in the institute, putting individuals rather
than committees in charge of overseeing projects.

   He hired Nelson A. Wivel, 61, a veteran National Institutes of Health
scientist and director of the now defunct Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee,
which oversaw all the gene therapy trials in the country. With the rank of
deputy director, Wivel was Wilson's number-two man.

   Wilson promoted his longtime staff assistant, 31-year-old Deborah Jurmu, whom
he had brought with him from the University of Michigan, to a new administration
job.

   She would oversee most of the non-science activities in the institute so
Wilson would have more time to do science.

   * After talking with Gao about producing the vector, Wilson went home
convinced that HAL had to be restructured. With only four people working there,
it was clearly overwhelmed by more than a dozen different projects, each
requiring a different gene drug. The problem with the CF drug had not been the
lab's first.

   And with so many unknowns in this emerging field, he now felt HAL should be
headed by a hands-on research scientist.

   He resolved to hire two more lab technicians, increase the space of HAL by 30
percent, and put the best vector grower he could find in charge. He picked
Guangping Gao.

   * The next day Gao reported to HAL, a collection of super-sterile rooms in
the University of Pennsylvania hospital across the street from the Wistar
Institute, where Wilson's labs were located.

   Donning a sterile gown, booties and cap, Gao started from scratch, making the
cell line to grow the virus.

   On Day One, he thawed cells stored in a freezer, distributed them among five
covered plates, and waited for the 10 million cells to multiply. On the fourth
day, he distributed the cells that now filled the five plates, to 25 plates.

   He waited another three days and redistributed the cells to 100 plates. By
Day 10, he had a billion cells.

   On Day 11, after the cells had multiplied until they covered precisely 90
percent of the surface of each plate, Gao infected them with adenoviruses. It
was essential that the cells covered no more and no less of the dish for the
adenoviruses to grow properly.

   Normally, adenoviruses cause colds but these had been disabled and armed with
the gene that cystic fibrosis patients lack.

   Gao waited three more days for the viruses to multiply, nourished by the
cells he had so carefully prepared. It wasn't until Sept. 11, 34 days after
Baker had given Wilson the disturbing news at the operating committee meeting,
that Gao was ready to harvest the virus.

   Not until he had finished the harvest would he know if all his work had been
worthwhile.

   * Gao was so excited on the day of the harvest that he woke up at 5:30, well
ahead of his alarm.

   Even though he had slept only four hours - having stayed late in the lab the
night before - Gao got up and headed for HAL.

   All night long, the viruses had been spinning at 20,000 revolutions per
minute, as a centrifuge separated them from broken up bits of cells and other
debris.

   Even at that speed, it took a long time to extract the virus, and Gao knew he
had to wait several hours for the process to be completed. It wasn't until
lunchtime, when the digital timer on the centrifuge indicated that 15 hours and
24 minutes had elapsed that he and lab technician Ryan Engdahl stopped it.

   Inside the centrifuge, which looked like a top-loading washing machine, were
six plastic tubes, each filled with a whitish fluid and a thin band of bluish
material in the center. The bands were about as thick as the width of a
matchstick. This was the concentration of viruses the centrifuge had separated
from other material in the tube.

   There would have been no blue line if no virus had been produced or the line
would have been much thinner if only small amounts had been made.

   "I like the color, Ryan," Gao said. "I like it."

   Engdahl smiled as Gao looked at the tubes and their blue lines, almost in awe
of what had been created.

   "After all that work," Gao said, "we've got it."

   Using a spectrometer, a device which counts viruses, Gao determined that more
than a trillion viruses had been made - more than enough to restart the human
cystic fibrosis trial.

   One hour later, Gao was sitting at the small wooden table in Wilson's office.
Before him was the printout of all the numbers generated by the spectrometer.

   Wilson didn't look at them at first. Instead he interrogated Gao, asking him
how he had prepared and infected the cells.

   Wilson didn't want to look at Gao's numbers only to be disappointed by
discovering that the figures couldn't be trusted because of lab error.

   Gao answered each question succinctly, providing Wilson with specific numbers
for different phases of the preparation as Wilson wrote the information onto a
blackboard.

   Standing back, Wilson studied the numbers he had arranged in a step-by-step
scheme while Gao sat silently, his hands folded before him. Satisfied that
everything had been done properly, Wilson was now ready to look at the results.

   "You believe these figures?" Wilson asked, looking at Gao's printout.

   "Yes," Gao said.

   "They're awfully high. They're 100-fold more than they were getting," Wilson
said, referring to the failed production attempt Baker had reported at the
meeting.

   Gao said he thought that the first attempts had failed because the cells were
either too tightly or loosely packed in the lab dishes when they were infected
with the virus.

   Wilson continued staring at the numbers on the sheet, leaning his chin on his
folded hands.

   "So we're swimming in the stuff," he said finally, smiling for the first
time. "That's fantastic."

   * Gao spent the next four weeks going through the final stages of preparing
the drug for the federal approval needed to resume the trials on volunteers.

   Toxicology studies were done on mice to make sure that the drug was safe.

   Other studies were done to show that the viruses did deliver the CF genes to
the cells and that the infected cells produced the protein needed by CF
patients.

   And samples from the first lot of viruses were sent to an independent
laboratory to make sure that it was not contaminated.

   Finally, on Oct. 7, the data were sent to the Food and Drug Administration.

   Approval was given 16 days later.

   The word immediately went out to cystic fibrosis patients for volunteers to
restart the trial.

   Wilson hoped to sign up 15 patients over the next year for the toxicity
trial. If the drug proved safe, a second trial would be undertaken to see if it
could control cystic fibrosis.

   Two weeks ago, the first volunteer, Christopher Manzi, signed up.

   The 19-year-old college student from Burlington, N.J., will get the new
vector on Monday - two years and eight months after the trial was stopped.

   It would be another year before Wilson would know if he had something that
might work.

   * (Seven of the eight seriously ill cystic fibrosis patients who volunteered
for the first phase of the gene therapy trial are still alive. Wendy Babb of
Palmyra, died last January at the age of 34, after an unsuccessful lung
transplant.)

NOTES: The Quest: Seeking an Ultimate Cure
One of a continuing series of reports on gene therapy research.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
"We move fast," said James M. Wilson, head of the Institute for Human Gene
Therapy. But he wasn't sure if it was fast enough. (The Philadelphia Inquirer,
BONNIE WELLER)
Molecular biologist Guangping Gao checks test results to see if enough of the
virus had been harvested to begin human trials. Ryan Engdahl works in the
background in the Human Applications Laboratory. (The Philadelphia Inquirer,
BONNIE WELLER)
Christopher Manzi, a cystic fibrosis patient, is the trial's first volunteer.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2589 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    December 3, 1996, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1110 words

HEADLINE: It's gone today and hair tomorrow; Health: Physicians and
pharmaceutical firms get closer in search for something that will stop and
reverse hair loss.

BYLINE: Judy Foreman, BOSTON GLOBE

BODY:


   Beth Stein, a 39-year-old New Jersey advertising copywriter, began losing her
hair at 19 -- presumably because of the genes that affect everyone in her
family, male and female.

   Eventually, her hair became so thin it was hard to style in a way that
covered her head.

   "When this happens to people, especially to a woman, it's extremely
emotionally distressing and socially crippling," she says. "I tried a lot of
phony treatments. I cried a lot. It was pretty devastating."

   Then, several months ago, she spotted an ad in the Yellow Pages for a New
York doctor touting a new way to make hair grow.

   It turned out to be a hair spray made from two drugs already approved by the
Food and Drug Administration: minoxidil, the active ingredient in Rogaine, an
over-the-counter potion that boosts hair growth in some people, and tretinoin,
the chief constituent of Renova and Retin A, prescription-only drugs that combat
wrinkles and acne.

   Never mind that the doctor's homemade concoction, though not illegal, had
never been tested in controlled clinical trials, so there is no solid proof that
it's safe and that it works.

   Like many of America's 20 million balding women and 40 million balding men,
all that Beth Stein wanted was more hair.

   Until recently, at least, that has been a quixotic quest. Though most of us
couldn't care less until something surprising happens -- like waking up one day
and realizing a once-robust hairline is drifting out of sight -- our hair grows,
falls out and grows again in a steady cycle throughout life.

   In the growth, or "anagen" phase, scalp hair grows for about two years, says
Barbara Gilchrest, who chairs the dermatology department at Boston University
School of Medicine.

   If you can grow hair down to your knees, it means you have an unusually long
anagen phase; if you can't grow it past your collar, you've got a short one.

   At the end of the anagen phase, the hair follicle, from which the hair shaft
grows, enters a short "catagen" phase in which it shrinks back to a smaller
size. In the third or "telogen" phase, the follicle just sits dormant for
several months.

   Eventually, the hair gets loose and falls out, and the cycle begins again.

   But in many men and women, hair follicles eventually wimp out, probably
because of the effect of male hormones called androgens. New evidence suggests a
female hormone, estrogen, may be involved, too.

   With each hair cycle, male hormones activate receptors in the follicle,
slowly turning large follicles into small ones that produce only wispy hairs.
This process is especially pronounced in people who are genetically predisposed
to balding.

   "It's as if the factory wears out," says Robert Stern, a dermatologist at the
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

   Researchers have been hustling to find options for both men and women with
hair loss. Here's what they're coming up with:

   Rogaine. Since February, Pharmacia & Upjohn has been selling its 2 percent
minoxidil product over the counter, though results are often less than dramatic.
About 25 percent of men and 20 percent of women can achieve what the FDA calls
"meaningful" hair for $ 1 or so a day.

   Minoxidil, which may work by increasing blood flow to the scalp, seems to
help most those who need it least -- people who are thinning, but not yet bald.

   And if you stop using it, you lose whatever gains you made.

   Propecia. This new anti-balding drug, still unapproved by the FDA, is a
weaker form of Proscar, Merck's anti-prostate enlargement drug, also called
finasteride.

   Finasteride combats hair loss by blocking the conversion of the male hormone
testosterone to DHT, or dihydrotestosterone, which turns big, healthy hair
follicles into wimps.

   In a six-month trial of Propecia tablets in 466 men ages 18 to 35, the
majority of those on the drug had "clinically significant" growth, says Merck,
which hopes to market the drug soon.

   Estrogen blockers. So far, this is just an idea -- but an intriguing one. In
a study, Robert C. Smart, a molecular toxicologist at North Carolina State
University, found that blocking estrogen makes hair grow faster than normal in
mice.

   Would it work in people? Nobody knows, though Ulrike Lichti, a physician and
hair-follicle investigator at the National Cancer Institute, notes that "the
hair cycle in mice and humans is very different." And estrogen is important for
healthy skin, so spreading an anti-estrogen cream on the skin could be harmful.

   Parathyroid blockers. Researchers have long known that a substance called
parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHRP) turns off cell division in skin
cells, including the thousands of cells that make up hair follicles, says
Michael Holick, chief of the Boston University endocrinology, nutrition and
diabetes department.

   So his team has been trying to find ways to block PTHRP in order to turn cell
division back on, and thus encourage hair follicles to grow. So far, he says, he
has found one experimental PTHRP blocker that makes resting hair follicles go
into the growth phase and stay there longer than normal, at least in mice. Tests
will soon begin in people.

   Gene therapy. Researchers at AntiCancer Inc. in San Diego have shown they can
use a cream made of liposomes -- small fat bubbles -- to deliver genes, like
those for hair color, into hair follicles in mice. Nobody has found the gene or
genes that control balding, and AntiCancer isn't looking. "But if such a gene is
discovered," says company biochemist Andrew Perry, "we can get it into the hair
follicle."

   Minoxidil-tretinoin. In New York, business is booming for Lewenberg, who says
his "proprietary" hair spray is a combination of 2 percent minoxidil and 0.025
percent tretinoin.

   The idea of mixing the two drugs makes sense to some dermatologists, who say
that tretinoin might increase the penetration of minoxidil into the scalp,
giving it more punch.

   So far, Lewenberg says he has sold, for $ 180 a month, his concoction to more
than 2,000 patients, and that 90 percent have had improvement in hair quality
after three months.

   That's hardly a scientific study, but Beth Stein, one of his patients, says
she's pleased that at least her hair has stopped falling out. She calls her
results "encouraging but not dramatic."

   But if nothing that you've tried for hair growth works and you find yourself
still pining for the puffy plumage of youth, take heart. Things may be better
when your kids are your age.

   With the new molecular understanding of how the hair follicle functions,
"there really is hope," says Holick. "Within a decade or two, balding could be a
thing of the past."

   Pub Date: 12/03/96

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1996


                             2590 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     December 2, 1996, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1319 words

HEADLINE: Drugs seem to help some thinning pates, and a "baldness cure" may yet
be found, but for now many of us will just keep on losing it;
AGING / JUDY FOREMAN

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Beth Stein, a 39-year-old New Jersey advertising copywriter, began losing
her hair at 19 - presumably because of the same bad genes that affect everyone
in her family, male and female.

   At first, her part just seemed to be getting wider. Soon, whenever she
shampooed her hair, she'd wind up with 15 or 20 strands in her hands.
Eventually, her hair became so thin it was hard to style it in a way that
covered her head.

   "When this happens to people, especially to a woman, it's extremely
emotionally distressing and socially crippling," she says. "I went to doctors. I
tried a lot of phony treatments. I cried a lot. It was pretty devastating."

   Then, several months ago, she spotted an ad in the Yellow Pages for a New
York doctor touting a new way to make hair grow.

   It turned out to be a hair spray made from two drugs already approved by the
Food and Drug Administration: minoxidil, the active ingredient in Rogaine, an
over-the-counter potion that boosts hair growth in some people, and tretinoin,
the chief constituent of Renova and Retin A, prescription-only drugs that combat
wrinkles and acne.

   Never mind that the doctor's homemade concoction, though not illegal, had
never been tested in controlled clinical trials, so there is no solid proof that
it's safe, and that it works.

   Never mind that the doctor isn't a dermatologist, the type of medical
specialist who usually treats hair growth problems.

   Never mind even that the physician, Dr. Adam LewenbergCQ, was using an idea
originally developed by someone else, Louisiana biochemist and use patent holder
Gail S. BazzanoCQ, who has a tale to tell of running afoul of a giant cosmetics
company in her quest to get her hair growth product on the market.

   Like many of America's 20 million balding women and 40 million balding men,
all that Beth Stein wanted was more hair.

   Until recently, at least, that has been a quixotic quest.

   Though most of us couldn't care less until something surprising happens -
like waking up one day and realizing a once-robust hairline is drifting out of
sight - our hair grows, falls out and grows again in a steady cycle throughout
life.

   In the growth or "anagen" phase, scalp hair grows for about two years, says
Dr. Barbara Gilchrest, chairman of the dermatology department at Boston
University School of Medicine.

   If you can grow hair down to your knees, it means you have an unusually long
anagen phase; if you can't grow it past your collar, you've got a short one.
(The reason eyebrows never get very long - in case you were pulling your hair
out over that one - is that eyebrow hairs have a very short, 2-month cycle.)

   At the end of the anagen phase, the hair follicle, from which the hair shaft
grows, enters a short "catagen" phase in which it shrinks back to a smaller
size. In the third or "telogen" phase, the follicle just sits dormant for
several months.

   Eventually, the hair gets loose, falls out, and the cycle begins again. At
any given moment, about 90 percent of hairs on the scalp are in the growing
phase and 10 percent are resting - and in some lucky souls, this process
continues throughout life.

   But in many men and women, hair follicles eventually wimp out, probably
because of the effect of male hormones called androgens. New evidence suggests a
female hormone, estrogen, may be involved, too.

   In men, who often have what's called "male pattern baldness," thinning starts
at the forehead and works its way back, sometimes merging with another bald spot
that begins at the crown of the head. Women don't usually have creeping
hairlines, but wind up with thin spots or very sparse hair all over.

   With each hair cycle, male hormones activate receptors in the follicle,
slowly turning large follicles into small ones that produce only wispy hairs.
This process is especially pronounced in people who are genetically predisposed
to balding.

   "It's as if the factory wears out," says Dr. Robert Stern, a dermatologist at
the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. "The factory starts to turn out an
inferior product, then it just goes out of business."

   Still, there is enormous variation in the degree of hair loss in both men and
women. At the same hormone levels, for instance, some men are as bald as the
proverbial billiard ball, and some as hairy as the Biblical Samson on a good
day.

   Eunuchs, by the way, always have lots of hair because they have been
castrated and have very low levels of male hormone, a link that was discovered
almost 50 years ago in a chance comparison of two twins.

   One brother was mentally ill and confined to an institution, where he was
castrated. Years later, the other brother went to visit and doctors were shocked
- the institutionalized man had a full head of hair while his brother was bald,
says Dr. Michael Holick, chief of the BU endocrinology, nutrition and diabetes
department.

   When the first brother was given hormones, he went bald, too.

   Because most guys consider castration a high price to pay for a manly mane,
researchers have been hustling to find other options for both men and women with
hair loss. Here's what they're coming up with:

   - Rogaine. Since February, Pharmacia & Upjohn has been selling its 2 percent
minoxidil product over the counter, though results are often less than dramatic.
About 25 percent of men and 20 percent of women can achieve what the FDA calls
"meaningful" hair for $ 1 or so a day.

   Minoxidil, which may work by increasing blood flow to the scalp, seems to
help most those who need it least - people who are thinning, but not yet bald.
It doesn't do much for "frontal regression," the backward creep of the hairline.

   And if you stop using it, you lose whatever gains you made, "which is good
for Upjohn but sort of a bore for patients," notes Stern of Beth Israel
Deaconess.

   - Propecia. This new anti-balding drug, still unapproved by the FDA, is a
weaker form of Proscar, Merck's anti-prostate enlargement drug, also called
finasteride.

   Finasteride combats hair loss by blocking the conversion of the male hormone
testosterone to DHT, or dihydrotestosterone, which turns big, healthy hair
follicles into wimps.

   In a six-month trial of Propecia tablets in 466 men aged 18 to 35, in which
neither the men nor their doctors knew whether they were getting the drug or a
placebo, the majority of those on the drug had "clinically significant" growth,
says Merck, which hopes to market the drug soon.

   - Estrogen blockers. So far, this is just an idea - but an intriguing one. In
a study, Robert C. Smart, a molecular toxicologist at North Carolina State
University, found that blocking estrogen makes hair grow faster than normal in
mice.

   "Estrogen keeps the hair follicle in an inactive state," says Smart, who adds
that by spreading an anti-estrogen cream on the skin, "you can make an inactive
follicle active."

   Would it work in people? Nobody knows, though Dr. Ulrike Lichti, a hair
follicle investigator at the National Cancer Institute, notes that "the hair
cycle in mice and humans is very different." And estrogen is important for
healthy skin, so spreading an anti-estrogen cream on the skin could be harmful.

   - Parathyroid blockers. Researchers have long known that a substance called
parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHRP) turns off cell division in skin
cells, including the thousands of cells that make up hair follicles, says
Holick.

   So his team has been trying to find ways to block PTHRP in order to turn cell
division back on, and thus encourage hair follicles to grow. So far, he says, he
has found one experimental PTHRP blocker that makes resting hair follicles go
into the growth phase and stay there longer than normal, at least in mice. Tests
will soon begin in people.

   - Gene therapy. Researchers at AntiCancer, Inc. in San Diego have shown they
can use a cream made of liposomes - small fat bubbles - to deliver genes, like
those for hair color, into hair

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1996


                             2591 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     December 2, 1996, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1859 words

HEADLINE: Drugs seem to help some thinning pates, and a "baldness cure" may yet
be found, but for now many of us will just keep on losing it;
AGING / JUDY FOREMAN

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Beth Stein, a 39-year-old New Jersey advertising copywriter, began losing
her hair at 19 - presumably because of the same bad genes that affect everyone
in her family, male and female.

   At first, her part just seemed to be getting wider. Soon, whenever she
shampooed her hair, she'd wind up with 15 or 20 strands in her hands.
Eventually, her hair became so thin it was hard to style it in a way that
covered her head.

   "When this happens to people, especially to a woman, it's extremely
emotionally distressing and socially crippling," she says. "I went to doctors. I
tried a lot of phony treatments. I cried a lot. It was pretty devastating."

   Then, several months ago, she spotted an ad in the Yellow Pages for a New
York doctor touting a new way to make hair grow.

   It turned out to be a hair spray made from two drugs already approved by the
Food and Drug Administration: minoxidil, the active ingredient in Rogaine, an
over-the-counter potion that boosts hair growth in some people, and tretinoin,
the chief constituent of Renova and Retin A, prescription-only drugs that combat
wrinkles and acne.

   Never mind that the doctor's homemade concoction, though not illegal, had
never been tested in controlled clinical trials, so there is no solid proof that
it's safe, and that it works.

   Never mind that the doctor isn't a dermatologist, the type of medical
specialist who usually treats hair growth problems.

   Never mind even that the physician, Dr. Adam LewenbergCQ, was using an idea
originally developed by someone else, Louisiana biochemist and use patent holder
Gail S. BazzanoCQ, who has a tale to tell of running afoul of a giant cosmetics
company in her quest to get her hair growth product on the market.

   Like many of America's 20 million balding women and 40 million balding men,
all that Beth Stein wanted was more hair.

   Until recently, at least, that has been a quixotic quest.

   Though most of us couldn't care less until something surprising happens -
like waking up one day and realizing a once-robust hairline is drifting out of
sight - our hair grows, falls out and grows again in a steady cycle throughout
life.

   In the growth or "anagen" phase, scalp hair grows for about two years, says
Dr. Barbara Gilchrest, chairman of the dermatology department at Boston
University School of Medicine.

   If you can grow hair down to your knees, it means you have an unusually long
anagen phase; if you can't grow it past your collar, you've got a short one.
(The reason eyebrows never get very long - in case you were pulling your hair
out over that one - is that eyebrow hairs have a very short, 2-month cycle.)

   At the end of the anagen phase, the hair follicle, from which the hair shaft
grows, enters a short "catagen" phase in which it shrinks back to a smaller
size. In the third or "telogen" phase, the follicle just sits dormant for
several months.

   Eventually, the hair gets loose, falls out, and the cycle begins again. At
any given moment, about 90 percent of hairs on the scalp are in the growing
phase and 10 percent are resting - and in some lucky souls, this process
continues throughout life.

   But in many men and women, hair follicles eventually wimp out, probably
because of the effect of male hormones called androgens. New evidence suggests a
female hormone, estrogen, may be involved, too.

   In men, who often have what's called "male pattern baldness," thinning starts
at the forehead and works its way back, sometimes merging with another bald spot
that begins at the crown of the head. Women don't usually have creeping
hairlines, but wind up with thin spots or very sparse hair all over.

   With each hair cycle, male hormones activate receptors in the follicle,
slowly turning large follicles into small ones that produce only wispy hairs.
This process is especially pronounced in people who are genetically predisposed
to balding.

   "It's as if the factory wears out," says Dr. Robert Stern, a dermatologist at
the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. "The factory starts to turn out an
inferior product, then it just goes out of business."

   Still, there is enormous variation in the degree of hair loss in both men and
women. At the same hormone levels, for instance, some men are as bald as the
proverbial billiard ball, and some as hairy as the Biblical Samson on a good
day.

   Eunuchs, by the way, always have lots of hair because they have been
castrated and have very low levels of male hormone, a link that was discovered
almost 50 years ago in a chance comparison of two twins.

   One brother was mentally ill and confined to an institution, where he was
castrated. Years later, the other brother went to visit and doctors were shocked
- the institutionalized man had a full head of hair while his brother was bald,
says Dr. Michael Holick, chief of the BU endocrinology, nutrition and diabetes
department.

   When the first brother was given hormones, he went bald, too.

   Because most guys consider castration a high price to pay for a manly mane,
researchers have been hustling to find other options for both men and women with
hair loss. Here's what they're coming up with:

   - Rogaine. Since February, Pharmacia & Upjohn has been selling its 2 percent
minoxidil product over the counter, though results are often less than dramatic.
About 25 percent of men and 20 percent of women can achieve what the FDA calls
"meaningful" hair for $ 1 or so a day.

   Minoxidil, which may work by increasing blood flow to the scalp, seems to
help most those who need it least - people who are thinning, but not yet bald.
It doesn't do much for "frontal regression," the backward creep of the hairline.

   And if you stop using it, you lose whatever gains you made, "which is good
for Upjohn but sort of a bore for patients," notes Stern of Beth Israel
Deaconess.

   - Propecia. This new anti-balding drug, still unapproved by the FDA, is a
weaker form of Proscar, Merck's anti-prostate enlargement drug, also called
finasteride.

   Finasteride combats hair loss by blocking the conversion of the male hormone
testosterone to DHT, or dihydrotestosterone, which turns big, healthy hair
follicles into wimps.

   In a six-month trial of Propecia tablets in 466 men aged 18 to 35, in which
neither the men nor their doctors knew whether they were getting the drug or a
placebo, the majority of those on the drug had "clinically significant" growth,
says Merck, which hopes to market the drug soon.

   - Estrogen blockers. So far, this is just an idea - but an intriguing one. In
a study, Robert C. Smart, a molecular toxicologist at North Carolina State
University, found that blocking estrogen makes hair grow faster than normal in
mice.

   "Estrogen keeps the hair follicle in an inactive state," says Smart, who adds
that by spreading an anti-estrogen cream on the skin, "you can make an inactive
follicle active."

   Would it work in people? Nobody knows, though Dr. Ulrike Lichti, a hair
follicle investigator at the National Cancer Institute, notes that "the hair
cycle in mice and humans is very different." And estrogen is important for
healthy skin, so spreading an anti-estrogen cream on the skin could be harmful.

   - Parathyroid blockers. Researchers have long known that a substance called
parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHRP) turns off cell division in skin
cells, including the thousands of cells that make up hair follicles, says
Holick.

   So his team has been trying to find ways to block PTHRP in order to turn cell
division back on, and thus encourage hair follicles to grow. So far, he says, he
has found one experimental PTHRP blocker that makes resting hair follicles go
into the growth phase and stay there longer than normal, at least in mice. Tests
will soon begin in people.

   - Gene therapy. Researchers at AntiCancer, Inc. in San Diego have shown they
can use a cream made of liposomes - small fat bubbles - to deliver genes, like
those for hair color, into hair follicles in mice. Nobody has found the gene or
genes that control balding, and AntiCancer isn't looking. "But if such a gene is
discovered," says company biochemist Andrew Perry, "we can get it into the hair
follicle."

   - Minoxidil-tretinoin. In New York, business is booming for Dr. Adam
Lewenberg, who says his "proprietary" hair spray is a combination of 2 percent
minoxidil and 0.025 percent tretinoin.

   The idea of mixing the two drugs makes sense to some dermatologists, who say
that tretinoin might increase the penetration of minoxidil into the scalp,
giving it more punch.

   So far, Lewenberg says he has sold, for $ 180 a month, his concoction to more
than 2,000 patients, and that 90 percent have had improvement in hair quality
after three months.

   That's hardly a scientific study, but Beth Stein, one of his patients, says
she's pleased that at least her hair has stopped falling out. She calls her
results 'encouraging. . . but not dramatic."

   Ron Maloney, 39, the owner of a real estate appraisal company in Pelham,
N.Y., has been using Lewenberg's hair spray several times a day for seven
months. Before that, he had tried Rogaine, Proscar and another chemical product
- all to no avail - and even considered scalp-reduction surgery, to make the
hair he had left cover more of his head.

   Then he tried Lewenberg's hair spray and is delighted with the results: "It's
the only thing I've ever had that works."

   All of which is not exactly music to the ears of two New Orleans researchers,
Dr. Nia Terezakis, a dermatologist in private practice, and Gail Bazzano, a
biochemist and president of the Alyzan Corp. They have spent more than a decade
developing and studying hair growth with the minoxidil-tretinoin combo.

   Years ago, Bazzano licensed her minoxidil-tretinoin technology to L'Oreal,
the European cosmetics giant, to develop and market. Nothing happened, so
Bazzano sued for breach of contract. Several weeks ago, she won her case, and $
1.2 million from L'Oreal. "I'm going to develop it now," she says.

   Spokesmen for Pharmacia & Upjohn, maker of minoxidil, and Ortho
Dermatological, maker of the tretinoin products, would not say whether their
companies are also trying to develop the combination treatment. For safety
reasons, the companies take a "Don't try this at home" line, urging consumers
not to try mixing the two drugs themselves.

   But some people are reportedly doing just that - with unclear results. Some
even try to make try to make minoxidil stronger by letting it evaporate or by
putting it in a microwave, an unwise idea because minoxidil can cause side
effects, including chest pains, rapid heart beat, dizziness, sudden weight gain
and swollen hands or feet.

   At the very least, if you really want to try mixing minxodil and tretinoin,
consult a dermatologist. If he or she agrees, get a druggist to "compound" the
combination.

   But if nothing that you've tried for hair growth works and you find yourself
still pining for the puffy plumage of youth, take heart. Things may be better
when your kids are your age.

   With the new molecular understanding of how the hair follicle functions,
"there really is hope," says Holick. "Within a decade or two, balding could be a
thing of the past."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS/PAUL DRAKE / Two hair-loss types: Thin hair,
receding hairline in woman (left); male-pattern baldness in man.  Judy Foreman
is a member of the Globe staff. Her E-mail address, via Internet is: foreman(AT
SIGN SYMBOL)globe.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1996


                             2592 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    December 2, 1996, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: GENE MAY HALT CLOGS IN NEW HEARTS

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   A few well-placed puffs of nitric oxide may prevent a complication of heart
transplantation that often causes the coronary arteries in the new heart to clog
up, research at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center suggests.

   Research in mice shows that inserting a gene responsible for nitric oxide
production into the walls of an artery can help prevent the smooth muscles cells
that line the blood vessel from building up, which restricts the flow of blood
to the heart muscle.

   ''That's just step one of a long series of steps,'' said Dr. Timothy Billiar,
the Pitt surgeon whose research team was responsible for isolating the gene,
called inducible nitric oxide synthase, or iNOS. But it's working so well, he
added, that Pitt has joined forces with a gene therapy company to pursue the
research.

   ''We're moving ahead very quickly,'' Billiar added, noting researchers are
testing the technique on larger animals - pigs for now and perhaps monkeys
eventually.

   The approach not only might extend the life of transplanted hearts, but of
transplanted livers, kidneys and lungs, which also can suffer from narrowed
blood vessels, said Dr. Si Pham, director of adult heart transplantation at
Pitt. And it might help prevent the narrowing of arteries that can follow
coronary balloon angioplasty and heart bypass operations.

   Results of the animal studies were presented at the American Heart
Association annual meeting in November. The agreement with the gene therapy
firm, GenVec Inc. of Rockville, Md., was announced in October.

   Nitric oxide is a gas that scientists have learned plays a number of
important roles in the body. Small amounts are essential for transmitting nerve
impulses and regulating blood pressure. Large amounts may trigger arthritis or
septic shock.

   In the blood vessel experiments, researchers have focused on nitric oxide's
ability to reduce inflammation and halt the growth of smooth muscle cells.

   Today's anti-rejection drugs help doctors prevent massive rejection episodes.
But low-level, chronic rejection can persist, often triggering the growth of
smooth muscle cells, a process called transplant arteriosclerosis. Within five
years of transplant, Pham said, about half of all heart transplant recipients
suffer narrowed coronary arteries.

   Dr. Larry Shears, a surgery department research associate, said nitric oxide
seems to halt this process, both by halting the growth of muscle cells and by
neutralizing the white blood cells that are involved in organ rejection.

   In the animal experiments, researchers transplanted aortas between
genetically identical mice and between genetically unrelated mice. After four
weeks, signs of transplant arteriosclerosis could be seen in the grafts between
the unrelated mice. The grafts between identical mice - in which no rejection
can take place - did not show signs of narrowing.

   But when researchers inserted the iNOS gene into grafts of the unrelated
mice, those grafts also remained free of transplant arteriosclerosis, Shears
said.

   The researchers used a virus called an adenovirus to insert the genes inside
the cells. The grafts are placed in a solution containing the special viruses
for about an hour before being stitched into the recipients.

   Shears said iNOS genes only survive in the transplant grafts for a few weeks,
but that's apparently long enough for the nitric oxide to halt the
arteriosclerosis process. The hope, he said, is that the extra nitric oxide is
important only for the first few weeks after the transplant, but further
research will be necessary to prove that.

   By placing the genes only in the blood vessel walls, doctors should avoid the
possible mischief nitric oxide can play elsewhere. For instance, nitric oxide
could weaken the heart muscle, reducing its pumping ability, Shears said.

   Nitric oxide is highly reactive, so it doesn't go far beyond the cell in
which it is produced, Billiar said. In the blood stream, ''as soon as it hits
hemoglobin, it's scavenged and it's gone.''

   Though the research is restricted to animals for now, clinical trials in
humans might begin in three years, Billiar said. The first human experiments
likely would involve kidney dialysis patients, who have Goretex fistulas
inserted into their arms to make it easy to attach dialysis lines to their blood
vessels. These fistulas usually become clogged within a year and a half, he
noted, but the iNOS gene might help extend that period.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1996


                             2593 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 1, 1996, Sunday, FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. F-5

LENGTH: 2810 words

HEADLINE: MIXED PROGNOSIS;
REGION'S MEDICAL QUALITY IS SUPERB, BUT THE COST IS HIGH, AND SERIOUS PROBLEMS;
PERSIST

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   High-quality health care is something most people value, but have trouble
defining. For many, good health care is like the definition a Supreme Court
justice once gave to pornography: You know it when you see it.

   Doctors may see it as technical competence - doing the right thing right.
Patients, besides wanting to feel better, might also think factors like the time
spent waiting in the doctor's office are important. Employers are likely to
weigh the cost of care and its impact on their health plan premiums.

   If it's hard to define quality, it's equally difficult to assign scores. In
the 1980s, the Health Care Financing Administration, which runs the Medicare
program, tried to do so by publishing death rates for every hospital in the
country. Death, however, is inevitable; sometimes doctors and nurses can delay
it, sometimes not. Trying to figure out which deaths were appropriate and which
were avoidable proved too tough, and Medicare abandoned the effort.

   Without dependable information to the contrary, most experts assume that the
quality of care for the bulk of medical needs - treating infections, stitching
up cuts, detecting high blood pressure - is fairly uniform throughout the
nation, said Beaufort Longest Jr., director of the University of Pittsburgh's
Health Policy Institute.

So to compare health care in major metropolitan areas, we looked at two extremes
- the availability of advanced care on the one hand, and the health of the most
vulnerable people on the other. And we looked at costs.

   MEDICAL SOPHISTICATION

   Most of the Benchmarks cities can boast of at least one medical school, plus
major hospitals that are referral centers for complex or difficult cases from
throughout their regions. Advanced and experimental treatments are likely to be
available in any of these cities for the sickest patients or those with unusual
ailments.

   But in the eyes of the National Institutes of Health, which sponsors more
medical research and a broader range of research than any other organization in
the country, these regions are not created equal.

   Just four of those areas - San Diego, Seattle, St. Louis and Pittsburgh
accounted for 60 percent of the $ 1.8 billion that the NIH awarded in fiscal
1995 to institutions in the 15 Benchmarks regions. The top six, which includes
Minneapolis and Cleveland, account for 75 percent of the total.

   Most of this money isn't spent on patient care. Some is spent on clinical
trials, but much of it goes to basic research, epidemiological studies and
medical education. The money is an indicator of the vitality of a region's
medical research community. And a vital research community means doctors can
bring the latest drugs, the latest instruments and, most importantly, the latest
thinking to bear on medical problems.

   ''A lot of people get treatments in this town that they wouldn't in other
cities,'' said Dr. Richard Harris, an internal medicine specialist and president
of the Allegheny County Medical Society.

   The presence of a world-renowned transplant program at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center no doubt means some candidates for transplants are
identified earlier here, and that more experimental transplant work is done. But
it also means that local doctors may have early access to new antibiotics, which
often are tested at transplant centers.

   The city's high ranking among NIH recipients also is noteworthy because the
competition is so keen. Only about one out of every four or five applicants wins
NIH grants, said Diana Jaeger, director of the NIH division of grants policy.
Few first-time applicants are successful.

   To get NIH funding, an investigator's proposal goes through a nine-month
review process, during which it is scored by scientific peers outside of the
NIH, and then by NIH advisory councils, which set priorities for funding.

   Most awards are for four years. In 1995, the NIH had 24,899 active research
project grants, 6,759 of which were awarded that year.

   Pittsburgh's high ranking among the Benchmarks cities is not surprising,
given that it ranked 14th among all U.S. cities in 1995. Allegheny General
Hospital's Allegheny-Singer Research Institute and research work at Shadyside,
West Penn, Mercy and St. Francis hospitals contribute to the Pittsburgh total,
but it has been the rapid growth of the Pitt Medical Center that accounts for
most of the grants.

   In 1995, only eight U.S. institutions garnered more NIH funding than Pitt. In
1990, Pitt ranked 28th overall; in 1985, 39th. In 1980, Pitt didn't even make
the top 50 list.

   An Association of American Medical Colleges analysis shows that Pitt received
$ 2.31 of every $ 100 the NIH awarded medical schools in 1995, up from $ 1.30 in
1985. That's a 78 percent increase in market share, the largest increase of any
U.S. medical school.

   That rapid increase helps explain why Pittsburgh hospitals get only a few
mentions in U.S. News and World Report's annual opinion survey of doctors on the
nation's top hospitals. Many U.S. doctors completed their training before the
Pitt Medical Center and its affiliated hospitals became the powerhouses they are
today.

   ''Some (doctor) in Buffalo doesn't know what's going on in Pittsburgh,'' said
Ian Rawson, senior vice president of Allegheny General, noting that opinion
surveys tend to reflect historical impressions. NIH funding, on the other hand,
is the gold standard, he said.

   The NIH ranking, Longest said, ''means a couple of very important things. For
one, it reflects a greater likelihood that advanced medical technologies will be
practiced here.''

   For instance, an analysis by the Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences
at Dartmouth Medical School finds that the rate of breast-sparing cancer
surgery, such as lumpectomies, varies widely among the Benchmarks cities. Among
Medicare breast cancer surgical patients in Pittsburgh, 31.7 percent underwent
breast-sparing procedures, the highest percentage of any of the Benchmarks
cities in 1993. At the other end of the spectrum, a little less than 10 percent
of the patients in Phoenix had lumpectomies.

   That difference is understandable, in part, because Pittsburgh has long been
the center of research on the safety and efficacy of breast-sparing surgery.
''Here, surgeons got the message quicker and more clearly,'' Longest said.

But the other implication of medical sophistication is more troublesome: the
cost of care. ''In some ways,'' Longest said, ''we pay dearly for being
technically advanced.''

   MEDICAL COSTS

   Dearly indeed. The costs of medical care in Pittsburgh are greater than in
any other Benchmarks region - 70 percent greater than the least expensive city,
Minneapolis-St. Paul, based on 1993 Medicare expenditures.

   Do Medicare beneficiaries get 70 percent healthier in Pittsburgh than in
Minneapolis? Or are they 70 percent sicker at the outset? That's not very
likely, said Dr. John Wennberg, director of Dartmouth's Center for the
Evaluative Clinical Sciences.

   A more likely explanation, Wennberg said, is that Pittsburgh has more
hospital beds than the other cities and that doctors here may be more aggressive
in ordering tests, performing procedures and hospitalizing their patients.

   Wennberg is a leader in the use of ''small area analysis,'' a technique for
comparing health care practices among geographic areas. He has found that the
costs of care, the use of certain procedures and the amount of hospitalization
can vary from locality to locality far more widely than can be explained by
differences in the health of residents.

   Earlier this year, Wennberg's team published its first ''Dartmouth Atlas of
Health Care,'' (American Hospital Publishing), a book that attempts to map out
these differences across the country. The Dartmouth group analyzed the zip codes
of people discharged from hospitals to determine 306 hospital referral regions.
These regions don't always match established metropolitan areas - the Pittsburgh
hospital referral region, for instance, extends into West Virginia and Ohio -
but are intended to show where most people in an area go for advanced services
such as brain and heart surgery.

   The Dartmouth group compiled statistics from Medicare, the American Hospital
Association and other sources for each area and then adjusted them to account
for differences such as cost of living and age of residents. As a result, these
numbers ''are probably the best available for comparisons that anybody has,''
said Pitt's Longest.

   The Dartmouth Atlas shows that in 1993, Medicare paid $ 5,096 for each
Medicare beneficiary in Pittsburgh who did not belong to a health maintenance
organization. That was the highest of any of the Benchmarks cities and was one
of the highest of any area in the country. Expenditures in Minneapolis-St. Paul,
by contrast, were $ 2,998 per non-HMO beneficiary. The U.S. average was $ 3,924.

   Hospital costs played a big factor. The Dartmouth numbers show that per
capita hospital expenditures, based on American Hospital Association figures,
were $ 1,315 in Pittsburgh in 1993, compared with a U.S. average of $ 1,053.
Among the Benchmarks cities, San Diego had the lowest expenditures, $ 764.

   Pittsburgh and St. Louis were tied among the Benchmarks cities as having the
most acute hospital beds per 1,000 population - 4.0; San Diego had the fewest -
2.1.

   ''More than half the variation is explained just by that one factor'' - the
number of hospital beds - Wennberg suggested. Doctors in communities with lots
of hospital beds tend to send lots of patients to hospitals.

   Though the Dartmouth figures are adjusted for age, Harris of the county
medical society still suspects that Allegheny County's large elderly population
may account for some of the differences. Is it just coincidence, he wondered,
that retirement areas such as Miami and Tampa also are among the Benchmarks
cities with the highest costs?

   Wennberg emphasizes that small area analysis only highlights the differences;
it doesn't indicate which cities have the right or the wrong mix of costs and
services. But he also adds that Pittsburgh could probably safely reduce its
hospital capacity to more closely resemble that in San Diego another highly
sophisticated medical community.

   Dr. Gordon MacLeod, professor of health services administration at Pitt's
Graduate School of Public Health, said Pittsburgh inevitably will end up looking
like San Diego. The Dartmouth numbers are based on 1993, a time when managed
care was firmly entrenched in San Diego and Minneapolis, but before it had made
significant inroads in Pittsburgh.

   A spate of hospital acquisitions, affiliations and mergers has been announced
over the past year or so, MacLeod noted, as have a number of hospital layoffs.
And about a quarter of Western Pennsylvania hospitals have reported losses for
four years or more. ''Those hospitals just won't be able to keep it up much
longer,'' he added.

   ''By the year 2000, we will probably have half the beds occupied that are
currently licensed,'' said Allegheny General's Rawson. Hospitals will be fewer
in number and smaller in size.  ''We're in the middle of an intense process.''

   But Wennberg contended that reducing capacity may be more difficult than
adding it. ''This sector has grown without restraint for so long,'' he said.
''It has a tremendous staying power.

''The ultimate tragedy of this misallocation is we so desperately need these
resources in other sectors,'' Wennberg said. Every dollar spent on medical care,
he noted, is a dollar that isn't available to educate a child, repair a pothole
or retrain an unemployed person.

   BLACK INFANT MORTALITY

   For all the money spent on medical care in Pittsburgh, it has had only
limited impact on one of the city's most vexing problems: black infant deaths.

   Black babies are among the most vulnerable populations in America. The
reasons are not completely understood, but usually encompass a host of concerns:
lack of prenatal care, maternal drug abuse and smoking, low rates of breast
feeding, poor parenting skills, teen pregnancies that are prone to premature
delivery.

   ''I think it's kind of a measure of everything,'' said Dr. Kenneth
Schoendorf, an epidemiologist in the National Center for Health Statistics'
infant and child health studies branch. Early infant deaths usually reflect the
mother's health; deaths in later infancy reflect the infant's environment and
access to pediatric services.

   ''It's reflective of health overall,'' he added.

   From 1991-93, the U.S. infant death rate was 8.6 for every 1,000 live births.
The death rate for black infants during that period was 17 per 1,000 live
births.

   Among the Benchmarks cities, Pittsburgh had the highest black infant
mortality rate, 23.8 per 1,000 live births, with Portland and Minneapolis
trailing at 23.3 and 21.6, respectively. Miami's official rate, 6.9 per 1,000,
is so low that it suggests that the city has problems in how infant deaths are
reported, Schoendorf said. The lowest dependable rate belonged to Milwaukee,
with 13.8 deaths per 1,000.

   The black infant death rate is so much higher than other racial groups that
looking at total infant mortality rates among these cities is worthless: those
cities with the highest proportion of black residents have the worst rates;
those with the fewest have the best.

   The black infant death rate has been improving steadily but oh-so-slowly
since the turn of the century, Schoendorf said. And it probably has improved
since 1993, the latest year for which he has city-by-city figures. The use of
pulmonary surfactants, which help protect the lungs of premature infants, should
save many lives. More may be helped by the recent discovery that placing infants
to sleep on their backs rather than their stomachs can prevent many cases of
sudden infant death syndrome.

   But further advances may have little to do with medicine. ''In Western
Pennsylvania, a woman can go to any hospital and get free prenatal care,'' said
Allegheny General's Rawson. ''It's more than an access problem. And it's not a
medical problem. Hospitals in many cases have come to the limits of what they
can do.

   ''Black infant mortality, in this case, is a surrogate for low income,''
Rawson said.

   Poverty is indeed the hardest issue, said Carmen Anderson, director of
Allegheny County's Healthy Start program. The program was designed to
demonstrate ways of lowering black infant mortality rates in 15 U.S. cities with
historically high rates.

   ''We know that we have significant problems and we have known that for some
time,'' Anderson said. But Healthy Start has shown that it can accelerate
improvement in black infant death rates.

   Though the program does not focus solely on black mothers and infants, it
operates in six areas of the county that include about two-thirds of the
county's black population and about half of the city's residents. Prior to the
program, from 1988-90, infants in those areas died at the rate of 19.8 per 1,000
live births. In 1994-95, once the program was in place, the rate had dropped to
15.8 per 1,000 for all races.

   About 3,000 births occur each year in those areas, but Healthy Start actively
provides services to only about 1,000 to 1,500 of those families each year.
Among those active clients, the infant death rate in 1994-95 was just 7.8 per
1,000 births - better than the overall U.S. average.

   The key is not only medical care, but providing services such as
transportation to doctor's appointments, help in getting mothers to stop smoking
or stop abusing drugs, and, perhaps most importantly, assigning case managers to
make sure mothers and infants get the services they need. In some cases, Healthy
Start arranges temporary housing. Family planning services help families space
out pregnancies, or avoid teen pregnancies, thus reducing the risk of premature
and low-birthweight babies.

   The biggest challenges are those most at risk: transient women, women who
deny being pregnant, and women who have serious drug and alcohol problems. These
women often are hard to reach and hard to get interested in the health of their
children, Anderson said.

   Healthy Start has completed its five-year demonstration project and now is
receiving a one-year extension of its federal funding.

   ''It's a transition phase for us,'' Anderson said. The program has a $ 6
million budget, but hopes to find other sources of support for some of its
services. But success in continuing to lower the death rate also depends on
other agencies keeping or expanding programs, such as drug abuse and family
planning services.

   ''We're improving,'' said Pitt's MacLeod, a former state health secretary who
praises the work of Healthy Start. ''But the data are still appalling. No city
would be pleased with these numbers.''

   HEALTH CARE

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC (3), PHOTO (2), INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: National
Institutes of Health: (National; Institutes of Health funding); INFORMATIONAL
GRAPHIC: Dartmouth Atlas fo Health Care: (Medicare expenditures); INFORMATIONAL
GRAPHIC: National Centers for Health Statistics: (Black infant; mortality);
PHOTO: John Kaplan: Doctors at Presbyterian-University Hospital work on a; liver
during a transplant procedure. Pittsburgh's federal research grants for; organ
transplants, genetic therapy and other advanced care gave it a No. 4; ranking in
medical sophistication.; PHOTO: Susie Post: This infant's tiny foot evokes the
fragility of new life.; Premature births are one cause of Pittsburgh's
distressingly high black infant; mortality rate, the worst among the Benchmarks
regions.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1996


                             2594 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   November 30, 1996, Saturday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. 01B

LENGTH: 840 words

HEADLINE: THE RACE AGAINST FAST-GROWING CANCER;
Gene therapy may outsmart brain tumors;
Testing the theory: Doctors are trying out on humans a cutting-edge new
treatment for several very deadly forms of cancer.

BYLINE: Anne Rochell; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Steven Micko is an imposing man. He's 6-feet-6 and 51 years old and has a
goatee, a low voice and an almost eerie fearlessness. It probably wouldn't be
wise to laugh at his bright red Bugs Bunny surgeon's cap.

   He wears the cap to hide the scar ---a long, pink ridge that stretches from
the middle of his forehead to the tip of his ear. It marks where surgeons cut
open his skull in September to remove a vicious tumor.

   Micko is desperate to beat this cancer, not so much because he's afraid to
die ---his wife, Connie, confirms death isn't his biggest fear - --but because
he wants to stop what he calls "suicidal" headaches he's had regularly for
years. Apparently, his doctors say, he had a low-grade tumor that changed over
time into what is called a glioblastoma multiforme, the most common,
fastest-growing and deadliest form of brain cancer.

   The usual surgery-chemotherapy-radiation route offers only about three months
of extra life. The dearth of options led Micko to step to the edge of medicine's
frontiers ---gene therapy.

   "When the doctor approached me with the idea of gene therapy, I said, 'If it
will get rid of the headaches, where do I sign?' " Micko said.

   Gene therapy has gone through laboratory and animal experiments and is moving
slowly into human trial for treatment of brain tumors as well as prostate, lung
and breast cancer. The studies are small ---a handful of patients in a dozen or
so programs ---and they are preliminary, researchers caution. It may be years
before truly effective therapies are found and go into widespread use.

A medical pioneer

   Micko is the ninth patient in the United States and the first in Georgia with
a newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme to try the treatment. It is being
studied in a two-year trial here and in Europe that will involve about 250
patients. The therapy involves altering the genetic makeup of the tumor cells to
make them susceptible to a drug.

   It's used after most of the tumor is surgically removed and is followed by
radiation. It replaces traditional chemotherapy.

   The same treatment was first tried two years ago at the National Institutes
of Health in 13 patients who had recurrent tumors. Seven showed some
improvement, meaning several more months of life. Only two patients are alive
today.

   "It wasn't curative," said Dr. Jeffrey Olson, a neuro-oncologist at Emory
University Hospital who performed Micko's procedure. "But we're encouraged if we
see anything. We figure we might be able to get a lot more bang for the buck in
newly diagnosed patients."

Persistently fighting the odds

   Micko, a technician in the bone-marrow transplant center at Emory, found he
had a brain tumor in September after a grand mal seizure in his lab and
temporarily losing his ability to speak.

   "With all newly diagnosed (glioblastoma multiforme) patients, we try to treat
them on some kind of research study," said Dr. Ian Crocker, Micko's radiation
oncologist. "We don't have any patients who have lived five years after a
diagnosis. I'm sick of my patients dying. Every time we try new treatments, we
hope."

   Here's how the gene therapy works. Doctors first remove most of the tumor
surgically, leaving a "bed" of tumor cells. Then, they take a piece of a herpes
virus called the thymidine kinase (TK) gene and insert it into another virus
that has been engineered in the lab to infect only growing cells. Brain cells
don't grow in adults, but tumor cells do.

Viral infection and gene therapy

   This virus within a virus is then inserted in a mouse skin cell, and the
whole package is injected into the tumor bed, suspended in a liquid solution.
Inside the mouse cell, the virus makes copies of itself and sends them to infect
the tumor cells. Within two weeks, most of the tumor cells are infected with the
virus and then contain the TK gene.

   Then, the patient is given ganciclovir, an anti-herpes drug. Because the
tumor cells carry the genetic material the drug targets, they are killed by the
drug.

   Radiation is then used to "mop up" leftover tumor cells. The therapy may
double survival time and offer patients a better quality of life, Olson said.

"The gene therapy doesn't cause many side effects," he said.

   Micko had the procedure in October. Today, his headaches are gone, he's
working again and the confusion he was suffering in the weeks following the
discovery of the tumor is starting to fade.

But he doesn't expect to be cured.

   "I won't live as long as I thought I would. I figured I'd live to 80," said
Micko, who has three children and three grandchildren. "Now, I figure I'll live
to whatever I live to."

MORE FOR PC USERS

   OncoLink's list of glioblastoma drug trials:
http://oncolink.upenn.edu/clinicalatrials/gmatrials.html

   Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center's Brain Tumor Center:
http://cpmcnet.columbia.edu/dept/tumor/index.html

   American Brain Tumor Association: http://neurosurgery.mgh.harvard.edu/abta/

Neurosciences on the Internet: http://www.lm.com/(tilde)nab/

GRAPHIC: Color photo: Steven Micko, a technician at Emory University Hospital,
is
 participating as a patient in research of gene therapy. / RICH MAHAN /
 Staff
 Illustration: A genetic Trojan horse for a deadly tumor
 1. Surgeons remove most of the tumor, leaving a small portion, or tumor
 bed, behind.
 2. A mouse herpes virus is injected into the tumor bed.
 3. The virus has been altered so it can't spread disease, but it can
 incorporate itself into tumor cell genes, making the tumor susceptible to
 the anti-herpes drug ganciclovir.
 4. Two weeks after surgery, the patient starts to take ganciclovir.
 5. Ganciclovir hunts down the altered genes of the brain tumor cells. The
 patient also receives radiation to kill cancer cells the ganciclovir
 might miss.
 Source: Emory University, staff research

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1996


                             2595 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       November 29, 1996, Friday , ALAMO

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. 7, Part A

LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: Protein may help dystrophy patients


BODY: Newsday Service

   Biomedical sleuths reported this week that a natural protein called utrophin
may substitute for one that's missing in patients with muscular dystrophy.

   Although still experimental, the results offer the best evidence yet that
treatments may be possible for the lethal muscle-wasting disease. Muscular
dystrophy is an inherited ailment that has eluded any cure.

   "This landmark advance is a wonderful Thanksgiving gift," said Dr. Donald
Wood, director of science and technology for the Muscular Dystrophy Association.
"These investigators have pioneered an exciting new avenue for therapy."

   The investigators are geneticist Kay Davies and her colleagues at Oxford
University in England, who announced their achievement in the journal Nature.

   They showed in mice that providing excess utrophin can eliminate some of the
disabling symptoms.

   They used a special breed of mice that have a genetic disease very similar to
human muscular dystrophy, exhibiting much of the same gradual wasting of
skeletal muscles.

   The new results with utrophin in mice are so encouraging because "it works
spectacularly well," Davies said by phone. "You get a dramatic reversal of the
muscle pathology. The muscles look normal, and the diaphragm - which is badly
affected (in muscular dystrophy) - looks essentially normal."

   Much of the excitement also stems from the fact that utrophin is a natural
protein that is normally made in human muscle cells. It is quite similar to the
missing protein, dystrophin.

   "Getting the body to make more of something it already produces is a
significantly easier engineering feat than introducing something new" via gene
therapy, Wood said. "Now we can systematically seek a treatment by searching for
small molecules that safely increase muscle production of utrophin."

   The idea, then, is to induce muscle cells to make excess utrophin, thereby
replacing the dystrophin they are unable to make because of a genetic error. In
Davies' mouse experiments, it was done through genetic engineering, adding extra
genes to force the mouse's muscle cells to produce more of the protein.

   Wood said the Muscular Dystrophy Association is asking Oncogene Science Inc.
of Uniondale, N.Y., to submit a proposal to begin the search for drugs that spur
utrophin production in muscle cells. Oncogene Science has developed techniques
to screen very rapidly for such chemicals.

   Nobel-Prize-winning biologist James Watson, a founder of the biotechnology
company, has urged the association to provide funds to support the search for
drugs.

   The two most common forms of muscular dystrophy are caused by a genetic
mutation that leaves muscle cells unable to make dystrophin, a protein that
strengthens their membranes. Without dystrophin, the weakened cell membranes are
gradually torn apart and the cells die.

   The disease is only seen in males, about once in every 3,000 U.S. male
births, Wood said.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2596 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   November 28, 1996, Thursday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: EXTRA; Pg. 04R

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: Education Report;
BRIEFS;
School's 'SharkWatch' world-class

BODY:


   The news program written and produced each weekday by students at Shoal Creek
Elementary School has won first place in the International Student Media
Festival. The show, called "SharkWatch," beat out thousands of entries from all
over the world in the category for grades four through six. Shoal Creek teacher
Hamilton Edwards oversees the show. The media festival is sponsored by the
Association for Educational Communications and Technology.

   SALEM STUDENT TAKES ESSAY PRIZE: Salem High School student Matthew C.
Fuhrmann has taken top honors in the annual Georgia Technology Month essay
contest sponsored by IBM. His prize was an IBM laptop computer. Fuhrmann, 16, an
11th-grader, won in the senior division. The essay contest is designed to
encourage middle and high school students to explore science and technology. The
essayists are asked to explain the daily influence of technology in life. More
than 2,000 students from around the state entered the contest.

   Fuhrmann wrote about science technology in the medical field ---
specifically, how gene therapy is being used to treat patients with life-
threatening diseases. It has the potential to completely eliminate genetically
inherited diseases as well as cancer and AIDS, he wrote. Fuhrmann's essay states
gene therapy is the future of medical and science technology and is becoming the
fastest-growing technology around the world.

   HERITAGE TEACHER HONORED: Heritage High School teacher Debbie English has
been named Social Studies Teacher of the Year by the Georgia Council for the
Social Studies. Innovative teaching methods, community involvement and service
and commitment to excellence in social studies education were among the
selection criteria. English teaches civics, world history and psychology at
Heritage. She and her students have been involved in the Aids Walk Atlanta, the
Atlanta Food Bank and the Task Force for the Homeless. English is the assistant
director for the Georgia Governor's Honor's Program and a Georgia High School
Association State cheerleading official. She is pursuing her doctorate in social
studies education.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1996


                             2597 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  November 28, 1996, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 188 words

HEADLINE: News briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Service

BODY:

   Stalking bad genes

   Here's a kernel of information that could someday save
your life: Purdue University scientists have found that corn
is full of genetic hitchhikers that could weaken, kill or
drastically alter the plant cells -but don't.  This extra
genetic material, akin to retroviruses that cause disease in
people, avoids damaging its host by keeping safely away from
active genes that determine the plant's traits. Finding out
why this happens could help scientists develop more efficient
gene therapy techniques in humans.

   Soy protein bonus

   Soy protein may be in line to join oat bran as the next
food craze for health-conscious consumers.

   After demonstrating that adding soy protein to the diet can
improve a person's cholesterol status, University of Illinois
researchers now have evidence that it may help stave off
bone-thinning in older women.

   Their study included 66 postmenopausal women who followed a
low-fat, low-cholesterol diet that was built around soy
protein for six months.  Women eating soy protein generally had
significant increases in bone density, the reseachers found.


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1996


                             2598 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     November 26, 1996 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: CWRU RESEARCHERS DEVELOP NEW IDEA IN CHEMOTHERAPY

BYLINE: By CLINT O'CONNOR; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   For years cancer patients have been faced with the mixed blessing of
chemotherapy: It can kill or shrink tumors but have devastating side effects.

   Now researchers at Case Western Reserve University's School of Medicine and
University Hospitals' Ireland Cancer Center say they have developed a method
that makes cancer tumors more susceptible to a type of chemotherapy while also
protecting healthy bone-marrow cells.

   By combining a drug with gene therapy, the doctors believe they can sidestep
the killing of healthy bone-marrow cells. They hope it will eventually allow
patients to receive higher doses of the chemotherapy in a shorter time.

   The research team, led by Dr. Stanton Gerson, spent two years working with
the drug benzylguanine and a mutated form of the gene MGMT. Thus far the
experiments have been done on human cells in the laboratory. More practical
applications, however, could be several years away.

   "People have been struggling with ways to protect bone marrow from
chemotherapy for years," Gerson said from Essen, Germany, where he was attending
a conference on gene transfer techniques. "This is a treatment that sensitizes
the tumor at the same time that it makes the bone marrow more resistant to
chemotherapy."

   Gerson, chief of the division of hematology and oncology at CWRU and the
Ireland Cancer Center, emphasized that the method developed by his team is not
for all types of chemotherapy. It would work with nitrosoureas chemotherapy, he
said. That is usually used in the treatment of brain tumors, melanoma and, to a
lesser extent, lymphoma and breast cancer.

   Gerson also noted that widespread use of such a method is dependent on more
research, approval of the Food and Drug Administration, and could take "five to
eight years before it gets to a large number of patients." Here is how it would
work: First, bone-marrow progenitor cells would be extracted from the patient.
Then the drug and gene would be added to those cells in the lab. Then the
patient would receive his or her first cycle of chemotherapy, along with an
infusion of the treated cells.

   "If the bone marrow reacts as expected, patients could get treatments every
two to three weeks, as opposed to six or eight weeks for some patients now,"
said Dr. Omer Koc, an oncologist and member of the research team.

   Koc said that for some kinds of cancer - breast cancer and lymphoma, for
example - more frequent treatment can be especially effective.

   "In general, this is obviously a very important approach to be explored,"
said Dr. Gary Nabel, a professor of internal medicine and biological chemistry
at the University of Michigan.

   Nabel, who is involved in gene therapy work to fight HIV, did not comment
specifically on the study because he had not seen it. But he did say there are a
few similar "chemo-protection" studies in progress. What makes the Cleveland
study unique, however, is the use of the mutated form of MGMT.

   Although the concept for the study took shape a decade ago, this phase of the
project took two years. In addition to Gerson and Koc, researchers included Jane
Reese, Keunmyoung Lee, Lili Liu, James Allay and Weldon Phillips. Their findings
will be published today in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   "It took a lot of weekends and a lot of good luck," said Reese, the senior
research assistant. "Science is not always just about hard work. There's a lot
of luck, too."

   Gerson said the other common side effects of chemotherapy, such as nausea,
vomiting and hair loss, would not be affected by the new technique.

   "If your bone marrow is damaged, it can be life-threatening," he said.
"Nausea and hair loss are not life-threatening."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: JAMES A. ROSS / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; Research team
members, from left, Dr. Omer Koc, Keunmyoung Lee and Jane Reese.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1996


                             2599 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   November 26, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z12

LENGTH: 3756 words

HEADLINE: Rebecca Lilly's Next Step: Takoma Park Teenager With Stubborn Brain
Tumor Tries Chemotherapy.

BYLINE: Don Colburn

BODY:


   In the five years since her brain tumor was diagnosed, Rebecca Lilly had
tried every major cancer treatment except one. Four open-brain surgeries, two
types of radiation and a pioneering gene therapy.

   Chemotherapy was the exception. Becca dreaded "chemo" and cringed when she
heard the word. She knew little about how chemo attacked a cancer, but plenty
about its toxic side effects -- the nausea and mouth sores and falling-out hair.
Even brain surgery was less scary to her: Been there, done that. She vowed never
to have chemo.

   Late last summer, the tumor in her brain gave her no choice but to change her
mind.

   Her brain scan was at noon, the Thursday before Labor Day. She lay still for
an hour inside a giant computerized magnet at the National Institutes of Health
Clinical Center as it took hundreds of cross-sectional pictures of the inside of
her head.

   The results would take a while, so Joe and Maureen Lilly took their daughter
to lunch at Hamburger Hamlet. Then, on their way to meet with the doctors on the
13th floor of the Clinical Center, they picked up the large manila envelope of
scans.

   Joe Lilly could not wait for the doctors. In the elevator, he pulled out the
glossy black-and-white scans and held them up to the ceiling light. By the time
the elevator reached 13, he could tell the news was not good.

   In the waiting room, Becca walked over to the picture window, then took a
turn at the pinball machine in the corner. Joe Lilly sat down and continued
searching the images of Becca's brain for telltale white spots.

   "This is new," he said to Maureen, pointing out a gust of white. "It reaches
farther back. We've never seen this much." He was hoping against hope that it
would turn out to be scar tissue from her surgery.

   The scene took a bizarre turn when Joe Lilly realized that the envelope
mistakenly included, among the pictures of Becca's brain, two scans of another
patient's knee. He showed them to Becca in an effort to break the tension.

   "Uh, wrong problem!" she said.

   Two doctors and a nurse invited Becca's parents into a small private room off
the waiting area. Becca stayed behind. They closed the door and sat down at a
round wooden table with a box of tissues on it.

   Pediatric cancer specialist Frank Balis began by summarizing the brain scan.
Joe Lilly's hunch was correct. The tumor was growing in several spots; it
appeared at least 25 percent bigger than the month before. Her latest stopgap
treatment with phenylacetate, a natural compound, clearly was not working.

   Balis went over the options, the first of which was to forgo further
treatment. "It would be a perfectly reasonable decision at this point to elect
not to do any more treatment, at least for a while," he said.

   Chemotherapy was the other possibility. Several experimental drug
combinations -- promising but unproven -- were available from the National
Cancer Institute. One factor in Becca's favor was that her tumor had never seen
chemo and might therefore be more sensitive to it.

   "The chance of anything we give her working at this point is diminishing," he
cautioned. Probably nothing could make the tumor go away. The focus should be on
symptoms, which sometimes could be controlled even when the scan showed tumor
growth.

   The Lillys had braced themselves for this, but nothing compared to hearing
the words.

   They faced a fearsome choice, riddled with uncertainty. "One of those forks
in the road," Balis called it. There was "no real rational way" to decide, he
admitted. "It gets down to a personal decision."

   Would Becca ask about the brain scan? he wondered. "Probably not," Maureen
Lilly said. "We think she just tunes out on that kind of dis cus sion."

   The meeting wound down. The Lillys asked for some time by themselves, and the
others quietly left the room.

   Five minutes later, Joe and Maureen Lilly emerged red-eyed and found Becca
playing cards in the waiting room. They had decided not to go into detail about
the latest setback until they could discuss their next move. They were
determined to put up a brave front before her.

   Becca looked up and said, "Mom, why were you crying?"

   Maureen Lilly hedged with a comment about the need to get going, and they
walked toward the elevator. But she also knew her 16-year-old daughter deserved
an answer, so she did the best she could.

   She reminded Becca they had hoped she could continue treatment with
phenylacetate. But the brain scan showed the cancer growing, so her therapy had
to be stopped. They didn't know yet what to try instead.

   Becca didn't ask any more questions on the way home.

   "I got no reaction," Maureen Lilly said. "I couldn't tell what part of the
conversation she picked up on, or even whether she picked up on any of it."

   One year ago this week, Becca Lilly of Takoma Park became the first child
with a brain tumor to undergo gene therapy. It didn't work a miracle.

   Becca has a high-grade malignant glioma, one of the most aggressive cancers.
Of children diagnosed with that type of tumor, only one in five is alive three
years after diagnosis. She has already beaten those long odds, but no treatment
has kept her tumor from growing back.

   Her symptoms have remained fairly manageable -- chronic headaches and
fatigue, punctuated by occasional brief spells of dizziness and double vision.
But with the tumor growing and with further surgery and radiation no longer
possible, her doctors this fall turned to experimental chemotherapy.

   Chemo is not standard treatment for most brain tumors, mainly because of the
difficulty of getting drugs into the brain. The tiny blood vessels that line the
brain are much more tightly "woven" than others, forming a barrier that prevents
toxic substances from leaking into the exquisitely sensitive tissue.

   The chemotherapy Becca's doctors had in mind combined a proven anti-cancer
drug called carboplatin with an experimental substance called RMP-7 designed to
briefly open a "window" in the blood-brain barrier. If it worked, the
carboplatin would pass through that window and attack the tumor.

   The carboplatin/RMP-7 combination is in the earliest stage of testing at NIH;
Becca was only the third child to receive it. She had two rounds, the first in
mid-September and the second late last month.

   Ten days after her first round of chemo, Becca attended the homecoming dinner
dance at Good Counsel High School with her date, Nick Lee. She wore a black
velvet dress with a high cut and a neck scarf to hide the catheter in her chest.
She didn't miss a single dance.

   All fall, she has kept up a teenager's stop-and-go pace, even while learning
to live with the disease that, in writer Susan Sontag's words, "doesn't knock
before it enters."

   The Lillys worked hard to ease Becca past her mental block against
chemotherapy. But it was neurologist Roger Packer, the doctor she knew best and
trusted most, who finally turned her around.

   One of the hardest things for a cancer patient, Packer told Becca, was to
consider another tough treatment when she was feeling good. The phenylacetate
she had been taking was relatively nontoxic but did not attack the tumor
directly, as chemotherapy would. Now they needed to try something else.

   What he suggested was a kind of chemotherapy. He said the word carefully,
knowing it was a verbal hand grenade.

   "I will lose my hair, won't I?"Becca said.

   Probably, Packer admitted.

   "Like all of it?"

   "It might just get thin," he said. "But even if you lose it, it'll grow back
when you stop the [chemo]."

   He explained how the intravenous pump would work and told her the biggest
danger would come about two weeks after the two-day dose of chemo. Her blood
counts would fall, leaving her vulnerable to infections. She might have to go
into the hospital and take strong antibiotics.

   "I think this is the best way to go," Packer said.

   Becca nodded and hopped down from the examining table.

   "She's awful strong," Packer told her parents. "She wants to continue on
fighting, and so do I, unless you have a different feeling about that."

   They didn't.

   Becca had taken the news about chemo so calmly that her parents worried she
had somehow tuned out and missed it. The next morning, Maureen Lilly asked Becca
what she thought Packer had said.

   "The tumor is growing, and I'm going to get chemo," Becca said.

   That same week, Becca started her junior year at Good Counsel High in
Wheaton. "Very confusing" was her summary of Day One.

   School has never been easy for Becca. Even before her tumor was diagnosed,
she had dyslexia, which made reading and writing difficult. But since her most
recent brain surgery in May, her memory has slipped and her difficulties with
language worsened.

   In the past, if she couldn't remember how to write a word, she would simply
ask someone to spell it for her. Now she sometimes forgets how to make the
letters. If someone tells her "t," she might write a "j."

   "That's not dyslexia," Maureen Lilly said. "That's the tumor."

   Sometimes, while talking, she'll take several tries to get to a common word.
At dinner recently, asking for the salad dressing, she first called it "salt,"
then "bread," then the "salad covering." It's as if she were recovering from a
mild stroke.

   She has learned that "sorta" is a canny all-purpose answer to confusing
questions. "Time out -- I'm lost," she'll say if a conversation moves too fast
for her.

   But she also can be as engaged, mischievous and "with it" as any typical
teenager.

   "Dad? I love you, man!" she croons with a big smile and her best imitation of
the Bud Light ad. "Can I have two dollars?"

   The Lillys knew Becca would miss a lot of school days, because of fatigue and
headaches, not to mention the chemo. They worked out a special curriculum at
Good Counsel. Becca takes three classes -- government, math and religion --
instead of the normal six, and gets summary report cards instead of letter
grades.

   Good Counsel is familiar territory; it's her third year. "She thrives here,"
said Gail Donahue, a resource teacher. "She's very much part of the group, and
she has lots of friends."

   Donahue is Becca's on-campus guardian. If Becca gets confused or frustrated
or needs help with a lesson, she finds Donahue and they work it out.

   The biggest change from last year is Becca's loss of auditory memory: She
remembers what she sees, but not always what she hears. Last year, Donahue could
get a lesson across by putting it on tape and letting Becca play it back. Now
she and Becca's other teachers rely increasingly on the visual: pictures,
diagrams, maps.

   "There's definitely a marked difference this year," said Paul Ravenscroft,
Becca's guidance counselor. "She just doesn't retain things. But you throw all
that out when it comes to her attitude."

   The remarkable thing, he said, is the way other students accept Becca as a
peer.

   "Becca wants to be like everybody else," said her classmate and close friend
Karen Gangloff. "She's trying to be as normal as possible, even with all she has
to go through."

   Because she rarely complains and doesn't dwell on her illness, many fellow
students don't realize what Becca is up against, Karen said.

   "She's one of the bravest people I've met. Even when she's feeling sick, I
have to like force her to go see the nurse. She's kind of stubborn that way."

   Only once has Becca ever confided in Karen how frightened she was. It was
last May, a few days before her fourth surgery. Karen could tell Becca was
upset, so they skipped religion class and went to the counseling office to talk.
"She told me that deep down, she was really, really scared, because she didn't
know what would happen," Karen recalled. Becca was crying. Karen reminded her
that it was okay to be scared, that Becca always tried to make it seem like no
big deal, but it was a big deal.

   "Becca has a hard time coming to terms with the fact that she is in any way
different -- because of her dyslexia or because of her tumor," her father said.
"She just can't accept that."

   If only she would tell her parents what she wanted most to do -- revisit
Disney World or go on an airplane ride or whatever -- they'd make it happen.

   "But she won't," Joe Lilly said. "That's not Becca."

   Perhaps it's because what she wants more than anything else is to be a normal
kid.

   The Lillys try to get her to set goals -- and limits -- for herself. Don't
bring all your books home, they advised. Don't plan on more than one hour of
homework a night.

   "But how am I going to pass?" was Becca's reaction.

   "Not to be like everybody else is very difficult for her," said
neuropsychologist Pam Walters, who interviewed Becca at NIH in September and
tested her speech, memory, intellect and emotional adjustment.

   Becca's frustration was not a sign of depression, Walters said. It was
entirely appropriate for a teenager in her situation. Indeed, her trademark was
her spunk. The day she finished her first round of chemo, for example, she
managed to stay cheerful despite fighting off nausea.

   "She looked so good," Walters said. "It was like, I'm done with this and now
I can go home and be a kid again."

   There was an added reason. That afternoon, Maureen Lilly got a call from the
animal shelter. A puppy was theirs if they wanted -- a black and white
short-eared "pointer of some sort." This was her 16th birthday gift. She named
the puppy Lady.

   It was unrealistic to think that chemotherapy would cure Becca's tumor, said
Peter Adamson, a pediatric cancer specialist and researcher at NCI. The hope was
that it might help slow the tumor down and fend off symptoms for a while.

   "Whenever something new is being tried, we get hopeful," Adamson said. "We
have to temper that hope with the reality of knowing how aggressive and
difficult to treat this disease is."

   If the Lillys didn't try chemotherapy, "they would always look back and
wonder what might have happened if they had," said Becca's older sister, Anne
Marie, who's studying to be a nurse. "I think they gave her the option of not
doing anything. I think Becca understood that."

   The week before Becca started chemo, Adamson talked with her about more
day-to-day concerns. He encouraged her to keep up her energy by eating whatever
appealed. A short hairstyle might make it easier to cope with falling-out hair.
They talked about hats, bandannas, wigs.

   Anne Marie Lilly, in a sisterly show of support, pledged to shave her own
head if Becca's hair fell out.

   Would she really do that? "She better," said their 13-year-old brother, Joe.
He'd shave his own head, Joe noted gallantly, but his buzzcut was already so
short that people would hardly notice.

   The morning her chemo started, Becca sat on the bed in her green sweats and
"In The Zone" T-shirt, playing Sorry with her family. Two pint-sized plastic
bags lay at her feet, one containing carboplatin and the other RMP-7. Both
connected to a blue Walkman-sized pump and then to the tube leading to her
chest.

   An anti-nausea drug dripped in first, for 15 minutes. Then, guided by the
computerized pump, the carboplatin flowed into a vein near her heart for 60
minutes. After 55 minutes, with the chemo at its peak in her bloodstream, the
RMP-7 kicked in for 10 minutes.

   Almost immediately, Becca felt queasy.

   "I think I might throw up," she said.

   They moved the Sorry board out of the way. Her sister handed her a pink
bedpan shaped like an enormous kidney bean.

   "Just relax," Joe Lilly said. He rubbed her shoulder as she spat up into the
bedpan. She wiped her mouth with a tissue and lay back against the pillow, a
washcloth across her eyes.

   One morning last summer, Becca's mother was reading aloud a newspaper article
to Becca and her 5-year-old sister, Sarah, when Sarah interrupted and said:
"Mom, is Becca gonna die?"

   Maureen Lilly caught her breath and replied, "We're all going to die sooner
or later." She expanded on that thought, mentioning God and explaining that
Becca had a very serious disease and that they were doing everything they could
to make her well.

   Then she turned to Becca: "How would you answer Sarah's question, Becca?"

   "What question?" Becca said.

   Maureen couldn't tell whether Becca had simply tuned out of the conversation,
or missed it altogether. Or was dodging.

   Becca's favorite class in high school is an elective that doesn't even meet
at Good Counsel.

   It was Gail Donahue's idea. She was searching for a "life skills" project to
take the place of academic subjects Becca can't handle, such as chemistry. She
knew Becca was crazy about young children.

   Which is why, three mornings a week, Becca joins Mrs. Cihlar's preschool
class at St. Andrew's Apostle School, not far from Good Counsel.

   "The children adore her," said Jean Cihlar.

   "Becca! Becca! Becca! Over here!" As soon as she walked in one morning this
month, 18 squirmy 4-year-olds started competing for her attention. "Give her
some room!" Cihlar pleaded as they crowded around.

   For an hour and a half, she helped them crayon, cut out finger puppets, play
house, build highways and castles, sing.

   "She plays with us and stuff," Sammie Mooney explained.

   "She's our friend," added Arianne Smith.

   Christine Bowman made her a pizza out of greenish-blue gunk. "No thanks, I'm
stuffed," Becca said. "You don't really eat it," Christine assured her. "It's
Play-Doh."

   "Becca, can you do this part?" Tino Marigliano asked, handing her a
rose-colored pig to cut out. She showed him how stay inside the lines. "You can
do this," she told him, handing the paper back. "Look, Becca, I did it!" shouted
Tino a moment later. They slapped high-fives.

   She even persuaded the kids to pick up their toys before the class gathered
to sing "Five Fat Turkeys Are We." Juice break caused a bit of a traffic jam, as
18 kids wanted to sit next to Becca.

   Each session with the 4-year-olds puts Becca on an emotional high, Donahue
said. The first thing Becca told her after her initial visit to St. Andrew's
was, "They really like me."

   The week before Halloween, Becca pulled a trick on neurologist Packer. She
had borrowed key accessories from her doctors and nurses at NIH. When she saw
Packer coming down the hall for her appointment, she hid around the corner and
ambushed him.

   She was wearing a physician's white coat over her sweat shirt and jeans, an
old pair of her father's wire rims on her nose, a stethoscope around her neck
and a knee hammer in her hand.

   "Come on, into my office," Becca said, leading a startled but obedient Packer
to an examining room. She ordered him to sit on the table, and put him through
the neurological motions he normally demands of her.

   "Say: How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck wood?"

   "No ifs ands or buts," he replied, stealing his own line.

   "Okay, walk!" she commanded, and he paced a wobbly line across the room.

   Then she hammered his right knee -- vigorously, with the hammer backward --
before he finally restored order and went back to being her doctor.

   The most obvious side effects of chemotherapy may be nausea and hair loss,
but the most dangerous one is its toxic impact on the bone marrow, the body's
blood factory. By temporarily wiping out production of blood cells, it can drive
the blood counts down, leaving a patient vulnerable to bleeding and infections.

   Falling blood counts -- red cells, white cells and platelets -- are the major
limitation on chemotherapy, Adamson said.

   After Becca's first round of chemo, her platelet count plummeted to 7,000
from a normal range of 150,000 to 450,000. She needed transfusions of platelets
and red blood cells. Even more worrisome, her white cell count tumbled. Ordinary
infections that her immune system would normally fend off with ease became a
major threat.

   Her October brain scan was reassuring: no change. The tumor seemed to have
stabilized. The doctors scheduled a second round of carboplatin/RMP-7, but going
ahead became a frustrating numbers game. Becca felt fine, yet her subpar counts
kept delaying the very treatment that might be her only hope of stymieing the
cancer. At times, she seemed hostage not only to the tumor but also to the fine
print of the protocol, the rules governing her treatment.

   "God himself can't get it moving if it's not in the protocol," Maureen Lilly
said.

   Finally, Becca's blood counts bottomed out and returned to normal, and she
got another two-day dose. All in all, she weathered the chemo surprisingly well:
a few days of feeling blah with an unruly stomach, then a couple of blood
transfusions as the blood counts fell. The second round was a bit rougher,
causing more fatigue, more stomach cramps, a few nosebleeds and some crying
spells.

   She came home from the hospital on Halloween, with a two-day supply of
anti-nausea pills, in time for trick-or-treating. Becca was a pigtailed clown --
red nose, green polka-dot dress, goofy tennis shoes and mismatched socks.

   And she still had her hair.

   "Despite our best efforts," Adamson joked to her. "You'll have to tell me
your secret."

   Last week, Becca had another brain scan at NIH. She had suffered a couple of
dizzy spells in the previous two weeks, one at school and one at home. The
doctors feared they might be small seizures triggered by the tumor.

   Becca was in the clinic waiting room when oncologist Adamson sat down next to
her and put his hand on her shoulder.

   "It's grown a little," he said. "Not lots, but a little."

   Becca nodded without saying a word.

   They had to cancel the third round of carboplatin/RMP-7, set for today. The
combination didn't seem to be helping her. It was too soon to know what they
would try instead, but there were several possibilities, he assured her.

   The cruel part was that she was feeling well.

   "We'll come up with something," Adamson told Becca. She gave him a hug.

   The doctors and the Lillys walked down the hall to a room where they could
display the scans on a light screen and compare August with November, side by
side. The change since August was unmistakable: more spots and swirls of white.
The tumor was growing upward from the rim of the cavity left by her surgery last
May, infiltrating tissue the surgeons had not dared cut out.

   There were still reasonable treatments to try as long as she felt okay,
Adamson said. "If she's fed up, that's another thing." He said it as a question,
giving the Lillys a chance to say yes, she is fed up.

   "No," Maureen Lilly said without one flicker of hesitation.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, At Camp Fantastic, Time Out for Fun
"AAAIIIEEE!" Counselor Jodi McKay shoved herself back from the breakfast table
the moment she caught sight of the beetle in her French toast. A clutch of
giggling campers scurried back to their seats, delighted with how well their
plan had worked.  Why did Jodi McKay deserve this?  "Lots of reasons," said Nate
Venditta, of Hagerstown. "She's the one who wakes us up in the morning." "She
sings -- really badly," said Zach Nelson, of Gainesville. "They're Arthur's
beetles," he added.  "I know nothing," protested Arthur Liu with a tattletale
grin.  "It was all Nate's idea," offered Timothy Young, of Chesterfield, Va.
"We do this every year," Damian Rodino, of Stafford, Va., admitted.  "Could be a
long week," said McKay, after another co-conspirator dropped ice chips down her
back and she obligingly shrieked.  It looks much like any other summer camp --
except for the wheelchairs, the missing legs, the blood transfusions and bald
heads.  Every August, the 4-H Center in the Blue Ridge mountains near Front
Royal turns into Camp Fantastic, a week-long getaway for youngsters, such as
Becca Lilly, who are battling cancer. They find a medley of swimming and
softball, horseback riding and hot-air balloon rides, cookouts and campfires,
ghost stories and goofing off.  "Other people see the disease. We see the kids,"
said Dianne DeOms, a staff member.  Camp Fantastic is run by Special Love, a
nonprofit group founded by Tom and Sheila Baker, of Winchester, Va., after they
lost their 13-year-old daughter to leukemia in 1976. The camp is supported
entirely by donations and private funds.  Above all, said director David Smith,
Camp Fantastic is a place where kids with cancer can just be kids.  Nearly half
of the camp's all-volunteer staff are doctors, nurses or nurse practitioners --
many on loan from the National Cancer Institute. They set up a makeshift
infirmary in

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1996


                             2600 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    November 25, 1996, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A19; THE FEDERAL PAGE

LENGTH: 641 words

HEADLINE: Compromise Would Retain but Shrink Genetic Experiments Panel

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Four months after facing a whirlwind of controversy over his proposal to
eliminate a genetics advisory board, National Institutes of Health Director
Harold E. Varmus has come up with a compromise plan that largely retains the
public oversight of genetic experiments that the board has provided since 1975.

   Apparently resuscitated, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee -- or RAC --
is a group of 25 scientists, ethicists and other experts who advise Varmus on
proposed experiments involving genetic manipulations of plants, animals or
people. During its 20 years, the panel has issued the first safety guidelines
for scientists wishing to create genetically engineered microbes, developed the
first review system for proposals to insert new genes into people and formally
approved the scores of such experiments that have since been performed.

   This summer Varmus proposed to kill the committee, saying it overlapped with
the Food and Drug Administration, which also must sign off on the kinds of
experiments that the RAC considered in its quarterly, open-to-the-public
meetings.

   But opponents, including dozens of patient advocates, academics, ethicists,
scientific societies and private citizens who responded to Varmus's notice in
the July 8 Federal Register, said the plan would eliminate the last opportunity
for the public to see what the country's gene jockeys were up to in their labs
and clinics.

   Opponents also noted that the FDA is not required in its closed-door meetings
to consider legal or ethical issues as part of its approval of scientific
studies, while the RAC was explicitly required to do so.

   A total of 71 comments were submitted to NIH in response to Varmus's proposal
-- a large number considering the committee's small budget and low profile, said
RAC acting chairman LeRoy Walters, director of Georgetown University's Kennedy
Institute of Ethics. Opponents outnumbered supporters 2 to 1. Only
representatives of the biotech industry, who had complained of having to jump
through both NIH and FDA hoops to get approval for experiments, offered strong
support for the proposal.

   "The comments showed that the biotech industry basically wanted to get rid of
the RAC, but the public wanted to keep it," said RAC member Abbey Meyers,
president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders, who has worked to
ensure that new protocols adequately protect individual subjects' rights.

   "I'm delighted that Dr. Varmus has changed his mind and the RAC will continue
to exist and these protocols will be discussed in public," said Meyers, one of
several RAC members to oppose the July proposal openly. "Thank goodness
democracy worked. He read the comments and he listened."

   In Friday's Federal Register, Varmus presented his revamped offering: a plan
that shrinks the committee from 25 to 15 members and takes away its formal
ability to approve or disapprove gene therapy experiments.

   Although that regulatory responsibility would be delegated to the FDA, as was
the case in the July plan, the committee would continue reviewing and publicly
discussing proposals by scientists wishing to conduct novel gene-splicing
experiments.

   "I think it's a tremendous improvement over the earlier proposal," Walters
said. "I think the discussion of protocols that raise novel issues is a valuable
mechanism for public accountability of the field, even if in the end there is no
vote to approve or disapprove."

   Walters and Meyers both expressed confidence that the FDA will take seriously
any comments the RAC submits regarding specific proposals.

   Comments on the new plan, which also calls for public gene therapy policy
conferences to discuss pressing issues in the quickly growing field, must be
received by NIH by next Monday. RAC members will vote on the plan at the
committee's next meeting on Dec. 9.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1996
