
                             2601 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 24, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

BODY:


   COMING OF AGE: The Story of Our Century
by Those Who've Lived It
By Studs Terkel. St. Martin's Griffin, $16.95.

   America's pre-eminent oral historian interviews people over 70, seeking their
perspective on modern times. Famous or not, most are like the author:
opinionated, flinty and unapologetically liberal. They "are great fun to listen
to and their stories . . . are instructive," Rebecca Pepper Sinkler said here
last year.

THE ISLAND OF THE DAY BEFORE
By Umberto Eco. Translated by William Weaver.
Penguin, $13.95.

   Roberto della Griva is a 17th-century man who lives not only by his wits, but
also by his words. Shipwrecked in the middle of the South Seas, he makes do with
the provisions he finds on a deserted and curiously well-stocked vessel and
keeps his sanity by relating his personal history, which is also the history of
his era. Selected as one of the best books of 1995 by the editors of the Book
Review, "The Island of the Day Before" is distinguished by "the author's ironic
lighthandedness and imagistic precision," Robert Kelly wrote in these pages. It
is, he said, "a grand and entertaining book, and a deliriously writerly one."

ALTERED FATES: Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life
By Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner. Norton, $15.95.

   It wasn't long ago that DNA was destiny. This book examines the work of
scientists who are seeking to subvert that axiom by introducing new genes into
flawed or diseased human bodies. It is "vivid, accessible and . . . gripping,"
Daniel J. Kevles said in the Book Review last year. THE HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY OF
HUMAN GENES, by L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza, Paolo Menozzi and Alberto Piazza
(Princeton University, $35), is an abridged edition of a 1994 book charting the
efforts of the Human Genome Diversity Project to track the origins of the
world's populations. Writing in The New York Times in 1993, Louise Levathes
said, "Dr. Cavalli-Sforza . . . has been able to make sense of the whisperings
of human ancestors that are recorded in the genes of present-day people."

SIGHTS UNSEEN
By Kaye Gibbons. Avon, $6.99.

   To a child, the adult world often seems governed by caprice. For Hattie, the
narrator, that arbitrary power is magnified by the effects of her mother's manic
depression. The author explores the family's ruin and restoration "with an
economy that makes a standard psychological novel look as full of irrelevancies
as a phone book," Jacqueline Carey wrote here last year.

THE ROAD AHEAD
By Bill Gates with Nathan Myhrvold and Peter Rinearson. Penguin, $15.95.

   The "road" has been considerably lengthened and repaved since its 1995 debut.
Bill Gates, the Microsoft Corporation's founder, has rewritten his opus,
analyzing the impact of the Internet -- the factor that our reviewer, Joseph
Nocera, thought might put an end to Microsoft's hegemony. "Experience tells us
that Mr. Gates is a formidable competitor," Mr. Nocera said.

BACK IN THE WORLD: Stories
By Tobias Wolff. Vintage Contemporaries, $12.

   Just restored to print, this collection features characters who are racing
against time with little fuel. Confronting middle age, they console themselves
with drugs, sex or possessions. "Two stories, 'Leviathan' and 'The Rich
Brother,' are as fine as anything Mr. Wolff has written," Russell Banks wrote
here in 1985.

FROM A DARKENED ROOM: The Inman Diary
Edited by Daniel Aaron. Harvard University, $17.95.

   Arthur Crew Inman (1895-1963) suffered from severe pathology -- after a
nervous breakdown during college, he retreated into a largely dark and closed
existence (he couldn't bear light of any kind), punctuated by conversation and
sex. But this diary (distilled from 17 million words) also reveals his life to
be strangely emblematic of the conflicts of the modern era. In 1985 our
reviewer, Michael Vincent Miller, called it "a fascinating document, by turns
bizarre and illuminating." Just as comprehensive but far less inward is A DIARY
OF THE CENTURY: Tales From America's Greatest Diarist, by Edward Robb Ellis
(Kodansha International, $14), which relates the major events of our time as
they were experienced by a journalist and historian who is now in his 80's. It's
"a lot of fun to read," Bruno Maddox said in the Book Review last year.

THE RIVER TO PICKLE BEACH
By Doris Betts. Scribner Paperback, $12.

   It is the summer of 1968 at the small North Carolina beach community managed
by Bebe and Jack Sellars. The violence that has shattered the nation seems to be
coming home when Jack's former Army pal Mickey McCane arrives, filled with
racism and resentment. Just restored to print, this is "a serious, provocative
novel," Jonathan Yardley wrote in these pages in 1972.

HORSEMAN
By Mike Nicol. Vintage International, $12.

   The title conjures up images of the apocalypse, which is what the central
character seems to carry with him. A European boy who flees his father's
persecution, he escapes to the forest, is tutored in killing and eventually
becomes a murderer for hire in what is now South Africa. This fable is "a
misanthropic tour de force," James Polk said here last year.   Laurel Graeber

GRAPHIC: Photo: Umberto Eco. (JACK MANNING)

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1996


                             2602 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 24, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: John Hirschbeck

SECTION: Section 8; Page 1; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1683 words

HEADLINE: Perspective;
Umpire's Rage, Father's Fight

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

DATELINE: POLAND, Ohio, Nov. 23

BODY:

   On the 52-inch television set in John Hirschbeck's living room, the moving
images seem unreal, a parody of Norman Rockwell's America. Almost nose to nose,
an umpire, a manager and a star baseball player are screaming as they jostle for
position near home plate. Suddenly, the player spits at the umpire, a hurricane
spray on this large screen.

   Two months ago, that picture became a symbol for many people of a nation and
its pastime losing civility, discipline and respect for authority. For the
umpire, Hirschbeck, being spat upon was also the beginning of a wrenching replay
of the past five years of emotional torment as an incurable disease attacked his
children.

    "I was shocked when he spit on me, and when he wasn't suspended immediately
I was very disappointed," said Hirschbeck, watching that video clip yet again
last week. "But I could deal with all that. It's when he dragged my family in,
when he stripped away my private life and talked about John, that he ripped my
heart out."

   It was after the game on Sept. 27 in Toronto that the player, Roberto Alomar
of the Baltimore Orioles, declared that the reason Hirschbeck had called him out
on a third strike that looked wide and then ejected him for complaining had to
do with the umpire's turning "bitter" after the death of his young son three
years ago. The next day, when Hirschbeck first learned about the player's
comments from reporters asking for a response, he charged into the Orioles'
locker room. He was restrained from Alomar by a fellow umpire.

   Alomar was later reported as saying that he spat because Hirschbeck called
him "names," including, in some accounts, an ethnic slur. The umpire denies
this, although he admits to using expletives of a more general nature right
after the spitting and during the locker-room episodes. The third man at the
plate, Orioles Manager Davey Johnson, has refused to offer his version. Last
week, Johnson said: "Anything I say would just accelerate this thing. It does no
good to talk about umpires in the papers." He would not elaborate when he said:
"I think they're both guilty."

   There have been apologies and acceptances, mostly as statements delivered
through the news media. Because the Orioles didn't make the World Series and
Hirschbeck was not scheduled to work post-season games, that ugly moment in
Canada was soon obscured by a thrilling Yankee victory and Frank Torre's
transplanted heart.

   The Hirschbecks gratefully retreated into the protective cave of this small
town. They needed to conserve their strength; the rare brain disorder --
adrenoleukodystrophy -- that killed John at age 8, also affects his younger
brother, Michael, 10. Their sisters, Erin, 8, and Megan, 5, are genetic
carriers, like their mother, and the disorder might affect them later in life.

   In ALD, a faulty gene is unable to produce the enzymes that clear away toxins
that destroy nerve cells in the brain.

   In the summer of 1991, when John was 6, his symptoms first appeared. He
seemed a little vague, unusually timid; there were brief brownouts of energy and
attention. Hirschbeck was away on his ninth season as an American League umpire
and Denise was pregnant, and busy with three preschoolers and a large house on
10 wooded acres. It would be the last time that she thought of herself living a
"charmed life, almost too perfect," in which a flight attendant and an umpire
fell in love on a Puerto Rico beach in 1980, and went on to "have it all."

   "John was such a bright, lively boy, beyond his years," said Mrs. Hirschbeck,
sitting at the kitchen table. "At the age of 1, he spoke in complete sentences.
At restaurants he pretended he could read the menu. He was very adventuresome
and outgoing.

   "And then he changed. He was afraid to go trick-or-treating on Halloween. He
forgot how old he was. He had reading problems in first grade."

   One doctor diagnosed attention deficit disorder and prescribed Ritalin, then
other drugs when the symptoms persisted. At spring training, a usually happy
family holiday, John became terrified of a dead bee. Always athletic, he was now
afraid to swim in the pool. The Hirschbecks quickly moved up the medical chain
and onto an emotional roller coaster of hope and dread and guilt.

   On April 7, 1992, just before he worked the season opener in Seattle,
Hirschbeck called home for the results of the magnetic resonance imaging test of
John's brain. Although there would have to be a second m.r.i., there did seem to
be suspicious gray spots on the fatty white myelin sheath. Hirschbeck flew home
after the game.

   He was in Akron, Ohio, two days later when the diagnosis was made, then on to
the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, a leading research center and
hospital for children with brain disorders. Dr. Hugo Moser, the ALD expert
featured in the film "Lorenzo's Oil" about another family struggling with the
disease, studied John and Michael and sent them on to Dr. William Krivit at the
University of Minnesota Hospital and Clinic for bone marrow transplants. The
only hope of halting the progress of the disease was to introduce a healthy gene
that could produce enzymes to stop the toxins before they tore though the sheath
to the axons that connect nerve cells to the rest of the body.

   For most of that summer, the Hirschbecks commuted to Minneapolis, often
living in a hotel for weeks at a time as the boys were prepped for their
transplants. Decisions were made over which the Hirschbecks still agonize.
Should they have opted for a shunt instead of steroids for John? Did they pick
the right donor for Michael? Were the girls getting enough attention?

   At the last moment, John's donor turned out to be infected with hepatitis. No
transplant. Megan, then 10 months old, became Michael's donor, even though it
would probably make him a carrier of the disease with an unknown effect.

   During this time, baseball allowed Hirschbeck to attend to his family without
worrying about salary or job. When medical bills overwhelmed their insurance,
friends in the game led by the managers Tony La Russa and Gene Lamont raised
$250,000 at a celebrity dinner and auction.

   On March 7, 1993, during spring training in Florida, John died in his
parents' arms. It was sooner than expected, but they were prepared. The
Hirschbecks had bought six cemetery plots in Poland, and they picked out
headstones for themselves and for John. They visit his grave almost every day
and speak to his etched likeness on the light gray stone.

   "We believe he is in heaven, listening," Hirschbeck said. "We wouldn't want
him to think he's out of our lives."

   John's bronzed Nike sneakers are on a shelf in the living room. He mugs and
grins out of family pictures on the refrigerator door.

   "I miss him a lot," said Michael, a friendly boy who describes himself as an
"awesome mathematician," but who has trouble reading because of ALD's effect on
his visual processing. "He was a good brother, but he was always busy following
Dad around."

   Dad, at the kitchen table with Megan on his lap, smiled. It was the family
"happy hour," Erin doing homework on the floor, Denise preparing dinner.

   "John had this thing for John Deere tractors," Hirschbeck said. "He could
tell you the model number from a distance."

   He waited for his voice to clear, then pointed out the window at the barn.
"We spoiled him, I guess, got him a lawn tractor for his last Christmas," he
said. "It's in there."

   The spoiling goes on. Last Christmas, Michael got a regulation Las
Vegas-style slot machine and more quarters than most third-graders need.
Hirschbeck bought himself a beeper, in case Michael had another seizure at
school. Michael's prognosis is not clear. According to Dr. Gary Goldstein,
president of the Kennedy Krieger Institute, the bone marrow transplant cannot
reverse the effects of the disease; how well Michael does depends on exactly how
much damage has already occurred. The disease was only recognized in the 1980's,
and research is in an early stage. Any hope for a cure, Goldstein said, rests
with gene therapy.

   For Hirschbeck, it was only between the white lines that he could escape such
medical history and frail hope. At 42, in his 14th major league season, he is an
intense and aggressive umpire who likes to take early control of a game, to make
the hitters swing by calling strikes. It could be a reason for misjudging that
first-inning call on Alomar, which he admits is possible.

   "You're killing me with that pitch," yelled Alomar, according to Hirschbeck.
Alomar kept complaining from the dugout, after three warnings and even after the
next batter had taken a pitch.

   "That's when I ran him," recalled Hirschbeck, back in front of his big-screen
TV. "And Dave Johnson ran out with him, yelling, 'This is a big game,' and I
told Davey, 'You tell him that.' "

   After Alomar spit, Hirschbeck roared, "He spit in my face," but the umpire
managed to restrain himself as Johnson dragged his player off the field.

   That image of a young, cocky, million-dollar ballplayer spitting on a
$150,000-a-year, middle-aged monitor was briefly the talk of the airwaves. Was
this how low the game had sunk? Was it excusable in the heat of pennant race?
Could the umpire have been as much perp as victim? The questions are still
unanswered, long after the image faded into Yankee pinstripes. Except for
Alomar, the three men at home plate have mostly avoided discussing their
confrontation.

   Alomar has pledged $50,000 to the institute, which the Orioles have offered
to match. Asked to attend a news conference announcing the donation, Denise
Hirschbeck declined, saying it wasn't "appropriate."

   Hirschbeck agreed with her decision; out of his own sense of rightfulness, he
turned down $50,000 for a motel commercial right after the spitting incident. It
didn't seem appropriate to profit from the indignity. But he does think that
good can come from bad.

   "If that $100,000 is the research funding that finds a cure that saves
Michael," he said, with the intimidating bravado of an umpire, "yeah, sure, what
the hell, Alomar can spit on me again."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Umpire John Hirschbeck and his wife Denise with their children,
from left, Erin, 8; Michael, 10, and Megan 5. (Keith Srakocic for The New York
Times); The Sept. 27 confrontation between Roberto Alomar, and umpire John
Hirschbeck with Manager Dave Johnson in the middle. (Photographs by Agence
France-Presse)

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1996


                             2603 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    November 24, 1996, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D03; ANGUS PHILLIPS

LENGTH: 1051 words

HEADLINE: He Leaves His Body to Science, His Heart to Sailing

BYLINE: Angus Phillips

BODY:


   Rockville scientist Craig Venter has been much in the news lately for his
work at, and after leaving, the National Institutes of Health, where he
developed a computerized tool that dramatically speeds the process of
deciphering up to 200,000 genes that contain core information needed to produce
a human being.

   His findings are so in demand by companies seeking to develop the next
generation of genetic "therapy" drugs -- those that correct genetic deficiencies
or keep them from occurring -- that he has made millions of dollars through the
private research company he set up in 1992, The Institute for Genomic Research
(TIGR) in Rockville.

   But while he enjoys science and intellectual challenge, Venter says the real
impetus for his years slaving over gloomy computers is fairly simple: "I just
wanted a bigger sailboat."

   Now he has it. Venter bought Sorcerer, an 85-foot aluminum racing sloop
designed by Argentine German Frers and built at the prestigious Palmer-Johnson
yard for the owner of Land's End, the clothing catalog company. After spending $
4 million, the owner decided he didn't want it after all.

   Venter, following a lifelong policy of buying rich folks' castoffs, picked it
up cheap in Fort Lauderdale last year and has been sailing hard from the Virgin
Islands to Chesapeake Bay since.

   Now he wants to push Sorcerer harder. He's the Washington area's only entry
in next May's Atlantic Challenge Cup -- a 3,000-mile race for mega-yachts that
aims to break the 90-year-old racing record for fastest monohull passage from
New York to England. It was set by the 185-foot schooner Atlantic in 1905.

   To beat the record of 12 days 4 hours 1 minute 19 seconds, Sorcerer or one of
the other 12 to 20 entries must average about 11 knots, which is not slow at
sea. Venter is no racer, and hopes to enlist local hotshots to help him,
including former Star class world champion Jim Allsop and three-time America's
Cup crewman Jim Kavlie. He also is spending liberally on sails -- close to $
100,000 for new mainsail, headsails and spinnakers.

   "That mainsail," said Venter last weekend, surveying the bright and shapely
swath of new, snow-white Spectra rising high above the deck, "cost more than my
first boat."

   He was referring to the 33-foot Cape Dory he bought 12 years ago, when he was
still an underpaid government hand, and he sailed it to Bermuda through a
tropical storm. But in fact Venter's first sailboat came long before that and
was actually free. That was in Vietnam, where he traded medical services for a
19-foot Lightning and learned to sail in the surf off Da Nang around the time of
the Tet offensive.

   Venter was a rebel teenager, and said he barely graduated from high school in
San Francisco before joining the Navy in the mid-'60s. He was assigned to Da
Nang as a corpsman, which gave him access to the medical gear. When an officer
came back from R&R with a bawdy, unwanted tattoo, Venter agreed to remove it in
trade for the Lightning.

   A former California surfer, he learned to sail through wild sea surf without
smashing his boat to bits, he said, while all around him soldiers and sailors
were dismasting and capsizing.

   Venter attended the two-year College of San Mateo on the GI Bill when he
returned home and bought a 19-foot Junior Folkboat to sail on breezy San
Francisco Bay. He took it with him to San Diego, where he finished undergraduate
work at the University of California and went on to get his Ph.D in 1975. He
taught at the State University of New York at Buffalo, then joined NIH in 1984
and bought his first offshore boat, the Cape Dory, which he named Sirius after
the dog star.

   Later he picked up a Passport 40 called Bermuda High and also briefly owned a
Tripp 33 race boat. A price he couldn't say no to popped up on Sorcerer while he
was negotiating to build a new 65-footer in Norfolk last year. "This boat was
basically the same price as the 65-footer," said Venter. "It was no contest."

   Sleek blue Sorcerer is indeed an amazing boat. It has every imaginable
mechanical gadget, including bowthrusters for close maneuvering under power,
electric power winches to raise and trim all sails, banks of computers for
navigation, global communication capability, and yards and yards of gleaming
varnished teak above deck and gleaming solid cherry cabinetry below.

   At 100,000 pounds, including 55,000 pounds of lead in a bulb at the bottom of
the keel for ballast, she's heavy. But she moved easily across the placid
Chesapeake last weekend in 6 knots of wind with Craig Fuller, former top aide to
George Bush when he was vice president, at the helm.

   Sorcerer is unusual among mega-yachts in that it has no paid crew for upkeep.
Venter said he bought the boat to sail it, not to have someone else sail it. But
after the transatlantic race he plans to keep it in Europe for a year and will
have a captain aboard while overseas.

   He picked the name "Sorcerer" for its magical implications, he said. It had
been named "Turmoil." Said Venter, "I've had enough of that in my life."

   Sorcerer was a commanding presence around Annapolis this year, the largest
sailboat in the local fleet, but it's gone now. Venter and a small crew last
week sailed south to Hilton Head, S.C,, where he'll organize shakedown sails
over the winter before heading to New York for the start of the Atlantic
Challenge on May 17.

   At that point, Sorcerer will suddenly shrink. It may be the biggest sailing
yacht in the Chesapeake Bay, but it barely made minimum length for the
Challenge, which is being organized by the New York Yacht Club as a test of some
of the grandest yachts in the world. Minimum size to enter is 85 feet, and
Sorcerer had to stretch to make it (the flagpole off the stern was counted as
part of the boat).

   On the starting line six months hence will be yachts that make Sorcerer look
like a dinghy, including Capt. Timothy Loughridge's 140-foot Sparkman & Stephens
ketch Sariyah; Thomas A. Perkins's 130-foot classic Herreshoff schooner
Mariette; the massive, 185-foot Adix, and 170-foot Xasteria.

   It may be deflating enough to send a poor genetic researcher back to his
computers, hunting for another breakthrough. One troubling thing about boats --
there always seems to be a bigger one out there beckoning.


GRAPHIC: Photo, angus phillips

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1996


                             2604 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           November 21, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: TODAY: SOLUTION-ORIENTED BRIEF THERAPY,Close Up Health Calendar

BODY:

   Thursday, November 21, 1996 TODAY: SOLUTION-ORIENTED BRIEF THERAPY,

   Close Up   Health   Calendar

   TODAY: Solution-Oriented Brief Therapy, Portland State University,  Smith
Center, 1825 S.W. Broadway.

   8:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Michele Weiner-Davis, psychotherapist/author, will
present a workshop for mental health professionals and the public. The therapy
is an approach to solving problems by focusing on solutions and treatment
goals. The workshop concentrates on concrete and practical skills building,
offering therapists techniques that can be put to use immediately. $95.
Registration begins at 8 a.m. For more information, call 725-4876. TODAY:
Genetics and Alzheimer's Disease, Oregon Health Sciences University, 3181 S.W.
Sam Jackson Park Road, old library auditorium.

   7:30 p.m. Dr. Haydeh Payami, associate professor of molecular and medical
genetics and neurology, OHSU, will discuss the identification of genes that
promote healthy aging of the brain. Payami studies the genetics of Alzheimer's
and Parkinson's diseases, looking at the relationship between the two diseases
and identifying genetic markers that lead to normal aging of the brain. For
more information, call 494-7686. SATURDAY: Diabetes Under Control For Kids,
Legacy Emanuel Hospital & Medical Center, Atrium.

   Nov. 23, 9 to 11:30 a.m. Speakers include Drs. Jim Hansen and Mark Kummer.
Free. Pre-registration required by calling 335-3500.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2605 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    November 21, 1996 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: VIRUSES MAY BE ENLISTED TO CURE BRAIN AILMENTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LEE HOTZ; LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers are subverting some of nature's most potent viruses - the
infectious agents responsible for HIV, the common cold and herpes - to enlist
them in defense of the ailing human brain.

   In research presented Tuesday at a national meeting of the Society for
Neuroscience, scientists outlined new experiments using genetically engineered
viruses to penetrate the brain's protective barriers and infect its unique nerve
cells with new genes to restore their health.

   The altered viruses could be used to combat neurological disorders, including
brain tumors, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and a variety of
inherited maladies. One day they may even help alleviate the effects of brain
damage caused by strokes.

   Despite technical hurdles, the new techniques already are showing preliminary
success in laboratory experiments, researchers said. Federal health officials
said the improved genetically engineered viruses may be ready to test on human
beings within five years.

   "There is a lot of excitement about the ability to introduce new genetic
information ... and the implications it has for diseases that affect the nervous
system," said Dr. Howard Federoff, a neurologist at the University of Rochester
School of Medicine.

   Domesticating a disease and then using it to rearrange the genetics of the
brain is one of the most promising - and riskiest - enterprises in modern
neuroscience, researchers said.

   Until this fall, researchers had not attempted to alter the genetics of human
brain cells, even though more than 100 clinical trials of experimental gene
therapy, aimed at correcting other medical conditions, are under way.

   Many scientists believe that viruses are the ideal way to transport genes
because they naturally infect cells to deposit genetic material. When it comes
to treatments designed to alter the brain, however, researchers fear they could
easily cause as much damage as the conditions they seek to cure.

   Because the brain is so delicate and in such a confined space, researchers
can introduce only small amounts of altered virus into the cranium, said Xandra
Breakefield, who is experimenting with viral gene therapies at Massachusetts
General Hospital. The "high infectivity" of a virus is especially important to
deliver enough therapeutic material to brain cells, Breakefield added.

   The challenge is to neutralize different viruses by removing their toxic
elements and then tailor each to target different neural disorders. Toward that
goal, the animal experiments reported Tuesday involved a range of altered
viruses.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1996


                             2606 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 21, 1996 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: UCSD, spinoffs generate $3 billion a year

BYLINE: Elizabeth Douglass, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD's new chancellor could hardy believe the numbers when he saw them: the
university and its estimated 120 spinoff companies generate nearly $3 billion
for the region's economy each year. "This is staggering," Chancellor Robert C.
Dynes said yesterday during a news briefing about the university's economic
impact on San Diego. University-related companies are everywhere in San Diego --
making up 40 percent of the local biotechnology industry, and 20 percent of the
successful telecommunications industry here, a UC San Diego study shows. Even
with only 60 of the spinoffs revealing their annual revenues, the study said the
group brings in an estimated $1.8 billion a year in sales to the region.

   The university itself generates about $1.1 billion in salaries, purchases and
the like. Dynes is impressed by UCSD's numbers, but he wants to do more. His
goal, he said, is for the university to touch the city and its foundations in
almost every way -- from educating residents and workers, to producing companies
and breakthroughs that give back to the region. In five years, Dynes said, he
wants to be able to strike up conversations around town and find that "at least
every second person I talk to has been or is being impacted by UCSD." In the
business world, he said, that will mean more partnerships with corporations that
move beyond the university's standard licensing of technologies and discoveries.
"The universities are going to be conducting the forward-looking research for
the corporations," Dynes said.

   "(And) we have to respond in different ways for different industries."
Economist Alan Nevin, managing director of Con Am Research in San Diego, said
that other institutions, including Stanford University in Palo Alto, and the
University of Texas at Austin, have been successful in commercial ties. "I think
it's at the incipient stage," Nevin said of UCSD's efforts.

   "It's just beginning.

   Once they learn to work with private industry, the potential is
immeasurable." Dynes cited the newly approved joint venture between UCSD and
Boehringer Corp., the Indiana-based subsidiary of the Dutch pharmaceutical firm
of the same name, as an example of one way expanded partnerships might work. The
new joint venture, 51 percent owned by the pharmaceutical company, will operate
as a separate company pursuing gene therapy diagnostics and the production of
"corrected genes" for use in therapy. UCSD expects to receive funding from
Boehringer -- provided the new venture is profitable -- and will provide much of
the staff and experience from about 20 years of research into gene therapy.

   Both would share in any proceeds from the venture, Dynes said. He said the
engineering department has submitted a proposal for a new facility that would
focus on bioengineering and devote space to a kind of incubator for
"precompetitive ventures."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2607 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 20, 1996, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words

HEADLINE: ALTERED VIRUSES OFFER HOPE IN TREATING BRAIN MALADIES;
 MEDICINE: RESEARCHERS USE HIV, COLD OR HERPES AGENTS TO RESTORE HEALTH TO
DISEASED CELLS IN LAB EXPERIMENTS.

BYLINE: ROBERT LEE HOTZ, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Researchers are subverting some of nature's most potent viruses--the
infectious agents responsible for HIV, the common cold and herpes--to enlist
them in defense of the ailing human brain.

   In research presented Tuesday at a national meeting of the Society for
Neuroscience, scientists outlined new experiments using genetically engineered
viruses to penetrate the brain's protective barriers and infuse its unique nerve
cells with new genes to restore their health.

   The altered viruses could be used to combat an array of neurological
disorders, including brain tumors, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and
a variety of inherited maladies. They one day may even help alleviate the
effects of brain damage caused by strokes.

   Despite formidable technical hurdles, the new techniques already are showing
preliminary success in laboratory experiments, they said. Federal health
officials said the improved genetically engineered viruses may be ready to test
on human beings within five years.

   "There is a lot of excitement about the ability to introduce new genetic
information . . . and the implications it has for diseases that affect the
nervous system," said Dr. Howard Federoff, a neurologist at the University of
Rochester School of Medicine.

   Domesticating a disease and then using it to rearrange the genetics of the
brain is one of the most promising--and riskiest--enterprises in modern
neuroscience, researchers said.

   Until this fall, researchers had not attempted to alter the genetics of human
brain cells, even though more than 100 different clinical trials of experimental
gene therapy, aimed at correcting other medical conditions, are underway.

   Many scientists believe that viruses are the ideal way to transport genes
because they naturally infect cells to deposit genetic material. When it comes
to treatments designed to alter the brain, however, researchers are worried that
they could easily cause as much damage as the conditions they seek to cure.

   Because the brain is so delicate and in such a confined space, researchers
can introduce only small amounts of altered virus into the cranium, said Xandra
Breakefield, who is experimenting with viral gene therapies at Massachusetts
General Hospital. The "high infectivity" of a virus is especially important to
deliver enough therapeutic material to brain cells, Breakefield said.

   The challenge is to neutralize different viruses by removing their
disease-causing genes and then tailor each of them to target different neural
disorders. Toward that goal, the animal experiments reported Tuesday involved a
range of altered viruses:

   * In a preliminary experiment designed to disarm HIV, neuroscientist Fred
Gage and his colleagues at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla
were able to retain the virus' ability to insert itself into brain cells to
create a nontoxic virus. At the same time, Gage said Tuesday, his team
successfully used the new virus, called a lentiviral vector, to deposit new
genes into brain neurons. The new genes are active for at least six months,
animal experiments show, meaning that they have had time to integrate into the
life of the cell. "Whether these are adequate concentrations to have a
biological effect, we don't know," he said.

   * Turning the cold virus into a potential treatment for Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's, researchers at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and
Rockefeller University have successfully used a modified version of the virus,
called an adeno-associated vector, to inject genes into an animal brain,
producing evidence that the new genes are activated inside nerve cells. The
researchers eliminated most of the common toxic and inflammatory side effects of
the virus. However, they acknowledged, the virus still provokes a response from
the immune system, as if it were an infectious disease.

   * Using the cold virus to treat a hereditary disease, researchers at the Iowa
School of Medicine used a modified adeno-virus to successfully transfer the
genes to treat Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, which affects the central nervous system.
Working with laboratory animals, Beverly Davidson and her colleagues corrected
the inherited disease. She is now testing the virus system against other
metabolic disorders.

   * Creating a treatment for brain cancer, researchers at Massachusetts General
Hospital reported that they have used genetically engineered herpes virus to
selectively destroy brain tumors in mice. Breakefield and her colleagues created
a herpes virus that can multiply safely inside tumor cells. They used an enzyme
produced by that virus as a catalyst to convert a nontoxic drug into a powerful
destroyer of tumor cells. Healthy brain cells are unaffected.

   Now her team is combining parts of the herpes virus and the cold virus to
create an even more potent infectious anti-cancer vaccine.

   At least one company has started clinical tests of an altered virus meant to
treat brain tumors.

   In September, Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corp. began a worldwide trial using a
genetically engineered herpes virus to treat patients with glioblastoma brain
tumors, the most common and deadly type of primary brain tumor. They are using
their altered virus to destroy tumor cells left in the brain after neurosurgery.

   At the neuroscience conference, however, some researchers said not enough is
known yet about the behavior of the modified viruses for them to be safely
tested on human beings.

   "People have gone to human trials too soon," Gage said. "We don't know enough
about the long-term effects."


   Making Viruses Beneficial

   Researchers are turning infectious viruses into living remedies for brain
diseases.

   * The Procedure: Scientists strip a virus of its harmful toxic elements and
insert into it new genes designed to treat a neural disorder.

   * Why It Might Work: Viruses can put new genes into neural cells which,
unlike other human body cells, do not reproduce.

   * Who Could Benefit: Altered viruses one day could be effective against brain
tumors, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, stroke damage and some
hereditary disorders.

   * The Risks: Viral gene therapies could transmit a viral disease or disrupt
normal brain functions.

   * The Next Step: Lab experiments to ensure that the new viruses are safe.

   * Quote: "There is significant progress being made."

   --Fred Gage at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1996


                             2608 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               November 18, 1996, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: ZONE NORTH; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: SPOTLIGHT

COLUMN: SPOTLIGHT COLUMN

BYLINE: Michelle B. Mueller Special To The Post-Dispatch

BODY:


   Sara Carter, a junior at Lutheran North High School, is in this week's
spotlight for her commitment to her school and neighborhood through her spirit
as a volunteer.

   At school, Sara has earned a reputation as a keen statistician for the boys'
basketball team. Last year she was a stats captain for the sophomore team and
will take on the job this winter for the varsity squad.

   Sara has led a project called Crusader Spotlight, which honors four to five
students in each class each week on the bulletin board. The board has short
biographies and photos of the students.

   Although Sara says she enjoys all of her extracurricular activities, she is
especially proud of her accomplishments with the Future Business Leaders of
America. As a sophomore, she served as treasurer of her school's chapter and
hopes to be president next year. She competes in various math and business
contests.

   Sara also works at the concession stands at athletic events and helped paint
the stands and organize a schoolwide barbecue.

   Last school year, Sara had to make one of the toughest decisions in her
school career, she says, when she qualified for two important programs this past
summer.

   She earned a seat in the national Future Business Leaders of America
competition in Washington by placing first in Missouri in the business math
division. She also qualified as an Engelmann Scholar at the University of
Missouri at St. Louis.

   She chose the Engelmann program, she says, because it related more to her
goal to be a veterinarian.

   At the Engelmann program this summer, Sara wrote a research paper on cystic
fibrosis and gene therapy. Her research showed that a gene link had been found
and that scientists were trying to correct mutated cells with adeno viruses,
which cause common colds.

   Sara's other volunteer projects include being a member of the youth group at
Our Redeemer Lutheran Church In Overland. She also helps with fund-raising
events at the church.

   Sara, who maintains a 3.85 grade-point average, is the daughter of Sarah
Carter of Overland and Glen Carter of Maryland Heights. She has a younger
half-brother, Brandon Carter, in High Ridge, and an older stepbrother, Johnny
Wright, in St. John.

   Here is what Sara says:

   After high school I plan to: go to college, graduate and be a veterinarian.

   The next item of clothing I would like to buy is: dress boots.

   The best book I ever read was: "A Time to Kill."

   I listen to: mostly contemporary Christian.

   I'm most proud of: my grades and my state championship in Future Business
Leaders of America.

   The last time I cleaned my room I found: money.

   My favorite subject in school is: advanced biology and accounting.

   If I could change one thing at school, I would: get rid of the cliques.

   My favorite time with my family is: when we go out to dinner.

   The items in my backpack today are: books, keys and notes.

   Nobody ever says I'm: stupid.

   At my 25th reunion I expect: to catch up on what everyone has done in the
last 25 years.

   What I enjoy most is: reading.

   I try to help my parents by: doing the dishes and taking the trash out.

   My favorite evening out is: dinner and a good movie.

   I know I'm growing up because: I'm allowed to make more decisions on my own.

   My favorite food is: steak.

   If I have to cook, I eat: soup.

   If I had $ 50 to spend, I would: buy clothes.

   When I talk too long on the telephone: absolutely nothing.

   If I could spend an hour with anybody in the world, I would choose: God,
because there's a lot about him that nobody knows.

   How others describe me: smart, not part of any cliques, dedicated, organized.

   If I could stay home from school one day, I would: probably sleep late.

   The item at the bottom of my school locker is: my coat and book bag.

   I spend too much money on: junk food such as McDonald's during basketball
season.

   My personal hero is: my mother.

   My favorite place to go is: to my friends' houses.

   If I could solve one problem in the world, I would: stop.

   The most meaningful part of high school for me has been: being exposed to
different people.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photo Headshot of Sara Carter

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1996


                             2609 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 16, 1996 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Slow profit is seen for UCSD deal;
It may be years before partnership on gene therapy will pay off

BYLINE: Craig D. Rose, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD's recently announced partnership to produce gene therapy products with a
unit of a Dutch company -- touted as a source of support for research at the La
Jolla campus -- may not produce research funding for the campus, at least any
time soon. Leslie Franz, UCSD's communications director, noted that funding by
the partnership for the university's genetic therapy programs will depend on the
venture making profits, which is not expected for at least three years.
Yesterday, UCSD formally agreed to join in a partnership with Boehringer
Mannheim Corp.

   of Indianapolis in a commercial venture to produce gene therapy products.
Along with other operations, the joint venture -- to be dubbed Molecular
Diagnostics and Therapeutics Service Center -- will target the production of
vectors, which are likened to molecular arrows required to deliver genetic
treatment into human cells. The vectors are expected to play a key role in
genetic therapy, an evolving field in which researchers hope to reverse or
prevent certain diseases by making genetic changes. "We create the warheads and
they have the missiles," said Kevin Kinsella, chief executive officer of Sequana
Therapeutics Inc., a San Diego-based gene discovery company. Although details of
the agreement remain to be completed, the university says it will provide its
clinical research applications laboratory for use by the venture, as well as its
cell processing laboratory. About a dozen employees will be transferred from the
university's payroll to the new venture. Boehringer, whose Amsterdam-based
parent company has annual sales of $4 billion, will contribute about $4.2
million in the first year, cover losses for the first three years and control 51
percent of the venture. But Boehringer's stake could grow if it contributes
funding beyond the third year, which in turn would dilute UCSD's 49 percent
stake. John Alksne, vice chancellor of health sciences, noted that UCSD's share
could shrink, however, only with agreement from six of eight members of the new
venture's board. UCSD will appoint three board members, while Boehringer will
name four; one will be jointly named.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2610 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 15, 1996 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: UCSD gene therapy pact approved;
Target is leadership in molecular medicine

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO -- UC San Diego and a German-based pharmaceutical firm hope to
become the focal point for gene therapy with a new campus center to conduct
advanced research and transfer it to the marketplace. The University of
California Board of Regents gave approval yesterday to the partnership with
Boehringer Mannheim Corp., which will provide funds and research support for
what UCSD officials call a "rapidly evolving, high-technology area." Gene
therapy, pioneered at UCSD in the 1970s, is a science by which minute quantities
of genetically engineered material are injected into the human body to treat
disease.

   The research has applications to conditions ranging from breast and colon
cancer and cardiovascular disease to Alzheimer's and AIDS. "I'm very excited by
it," UCSD Chancellor Robert C. Dynes said of the agreement.

   "It's a vehicle . . . to (take) some of the scientific advances and
technology that's come out of UCSD and transfer it to the commercial
marketplace." Under the joint venture, unveiled at a briefing in September, the
two partners will co-own a new company.

   This is an apparent first for a university that is more accustomed to seeing
fruits of its research carried off campus to separate, private businesses. "This
is a different kind of spinoff, creating a new company," said Dynes. "This is a
new move for UC." While this venture is new, the university's role in start-up
companies is not.

   UCSD has been involved in the growth and development of companies in several
key areas, including health care, biotechnology, high-tech ventures, computers
and telecommunications.

   About 120 companies, employing 15,000 people and with annual revenues
exceeding $41.8 billion, can trace their roots to UCSD. The new campus center
will offer molecular diagnostics and genetic screening, which can provide
warnings of a body's susceptibility to cancer and other diseases long before
such a condition can be diagnosed.

   It will also house a new, licensed laboratory for stem-cell processing
services. The center will provide contract manufacturing of genetic materials
and viral vectors, used to carry genes into a target cell, for a variety of
clients including UCSD faculty members, researchers from other universities and
private industry worldwide. If successful, Dynes said, "We will be the U.S.
center for gene therapy." UCSD already performs some of this work in prototype
facilities, but needed an outside partner to bankroll further research and
provide expertise in product development and marketing.

   Boehringer Mannheim is expected to provide at least $4.2 million the first
year, which includes the cost of building and equipping the stem-cell lab. The
venture is projected to start making money for both partners by the third year,
mainly from "manufacturing" the gene-therapy carriers. For the privately held
Boehringer Mannheim Corp., the venture provides a chance to collaborate with
some of the leading scientists and clinicians in its field. The deal calls for
the jointly operated Molecular Diagnostics and Therapeutics Service Center to be
owned 51 percent by Boehringer Mannheim and 49 percent by UCSD. That division
was questioned by some regents Wednesday, but ultimately proved not to be a
problem. Management will be handled by an eight-member committee -- four
appointed by Boehringer Mannheim, three by UCSD, and a president selected by
mutual agreement.

   Major business decisions will require approval from six of the eight members.
Patents developed by UCSD researchers will become UC property; jointly developed
inventions will be jointly owned. Boehringer Mannheim, which has a U.S.
subsidiary in Indiana, was selected from among 22 domestic and foreign
pharmaceutical companies that expressed interest in a campus-based joint
operation.

   It does $4 billion worth of business annually and is establishing
molecular-medicine service centers in other cities, including Milan, Italy. The
deal is anticipated to run at least 10 years, but either side will have the
right to pull out after five years.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2611 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1996 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      November 12, 1996 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-01

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: CU tests new cancer treatment School first in state to offer gene
therapy

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:
 A revolutionary method of treating brain cancer and malignant melanoma is being
offered in Colorado for the first time by University of Colorado researchers.

   Called gene therapy, the method essentially involves altering a person's
genetic makeup by inserting specific genes into the body so cancerous tumors are
susceptible to treatment.

   Researchers at the CU Cancer Center said yesterday that they have joined in
international gene therapy studies.

   "We have taken the first step in Colorado of taking gene therapy into the
clinic for treating cancer patients," said CU oncologist Michael Glode, who is
co-director of the program. The average doctor could have the technology, if it
works, in about a decade.

   "But this is very much a technology in its infancy," Glode added. While "the
concept is absolutely elegant," he said researchers have been bogged down
searching for viruses that are virulent enough to do the job without side
effects.

   A handful of patients, such as Sally Busch of Fort Collins, "are the
volunteers and heroes    in helping doctors learn what will work. It's a very
slow process."

   Busch, 54, was diagnosed with malignant melanoma in July. A mole on her back
began to change, and the cancer - which first attacks pigment cells - spread to
her lymph nodes. Interferon treatments didn't work.

   As one of four melanoma patients in the study, Busch said, "I'm pleased to be
in the right place at the right time.    I'd rather not be here at all."

   She's had two intravenous injections of Allovectin-7, which consists of an
engineered viral DNA in a delivery system of tiny fat globules called lipids.
The injections are made into her lymph nodes where there are tumors. More
injections will follow over 10 weeks.

   Melanoma protects itself from being detected by the immune system by
suppressing antigens on the cell surface, explained CU oncologist Rene Gonzalez,
director of CU's melanoma center.

   The genetic code in Allovectin-7 is intended to make the tumor cells express
the antigen HLA-B7 so the immune system can attack and shrink the tumors,
Gonzalez said.

   Doctors won't be able to tell for two to three months whether the treatments
are effective.

   Brain cancer is another cancer that has a poor prognosis and few weapons.

   "There is essentially no treatment," with most patients living no longer than
12 to 18 months, said CU neurosurgeon Kevin Lillehei.

   Radiation and chemotherapy have been used, "but we have pushed the window.
You can only give so much chemotherapy and so much radiation," he said.

   One patient has received gene therapy at CU, having undergone the treatment
about a month ago.

   First, as much of the tumor as possible is removed. The area near the tumor
is injected with viral-producer cells that have been engineered to produce
viruses carrying thymidine kinase gene.

   The brain is "ideal" for this approach, Lillehei said, since the virus only
attacks active dividing cells. The only active dividing cells in a brain are the
tumor cells.

   In about two weeks the engineered virus infects tumor cells with its DNA.
Lillehei said the tumor then becomes susceptible to the antibiotic ganciclovir,
which is intended to kill cancerous cells but won't harm normal brain cells.

   The antibiotic is given for two weeks. The patient then gets radiation.
Lillehei said no benefit can be seen for two to three months.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Denver Post/Brian Brainerd Cancer patient Sally Busch joins,
from left, CU researchers Rene Gonzalez, Michael Glode and Kevin Lillehei in
discussing gene therapy yesterday. Busch is one of four melanoma patients in
Colorado receiving the revolutionary therapy.  Time Magazine, The Denver Post
Gene therapy: How it works

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1996


                             2612 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 12, 1996, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: NEXT L.A.;
 PLAYERS;
 AFTER FINDING A CURE FOR BOREDOM, BIOLOGIST TACKLES GENETICS

BYLINE: RUSS LOAR, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:


   Luis Villarreal did not grow up pondering the riddles of human existence.

   He grew up in the rough and ragged streets of East Los Angeles, spending his
high school years pondering the intricacies of motorcycle engines.

   That he is now pushing out from the edge of what is known about the genetic
mechanisms of the human body is more a result of boredom than ambition, as he
tells it.

   "I never envisioned myself doing what I'm doing now," said Villarreal, 47, a
UC Irvine molecular biologist who founded the Center for Viral Vector Design on
campus five months ago. "I sort of backed into this career by avoiding all the
things I didn't want to do. Somehow, I ended up doing this."

   The center is a workshop of sorts, where Villarreal and other researchers are
developing specialized viruses to be used as "vectors," or delivery systems, for
genetic material cloned in the campus lab.

   The advances of recombinant DNA technology during the last two decades have
raised public expectations that such gene transfers will soon provide a cure for
a number of inherited and acquired diseases. But the creation of a biological
delivery system that will effectively counteract genetic deficiencies and not be
rejected by the human host remains a significant problem, said Villarreal, who
finds the challenge a sufficient cure for boredom.

   "I've always been curious about how things work. I've been a tinkerer
forever. When I was a kid, I took apart my brother's 10-speed bike, including
the derailleur, and hundreds of ball bearings fell all over the garage floor.
Somehow, I managed to get it all back together. I guess that's a characteristic
I have that has been useful in problem-solving."

   Villarreal's flair for improvisation was not always appreciated. In high
school, his ability to devise solutions to problems on a physics exam was called
into question.

   "I used a method that I now know is called analytical geometry, but I didn't
have a clear sense of what I was doing back then," he said. "I analytically
determined what the answers should be, and I got the highest score in the class
by doing that.

   "If I had a student these days who had come up with an innovative way to
solve a problem like that, that would be someone to really encourage. But in my
case, I was told, 'There's no way you could have beat these other students
because you have not taken trigonometry. You must have cheated.' "

   Villarreal grew up in a family of three brothers whose parents had not gone
beyond the fourth grade. After high school graduation, Villarreal enrolled at a
community college, looking for the training that would earn him a steady job as
a medical technician.

   "After one year of taking courses at a junior college, I was bored to tears
with it. It was just memorization."

   His search for intellectual intrigue led to a bachelor's degree in
biochemistry from Cal State L.A., a doctorate in biology from UC San Diego and a
research fellowship in 1976 with genetic researcher Paul Berg at Stanford
University, who won the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering
work.

   Shortly before Villarreal arrived at Stanford, Berg had called for a
moratorium on genetic research over concerns about the potential for abuse.

   Though the scientific community's fears have largely been assuaged,
Villarreal said there is a persistent public perception that genetic engineering
amounts to a violation of the laws of nature.

   "The prevailing public view of people in science is the stereotype of the mad
scientist. Yet, if you look at the contributions of scientists toward the
well-being of the planet, they've been very active."

   He tells the story of a parasitic wasp that doesn't make nests.

   "When they find an insect larva, they inject an egg into it and the egg will
develop inside it. In order to grow in another organism, you have to turn off
the immune system of that organism.

   "And the way the wasp does it is that it makes a virus that gets into the
larva and turns off the immune reaction in the insect larva so the egg can grow.
That's gene therapy. People keep thinking they've discovered things that nature
hasn't done. Then we find out, sure enough, it is a natural process after all."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Luis Villarreal founded Center for Viral Vector Design at UC
Irvine.  PHOTOGRAPHER: JOSE BARRERA / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1996


                             2613 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   NOVEMBER 12, 1996, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: UC Scientists to Send Tumor-Killing Gene Through Bloodstream

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    Specialists at the University of California at San Francisco are about to
try a new approach to gene therapy experiments by injecting synthetic genes
through the bloodstreams of cancer patients in an attempt to suppress the growth
of their tumors.

   The patients all have liver cancer, and the first of three in the clinical
trial will receive within the next few days an injection of genetically
engineered viruses carrying the genes. Two more patients will be treated in
quick succession, according to Dr. Alan P. Venook and Dr. Robert S. Warren, who
are conducting the clinical trial at UCSF.

   All three patients originally developed colon cancer, but despite standard
chemotherapy, the tumor cells have spread to their livers so pervasively that
the cancers are inoperable, Venook said.

   Experimental efforts at treating cancer and other life-threatening diseases
through gene therapy have been under way for years at many medical centers. But
for the first time, doctors in this trial will be going after the tumors by
injecting cancer-killing genes directly into the hepatic artery that carries
blood to the liver.

   The likelihood of success from this first trial is impossible to predict
because the experiment is fraught with so many unknowns -- and the patients all
know it, Venook said in an interview yesterday.

   ''We're extrapolating every step of the way from our animal experiments,'' he
said, ''and we can't really know what to expect because what happens in rats is
by no means a sign that the same thing will happen in humans.

   ''The patients know that too, because they've been fully informed about the
risks, and while they certainly have hopes for a remote chance of success, they
also know that what they're doing will help advance the science for other
patients in the future.''

   To create the synthetic genes, scientists at a small San Diego biotechnology
company called Canji Inc. engineered an adenovirus -- one of the many viruses
that cause colds and upper respiratory diseases -- by removing the ability of
the virus to cause infection and inserting a synthetic copy of a gene known as
P53.

   That specific gene was isolated more than seven years ago when scientists
discovered that it was a ''tumor suppressor gene,'' possessing a unique ability
to fuse itself into the genetic material of cancer cells and cause the tumors to
die.

   Among the many unknowns in the coming experiments, Venook said, is whether
the altered viruses carrying the genes might set off a harmful immune response
or a helpful one in the livers of the patients -- and, in fact, just how the
patients' immune response to the virus might affect other organs.

   The engineered genes themselves cannot be harmful, Venook said. But no one
knows how many virus particles will be required to carry enough genes to cause
the tumors to shrink.

   The experimental plan is to inject between 10 million and 100 million copies
of the gene-carrying viruses in the first phase of the experiment, and then --
if all goes well -- to increase the numbers of viruses in successive injections.

   A few days after the first gene- carrying viruses have been injected, Venook
and Warren will remove bits of tumor tissue from the patients and analyze them.
Their hope is that the P53 genes will begin to kill off the tumor cells in a
phenomenon known as ''programmed cell death,'' or apoptosis, Venook said.

   The patients, all of whom have been regularly receiving standard chemotherapy
for their cancers, are at home now, but will undergo the gene therapy injections
at UCSF and remain there for a few days so the researchers can see whether the
new genes are beginning to work.  A week later, they will have specialized pumps
installed surgically at UCSF so their standard chemotherapy can be delivered
directly to their livers, Venook said.

   Canji, the small firm that developed the P53 gene delivery system more than
three years ago, has since been bought by Schering- Plough, the pharmaceutical
giant. In a research partnership between the UCSF cancer specialists and the
drug company, Schering- Plough is financing the new gene therapy trials.


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1996


                             2614 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    November 11, 1996, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: Couple can't tend their animals

BYLINE: Judy Hill

DATELINE: ARCADIA

BODY:


   Diane and Jerry Bolvin recently took another direct hit.

   Cancer - which, like floods, hurricanes, tornadoes and earthquakes, ought to
rank as one of nature's worst disasters - savaged them again.

   Like many people struggling with catastrophic illness, the Bolvins are almost
paralyzed and in limbo, struggling in financial, emotional and psychological
quicksand.

   Jerry's battle with cancer began about two years ago when he was diagnosed
with untreatable lung cancer that had spread to his brain.

   Married 15 years, the Bolvins met in Port Orchard, Wash., where Jerry, 67,
was a car painter. Diane, 52, worked in a shipyard.

   They moved to Arcadia, where Diane's parents lived, nine years ago. They
wanted some land, a few animals, a peaceful, bucolic life.

   They achieved that - for a while.

   Then cancer struck.

   Even so, the couple kept on. Diane ran a small grocery store in Sarasota and
managed their 19-acre spread.  Readers to the rescue

   Once they discovered that traditional treatment offered Jerry little hope,
they sought nontraditional therapy in North Carolina.

   That's when you met them first.

   Diane's grown daughters were able to care for the livestock while they were
gone. But Diane knew she had to get rid of some of the animals.

   She reached out to Tribune readers who took in 18 of the potbellied pigs that
she raised for sale as pets.

   During all this, Diane also searched for treatment that might save Jerry.

   She found a gene therapy program in Texas that offered some hope. But getting
into the program - providing medical information, tests and so forth - has taken
months.

   Meanwhile, Jerry's health deteriorated. Diane found she couldn't leave him
alone any longer, so she had to close the store, cutting off their main source
of income.

   Now they're living on Jerry's Social Security and their savings.

   "I hope the money lasts long enough," Diane says with a sad shake of her
head.

   Petite, with long auburn hair touched with gray, Diane has a round, friendly
face, a beautiful smile.

   Tiny white sneakers, blue jeans and a baggy T-shirt make her look far younger
than her years.

   Jerry looks his age.

   His hair is thin, his body thinner. Oxygen helps him breathe.  Call comes too
late

   Officials from the experimental program called the other day.

   They'd take him. With one catch. He couldn't have active cancer.

   But while Jerry waited, three active tumors grew in his brain.

   "If only we'd been able to get him in there quicker," Diane frets.

   So instead of heading for Texas and hope, they're sitting in Arcadia,
waiting, wondering.

   The house is stacked with goods from Diane's old store. The yard is uncut.
The barn needs tending.

   There are still 20 or so pigs - more than a dozen of which Diane would like
to place in loving homes.

   Horses need currying, stalls need cleaning, pigs need feeding.

   But neither Jerry, sapped by illness, nor Diane, sapped by stress, can do
much.

   Except fight to survive another day.  Reach Judy Hill through e-mail at
trib01d@prodigy.com. Or fax at (813) 259-7676. Or call (813) 259-7812. Or write
c/o The Tampa Tribune, P.O. Box 191, Tampa, 33601. You can read past columns at
http://www.tampatrib.com/

   baylife/hillindx.htm

GRAPHIC: SIGNATURE (C)

NOTES: JUDY HILL

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1996


                             2615 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        November 10, 1996 Sunday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 2241 words

HEADLINE: TRIALS OF NEW GENE DRUG FOR LIVER DISEASE STALLED

BYLINE: By DONALD C. DRAKE Knight-Ridder Newspapers

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   The scientists at the Institute for Human Gene Therapy were excited as they
discussed the revolutionary drug they had just developed. It targeted an
inherited liver disease so deadly that it kills half of its infant victims
within the first week of life.

   The information from their experiments was good, and institute Director James
Wilson wanted to launch human trials.  But It would take three times that long
to clear all the regulatory hurdles set up to protect lab animals and patients
from experiments with unproven drugs, especially drugs that change the genetics
of the patient's cells.

   Before the ordeal was over, Wilson's lab would go before five local and
federal review boards, present hundreds of pages of information and mate 275
mice to prove that future generations wouldn't be threatened.

   Wilson was racing to develop the first effective gene therapy against a human
disorder, a breakthrough that could revolutionize medicine's approach to
disease.

   The new drug was against ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a
disorder of the urea cycle. Through this cycle of biochemical changes, the body
disposes of ammonia, a byproduct of eating protein, by converting it to urea and
eliminating it in urine.

   Almost 50 percent of male babies born to mothers with the genetic disorder
have the defect. Half of these baby boys produce no OTC, an enzyme that turns
ammonia into urea. Without the enzyme, ammonia builds up as soon as the newborn
eats his first meal, plunging him into a coma, brain damage and death.

   The other half have a partial defect and can be kept alive for 10 to 15 years
with drugs and a protein-restricted diet. Only a handful of afflicted babies
have such a mild form of the disease that they live to adulthood.

   Even though OTC strikes only about 100 children a year in this country, a
successful drug would be immensely important because it would constitute the
first clear proof that gene therapy works.

   Two months after the March meeting, Wilson and Mark Batshaw, a world OTC
authority who is chief physician at Children's Seashore House in Philadelphia,
discussed the study at the annual meeting of the National Urea Cycle Foundation,
composed of 115 families dealing with urea disorders.

   Sitting spellbound in a meeting room of the Adam's Mark Hotel on City Avenue,
50 parents, some with their children beside them, listened to Wilson and Batshaw
explain gene therapy and the need for volunteers willing to test a new drug.

   Wilson said a disabled cold virus, called a vector, would be used to
transport the OTC gene into the liver cells of patients. The gene would make the
missing enzyme. This particular virus, an adenovirus, was "extraordinarily more
effective" in delivering genes than vectors tried before, he said.

   It worked, at least temporarily, in sparse fur mice, a species without much
hair that has a disease similar to OTC.

   The two researchers explained that a toxicity trial would first determine
whether the drug was safe. If it was, a second trial would be done to see if it
fixed the genetic defect.

   Batshaw announced that after lunch he would draw blood to identify carriers
and possible test subjects. A few hours later, he was inundated with volunteers.

   Privately, Wilson and Batshaw grappled with the ethical issue of whether to
test the drug on babies or adults.

   Usually, untried medicines are first given to desperately ill patients with
no other options.

   Because babies with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency have a 50 percent
chance of dying within the first few days of life, they would benefit the most
from an effective drug.

   And from a research perspective, newborns would be ideal test subjects.
Because they make no OTC, finding any enzyme in them after treatment would prove
the drug was working. It would be harder to prove this in adults because they
make some OTC.

   But Batshaw cautioned against treating babies who had been in a coma for more
than three days. By then, he said, brain damage would be so severe that the
quality of the baby's life would be poor.

   And bioethicists had advised Wilson against using babies because they can't
give informed consent and are unlikely to benefit from a trial designed to test
toxicity.

   Babies posed logistic problems, too: With so few OTC births a year, hospitals
around the country would have to be nimble to contact Batshaw for the drug,
which must be administered within a day or two of birth.

   It would be far easier to recruit adults, mostly afflicted mothers. Even
though they have a less serious form of the disease and make some OTC, 10
percent periodically suffer lethargy, comas or other symptoms, and 1 percent
will die from the disorder.

   Also, Batshaw and Wilson realized that regulatory bodies would be more likely
to approve a toxicity trial in adults than children.

   The first trial, Wilson and Batshaw decided, would use adults.

   The OTC researchers spent that summer assembling information and preparing
applications for the many committees and agencies that regulate human trials.

   On Sept. 14, 1995, they went before Penn's Institutional Biosafety Committee,
set up to protect the community and university personnel from the dangers of
experimentation.

   Society is so skittish about experiments with genetic material that the
institute had to seek approval from the IBC three times, first when it made the
OTC vector in the lab, then when it started animal experiments, and now that it
was ready to start human trials.

   Two weeks later, the institute went before Penn's Institutional Review Board,
designed to protect people who volunteer for trials.

   Experimentation has become so tightly regulated that even test animals have a
committee, the university's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, to make
sure that they are used wisely and treated humanely.

   Penn labs can acquire animals for research or teaching only with approval
from this committee, after explaining how each animal will be used, cared for
and disposed of. Approval is necessary even for experiments with eggs, if they
are within 72 hours of hatching.

   The two Penn agencies approved the OTC applications with minor changes.

   On Dec. 4, Wilson and Batshaw boarded the Metroliner for a meeting with the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), a federal agency that until recently
reviewed, with the Food and Drug Administration, all human trials involving
genetic material.

   Wilson was expecting problems because of a negative assessment by Robert
Erickson, a University of Arizona genetics professor and RAC member.

   The 17 RAC members sat at a huge conference table at the National Institutes
of Health in Bethesda, Md. To one side were rows of chairs for observers. Unlike
the Penn committees, which confer in private even though they are charged with
protecting the public, the RAC meetings were open.

   Erickson began the meeting saying it was "very difficult to accept" a trial
in which the vector is delivered through an artery leading directly to the
liver. Erickson said he thought this was impractical for widespread treatment
and that the trials should be deferred until a better vector was available.

   Another RAC member was concerned about giving a potentially dangerous drug to
healthy people who only carried the defect and were not likely to suffer
symptoms. Until now, gene drugs had only been tested on people facing death.

   Batshaw defended the application, saying that at least 10 percent of the
mothers would develop symptoms and 1 percent would die. And there was no way of
identifying them beforehand.

   Wilson also responded to the criticism. Delivering the drug through the
artery to one half of the liver was first proposed as a safety measure, Wilson
said, to prevent endangering the entire organ in case the treatment proved
toxic.

   But, he said, baboon studies showed that giving the drug intravenously was
just as safe, so using the artery was probably not necessary.

   After Wilson finished, the matter was put to a vote. As was custom, the
primary reviewer, Erickson, made the motion. He moved to approve the
application, if the drug was delivered intravenously and if the patients least
likely to benefit were excluded.

   The vote was 12 to 1 in favor, with four abstentions.

   "What a victory," Wilson said, as he and Batshaw rushed to catch the
Metroliner back to Philadelphia.

   "Do you realize what they've approved?" Batshaw said.

   For the first time, the RAC had approved a gene therapy trial in which
vectors would be given through the bloodstream to nonterminal patients. It was a
regulatory milestone in this emerging field.

   Now only one obstacle remained before the human trials could begin, getting
approval for an investigational new drug (IND) from the Food and Drug
Administration. This would permit an unlicensed drug to be used in humans.

   It was now nine months since Wilson had decided to do clinical trials.
Getting FDA approval would be the most difficult hurdle.

   As the OTC drug was making its way through the regulatory maze, Wilson was
becoming convinced that it would be the first successful gene therapy.

   Though scientists have reported isolated successes with gene drugs, none has
worked consistently against any disease.

   Wilson's optimism for the OTC drug was bolstered by the encouraging results
from his laboratory.

   Wilson had been worried that the vector wouldn't produce OTC quickly enough
to save the infants from brain damage. But the sparse fur mice started making
the enzyme within 24 hours of getting the vector.

   Another question was whether the enzyme produced by the vector would prevent
ammonia from building up. The mice were inoculated with the vector and then
given a large dose of ammonia. Untreated animals died because they lacked OTC to
process the ammonia. Animals treated with the vector survived because they were
making OTC.

   And Wilson had worried that patients would become immune or allergic to the
vector after a single treatment. But he discovered that could be prevented if
the mice were given a drug to suppress their immune systems.

   It looked as if they were getting around all of the obstacles to successful
gene therapy.

   The big question was whether all of this would work in humans.

   Wilson, Batshaw and five others on the team went to Washington on Feb. 10 for
a pre-IND meeting with the FDA. Wilson didn't want to take a chance that the FDA
would find something missing in the supporting material and request more
information tying the application up for months or longer.

   His caution was warranted. Because the genes were being delivered through the
bloodstream, FDA officials questioned whether they would be passed on to the
test subjects' children. Accidentally altering future generations is one of the
greatest concerns of this new field.

   The FDA wanted Wilson to prove that this wouldn't happen.

   So, Wilson went home and did more mice experiments, using an extraordinarily
sensitive test called polymerase chain reaction. It showed that genetic material
from the vectors had found its way to the mice's reproductive organs, but Wilson
didn't think this posed any danger to fetuses.

   Wilson sent the new information to the FDA, confident that the IND
application would be quickly approved and trials could start by summer.

   The FDA did not agree with Wilson. It said finding the genetic material in
the gonads did pose a potential risk and refused to approve the IND application.

   Wilson couldn't believe it. Only one in 100,000 cells was being infected with
the vector.

   Wilson went home that night convinced that the FDA was demanding the
impossible, proof that something will never happen.

   Two days later, Wilson had a plan. Assembling his team, he explained that he
wanted to swamp the gonads of 200 male and female mice with the vector, breed
them and then examine the hundreds of resulting fetuses for contamination.

   Because animal tissues and systems tend to behave similarly, the assumption
was that if mice don't transmit genetic material to offspring, then humans won't
either.

   With so many fetuses, it was a tricky and time-consuming study. And it would
delay human trials for several months. But now that Wilson had a plan, he felt
differently about the FDA demands.

   It wasn't such a bad idea, he thought, to put to rest this question about the
offspring.

   The tedious task of infecting so many mice with the OTC vector, breeding
them, retrieving the fetuses, and checking the tissue for evidence of the vector
fell to research associate Xuehai Ye.

   Working in a fourth-floor lab of the Wistar Institute, Ye spent two months,
night and day, breeding 275 mice and then analyzing 831 fetuses, intently
looking for something his boss was convinced would never be found. In September,
Ye reported to Wilson that no fetuses showed evidence of contamination even
though the gonads of their mothers and fathers had been heavily dosed with the
vector.

   Wilson was elated, but not surprised. On Oct. 7, he sent the new information
to the FDA and awaited its decision.

   In late October, Wilson, Batshaw and other members of the OTC team received a
conference call from the FDA.

   The FDA officials asked a few questions as Wilson and the others braced
themselves. The FDA decision came almost matter-of-factly. The IND was approved.

   The final regulatory hurdle had been cleared - one year, seven months and two
weeks after Wilson decided to go for it.

   The human trials could begin.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1996


                             2616 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        November 10, 1996 Sunday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: HEART ASSOCIATION GATHERING IN N.O.

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   Diseases that kill one American every 33 seconds will command the attention
of 34,000 people converging on New Orleans for the annual meeting of the
American Heart Association.

   The 4,400 reports they will hear today through Wednesday will address
technological advances, but there also will be discussions on the cost of care.

   " 'What does it cost to buy an extra year of life?' People are starting to
look at it in those terms," said Dr. Russell V. Luepker, chairman of the
association's program committee. "Also, 'Can we afford that?' In an era of very
high expenditures and a presumed limitation on resources, people need to start
asking those questions in a systematic way so there are data to make these
decisions on."

   Such concerns are paramount as the cost of technological innovations rises,
said Dr. Sidney C. Smith Jr., the association's immediate past president.

   "This year, it's estimated we'll spend as much as $150 billion on stroke and
heart disease alone," he said. "Two thirds will be hospital-related. If nothing
is done by 2000, we'll spend over $200 billion. If you couple that with a
population that's overweight and underexercised and starting to smoke more, we
have a real problem on our hands."

   Cost is one issue raised by several groups of scientists who have been
weighing the merits of technological advances such as angioplasty and stents in
opening clogged blood vessels and ensuring they stay open.

   In angioplasty, a balloonlike device flattens plaque deposits that clog those
vessels, but the balloon is withdrawn, leaving the possibility of another
blockage. A stent is a metal mesh cylinder inserted into the area and left there
to keep the passage open.

   "There has been considerable debate over whether that's better," said
Luepker, chairman of the epidemiology division at the University of Minnesota
School of Public Health. "There are complications, there are additional
expenses, and if you don't hold the artery open any longer, they're not worth
putting in. Plus, there's always the problem of putting a foreign body in."

   Delegates also should expect more information on risk factors for heart
disease, Luepker said, as cardiologists report on their attempts to puzzle out
an explanation for traumatic, and potentially fatal, events such as strokes and
heart attacks.

   The evolution of heart disease takes many years, Luepker said. "The actual
acute event, that hour or two in which something dramatic happens, is the
culmination of events that have been going on for years. But there may have been
circumstances that occurred an hour or two before that we're trying to
understand."

   After a heart attack, the heart muscle is damaged, usually irreparably. But
some scientists will report on efforts to trick animal hearts into repairing
themselves.

   Another promising area of research is gene therapy, specifically for use in
altering a blood vessel or changing a graft to make it last longer and be less
prone to plaque buildup.

   "This isn't something you're going to see in a clinic next week, but progress
on them has been substantial," said Dr. Rose Marie Robertson, the program
committee's vice chairwoman.

   Another topic of interest should be the importance of including greater
numbers of women in clinical trials, said Robertson, vice chairwoman for
academic affairs at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, Tenn.

   "Much of the data we've used were gathered in studies that included mostly
men," she said. "One out of two women will die of cardiovascular disease or
stroke. It's important that we learn how to handle cardiovascular disease in
women."

   For those who can't get to the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center for the
association's 69th Scientific Sessions, some convention reports will be put on
the association's web site as they are presented. The address is www.amhrt.org.

   Nearly a third of the delegates will come from foreign countries, Luepker
said. Portions of the meeting will be broadcast to France, Asia, South America,
Africa and the Middle East.

   "Some people have lamented the fact that the American Heart Association
meeting has more international people coming," he said. "Science doesn't know
international boundaries, and you're as likely to find the answer in France as
you are in Louisiana. It's the answer that's important - knowing what's going on
and what people are thinking."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1996


                             2617 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 1, 1996 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   FPA completes Sterling merger FPA Medical Management Inc. completed its
merger with Sterling Healthcare Group in a transaction valued at $159 million
based on the $19.63 closing price of FPA shares yesterday.

   FPA is a San Diego-based medical practice management company. Genzyme
licenses Vical therapy Vical Inc. announced that Genzyme has exercised an option
for an exclusive license of Vical's gene therapy for the potential treatment of
cystic fibrosis.

   The exercise included a $1 million payment to Vical and may result in future
milestone and royalty payments.

   Vical is a San Diego-based biotechnology company. Deal means $1 million for
Genta Genta Inc. has completed a previously announced agreement with a unit of
SkyePharma PLC, under which Genta will license the rights to develop time
release versions of five pharmaceuticals.

   San Diego-based Genta will receive $1 million plus royalties on any products
that result.

   The company said the funds will sustain its operations into December.
Allstate to resume state business Allstate Insurance Co. said it will resume
normal business operations in California, including the sale of homeowners
insurance, on Monday.

   Passage of the California Earthquake Authority "will allow companies like
Allstate to get back into the homeowners insurance business in the state," said
Ronald D. McNeil, senior vice president of personal lines for the Northbrook,
Ill., insurer. Peninsula Bank sets dividend Peninsula Bank of San Diego has
announced a 14.5 cents per share cash dividend on outstanding shares of its
common stock.

   The dividend will be paid Nov. 22. In another development, Daniel Herde and
Brian Gowland, former senior executives with San Diego Trust & Savings, have
been named to Peninsula's board of directors. FHP to pay $500,000 fine FHP
International Corp. of Fountain Valley said it will pay a $500,000 fine to
resolve a dispute involving care given to a member of TakeCare Health Plan, a
health-care plan FHP acquired in 1994. The case involved a 9-year-old kidney
tumor patient who required surgery.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2618 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   October 30, 1996, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 3; View Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

HEADLINE: BODY WATCH;
 SOME NEW WEAPONS AGAINST THE DISEASES THAT STEAL VISION

BYLINE: MADELINE DREXLER, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:


   When she was 7 years old, Laura Brassard became a habitue of the night.
Daylight had become unbearable. In school, she would squint at the blackboard
from behind dark, wraparound sunglasses. Even the faint glow of street lights
made her eyes burn.

   What cast a gloom over her world for the next 10 years was a rare eye
disease, Stevens Johnson syndrome. Triggered by an allergy to common
medications, the disease produces sores inside and outside the body that
eventually heal but leave lasting vision damage.

   Not only do the eyes become exquisitely sensitive to light, but the eyelids
become so rough and scaly that a mere blink, even the darting eye movements of
dream-filled sleep, is like sandpaper rubbing over the cornea, the transparent
tissue covering the eyeball. Because the damaged cornea no longer focuses light
correctly, patients often become legally blind, able to discern only big, blurry
forms.

   "They live a life that has been described to me as living like a
vampire--only going out at night," says Dr. Perry Rosenthal, a Harvard
University School of Medicine ophthalmologist and president of the Boston
Foundation for Sight.

   But all that has started to change. In 1994, Rosenthal received approval from
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for a novel lens that has given back sight
to Brassard and other patients with corneal damage. Rosenthal's invention is
just one of several visionary ideas these days in sight restoration. As
technology produces materials that can coexist with the body and scientists
better understand the mechanisms of sight and blindness, researchers are
developing treatments for acquired blindness that could not have been imagined
even 10 years ago.

   The Boston scleral lens, as Rosenthal calls it, looks like an oversized
contact lens. About the size of a quarter, it arches over the cornea and rests
on the relatively insensitive sclera, the white tissue of the eye. The space
between the lens and the cornea is filled with artificial tears--a layer of
lubricating fluid that protects the eye, smooths surface irregularities and
fulfills the optical duties of the damaged cornea.

   The result is that people with corneal disorders and injuries--tens of
thousands in the United States alone--might see painlessly again. The lenses can
replace corneal transplant surgery--an option that is not foolproof and is
prohibitively expensive in developing countries, where blinding corneal diseases
are common. For patients like Brassard, whose underlying medical conditions make
transplant surgery futile, the lenses are the only way to restore sight.

   If the scleral lens has transformed lives in the here and now, genetic
research is looking for dramatic cures during the next decade. From pediatric
eye-muscle disorders like strabismus, in which both eyes cannot focus on the
same point, to common diseases of adulthood such as glaucoma and cataracts, to
the macular degeneration of old age, genes play a significant role.

   If researchers find out how genetic mutations alter the eye's normal
functions, they could create tailor-made treatments that would compensate for
the changes. These treatments could range from gene therapy to transplanting
healthy cells to administering drugs.

   Today, two unexpected drugs are being used to treat vision-robbing disorders.
One is the botulinum toxin, a purified form of the bacterial toxin that can
paralyze and kill if eaten in contaminated food. Patients with conditions such
as blepharospasm, muscle contractions that squeeze the eyelids shut, receive
injections that weaken the clenched muscles and allow the lids to part.

   The second drug is thalidomide, the notorious sedative that, in the late
1950s and early 1960s, caused pregnant women to give birth to babies with
missing or stunted limbs. Because it prevents blood vessels from proliferating,
thalidomide is being clinically tested at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary as a treatment for macular degeneration, in which unchecked vessel
growth impairs sight.

   Perhaps the most futuristic technology today is the retinal implant pioneered
by Dr. Joseph Rizzo at Massachusetts Eye and Ear. This electronic microchip, now
being tested in rabbits, sits on the surface of the retina, the nerve layer at
the back of the eye that senses light and helps to send images to the brain. The
microchip transforms visual data into electric pulses, substituting for the
chemical messages of the retina's rod and cone cells. Theoretically, if the chip
received a picture from the outside and converted it into neural messages, it
would result in an artificial version of shadow and light that bypasses the
damaged eye. But this particular scientific vision is loaded with ifs.

   But patients like Brassard have no choice but to rely on miracles. Three
years ago, when she was fitted with the Boston scleral lens, her life changed.
She could open her dark-brown eyes in daylight without pain and give up her
sunglasses.

   "I felt invincible," she says. "I had a newfound confidence." So much
confidence, in fact, that she was chosen to star in her high school's production
of "The Belle of Amherst," a two-hour solo performance under the spotlights.
"It's a new thing for me to look into people's eyes," says Brassard, now a
junior at Rhode Island College. "But I can do it, and I will do it."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1996


                             2619 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
SYSTEMIX'S INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS REJECT SANDOZ OFFER

BYLINE: Dow Jones

BODY:

   Systemix Inc. said yesterday that its independent directors had rejected
Sandoz Ltd.'s unsolicited offer to acquire the rest of the research company for
about $67 million. Systemix's stock closed down $1.75, at $14.25. Sandoz, the
Swiss drug company, already holds a 73 percent stake in Systemix, which
researches gene therapies for cancer, AIDS and genetic diseases. Sandoz made the
proposal in May, sending Systemix shares soaring 71 percent. In June, five
shareholder suits were filed to block the proposal. Sandoz said it would review
Systemix's decision before taking further action.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1996


                             2620 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 29, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk;  Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1339 words

HEADLINE: Discovery of Breast Cancer Gene Produces Clues but No Answers

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   JUST two years ago, a team of scientists won a fevered race to find an
elusive gene that causes breast cancer in women who inherit it. And researchers
hoped, with bated breath, that it might be the answer to breast cancer.

   But science is rarely so neat and simple, and the gene, known as BRCA1, for
breast cancer 1, has turned out to be an enigma.

    To have any chance of correcting the damage done by the mutated gene,
scientists need to find out what the ordinary version of the gene is meant to do
in the cell. So far they know that the gene directs cells to make a protein that
is apparently needed to prevent a sort of wild proliferation. Women who inherit
a changed, or mutated, form of the gene have as much as a 90 percent chance of
developing breast cancer and as much as a 60 percent chance of developing
ovarian cancer. Beyond that rudimentary understanding, however, ignorance
reigns.

   At a recent meeting of breast cancer researchers, sponsored by the University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas and the Susan G. Komen
Foundation, all the excitement and uncertainty of the chase were apparent as
scientists exchanged notes, hoping to catch a new scent that would lead them out
of the impasse.

   Despite all the powerful tools of molecular biology, it was clear that
hunches and analogies also had leading roles in the attacks being planned on the
BRCA1 gene.

   But it was also clear that some order was emerging above the confusion of
BRCA1 research. Some groups are finding a skein of interacting proteins inside
human cells that includes the BRCA1 protein, which is the protein made from the
BRCA1 gene. If any of those proteins is disrupted, a cell can turn cancerous,
the researchers propose. Another group believes the natural role of BRCA1, in
its normal, unmutated form, is to act as a brake on the cell's growth. These
scientists have such confidence in this idea that they have given the normal
form of BRCA1 to patients to put brakes on proliferating tumor cells.

   And it was clear that many of these scientists are keenly aware that the high
tech, glitzy molecular biology studies that sometimes seem to be an end in
themselves are ultimately aimed at relieving real human suffering.

   "In my book at least, breast cancer research is not a job, it's a mission,"
said Dr. Edison Liu, the director of the division of clinical science at the
National Cancer Institute.

   Living cells have complicated genetic programs designed to insure that they
divide when needed but destroy themselves for the body's good if they are
genetically damaged. It is when the genes in this control program themselves
become damaged that aberrant cells get the chance to enter cancerous growth.

   Many so-called cancer genes have turned out to be mutated or defective
versions of the genes in the cell's growth control program. But even with this
strong clue, it is hard to figure out what a newly discovered gene like BRCA1 is
meant to do. In fact, initial hypotheses have proved to be wrong.

   So how do scientists figure out what a mystery gene, like BRCA1, does? Dr.
Frank J. Rauscher 3d, the exuberant son and namesake of a well-known cancer
researcher and former head of the American Cancer Society, said the usual
approach was to reason by analogy.

   First, said Dr. Rauscher, who is a molecular biologist at the Wistar
Institute in Philadelphia, virtually every scientist studying BRCA1 sought out
possible similarities with genes of known function. Unfortunately, BRCA1 seemed
totally novel.

   "By and large, it was a big black box," Dr. Rauscher said. And so, he
continued, "most studies are descriptive." Scientists' next move is to find out
where in the cell the BRCA1 protein is active. If it is in the nucleus, for
example, where the genetic material nestles, the protein's role might be to
switch other genes on or off. Researchers are also scrutinizing the structure of
the BRCA1 protein, looking for regions that might be designed to bind to DNA or
known protein molecules.

   Dr. Rauscher said he had found a protein that he called BAP1, for breast
cancer 1 associated protein, that latched onto the BRCA1 protein and that was
found in the nucleus of the cell, where genes are flicking on and off. And, he
said, it now appears that the gene that makes the BAP1 protein was frequently
mutated in breast cancer cells and also in cells of patients with lung cancer,
raising the odds that the interaction of the BAP1 and BRCA1 proteins might be
important.

   But, Dr. Rauscher confessed, "that still does not tell us much about what
BRCA1 does." So far, he said, "what we are left with is more descriptions of an
unknown biochemical pathway."

   Dr. Richard Baer, a tall and dignified microbiology professor at the
University of Texas Southwestern School of Medicine, said he had found a
different protein that attached itself to BRCA1, a protein he called BARD1, for
breast cancer associated ring domain protein. This protein, Dr. Baer explained,
emerged as a result of two years of patiently screening 11 million fragments of
DNA for pieces that might make proteins that would stick to BRCA1. From the 11
million fragments, Dr. Baer found 16 possibilities that looked promising. And
among those he found BARD1.

   Dr. Baer said he was now looking to see if BARD1 was mutated in breast cancer
cells, which might indicate that it was crucial to the normal functioning of
cells. So far, he confessed, he has no idea what BARD1 does. And, he added, it
is perfectly plausible that BAP1, BARD1 and BRCA1 all attach to each other to
make a melded protein that controls cell growth.

   The search for proteins that attach to BRCA1 "is rational at first," Dr. Baer
said. After all, several well-known molecules that cells use to copy genes are
actually conglomerates of two or more proteins. And, Dr. Baer said, everyone
hopes to find proteins that attach themselves to BRCA1 and whose functions are
known. The problem is, he said, that the proteins that have been found -- BARD1
and BAP1 -- are as baffling as BRCA1 itself.

   Dr. Roy Jensen, a cell biologist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in
Nashville, took a different tack. He asked whether he could cure tumors in
animal experiments by restoring a normal BRCA1 gene to cells.

   The studies involved mice that lacked normal immune systems and so did not
reject human tissue as foreign cells. Dr. Jensen implanted cells from human
breast cancers into animals' abdomens. The tumors grew large and lumpy,
grotesque masses that bulged from the soft underbellies of the mice. But when
Dr. Jensen treated the mice with the BRCA1 gene, the tumors began to shrink and
a few melted away.

   It was surprising, Dr. Jensen said, because in laboratory experiments, when
researchers added normal BRCA1 genes to cancer cells, the cell stopped growing
but did not die. Yet in the mice, "in every case, the tumor was at least
shrunk," Dr. Jensen said, adding, "We're trying to figure out why."

   Encouraged by this result, Dr. Jensen's colleagues, Dr. Jeffrey Holt and Dr.
David Tait, conducted a small study of 10 women with advanced ovarian cancer and
with mutated BRCA1 genes. They supplied the women with normal BRCA1 genes,
injecting the women in their abdomens with viruses containing the genes. The
viruses, which can slip through cell walls, were necessary to carry the BRCA1
genes inside the tumor cells.

   The investigators are still analyzing their data and it is far too soon to
say whether the gene therapy will be effective. More than 90 percent of
treatments that look promising in laboratory and animal studies fail to pan out
when they are tested in humans.

   But, Dr. Jensen added, no matter what happens with the current studies, the
discovery of the BRCA1 gene has galvanized breast cancer research.

   "The most difficult question in breast cancer is deciding what to work on,"
Dr. Jensen said. But now, he said, with the BRCA1 gene in hand, "it becomes less
of a fishing expedition and more a matter of getting from point A to point B."

GRAPHIC: Chart: "A Framework for a Mystery" In thinking about how the BRCA1 gene
might act to produce cancer, scientists theorixe that the BRCA1 protein it
encodes (1) might enter the nucleus (2) to form a complex (3) with one or both
of two other proteins, BARD1 and BAP1. In its normal form, such a complex might
act as a switch for the DNA mechanisms for cell division (4), preventing the
abnormal proliferation of cells.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1996


                             2621 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1996, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;   Page 2;   Column 1;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
Two inventors contend that the V-chip is an idea they've seen before -- in their
own patent.

BYLINE: By Teresa Riordan

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   IN this election season's first Presidential debate, President Clinton
trumpeted his support for the V-chip, a technology that allows parents to filter
out broadcast and cable television programs they deem inappropriate for their
children. Back in February, Congress passed a law requiring that all televisions
sold in 1998 be equipped with a V-chip.

   Brett West, of Ridgefield, Conn., and John P. Gardner of Arlington, Tex.,
have received a patent that they believe might entitle them to a royalty on
virtually every one of these new V-chip televisions.

    "This is a very broad patent that covers the V-chip concept in many
different applications," contended their patent lawyer, Harold Levine, of
Dallas.

   The patent describes a technology similar to the V-chip system mandated in
the Feb. 8 telecommunications law. That law provides for an industry-generated
rating system for television programs that is much like the one already in place
for movies.

   The West-Gardner patent, which was applied for in May 1994 and which does not
mention the word V-chip, covers a technology that enables parents to program a
television set so that, for example, it filters out shows that have been encoded
with an "R" rating because they contain sex or violence.

   "Each family member has a personal identification number," said Brett West,
who founded a movie-listing company unrelated to the V-chip called Cinemasource
Inc. "The television is programmed to know who is permitted to see what. You can
tailor viewing according to the child and give your 18-year-old more access than
your 5-year-old."

   Mr. West said the patent also covered a way to program the television so that
family members' identification numbers would allow them to watch television only
a limited number of hours each week.

   Mr. Levine said he had not yet approached any television manufacturers about
licensing his clients' patent but that he planned to do so soon.

   "It's not our intention to exploit the industry now that there is a law
mandating this," Mr. West said. "We're talking about pennies or dimes per TV."

   At least one V-chip expert is skeptical that the inventors will be able to
collect a royalty, however modest. Joel Federman, co-director of the Center for
Communication and Social Policy at the University of California at Santa
Barbara, said he had identified 23 television filtering products that were
either for sale now or would be soon. "There are all sorts of questions, both
nationally and internationally, about who owns this technology," Mr. Federman
said.

   Mr. West and Mr. Gardner received patent 5,550,575.

Demythologizing Gene Therapy

   In Greek mythology, a chimera is a creature made up of the head of a lion,
the body of a goat and the tail of serpent. In science, the word chimera
signifies a molecule that consists of parts that are not found together in
nature.

   Kimeragen Inc., a privately held biotechnology start-up company in Newtown,
Pa., hopes that its chimeric molecules, covered by a patent issued this month,
will turn out to be a powerful new form of gene therapy.

   In conventional gene therapy, a normal gene is injected into a cell
containing a mutated gene in the hope that the new gene will allow the
production of normal proteins. Kimeragen's approach, based on research by Eric
B. Kmiec at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, is to dispatch
synthetic molecules called "chimeraplasts" to repair gene damage or to
deactivate a malfunctioning gene altogether.

   "The molecule lines up next to the abnormality in the gene and uses the
chimera as a template to make the correction," said Gerald L. Messerschmidt,
president of Kimeragen. "We program what correction we want made, but the cell
actually makes the correction with its normal machinery."

   In a recent issue of the journal Science, Dr. Kmiec reported that in
laboratory experiments with blood cells his method repaired 10 to 20 percent of
the genetic mutations causing sickle-cell anemia, which may be a high enough
level to alleviate symptoms of the disease.

   "The Science article uses sickle-cell anemia as a demonstration of how this
technology can repair a gene," Dr. Messerschmidt said. "The same mechanism is
very likely to work for many genes."

   Dr. Kmiec is to be granted patent 5,565,350, which has been licensed to
Kimeragen.

But Try to Make A Pie Out of It

   Jeffrey A. Chapman of Phoenix has patented a "carvable artificial pumpkin"
made from an acrylic-coated polyurethane foam.

   "Members of the public have before now been forced to purchase real
pumpkins," the patent states. "However, real pumpkins are perishable and
therefore will rot after a time. They are messy and smelly to carve. They cannot
be reused in subsequent years."

   By contrast, the artificial pumpkin has none of these drawbacks and is
"durable, nonflammable and carvable," according to the patent.

   Mr. Chapman received patent 5,491,007.

   Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office,
Washington, D.C. 20231.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1996


                             2622 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                            October 28, 1996, Monday

SECTION: Pg. 1, Part A

LENGTH: 1519 words

HEADLINE: Patients aren't trying new cancer treatments Don Finley Express-News
Medical Writer


BODY: Dr. Daniel Von Hoff shakes his head as he reads from a long list of
promising new experimental cancer drugs that nobody seems to want.

   There's BW-1843, a new drug for stomach cancer: "Young Hispanic males are
dying left and right from stomach cancer." There's LU-103793 for colon cancer,
and HMAF, derived from a mushroom, for colon and lung cancers.

   "We've got a new drug for melanoma, called temozolomide. Melanoma! We've
never had anything for melanoma," said Von Hoff, who heads the research arm of
the Cancer Therapy and Research Center.

   "That's what's driving me up the wall now, is we've got this great stuff. And
we can't get anyone to come in for them."

   In San Antonio, and across the country, patients are less likely to enter
into trials of experimental new therapies. The problem worries cancer experts,
since fewer patients mean longer delays in getting new drugs approved.

   "The patients' willingness to participate if offered is still there," said
Dr. Otis Brawley, director of special populations with the National Cancer
Institute. "But what is not there, very frequently, is the offer to participate,
and the willingness by the insurance company to pay for that participation."

   The Cancer Therapy and Research Center's Phase-1 Clinic is one of the few
places in the United States where cancer patients can receive the latest
experimental drugs to emerge from the laboratory. Phase-1 refers to the
earliest, small safety studies required on the long path to federal approval.

   The clinic is located on the second floor of the Grossman Cancer Center,
which opened in 1995 at 7979 Wurzbach Road. A fund-raising campaign to build the
center brought in more than $15 million.

   "Look at what the whole community has done here," Von Hoff said. "You can
hear the frustration in my voice. People in the community have given money.
We've got the compounds, all these treatments. And still there are empty
chairs."

   Last year, only about 500 patients volunteered for clinical trials here. That
was down from 624 the previous year. This year, Von Hoff said, the number will
be in the 400s.

   In 1995 in San Antonio, 1,436 people died from cancer, according to the
Metropolitan Health District. And yet, many of those enrolling in clinical
trials here are from other cities, other states, other nations.

   "Patients come from all over the world," Von Hoff said. "But I'd like to see
more people come from San Antonio. We built the center for them."

   One of those out-of-towners is Hans Adam, 57, of Lubbock. After his colon
cancer spread to his liver, he discussed his options with his doctor.

   "My doctor knew about CTRC, knew they did a lot of clinical trials. He sent
me down here in January," he said. He has flown here regularly to receive a
recently approved drug called CPT-11.

   Adam said it never occurred to him to give up after his cancer spread, as
many do. "My policy is, as long as I can maintain a good quality of life, I'll
keep going."

   CPT-11 was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in July for
colorectal cancer after initial testing in San Antonio, although tests on the
correct dosage - which Adam's treatment falls under - continue.

   Other San Antonio-tested drugs approved this year include Taxotere, a drug
derived from the Yew tree for breast cancer; gemcitabine, the first new drug in
decades for pancreatic cancer; and topotecan, for ovarian cancer.

   Enrollment in clinical cancer trials has dropped across the country at a time
when molecular biology is starting to answer long-kept secrets about how cancer
begins in the cell. That knowledge has led to new and better drugs.

   "It used to be hit-and-miss -grind up the table, lets see if it works," Von
Hoff said. "That's not the case anymore. We've got specific (molecular) targets
for each of these drugs, we know exactly how they work."

   Brawley said the federal government has managed to maintain 25,000 to 30,000
patients a year in clinical trials only by expanding their network of community
doctors and locations experimental drugs are available.

   "The number of patients per doctor has gone down, but the number of doctors
involved has gone up. That is a measure that is only going to work for a short
time."

   Part of the reason, Brawley said, is that for some major cancers there are
fewer studies. For those cancers, science is approaching a dead end, and
researchers have returned to the laboratory to find new and better approaches -
particularly in genetic therapy.

   "We've spent 30-odd years trying to cure metastatic cancer with
chemotherapy," Brawley said. "That works with some diseases. For other diseases
like lung cancer and metastatic colon cancer and pancreatic cancer, it is not
working."

   The success of experimental therapy often is measured in additional months of
life, rather than cures. However, some long-term successes do emerge from
clinical trials.

   One of the most visible of those has been Lloyd Healey, who recently became
the first person ever to drive more than 200 miles per hour in an
electric-powered car.

   Diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 1992, Healey entered into a study of the
drug gemcitabine after standard therapy failed to cure him.

   Healey hasn't been cured, but his cancer is in remission. Of the more than
200 patients that began the initial gemcitabine study, only Healey is still
alive.

   "That's the real benefit of clinical trials," Healey said. "I watched my
eldest daughter graduate from Judson (High school). Now she's at Rice
University, one of the senior leaders and she's carrying just under a 4.0. All
sorts of doors are opening for her, and I never thought I'd ever see her
graduate from high school."

   Insurance coverage, Brawley said, is increasingly a major barrier, with more
insurers refusing to pay for unproven therapies. At many HMOs, patients whose
cancer has spread - making it incurable by standard therapies - are referred
back to the primary care doctor for so-called terminal care under the HMOs
rules.

   "The oncologist no longer takes care of those people, and the new paradigm of
health maintenance organizations is that general internists take care of those
people. General internists don't offer experimental treatments," Brawley said.

   The cost to patients in clinical trials is not the drugs, which are provided
free by the drug companies, but rather the doctor's visits and tests required to
monitor their progress. The cost varies widely depending on the location of the
cancer and the severity of disease.

   Most of these tests would be performed anyway, researchers say, whether the
patient was in a study or not.

   "A number of HMOs have a set rule that if you sign a consent form for an
experimental study, they will not pay for any cancer care - be it experimental
or non-experimental," Brawley said.

   But Von Hoff believes a lot of the problem is awareness, rather than
economics.

   "One of the misconceptions I think people have is they feel we're going to be
experimented upon, that they're going to get placebo versus some other drug. We
don't give placebos. Everybody gets treated with standard therapy versus new
agents. Or after you fail everything, it's the new agents.

   "A lot of times, though, people just don't ask. They'll hear: 'We've
exhausted all the therapy for you Mrs. Jones, there's nothing else you can do.
Why don't you go home with your daughter and live out your last days?' "

   "We need to let the American public know that clinical trials are important,"
Brawley said.

   It was clinical trials, Brawley added, that proved radical mastectomy for
breast cancer, "which we thought was the right thing to do for 75 years," could
be replaced in many cases with lumpectomy followed by radiation. - - -

   A partial list of experimental cancer drugs being studied in San Antonio

   - LY-231514: For breast, pancreatic, colon cancer

   - LU-103793: Colon cancer

   - SU101: Ovarian, brain cancer

   - ONYX015: Head and neck tumors

   - Temozolomide: Melanoma

   - BW1843: Stomach cancer

   - HMAF: Lung and colon cancer

   - MGBG: Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, pancreatic cancer

   - Crisnatol mesylate: Brain cancer

   - Piritrexim Isethionate: Kaposi's sarcoma, bladder cancer

   - DFMO: Brain, breast cancer and cancer prevention in high-risk patients

   - DHAC: Prostate cancer

   - Intoplicine: Various solid tumors

   - Aminopterin: Various cancers

   For information about clinical cancer trials at the Cancer Therapy and
Research Center, call Susan Beardslee at 616-5798.

   Below are additional resources for information about cancer and clinical
trials.

   Telephone help:

   National Cancer Institute: 1-800-4-CANCER

   American Cancer Society, San Antonio chapter: 614-4211.

   Online help:

   Centerwatch: Clinical Trials Listing Service: http://www.centerwatch.com/

   Cansearch: A Guide to Cancer Resources:
http://asa.ugl.lib.umich.edu/chdocs/cancer/

   CancerNet: the National Cancer Institute's online service:
http://wwwicic.nci.nih.gov/

   medicine

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2623 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       OCTOBER 25, 1996 Friday SF EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2446 words

HEADLINE: LONG, WINDING ROAD TO REACH DRUG'S PROMISE

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The scientists at the Institute for Human Gene Therapy were excited as they
discussed the revolutionary drug they had just developed. It targeted an
inherited liver disease so deadly that it kills half of its infant victims
within the first week of life.

   The data from their experiments were good, and institute director James M.
Wilson wanted to launch human trials.

   Sitting at a library conference table were a surgeon, a radiologist, an
expert on animal trials, and a leading authority on the rare disease.

   The date was March 7, 1995. Wilson estimated that trials could start within
six months.

   He was overly optimistic. It would take three times that long to clear all
the regulatory hurdles set up to protect lab animals and patients from
experiments with unproven drugs - especially drugs that change the genetics of
the patient's cells.

   Before the ordeal was over, Wilson's lab would go before five local and
federal review boards, present hundreds of pages of data, and mate 275 mice to
prove that future generations wouldn't be threatened.

   * Wilson was racing to develop the first effective gene therapy against a
human disorder, a breakthrough that could revolutionize medicine's approach to
disease.

   Since coming to Philadelphia in 1993 and setting up the institute at the
University of Pennsylvania, Wilson and other institute scientists had developed
gene drugs against cystic fibrosis and two types of cancer - one involving the
brain and the other the lungs.

   Though he was hopeful that these drugs, which have gone into human trials,
would prove effective, he was especially optimistic about this newest one
because gene drugs seemed to work better in liver cells than most others.

   The new drug was against ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a
disorder of the urea cycle. Through this cycle of biochemical changes, the body
disposes of ammonia - a byproduct of eating protein - by converting it to urea
and eliminating it in urine.

   Almost 50 percent of male babies born to mothers with the genetic disorder
have the defect. Half of these baby boys produce no OTC, an enzyme that turns
ammonia into urea. Without the enzyme, ammonia builds up as soon as the newborn
eats his first meal, plunging him into a coma, brain damage and death.

   The other half have a partial defect and can be kept alive for 10 to 15 years
with drugs and a protein-restricted diet. Only a handful of afflicted babies
have such a mild form of the disease that they live to adulthood.

   Even though OTC strikes only about 100 children a year in this country, a
successful drug would be immensely important because it would constitute the
first clear proof that gene therapy works.

   * Two months after the March meeting, Wilson and Mark L. Batshaw, a world OTC
authority who is chief physician at Children's Seashore House in Philadelphia,
discussed the study at the annual meeting of the National Urea Cycle Foundation,
composed of 115 families dealing with urea disorders.

   Sitting spellbound in a meeting room of the Adam's Mark Hotel on City Avenue,
50 parents, some with their children beside them, listened to Wilson and Batshaw
explain gene therapy and the need for volunteers willing to test a new drug.

   Wilson said a disabled cold virus, called a vector, would be used to
transport the OTC gene into the liver cells of patients. The gene would make the
missing enzyme. This particular virus - an adenovirus - was "extraordinarily
more effective" in delivering genes than vectors tried before, he said.

   It worked, at least temporarily, in sparse fur mice, a species without much
hair that has a disease similar to OTC.

   The two researchers explained that a toxicity trial would first determine
whether the drug was safe. If it was, a second trial would be done to see if it
fixed the genetic defect.

   Batshaw announced that after lunch he would draw blood to identify carriers
and possible test subjects. A few hours later, he was inundated with volunteers.

   * Privately, Wilson and Batshaw grappled with the ethical issue of whether to
test the drug on babies or adults.

   Usually, untried medicines are first given to desperately ill patients who
have no other options.

   Since babies with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency have a 50 percent
chance of dying within the first few days of life, they would benefit the most
from an effective drug.

   And from a research perspective, newborns would be ideal test subjects.
Because they make no OTC, finding any enzyme in them after treatment would prove
the drug was working. It would be harder to prove this in adults because they
make some OTC.

   But Batshaw cautioned against treating babies who had been in a coma for more
than three days. By then, he said, brain damage would be so severe that the
quality of the baby's life would be poor.

   And bioethicists had advised Wilson against using babies because they can't
give informed consent and are unlikely to benefit from a trial designed to test
toxicity.

   Babies posed logistic problems, too: With so few OTC births a year, hospitals
around the country would have to be nimble to contact Batshaw for the drug,
which must be administered within a day or two of birth.

   It would be far easier to recruit adults - mostly afflicted mothers. Even
though they have a less serious form of the disease and make some OTC, 10
percent periodically suffer lethargy, comas or other symptoms, and 1 percent
will die from the disorder.

   Also, Batshaw and Wilson realized that regulatory bodies would be more likely
to approve a toxicity trial in adults than children.

   The first trial, Wilson and Batshaw decided, would use adults.

   * The OTC researchers spent that summer assembling data and preparing
applications for the many committees and agencies that regulate human trials.

   On Sept. 14, 1995, they went before Penn's Institutional Biosafety Committee,
set up to protect the community and university personnel from the dangers of
experimentation.

   Society is so skittish about experiments with genetic material that the
institute had to seek approval from the IBC three times - first when it made the
OTC vector in the lab, then when it started animal experiments, and now that it
was ready to start human trials.

   Two weeks later, the institute went before Penn's Institutional Review Board,
designed to protect people who volunteer for trials.

   Experimentation has become so tightly regulated that even test animals have a
committee - the university's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee - to
make sure that they are used wisely and treated humanely.

   Penn labs can acquire animals for research or teaching only with approval
from this committee, after explaining how each animal will be used, cared for
and disposed of. Approval is necessary even for experiments with eggs, if they
are within 72 hours of hatching.

   The two Penn agencies approved the OTC applications with minor changes.

   On Dec. 4, Wilson and Batshaw boarded the Metroliner for a meeting with the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), a federal agency that until recently
reviewed, with the Food and Drug Administration, all human trials involving
genetic material.

   Wilson was expecting problems because of a negative assessment by Robert P.
Erickson, a University of Arizona genetics professor and RAC member.

   The 17 RAC members sat at a huge conference table at the National Institutes
of Health in Bethesda, Md. To one side were rows of chairs for observers. Unlike
the Penn committees, which confer in private even though they are charged with
protecting the public, the RAC meetings were open.

   Erickson began the meeting saying it was "very difficult to accept" a trial
in which the vector is delivered through an artery leading directly to the
liver. Erickson said he thought that this was impractical for widespread
treatment and that the trials should be deferred until a better vector was
available.

   Another RAC member was concerned about giving a potentially dangerous drug to
healthy people who only carried the defect and were not likely to suffer
symptoms. Until now, gene drugs had only been tested on people facing death.

   Going to the podium, a somewhat tense Batshaw defended the application,
saying that at least 10 percent of the mothers would develop symptoms and 1
percent would die. And there was no way of identifying them beforehand.

   Wilson also responded to the criticism. Delivering the drug through the
artery to one half of the liver was first proposed as a safety measure, Wilson
said, to prevent endangering the entire organ in case the treatment proved
toxic.

   But, he said, baboon studies showed that giving the drug intravenously was
just as safe, so using the artery was probably not necessary.

   After Wilson finished, the matter was put to a vote. As was custom, the
primary reviewer, Erickson, made the motion. He moved to approve the
application, if the drug was delivered intravenously and if the patients least
likely to benefit were excluded.

   The vote was 12 to 1 in favor, with four abstentions.

   "What a victory," Wilson said, as he and Batshaw rushed to catch the
Metroliner back to Philadelphia.

   "Do you realize what they've approved?" Batshaw said.

   For the first time, the RAC had approved a gene therapy trial in which
vectors would be given through the bloodstream to non-terminal patients. It was
a regulatory milestone in this emerging field.

   Now only one obstacle remained before the human trials could begin - getting
approval for an investigational new drug (IND) from the Food and Drug
Administration. This would permit an unlicensed drug to be used in humans.

   It was now nine months since Wilson had decided to do clinical trials.
Getting FDA approval would be the most difficult hurdle.

   * As the OTC drug was making its way through the regulatory maze, Wilson was
becoming convinced that it would be the first successful gene therapy.

   Though scientists have reported isolated successes with gene drugs, none has
worked consistently against any disease.

   Wilson's optimism for the OTC drug was bolstered by the encouraging results
from his laboratory.

   Wilson had been worried that the vector wouldn't produce OTC quickly enough
to save the infants from brain damage. But the sparse fur mice started making
the enzyme within 24 hours of getting the vector.

   Another question was whether the enzyme produced by the vector would actually
prevent ammonia from building up. The mice were inoculated with the vector and
then given a large dose of ammonia. Untreated animals died because they lacked
OTC to process the ammonia. Animals treated with the vector, however, survived
because they were making OTC.

   And Wilson had worried that patients would become immune or allergic to the
vector after a single treatment. But he discovered that could be prevented if
the mice were given a drug to suppress their immune systems.

   It looked as if they were getting around all of the obstacles to successful
gene therapy.

   The big question was whether all of this would work in humans.

   * Wilson, Batshaw and five others on the team went to Washington last Feb. 10
for a pre-IND meeting with the FDA. Wilson didn't want to take a chance that the
FDA would find something missing in the supporting material and request more
data, tying the application up for months or longer.

   His caution was warranted. Because the genes were being delivered through the
bloodstream, FDA officials questioned whether they would be passed on to the
test subjects' children. Accidentally altering future generations is one of the
greatest concerns of this new field.

   The FDA wanted Wilson to prove that this wouldn't happen.

   So, Wilson went home and did more mice experiments, using an extraordinarily
sensitive test called polymerase chain reaction. It showed that genetic material
from the vectors had found its way to the mice's reproductive organs, but Wilson
didn't think this posed any danger to fetuses.

   Wilson sent the new data to the FDA, confident that the IND application would
be quickly approved and trials could start by summer.

   * The FDA did not agree with Wilson. It thought finding the genetic material
in the gonads did pose a potential risk and refused to approve the IND
application.

   Wilson couldn't believe it. Only one in 100,000 cells was being infected with
the vector. Wilson argued that the chances of fetal transmission were
infinitesimal. Requiring the gonads to be completely free of viral material, he
said, would preclude administering any vector by IV - essential if gene drugs
were to be widely used.

   The FDA remained unmoved. It wanted proof that future generations would not
be at risk.

   Wilson went home that night convinced that the FDA was demanding the
impossible - proof that something will never happen.

   Two days later, Wilson had a plan. Assembling his team, he explained that he
wanted to swamp the gonads of 200 male and female mice with the vector, breed
them and then examine the hundreds of resulting fetuses for contamination.

   Since animal tissues and systems tend to behave similarly, the assumption was
that if mice don't transmit genetic material to offspring, then humans won't
either.

   With so many fetuses, it was a tricky and time-consuming study. And it would
delay human trials for several months. But now that Wilson had a plan, he felt
differently about the FDA demands.

   It wasn't such a bad idea, he thought, to put to rest this question about the
offspring.

   * The tedious task of infecting so many mice with the OTC vector, breeding
them, retrieving the fetuses, and checking the tissue for evidence of the vector
fell to 34-year-old research associate Xuehai Ye.

   Working in a fourth-floor lab of the Wistar Institute, Ye spent two months,
night and day, breeding 275 mice and then analyzing 831 fetuses, intently
looking for something his boss was convinced would never be found.

   Last month, Ye reported to Wilson that no fetuses showed evidence of
contamination even though the gonads of their mothers and fathers had been
heavily dosed with the vector.

   Wilson was elated, but not surprised. On Oct. 7, he sent the new data to the
FDA and awaited its decision.

   At 11 a.m. Monday, Wilson, Batshaw and other members of the OTC team received
a conference call from the FDA.

   The FDA officials asked a few questions as Wilson and the others braced
themselves. The FDA decision came almost matter-of-factly. The IND was approved.

   The final regulatory hurdle had been cleared - one year, seven months and two
weeks after Wilson decided to go for it.

   The human trials could now begin.

NOTES: THE QUEST: SEEKING AN ULTIMATE CURE
One in an occasional series on gene therapy research.

CORRECTION-DATE: OCTOBER 26, 1996

CORRECTION:
CLEARING THE RECORD, PUBLISHED OCTOBER 26, 1996, FOLLOWS:
 A photo caption with a story about gene therapy research in yesterday's paper
incorrectly identified one of the scientists as Alan Davis. While Davis is
involved in the research, the person pictured was actually Nelson A. Wivel,
deputy director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO (2)
1. Xuehai Ye conducts tests to win approval for human trials of a gene therapy
to fight a deadly liver disease. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, AKIRA SUWA)
2. James Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy, talks with
FDA officials to learn if human trials can begin. The team includes (from left)
Jennifer Dennin, Allan Davis and Guang-ping Gao. (The Philadelphia Inquirer,
MICHAEL MALLY)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2624 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    OCTOBER 25, 1996, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 929 words

HEADLINE: A QUILT OF THEIR OWN
 Women with breast cancer stitch memorial of struggle

BYLINE: Elaine Herscher, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    When a group of quilts honoring women with breast cancer went on display at
Golden Gate Park earlier this week, people stood three-deep waiting for their
chance to take in the words and images.

   Some stayed a long while, arms around one another, thinking about something
they had been through or someone they had lost.

   Their creators say the quilts, which are circulating widely for the first
time in connection with Breast Cancer Awareness Month, are a potent symbol of a
cruel disease that, despite better detection, still kills at an alarming rate.

   ''Women who have breast cancer needed a voice. There was no creative way for
them to speak about having this illness,'' said Cindy Perlis, who runs the
project as the director of Art for Recovery at University of California at San
Francisco and Mount Zion Medical Center.

   Unlike the AIDS Quilt, which is now the size of 24 football fields and
commemorates only those who have died, the four breast cancer quilts are both a
memorial to the dead and a venue of expression for people living with the
illness.

   Some of the panels are ironic, some angry, some contain stunning art and
others raw images by women who would never call themselves artists.

   ''When I started this project, women asked me if I would censor what they
did. I told them absolutely not,'' said Perlis. ''This is about expressing their
spirit. It is not about creating a beautiful image.''

   More than 100 women have contributed to the project, which Perlis hopes will
gain national status. The quilts were started at a time when the disease is
being detected earlier -- more women are being diagnosed and treated sooner
because mammograms and self-exams are becoming a routine part of American
women's health care.

   Scientific advances have also offered hope. This month, a Richmond biotech
company reported it has genetically altered a common virus so that it destroys
tumors. And earlier this year, researchers investigating the flawed genes that
cause hereditary breast cancer discovered that in their normal form, the same
genes can halt or shrink the growth of human breast cancers. That advance raises
possibilities for new drugs and even gene therapy for many types of breast
tumors.

   The bad news is that women are still getting and dying from the disease in
huge numbers, especially in the Bay Area, which inexplicably has the highest
incidence of breast cancer in the nation. It is estimated that 19,000 American
women will be diagnosed next year. It is likely that 4,600 of them will die.

   ''We're not making progress here,'' said Barbara Brenner, executive director
of Breast Cancer Action in San Francisco. ''Every day we've got more women being
diagnosed, and we aren't doing any better than 30 years ago. No drug has been
approved for breast cancer treatment in four years. For a woman diagnosed today,
the treatment she would get for early- stage disease is the same treatment she
would have gotten 20 years ago.''

   The means of treatment consist largely of surgery of various degrees up to
mastectomy, a complete breast removal, chemotherapy and radiation. These are all
crude means of eradicating the diseased tissue, not cures.

   By the time quilt contributor Kay Newhouse was diagnosed with breast cancer,
she had already been through two complicated, painful bone graft surgeries to
treat damaged vertebrae from a skiing accident. She was still wearing a neck
brace when her gynecologist found a hard lump in her breast.

   ''I didn't have quite the usual reaction of other women, like 'Oh, my God,
what has happened to my life.' I had been through so much it was like, 'What
else is new?' '' Newhouse said.

   Newhouse, a Berkeley artist, went through a lumpectomy, radiation and seven
months of chemotherapy, which made her hair fall out in handfuls. Less than a
year later, her doctor found another lump and, tired of being under the knife,
she asked him to do a mastectomy and get it over with. Newhouse, 56, has been
cancer-free for three years.

   No one would wish such a disease on herself, but some women who have survived
breast cancer -- Newhouse included -- say the crisis changed their lives in good
ways.

   ''I was at a plateau in my life where everything was so safe and
unadventurous, and this whole thing just turned my life upside down,'' she said.
''It wasn't until I got sick that I was writing and drawing, and I got this fire
in my belly and it was very exciting. I finally had something to say.''

   Newhouse poured her experience into a book titled ''Catch Me.'' And she made
three quilt panels -- one depicting a woman whose bald head is festooned with
fanciful baubles and colorful string. It bears the caption: ''No hair? Well,
then.''

   Citing early detection as the best bet for survival, the American Cancer
Society recommends monthly breast self-exams for all women over age 20; clinical
exams every three years for women 20 to 40, and every year after 40; and a
mammogram every one to two years from age 40 to 50, and every year after 50.

   The quilts were displayed on Sunday at the annual Race for the Cure,
sponsored by the Susan B. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation. They continue on
exhibit until Monday at Nordstrom in San Francisco Centre, at San Francisco
Mayor Willie Brown's breast cancer summit November 9 at Yerba Buena Center for
the Arts, and in the lobby of Mount Zion Medical Center through the end of
November. Perlis hopes the quilts will continue traveling through the Bay Area.

   Anyone interested in making a quilt panel can call Cindy Perlis at Art for
Recovery at (415) 885-7221.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2),(1) Survivor Jeanne Andersen (left) and her mother, Mary
Nelson, reflected on one of the quilt panels, (2) Breast cancer survivors gave a
group hug onstage at Race for the Cure, at Sharon Meadows in Golden Gate Park ,
PHOTOS BY LEA SUZUKI, THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1996


                             2625 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        October 24, 1996 Thursday Final

SECTION: Business Pg. 1

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: Businesses make pitches to potential investors

BYLINE: RICK ROMELL

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The Wisconsin Venture Fair returned to Milwaukee on Wednesday, looking to
arrange the marriage of money and ideas that could develop into the next
Hewlett-Packard, or, more realistically, the next Promega Corp.

   Speaking on behalf of companies producing everything from collaborative
software to doggie treats, 13 entrepreneurs made their pitches to about 40
potential investors gathered at the Wisconsin Club, once the opulent mansion of
19th-century Milwaukee business titan Alexander Mitchell.

   The idea wasn't to strike quick deals in the club's teak-covered rooms, but
rather to introduce eligible young businesses to financial patrons.

   "I call it a coming-out party, because the dance starts from this day
forward," said Ken Syke, director of the Wisconsin Innovation Network
Foundation, which sponsors the event.

   The foundation screened 67 applicants to come up with the 13 companies that
made presentations Wednesday.

   Although the group included Madison's Charlee Bear Farms Inc., a marketer of
dog-training treats, and the Milwaukee-based Omanhene Cocoa Bean Co., a producer
of fine chocolate, the great majority of companies were high-tech firms.

   That's typical for the venture fair, said Jan Eddy, owner of Wingra
Technologies and a member of the event's steering committee. Venture capitalists
are interested in firms in high-growth markets, and that typically means
advanced technology.

   Among such firms on hand Wednesday:

   Mirus Corp., a year-old gene therapy company in Madison.

   TreviMed Inc., a start-up Brookfield firm holding technology that can be used
to detect the DNA damage that leads to cancer and genetic disease.

   Framework Technologies Corp., Milwaukee, a developer of software that lets
engineers and others scattered throughout the world work together on the same
project at the same time.

   "Hopefully, there are a few Hewlett-Packards here," foundation Chairman
Robert Brennan said.

   That would be a long shot. Computer giant Hewlett-Packard employs 100,000
people and brought in nearly $32 billion in revenue last year. The biggest
company on hand Wednesday had sales of $2.7 million a year.

   But the venture fair, begun in 1984, has had its successes, most notably
Promega. The Madison biotechnology company, one of the first fair participants,
now employs 420 people.

   Brennan stressed the importance of fostering entrepreneurship an area, he
said, in which Wisconsin's otherwise strong economy lags behind the East and
West coasts. Luring a big auto factory to a state creates jobs, he said, but so
does nurturing the growth of small Wisconsin firms.

   "The good thing about this is these people are already here," Brennan said.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1996


                             2626 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  October 23, 1996, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. A-13, FIRST PERSON

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: I'M LIVING PROOF OF MEDICINE'S MIRACLES;
BUT WE MUST FIND A WAY TO COVER THE UNINSURED

BYLINE: ARLEN SPECTER

BODY:


   I can personally report on the miracles of modern medicine.

   Three years ago, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan detected a benign
tumor at the outer edge of my brain. The tumor - called a meningioma - was
removed by conventional surgery with five days of hospitalization and five more
weeks of recuperation.

   A small regrowth was detected by a follow-up MRI this June. On Oct. 11, it
was treated with high-powered radiation from the ''gamma knife.'' I entered the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in the morning and left the same
afternoon, ready to resume my regular schedule. Like the MRI, the gamma knife is
a recent invention, coming into widespread use in the past decade.

My own experience as a patient has given me deeper insights into the American
health-care system beyond the U.S. Senate hearings, where I preside as chairman
of the appropriations subcommittee with jurisdiction over health and human
services. I have learned that 1) our health-care system, the best in the world,
is worth every cent we pay for it; 2) patients sometimes have to press their own
cases beyond the doctors' standard advice; 3) greater flexibility must be
provided on testing and treatment; and 4) our system has the resources to treat
the 40 million Americans not now covered, but we must find the way to pay for
it.

   Health care in America costs $ 1 trillion out of our $ 7 trillion economy.
The Senate and House subcommittees on health have taken the lead to raise
funding for medical research for the National Institutes of Health.
Notwithstanding budget cuts generally, we added $ 820 million this year to bring
the total research budget to $ 12.7 billion.

   For that investment, we have seen dramatic breakthroughs in gene therapy and
advances in treatment for heart disease, cancer, AIDS, diabetes, Alzheimer's,
etc. Scanning devices such as satellite imaging used by the CIA are now applied
to detect breast cancer. Complex computerization assists MRIs to define the
scope of treatment.

It isn't enough to have such machines. We have to use them more extensively.

   In the spring of 1993, I complained to many doctors about a tightness in my
collar and light pains running up the sides of my head. All tests proved
negative. The symptoms persisted.

   I asked for an MRI scan. The doctor said it wasn't indicated. I insisted. I
got it. The MRI showed a benign tumor the size of a golf ball between my brain
and skull.

   While MRIs are expensive, those costs can be reduced by around-the-clock use
of the machine. The marginal costs of operating it from midnight to 8 a.m. are
small. The inconvenience to the patient is worth it. The extra cost to insurance
companies would be more than made up by preventing more serious illness and
higher costs later.

   While my June 1993 operation was performed by one of the finest surgeons at
one of the best hospitals, I was among the approximately 15 percent of cases in
which tiny cells at the margin apparently caused a small regrowth. When the
regrowth was detected in June, the general recommendation was surgery. A
minority of doctors suggested consideration of a relatively new procedure known
as the gamma knife. Since there was no urgency, I took some time to study the
alternatives.

   Most doctors, even some with extensive experience with the gamma knife,
insisted on conventional surgery. Why? 1) Because that was the traditional
approach; 2) because there was more long-term follow-up data on surgery even
though successful gamma knife procedures were on record for more than 20 years;
and 3) because the tumor was in a good location for surgery. Somehow the gamma
knife, it was argued, should be reserved for locations which the surgeon's knife
could not reach. But my tumor was also in a good spot for radiation.

   My inquiries among doctors in the United States and Sweden (where the gamma
knife was invented) disclosed almost universal agreement that the gamma knife,
if unsuccessful, would not make the tumor more difficult to treat. Later surgery
could always be utilized. The noninvasion gamma knife eliminated the risk of
anesthesia and infection from surgery.

   With a high success rate from the worldwide experience of 40,000 gamma knife
procedures and 5,000 meningioma procedures like my own, it was hard to
understand why it was not used more. I found that Dr. L. Dade Lunsford at the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center had the most experience in the United
States with the gamma knife. Since 1987, his team had used the procedure 2,100
times. Only one of his 270 meningioma patients had required later surgery. Dr.
Lunsford estimated the overall success rate at 98 percent.

   So I checked into UPMC at 6:15 on Oct. 11, had a brace attached to my head
and took another MRI. All I required was local anesthesia before pins were
pressed to my head to make the brace secure. I then watched the computer
calculate how much radiation should be applied to the tumor and its margin, as
shown on the MRI scan.

   At about 9:30 a.m., my head was inserted into a 500-pound helmet with 201
holes that directed cobalt beams from all directions to focus on the meningioma.
Each beam was relatively minute, but the confluence was high-powered. There were
seven bombardments of radiation for three minutes or less. In between, my
position was altered with one change of the helmet.

At about 10:50 a.m., the radiation was completed and a head compress was applied
for two hours. After lunch and a brief conversation with Dr. Lunsford, we
briefed the news media. I left the hospital in mid-afternoon to spend the night
in a local hotel and then resume my schedule the next day.

   I felt fine almost immediately. I was right back on the squash court and back
to my 14-hour days traveling across Pennsylvania. An MRI will be taken in six
months. I have some apprehension as to how it will all work out, but so far, so
good. I feel very lucky!

   Nothing is more important than a person's health. We have done a great job in
the United States in producing the greatest health-care system in the world. I
am aware that it is better for some, like myself, than for others. I am
convinced that America has the doctors, nurses, hospitals, medical equipment,
pharmaceuticals, etc. to provide for all our people. My pending legislation
provides a plan to do that within the current $ 1 trillion expenditure.

   Informed, aggressive patients can do much to help themselves.

   Arlen Specter, a Republican from Philadelphia, represents Pennsylvania in the
U.S. Senate.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, DRAWING: T. Benson: Health is wealth. It's expensive, too.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1996


                             2627 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    October 22, 1996, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C, Business Digest

LENGTH: 1266 words

HEADLINE: Service business suggested for reuse of Fort Ritchie

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   Services, not industry, hold the greatest promise for reuse of Fort Ritchie,
the consulting firm of Hamilton, Rabinovitz & Alschuler told Washington County
officials yesterday.

   The study, presented to the executive council of the Local Redevelopment
Authority, narrows the list of possible uses for the 638-acre Army post, which
the military will vacate by October 1998. The authority hopes to have a reuse
plan by February for the post, which employs about 1,900 people.

   The installation's remote location in northern Washington County near the
Maryland-Pennsylvania border is ill-suited for industrial or office parks, but
may be right for a conference or training center, telemarketing and
telecommuting, or a retirement community, the study concluded.

Health Science buying three research buildings

   Health Science Properties Inc. announced a purchase of three Gaithersburg
scientific research buildings for $ 17.3 million yesterday, the California-based
real estate investment trust's third area acquisition in a few months.

   Health Science's acquisition of the West Watkins Mill Road properties from
Copley Real Estate Advisors of Boston demonstrates its commitment to expand in
the Maryland-Washington-Virginia corridor, said Joel S. Marcus, the company's
vice chairman. The 137,000-square-foot project is fully occupied by Sandoz
subsidiary Genetic Therapy Inc. and Medimmune Inc.

   Health Science last month spent $ 14 million to buy two biotechnology
buildings in Gaithersburg from Copley. The REIT has targeted the Washington
suburbs because of proximity to the National Institutes of Health and other
medical-related institutions.

D'Alonzo, president and CEO of GenVec, resigns

   Thomas W. D'Alonzo has resigned as president and chief executive officer of
GenVec. The Rockville-based biotechnology company, which has been attempting to
develop ways to get therapeutic genes to the site of diseases for treatment, did
not name a successor.

   Herbert J. Conrad, of GenVec's board of directors, has assumed the position
of chairman of the privately held company. He said in a brief statement that
D'Alonzo "has made a lasting impression at GenVec and has put the company in a
position to capitalize on its strong technology."

   Conrad said the company was thankful that D'Alonzo had worked "so diligently
to assure a smooth transition during the change of leadership."

Tracor receives contract for work on Navy systems

   Tracor Applied Sciences Inc., of California in St. Mary's County, said
yesterday that it has won a five-year contract worth up to $ 35.8 million for
work on combat and communications systems for the Navy.

   The work will support the Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division at the
Patuxent River Naval Air Station.

   The Maryland company will design, integrate and provide training for combat
and communications systems.

Kiddie Academy names Bizzarro its new CEO

   Kiddie Academy International Inc., a Bel Air-based national operator and
franchiser of child care centers, has named Angelo D. Bizzarro, a director, as
its chief executive officer.

   Bizzarro, former president and chief of Caterair International Inc., will
succeed George Miller, who has been CEO since 1995. Miller will remain board
chairman.

Canada's Agrium to buy Viridian for $ 1.02 billion in stock

   Canadian fertilizer company Agrium Inc. said yesterday that it has agreed to
buy Viridian Inc. for $ 1.02 billion (U.S.) in stock, which would make Agrium
the largest maker of low-cost, nitrogen-based fertilizer in North America.

   The transaction was driven by growing fertilizer demand throughout the world,
and by healthy corporate cash flows and earnings, analysts said.

   Viridian, based in Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta, is Canada's largest maker of
nitrogen, phosphate and sulfate fertilizers. Agrium, based in Calgary, Alberta,
makes nitrogen, potassium and phosphate fertilizers.

Viacom, MCA nearing deal involving networks

   Viacom Inc. is close to a deal with MCA in which Viacom would pay $ 1.45
billion and exchange its 50 percent interest in the Sci-Fi Channel for the 50
percent of the USA Network it does not already own, executives close to the
discussions said yesterday.

   These executives cautioned that the details of the agreement had yet to be
ironed out. But they said the transaction would come in a settlement of a
lawsuit filed against Viacom by Seagram Co., which bought MCA last year.

   The Seagram suit contended that Viacom had violated their partnership in the
USA Network by starting other cable services, including MTV, without Seagram's
consent. Viacom countered that Seagram simply wanted to force Viacom to sell its
cable services to MCA.

Molson told it must give up Coors rights in Canada

   An arbitration panel says Molson Breweries of Canada must give up its rights
to brew and distribute Coors Brewing Co. products in Canada because it allowed
another American brewer, Miller Brewing Co., to buy a stake in Molson.

   The three-member panel in Toronto also ordered Molson to give Coors any
profits derived from Coors products since April 2, 1993, Coors officials said.
The panel ruled Molson violated its licensing agreement with Coors by allowing
Miller to buy into Molson without Coors' consent. Miller is the second largest
U.S. brewer and Coors is third.

   Damages owed to Coors are to be determined early next year.

Germany is first to approve new vaccine

   Germany is the first nation to approve a new vaccine which can inoculate
patients against four illnesses at once, German health authorities said
yesterday.

   The vaccine, using the active ingredient Infanrix DTP+Hib, is manufactured by
British-American drug giant SmithKline Beecham PLC and inoculates patients
against tetanus, diphtheria, whooping cough and bacterial meningitis.

   Previously, children needed to be vaccinated twice to be protected against
these diseases. Combination vaccines are becoming more popular with governments
and school officials because they save on the cost of multiple injections.

Former Kmart executive accused of securities fraud

   A former Kmart Corp. executive was accused yesterday of providing inside
information to a Texas real estate broker who allegedly earned $ 263,835 by
investing in an office supply chain sold to Kmart in 1993.

   The complaint, filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission, was the
latest of several legal actions that have stemmed from investigations by federal
officials and Kmart itself of fraud and wrongdoing at its real estate
department.

   The complaint, filed in U.S. District Court in Detroit, accuses former Kmart
executive Michael Garzoni of tipping real estate broker Mark Aronds to talks
between Kmart's OfficeMax subsidiary and BizMart, which Kmart OfficeMax bought
in 1993.

Morningstar to acquire Presto for $ 133.5 million

   Morningstar Group Inc. said it will buy Presto Food Products Inc., a closely
held maker of toppings, creamers and desserts, for $ 133.5 million in cash.

   Dallas-based Morningstar makes nondairy creamers and frozen deserts in the
eastern United States. Its brands include International Delight coffee creamer
and Second Nature, a refrigerated no-cholesterol egg substitute. Presto, based
in City of Industry, Calif., sells nondairy creamers, mostly on the West Coast.

   The acquisition, expected to close within 30 days, follows two years of
consistently strong earnings performance and significant debt reduction since C.
Dean Metropoulos became chairman and chief executive of Morningstar.

   Pub Date: 10/22/96

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1996


                             2628 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 22, 1996, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: After slump, IPOs find a cautious following;
BOSTON CAPITAL / STEVE BAILEY & STEVEN SYRE

BYLINE: By Steve Bailey & Steven Syre, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The market for new stock offerings that created instant fortunes in the
spring but fell out of fashion by the end of the summer has climbed back to new
heights of popularity.

   Six initial public stock offerings or secondary deals are scheduled for
pricing in Massachusetts alone this week.

   Nationwide, the 468 deals in the pipeline are a new record.

   But the market that once snapped up everything in sight has become very picky
on price. By all accounts it is no longer a seller's market and the number of
stocks that double in price during their first weeks of trading are slim indeed.

   More typical is the experience of ArQule Inc. of Medford, a biomedical
company that went public Wednesday and has held steady in trading about 75 cents
above its $ 12 IPO price.

   "The markets are more cautious, maybe a little smarter than they were six
months ago," said ArQule chief financial officer James Fitzgerald.

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, a gene therapy company,
hit the market at 15 the day after the ArQule IPO and have since slipped to 13
5/8.

   Among 53 IPOs launched in October, the average new stock had appreciated by
14 percent yesterday. More than one in every four had broken even or lost money
for initial investors in the early going and only one had doubled in price.

   The so-called aftermarket for new shares may be subdued compared with big
price surges of the spring, but initial pricing is also under more pressure.

   The growth-stock mutual funds behind the institutional appetite for new
issues stopped buying when small stocks plunged in midsummer and their flow of
new customer cash briefly ebbed. The same portfolio managers are flush with
money again but exercising more caution.

   "The portfolio managers are going to be less indiscriminate," said David
Menlow, publisher of the IPO Financial Reporter. "They just went in and put
money down without thoughts of a pullback before. Now they don't want to be
burned twice in the same year."

   Seventy percent of all IPOs launched in May kicked off at a value above the
underwriter's price-forecast range, according to Renaissance Capital Corp., an
institutional research and money management firm in Greenwich, Conn. The other
30 percent went off at a price within the range.

   The story was different in September. Of all the offerings last month, 38
percent went off above the estimate, 46 percent within the range and 16 percent
below the expected price forecast.

   Investment bankers agree their institutional customers continue to be tougher
on new deals as a result of the small stock correction in July.

   "I think the market is just more conservative on its values than it had been
in 1995 and early 1996," said Ben Howe, a managing director at Montgomery
Securities' Boston office.

   But skittish mutual fund managers are only half the story behind the IPO
price squeeze. The sheer number of offerings that investment bankers are trying
to sell keeps a damper on prices.

   This week alone, 48 deals worth about $ 2.1 billion are scheduled to hit the
market. Next week, another 35 IPOs worth $ 2 billion are expected to be for
sale.

   "There's still an enormous storm of IPOs," said William Smith of Renaissance
Capital Corp. "It's a nor'easter of IPOs and it keeps on going. We don't see any
abatement in the number of deals out there, which is the main reason we're not
seeing the great premiums we saw earlier."

   By Menlow's count, the 468 IPO and secondary offerings in some stage of sale
this week surpass the old record of 466 set on June 14. Deals began to fall off
the shelf a short time after that mark was set and the total number of offerings
shrunk to 381 by Aug. 16.

   The two largest Massachusetts deals scheduled for pricing this week are both
secondary stock offerings, by CareMatrix Corp. and Sapient Corp.

   Among the IPOs, two software companies are expected to raise the most money.
Giga Information Group is expected to pull in about $ 40 million and Bitstream
Inc. should raise about $ 27 million.

   One deal originally on this week's pricing schedule, MediQual Systems Inc. of
Westborough, has been postponed, according to Menlow.

 In the pipeline

   New offerings scheduled for pricing this week. Company Location Type Amount*
CareMatrix Corp.  Needham Secondary $ 106.0m Sapient Corp.  Cambridge Secondary
$ 48.9m Giga Information Group Cambridge IPO $ 40.0m Bitstream Inc.  Cambridge
IPO $ 27.0m Cubist Pharmaceuticals Cambridge IPO $ 22.0m QC Optics Inc.
Burlington IPO $ 5.7m * secondary offering values based on number of shares sold
and yesterday's closing price. IPOs valued at midpoint of price estimates
SOURCE: Bloomberg Business Ne

GRAPHIC: CHART, GLOBE STAFF CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1996


                             2629 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         October 22, 1996 Tuesday Metro

SECTION: News Pg. 1

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Cancer center to try gene therapy
 UW site's tests are state's first on people

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The state's first test of human gene therapy is about to begin at the
University of Wisconsin's Comprehensive Cancer Center. Researchers will use a
"gene gun" to shoot DNA-coated gold pellets into the tumor cells of certain
cancer patients.

   People with the deadly skin cancer melanoma or cancers called soft-tissue
sarcomas will be candidates for the therapy. Such tumors are difficult to stop,
fast to recur and quick to spread, according to UW cancer surgeon David Mahvi,
who will lead the research effort.

   The gene gun was developed by Auragen, a firm formerly known as Agracetus, of
Middleton. The helium-powered device fires the tiny pellets coated with genetic
material designed to help focus the patient's immune system so it can better
fight the patient's cancer.

   The process involves removing about a cubic centimeter of tumor from a
patient about 50 million cells. The cells will be treated with radiation to kill
the cancer and then shot with the gene gun to impregnate them with new DNA, the
genetic material that tells cells what proteins to produce and in what quantity.
In this case, the new DNA will direct the tumor cells to secrete a substance to
make the patient's white cells better able to recognize and fight cancer.

   The cells then will be returned to the patient via an injection.

   "The theory behind all this is that if you can do something to help the cells
to see the tumor better, they'll leave that area and go around the body and take
care of (cancer) at other sites," Mahvi said. "You can do this whole procedure
in about four hours."

   The hope is that in the future surgeons would "be able to pull this gun out
at the time of operation and shoot it into tumors you can't take out," such as
inoperable liver or pancreatic tumors, Mahvi said.

   UW and Agracetus had to seek and receive approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to use the gene gun and from the National Institutes of Health's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for the procedure they'll use in the medical
portion of the experiment.

   Lab experiments using human cells in test tubes and live mice have shown the
treatment has potential to fight existing cancer and defend against new tumors.

   If it works in human tests, a major question is how long the benefit will
last. Some 58% of mice "vaccinated" with the genetically altered cells remained
tumor-free for more than 10 months, vs. only 4% of untreated ones, according to
a study published in a medical journal by Mahvi and colleagues.

   Other, similar techniques to boost the immune system to fight cancer have
been tried against melanoma, and about 20% of patients have had tumor remission,
Mahvi said.

   "We have seen people get very durable responses," he said.

   The UW clinical trial hopes to enroll 12 patients who will be followed for
life.

   If the treatment works and patients later relapse, researchers will have to
carefully consider what the next step should be, Mahvi said. Federal approval
would be required to repeat the treatment a second or third time, he said.

   That certainly would be tempting, he admitted, if a patient responded the
first time around.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1996


                             2630 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        October 20, 1996, Sunday , FINAL

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1, Part F

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Literature

BYLINE: Judyth Rigler Express-News Book Editor


BODY: Buy the book - Sold-out Book & Author Luncheon to benefit cancer research

   There's one thing you can say for sure about the 1996 Book & Author Luncheon:
It'll be one for the books.

   Seven books, to be exact.

   Set for Friday at Marriott Rivercenter, the fifth annual event has been sold
out for months. While the main course is a best seller, and the dessert - a cake
shaped and decorated like a book - is a prize winner, the big attraction for the
1,000 attendees is the food for thought that comes from hearing about new books
and meeting the writers who cooked them up.

   Perhaps the most nourishing thing about the luncheon, however, is that all
proceeds go toward cancer research and the hope for a cure.

   Co-sponsored by the San Antonio Express-News, Baptist Memorial Healthcare
System and Cancer Therapy & Research Center, the luncheon has netted more than
$180,000 in its first four years.

   The real beneficiary of these funds is the Phase I Drug Development Program,
made possible through a National Cancer Institute grant awarded to CTRC and the
University of Texas Health Science Center. In Phase I studies, a new anti-cancer
drug, previously tested in the laboratory, is given to humans for the first
time.

   Patients benefit both directly and indirectly, as luncheon proceeds go into a
trust that can be tapped to provide for the special needs of patients
participating in the research. Also, part of the program is a new oncology
research unit opened last summer at St. Luke's Baptist Hospital, with the focus
on gene therapy.

   This year's authors, and their books, are:

   -Floyd Cooper, illustrator, "Satchmo's Blues" (Bantam Doubleday Dell Books
for Children) - a picture book for ages 6-10 about young Louis Armstrong and his
dream of saving enough money to buy a brass cornet.

   -Susan Eisenhower, "Mrs. Ike: Memories and Reflections on the Life of Mamie
Eisenhower" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux) -biography of Mamie Eisenhower by her
granddaughter that reveals a heroic and magnetic personality who triumphed over
obstacles and survived great tragedy.

   -Stephen W. Frey, "The Vulture Fund" (Dutton) - financial thriller, already
sold to Hollywood for $1 million, about a Wall Street rising star who gets
caught up in a high-level game of financial risk.

   -Anne Lindsay Greer, "Contemporary Mexican Cooking: Famous Chefs' Recipes for
the World's Greatest Mexican Specialties" (Gulf Publishing) - the best-loved
recipes of more than 20 chefs and restaurateurs in the Southwest, compiled by a
food expert.

   -Richard Lederer, "Fractured English" (Pocket Books) and "Pun and Games"
(Chicago Review Press) - a new collection of language blunders, all for real,
and a book for kids that proves it's never too early to begin playing with
words.

   -Prudence Mackintosh, "Just As We Were: A Narrow Slice of Texas Womanhood"
(University of Texas Press) - a revealing look at the world of privileged,
educated, well-married and well-connected Texas women, from the inside out.

   Gretchen Burkholder, Pam Kirkpatrick and Lenore Prisco are co-chairs of the
fifth luncheon which, like its predecessors, was sold out months ago with no
advertising and no invitations mailed. They credit the event's founder, Karen
Norman, and her co-chairs, Caroline Walker and Terry Walder, with building a
firm foundation with a well-planned event and a team of more than 100 volunteers
who return to work hard each year to make it even better.

   "The Book & Author Luncheon has given me an opportunity to work with great
volunteers in our community, to support cancer research and to emphasize the
importance of reading and books. That's a winning combination," Kirkpatrick
said.

   "It's one of the best-organized and most effective volunteer activities with
which I've ever been involved."

   Fred R. Mills, president and CEO of Baptist Healthcare System, agrees.

   "The Baptist is fortunate to be part of such a prestigious affair on two
counts," he said. "We are gratified that St. Luke's Baptist Hospital is host to
the vital research being done by the Cancer Therapy & Research Center, and we
are pleased to play a role in this unique fund-raising event that helps make
this cancer research possible.

   "We appreciate the opportunity to benefit from this highly successful effort.



   "We are most grateful for the many dedicated volunteers who work so hard to
coordinate the event, and to the Express-News for making it possible. Community
partnerships such as this multiply our individual efforts to provide the highest
quality of health care possible." - - -

   1996 Book & Author Luncheon

   AUTHORS: Floyd Cooper, Susan Eisenhower, Stephen W. Frey, Anne Lindsay Greer,
Richard Lederer, Prudence Mackintosh

   WHEN: Friday, Oct. 25. 10 a.m. book sales & signing. 11:30 a.m. luncheon and
author talks. 1:30 p.m. book sales & signing (Tickets are sold out)

   WHERE: Marriott Rivercenter Hotel

   WHY: To benefit the Phase I Drug Development Program at St. Luke's Baptist
Hospital

   SPONSORS: San Antonio Express-News, Baptist Memorial Healthcare System,
Cancer Therapy & Research Center

   NEW EVENT: Twig Book Shop/Cappy's reception and book signing. 5-7 p.m.
Friday, free and open to the public. Book sale proceeds go to Phase I Drug
Development Program.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2631 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 20, 1996, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. X08

LENGTH: 1857 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE

BODY:


   FIRE ON EARTH

   Doomsday, Dinosaurs and Humankind

   By John and Mary Gribbin

   St. Martin's. 256 pp. $ 23.95

   CHICKEN LITTLE, we now know, was not wrong -- just misguided. Thanks to
modern science, it's clear that the sky is falling, has been for 4.5 billion
years, and will continue to do so with disconcerting ferocity until cosmic
closing time. The heavens are just full of stuff (asteroids, meteors, comets and
a miscellany of rubble) that has a good chance of whacking the Earth sooner or
later. The inventory of that celestial armamentarium -- and the likelihood of an
ultimately ruinous Big Splat -- are the subjects of this morbidly mesmerizing
book by two prolific science authors.

   In a work that is part science history, part ballistic apocalypse, the
Gribbins explain in splendidly lucid prose how researchers came to believe that
dinosaur extinction 65 million years ago was caused by a six-mile-wide object
that smacked into what is now eastern Mexico. They also review evidence of more
recent cataclysms such as the 1908 meteor that exploded over Tunguska, Siberia,
producing a fireball that was, by conservative estimates, "roughly a thousand
times as powerful as the nuclear blast that destroyed Hiroshima" -- and it was
only about a football field in diameter. The dust blown into the upper air
glowed so brightly that for two nights you could read a newspaper at midnight
across Europe. Along the way, we learn why it's likely that dislodged pieces of
Mars would be flying around the solar system, how 300 tons of organic
interplanetary dust settle onto Earth every year, and why the hundreds of
asteroids that cross Earth's orbit are worrisome.

   The biggest surprises, however, come in the extensive discussion of comets.
There are, we learn, maybe 100 trillion of them in the Oort Cloud (at the
outermost periphery of the solar system) and environs. Since most comets are
merely "dirty snowballs" made up of ice and dust, they might seem a trivial
hazard. But some, it turns out, have depressingly solid cores and are loomingly
huge -- including numerous "supercomets" 200 miles in diameter. Those, the
Gribbins write, "could represent the biggest long-term threat to the environment
here on Earth." There are 35,000 such objects in the inner reaches of the solar
system, and their trajectories are often chaotic and thus hard to predict.

   Under the circumstances, the authors note, recent proposals to aim nuclear
weapons at incoming blobs from space may not be far-fetched at all: "If comet
impact is the way the world as we know it will end, as things stand today we
will probably have less than three months' warning of our doom." Stay tuned.

   -- Curt Suplee

   BEGINNING LIFE

   By Geraldine Lux Flanagan

   DK Publishing. 120 pp. $ 19.95

   IF THIS book were wordless, its wondrous photographs alone would be enough.
In a succession of arresting color images, Beginning Life depicts how a human
being develops from conception to birth.

   There's the egg magnified 2,000 times, looking like an alien planet. There's
an intrepid sperm cell fighting its way through a thicket of mucus to gain
entrance to the uterus. There are photos (obtained from test-tube
fertilizations) of translucent clumps of dividing cells: four, eight, 16. Then
the clump rearranges itself until, by four weeks, it has formed an embryo a few
millimeters long, with head- and tail ends, a mid-line and minuscule arm buds.

   The images of the fetus are equally astonishing. During the second month, a
paddle begins to transform itself into a fingered hand; a lidless eyeball
stares. In a picture taken in the 19th week of pregnancy, a fetus with sealed
eyes sucks its thumb, veiled in delicate folds of membrane.

   Flanagan, also author of The First Nine Months of Life, collected the
pictures from researchers, photographers, photo libraries and other sources. She
complements the photos with a vivid, detailed description of how a pair of fused
cells gives rise, over the course of 40 weeks, to a fully developed infant. It's
laced with intriguing facts (the fastest sperm can reach the egg as quickly as
half an hour after intercourse; fetuses of women who experienced a 1980
earthquake in Italy were hyperactive in the womb for up to three days
afterwards; flavorings of foods consumed by the mother, such as garlic or curry,
may reach the fetal taste buds via the amniotic fluid).

   This is an ideal book for expectant parents or for introducing a school-age
child to the facts of human reproduction. Beginning Life will make you marvel
anew at the multiple transformations that take place during a pregnancy.

   -- Susan Okie

   SEX AND THE ORIGINS OF DEATH

   By William R. Clark

   Oxford University Press. 224 pp. $ 19.95

   THE INEVITABILITY of death is a relatively recent improvement on life. More
than three billion years ago, when living things first arose on the planet,
there was simply no such thing. Our primordial single-celled ancestors might die
by accident or by wandering into a nutrient-poor environment. But they didn't
have to expire. Nor do today's bacteria: If given sufficient chow and wholesome
surroundings, they'll just keep dividing cheerfully until the end of time.

   Advanced life forms, however, are condemned to certain death. It is the
ultimate sacrifice we make for the potential improvement of the biotic
commonweal. This is a hard truth, and UCLA cell biologist William Clark does an
exemplary job explaining and apologizing for it.

   "Death did not appear simultaneously with life," Clark writes, but evolved
only after our cellular forbears started playing around with sex. Instead of
dividing by simple fission, they began sharing DNA in a way that ensured
continuous variation and a means of repairing errors in the genetic code. But
that also left them with two sets of DNA. One was employed in sex and
sequestered in special germ cells (sperm and eggs in the case of humans); the
other was used to direct body cells' day-to-day housekeeping. And there's the
problem. "Unrecombined somatic cell DNA," Clark writes, "becomes not just
redundant but irrelevant. It could also become dangerous" by accumulating errors
over time, causing problems of which cancer is the most pernicious.

   Nature remedied this problem by inventing programmed cell death, a built-in
suicide routine which can be switched on as needed and limits your body cells to
an effective maximum of 50 divisions. And it's needed frequently. Clark
describes the many ways in which life depends on obligatory cell death (the
"default state" of many neurons), explains how the immune system exploits the
routine, and ends by musing on the differences between death at the cellular and
corporeal levels. It's an intellectually exciting and often lyrical trip to the
strange zone where philosophy meets phylogeny.

   -- Curt Suplee

   THE EDGE OF THE UNKNOWN

   101 Things You Don't Know About Science

   And No One Else Does Either

   By James Trefil

   Houghton Mifflin. 355 pp. $ 23

   JAMES TREFIL makes sense of science for the rest of us. That's what has made
books like his Science Matters: Achieving Scientific Literacy (with George Mason
University colleague Robert M. Hazen) popular. His latest effort is in the same
mold. It's a book made for the bedside table or the bathroom reading rack,
perfect for enjoying a bit at a time.

   Trefil lays out what he calls the 10 biggest questions, including such cosmic
stumpers as "Why do we age?" and "How did life begin?" He then moves on to 91
other big questions about everything from quasars to killer bees. His real
expertise is in physics, but he writes that he was surprised to find that many
of the "most interesting and compelling frontiers in science today are not in
physics or even in cosmology but in biology."

   Yet while Trefil is indeed a brilliant explainer of physics and related
sciences, when it comes to biomedical sciences his gift of explanation doesn't
have the advantage that comes from profound depth of knowledge. And he is one
opinionated pedagogue. He raps Congress on the knuckles for cancelling funding
for the Superconducting Supercollider, the $ 10 billion atom smasher he said
could have brought the kinds of discoveries that would keep us from becoming
"just a footnote in history." But his plug for genetic therapies -- which hold
great promise but have so far produced little but disappointment -- is overly
boosterish, like reading those gee-whiz predictive pieces from the old Popular
Science.

   Ultimately, little is actually explained in these three-page chunklets; much
of science firmly resists being reduced to bite size. But these mini-lessons get
the mind working, catch you up on the latest thinking in these fields, and just
might get you in the mood to do more exploring on your own.

   -- John Schwartz

   QUEST FOR PERFECTION

   The Drive to Build Better Human Beings

   By Gina Maranto

   Scribner. 335 pp. $ 25

   THIS IS history as warning. The science of new birth technologies is rolling
us down the path to eugenics, according to author Gina Maranto, and scientists
have shown no propensity to rein in their drive to manipulate human reproduction
because of ethical concerns. By her reckoning, with the advent of methods for
examining the genes of test-tube embryos to decide whether they're worthy of
implantation, we're heading for Brave New World.

   But if you're willing to accept the author's deep distrust of science, Quest
for Perfection is a fascinating chronicle. Maranto traces society's urge to
build better babies all the way back to ancient Sparta, where military elders
examined each newborn infant and ordered that the "puny and ill-shaped" ones be
abandoned in a chasm. She describes the centuries-long effort to solve the
mysteries of reproduction and development: Malpighi's meticulous studies of
chick embryos, the microscopist Leeuwenhoek's shocking observation of "living
creatures" swimming in his own semen and finally -- in 1827 -- Karl Ernst von
Baer's discovery of the elusive human egg.

   As soon as they understood, scientists began to tinker. Starting in the 1870s
with experiments on test-tube fertilization in animals, the field of assisted
reproduction moved inexorably toward the event that began the IVF boom: the
birth in 1978 of Louise Brown, the world's first test-tube baby. That sparked
the international growth of clinics competing for the money to be made from
infertile couples. Governments, particularly our own, failed to regulate the
burgeoning new field, and abuses and scandals quickly followed.

   Maranto's biggest worry is the current trend among artificial reproduction
centers toward offering "preimplantation diagnosis" of embryos' genetic
characteristics, such as sex and predisposition to diseases. Next, she fears,
will come efforts to predict athletic ability, IQ or height, and then the
development of gene-altering techniques. The more we lose control of our
environment, she writes, the more we fantasize that we can control the destiny
of our offspring: "We want our children to be what we cannot: above the mundane
world, immortal, ourselves incarnate."

   -- Susan Okie


GRAPHIC: Photo, from "beginning life", Electron magnification of sperm hanging
on in a channel to a female egg. Sperm can wait for several days in the
fallopian tube.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1996


                             2632 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 18, 1996 Friday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 041

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: Business Briefcase

BODY:

   ADM PROBE: Illinois-based Archer Daniels Midland Co. said yesterday that one
of two executives being investigated by the Justice Department in connection
with a price-fixing scheme was retiring from the agricultural products giant and
the other was taking a temporary leave. The company said Michael Andreas, vice
chairman and son of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, was taking a temporary leave of
absence, and that Terrance Wilson, a vice president in charge of corn refining,
has retired. ADM on Tuesday pleaded guilty to two counts of pricing-fixing and
agreed to pay $ 100 million in fines to the federal government.

   HEALTH DEAL: California-based Tenet Healthcare Corp. said it will buy OrNda
HealthCorp for about $ 3.22 billion in stock and assumed debt to add 50
hospitals, including the Massachusetts market. The combined company's annual
revenue will rise to about $ 8.5 billion. The acquisition, which comes after
about three months of talks, is expected to create $ 70 million in cost cuts
after a year, the companies said.

   DOW WOW: U.S. stocks rose to records for a second day yesterday. The Dow
Jones Industrial Average surged 38.39 to 6059.2 and the Standard & Poor's 500
Index rose 2.58 to 706.99, both records. The benchmark 30-year Treasury jumped
about 3-4, or $ 7.50 per $ 1,000 bond, pushing its yield down 6 basis points to
6.80 percent.

   IPO GOES: Cambridge-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a developer of gene
therapy treatment to spur red blood cell growth in anemic patients, held its
initial public offering, valuing the company at $ 250 million. Transkaryotic
Therapies sold 2.5 million shares at $ 15 each to raise $ 37.5 million. The IPO
represents a 15 percent stake in the company. It had been expected to sell the
shares for $ 13 to $ 15 a each. Shares closed unchanged at $ 15 in trading of 3
million.

   LIBERTY MOVE: Liberty International, a subsidiary of the Liberty Mutual
Group, said yesterday it has acquired a controlling interest in Companhia
Paulista de Seguros, Brazil's seventh largest property and casualty insurer. The
transaction is valued at $ 105 million for a 100 percent controlling interest in
Paulista. In addition to its acquisition, Liberty International announced that
it will invest up to $ 50 million in Paulista over the next several years.

   U.S. OFFICE: Washington-based U.S. Office Products Co. said it acquired five
companies including Bay State Computer Group of Boston and agreed to buy 25
others, paying a total of about $ 269 million in stock and cash. The purchase of
Bay State moves U.S. Office Products into the computer-services business for the
first time. Bay State has about $ 80 million in annual revenue, U.S. Office
Products said.

   ORAVAX SHARES: Cambridge-based OraVax Inc.'s shares dropped 26 percent after
a clinical trial on urease, one of the company's lead products, found that the
ulcer vaccine was less potent than expected. The disappointing study results
mean OraVax and its partner must reformulate the vaccine to make it more
powerful - adding millions of dollars and at least one year to the development
process, analysts said. Its partner is Pasteur Merieux Connaught, a unit of
France's Rhone-Poulenc SA. The oral vaccine was designed to treat and prevent
peptic ulcers caused by Helicobacter pylori, or H. pylori, bacteria. OraVax fell
2 5-8 to 7 3-8 in trading of 192,400 shares, more than five times its
three-month daily average. The stock had risen 32 percent in the past two weeks
amid investor and analyst hopes for the trial results.


LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1996


                             2633 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 18, 1996, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: UT prof cites 'smoking gun' in tobacco-cancer link

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A chemical in cigarette smoke causes genetic damage that can
be linked to lung cancer - the first time researchers have
shown how tobacco can cause the deadly disease, a Texas-based
scientist said Thursday.

   In a report published in today's issue of the magazine
Science, Moon Shon-Tang, an associate professor of
biochemistry at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, described how he determined that a metabolized form of
the chemical called benzo[a]pyrene damages a key gene that
normally prevents the development of lung cancer.

   Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the
nation.  More than 170,000 new cases are diagnosed each year.

   Most such cancers are associated with smoking.

   Tang, who holds a doctorate in his field, called his findings
the ""smoking gun'' that demonstrates the tobacco-cancer link.

   He hopes that researchers eventually can use this information
to find ways to block the chemical's damaging effects and thus
prevent lung cancer.

   Tang, who works at Anderson's Science Park in Smithville,
based his work on the understanding that benzo[a]pyrene, or
BP, is a known carcinogen and the fact that a gene called p53
is commonly mutated in the tissues of patients with lung
cancer.

   But how the chemical caused cancer was a mystery.

   The amount of BP found in the smoke of an average cigarette
varies from 20 to 40 nanograms - 20 to 40 billionths of a
gram.  The BP is metabolized in the lung to a substance called
BPDE.

   Tang and his co-workers added BPDE to cells grown in the
laboratory.  They then used techniques of molecular biology to
determine where on the p53 gene the chemical BPDE attached.

   The place where the chemical attached most likely would be the
spot where it caused the gene to mutate, he said.

   When he and his team looked for the chemical attachment, they
found it at three places on the p53 gene.  These three places
commonly are mutated in lung cancer.

   Tang said the most likely explanation is that BPDE damages the
gene, allowing the malignant change to take place.

   ""The p53 gene is the guardian of genome stability,'' Tang said.

   In other words, p53 acts as a brake to prevent genes from
becoming malignant.

   It is an anti-oncogene.  A person's cells are protected when
they contain only one normal form of the gene.

   But when both of the p53 genes in the cell become mutated, the
risk of developing cancer increases greatly.  Tang said that
p53 mutations are found in half of all malignant tissues.

   He said the most likely spot for intervening in the cancer
process is to find a way to prevent BPDE from binding to the
gene.

   One area where BPDE tended to hit hardest is a ""hot spot'' for
mutations in lung cancer, Tang said.

   Tang hopes to do another study to look for similar damage in
the tissues of heavy and light smokers and then compare that
to the damage seen in nonsmokers.

   He also hopes to look for the genetic changes in the normal
tissues of patients with lung cancer.

   Dr. Jack Roth, a gene therapy researcher at Anderson,
has been testing a gene therapy that restores a normal p53
gene to cells in which it is mutated.

   In that way, he hopes to halt the malignant changes that lead
to lung cancer as well as other cancers.

   While he has demonstrated that transferring the normal gene is
possible, he has not yet gotten it into enough cells to cure
the cancer.


LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1996


                             2634 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1996 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 18, 1996 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: STATE; Pg. F03

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: Merging drug firms to cull 400 state jobs

BYLINE: EDWARD R. SILVERMAN

BODY:

   More than 400 New Jerseyans will lose their jobs at several factories and
warehouses run by Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Sandoz Ltd., which are in the process of
laying off thousands of employees worldwide as they look to complete their $27
billion merger early next year.

    The decision to close some of its facilities in East Hanover, Summit and
West Caldwell is part of a plan to reshuffle more than 1,200 workers at 11
manufacturing and distribution facilities scattered around the country and in
Puerto Rico.

    When the merger was announced last March, Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz said they
planned to move quickly to integrate their operations and eliminate 10 percent
of their global workforce or about 10,000 jobs in order to save $1.3 billion
over three years. New Jersey is expected to bear much of the brunt. That's
because the two Swiss drug makers employ a total of 4,500 people statewide,
including Ciba-Geigy's U.S. headquarters in Summit and Sandoz U.S. headquarters
in East Hanover. Cuts in Summit Ciba-Geigy has already announced plans to
consolidate operations in Summit that would involve eliminating or transferring
at least 1,500 of the more than 2,000 jobs there, along with the proposed sale
of much of its 88-acre corporate campus.

    Moreover, an internal memo distributed last summer noted that some
departments in the U.S. drug business will lose much more than 10 percent of
their staffs, although the drug makers subsequently insisted that the targeted
savings also included other costs to be slashed.

    However, some of the 435 local factory and warehouse jobs to be eliminated
from Summit, East Hanover and Caldwell won't take place for several months or
more, because the two drug makers are still awaiting merger approval from the
Federal Trade Commission.

    Although the European Union has already cleared the deal, the FTC may not
finish its review until next March, and possibly as late as next June, according
to sources inside Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz. Once approved, the companies will be
called Novartis. FTC concerns But FTC officials apparently are worried about
investments in biotechnology firms. The two drug makers have spent billions to
purchase or form alliances with several high-flying U.S. biotech companies.

    Some of the most prominent examples includes Ciba-Geigy's 49-percent stake
in Chiron Corp., a leading biotech company. Sandoz, meanwhile, owns two other
well- known players, Genetic Therapy Inc. and SyStemix Inc.

    Last spring, Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz executives said they hoped to have FTC
approval this fall. More recently, Daniel Vasella, a Sandoz executive who will
become chief executive of the combined companies, said permission may not come
until early next year.

    Yesterday, an FTC spokeswoman declined to comment. Todd Forte, a Ciba-Geigy
spokesman, acknowledged that biotech issues are "outstanding," but downplayed
any delays. "I think it's a rumor," he said. "We're still making progress and
anticipate approval this fall." More setbacks A regulatory delay isn't the only
setback the two drug makers have suffered while attempting to forge their
merger. Last month, James Callahan, who was named recently to run their combined
U.S. drug business, suddenly resigned.

    A replacement is now being sought, but isn't expected to be named for
months.

    For local factory and warehouse workers, the waiting is over. In Summit,
where Ciba-Geigy makes Ritalin, a controversial medication used to treat
attention deficit disorder, 150 factory jobs will be eliminated. A few jobs will
be transferred to East Hanover, but most will be moved to Suffern, N.Y.

    In East Hanover, where Sandoz makes Lescol, a cholesterol fighter, and
Clozaril, which is used to combat schizophrenia, 250 jobs will be axed. These
jobs will eventually be moved to Colorado. However, 20 warehouse jobs may be
added, leaving 100 manufacturing and distribution positions. This should take at
least four years.

    And in West Caldwell, 35 warehouse jobs will be phased out over the next
year. In all three sites, however, the drug makers expect to begin notifying
employees shortly.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                             2635 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   OCTOBER 17, 1996, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1016 words

HEADLINE: A Big Bet on Biotech
 Tularik turns to private hands for $ 60 million

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Led by some of the most successful pioneers in biotechnology, tiny Tularik
Inc. is now blazing new financial ground for the cash-starved industry.

   The South San Francisco drug-development company just completed a $ 60
million private placement. Analysts believe it was the single biggest private
financing of a biotech company.

   The company, whose chairman is Genentech Inc. co-founder Robert Swanson,
considered going public to raise money. But the market for biotech stocks was
too weak this summer. So the company turned to institutional investors who
provided cash in exchange for an estimated 20 percent stake in the company.

   ''Most investors who invest regularly in biotech already knew something about
Tularik,'' said Mark Edwards, managing director at Recombinant Capital Inc., a
San Francisco consulting firm. ''Now, for people who weren't paying attention,
this suggests this is one hot company.''

   All of its six major research programs, which include AIDS, immune system
disorders and obesity, target $ 1 billion-plus markets.

   But the real appeal stems from the company's promising scientific approach.
The basic idea starts by identifying the particular strands of DNA involved in
major diseases. Scientists then try to figure out just how the culprit genes
really function, hoping to find drugs to regulate the genes' activity.

   Tularik hopes to end with a traditional ''small molecule'' drug -- a bottle
of pills.

   That's an important departure from both classic biotech and the budding new
field of gene therapy -- both of which end up with products that must be taken
by injection.

   Whether it will pan out is anyone's guess. Most of the world's major
pharmaceutical companies are pursuing similar research strategies in alliance
with smaller genetic research firms.

   All that's clear for now is that a fair number of bets are being laid that
Tularik might be onto something.

   Combined with earlier rounds of financing, the new deal gives the 5-year-old
company an implied market value of roughly $ 320 million.

   That's more than all but a handful of publicly traded biotech firms, many of
which have at least one drug candidate in advanced human trials.

   By contrast, Tularik is still in the rodent-testing phase in all of its
programs.

   ''Tularik has done a fantastic job of identifying novel targets for drug
design in some important clinical areas,'' said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor of
Bioventure View, an industry publication in San Mateo. ''What remains to be seen
is whether they can make a drug.''

   Analysts said the company owes its early head of steam to a star-studded
roster of top management, including Swanson and chief executive David Goeddel, a
top Genentech scientist during that company's legendary early years.

   Goeddel, 45, said another strong suit is the array of alliances Tularik has
forged with several global pharmaceutical powers.

   These include development deals with Merck & Co., Sumitomo Pharmaceuticals
Co. and Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. In addition, Pharma Vision 2000 AG, a large
Swiss investment company that is a major shareholder in drug giants Roche
Holding AG and Glaxo Wellcome, took a $ 32.8 million stake in Tularik's latest
offering in exchange for a 10 percent piece.

   Most other companies at Tularik's stage probably would be headed for an IPO,
allowing early-stage investors a chance to cash out, but Goeddel said the time
for a public offering did not seem right.

   By mid-summer, he noted, ''the market had turned pretty bad in terms of
biotech IPOs.''

   Choosing to raise money in the private markets instead, the company thus
avoided landing on a lengthy list of cancelled stock-market debuts this summer.

   There are also some advantages of staying private during the hit-and-miss
phase of drug discovery.

   ''If you're private, you don't have to expose your mistakes,'' said Jennifer
Van Brunt, editor of BioWorld Financial Watch, a unit of Atlanta-based American
Health Consultants.

   But Goeddel made it clear that he doesn't plan to cling to private status
much longer. An IPO is now expected sometime next year.

   ''It's still our intention to do a public offering when the market is right
and we feel our progress at the time is right,'' he said.

 CHART:
          LARGEST PRIVATE BIOTECH FINANCINGS
 .
     BAY AREA
                                       Amount raised
 Company                  Date         (in millions)
 Tularik                  10/96                  $60
 Affymetrix                9/95                  $39
 Norian                    8/92                  $34
 Affymax                   4/91                  $26
 Vivus                     6/93                  $25
 Affymax                  12/89                  $25
 Aviron                   11/95                  $22
 Coulter                   5/96                  $22
 Gilead Sciences           9/91                  $20
 Gryphon                  12/95                  $19
 .
     ALL U.S.
 Tularik                  10/96                  $60
 Hybridon                 10/95                  $57
 Ariad                     3/92                  $46
 PathoGenesis              6/92                  $42
 Affymetrix                9/95                  $39
 Cell Therapeutics         8/92                  $38
 Human Genome              5/93                  $37
 Norian                    8/92                  $34
 ICOS                      6/90                  $33
 Darwin                    4/96                  $30
 .
 Source: Recombinant Capital (www.recap.com)
 EC:

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), CHA,(1) David Goeddel, president and CEO of Tularik, was a
force at Genentech, (2) Matthew Narbut, a chemist at Tularik, tested new drug
leads at the company's South San Francisco laboratory , BY FREDERIC LARSON, THE
CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1996


                             2636 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   October 16, 1996, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 185 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme extends pact with cancer institute;
BUSINESS BRIEFS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge said it entered into a three-year collaborative
research and development agreement with the National Cancer Institute to develop
a gene therapy approach for treating metastatic melanoma, an inoperable form of
skin cancer that kills 8,000 people annually. The agreement comes after an
18-month collaboration between Genzyme and Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, the National
Cancer Institute's chief of surgery, on developing a way to stimulate the body's
immune system to battle metastic skin cancer. Forty patients have undergone a
safety clinical trial with first results to be reported early next year, Genzyme
noted. The announcement expands the collaboration, which is based on Rosenberg's
identification of the genes that produce antigens to fight melanoma tumors. By
injecting metastatic skin cancer patients with tumor fighting genes, researchers
hope the antigens will stimulate the immune system to attack the tumor cells.
Currently, there is no effective treatment available for metastatic melanoma.
Genzyme declined to release the financial terms of the agreement.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1996


                             2637 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1996 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     October 16, 1996 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-01

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: Amgen expansion clouded Ground broken today as stock price wavers

BYLINE: By David Algeo, Denver Post Business Writer

BODY:
 Amgen Inc. will start construction today of a massive, $ 200 million
manufacturing plant in Longmont, where the biotechnology giant will produce
Epogen, a genetically engineered protein that stimulates the growth of red blood
cells.

   "This is excellent news for Longmont," said research analyst Charles C.
Duncan of Chatfield Dean & Co. "This will build the tax base immensely, and they
are going to have to staff that facility."

   But as the groundbreaking ceremony gets under way, a pesky cloud looms
overhead. Amgen's stock price has wavered in recent months as another
biotechnology company has touted its plans to develop a drug that would compete
with Epogen. Amgen shares closed at $ 59.38 yesterday on the NASDAQ National
Market System, down $ 3.69.

   Plans by Cambridge, Mass.-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. to create its
own version of Epogen won't affect Amgen's construction plans, said Amgen
spokesman David Kaye.

   "Zero impact," said Kaye, based at Amgen headquarters in Thousand Oaks,
Calif. "We're extremely confident in our patent position."

   Indeed, Amgen recently sent Transkaryotic a letter, saying the Massachusetts
company is misleading prospective investors and that it will be difficult or
impossible for Transkaryotic to produce an Epogen-like drug that doesn't
infringe on Amgen's patents.

   "We very vigorously defend our patents, and we have a good batting record,"
Kaye said.

   Amgen executives and Longmont officials will assemble at the construction
site at 11 a.m. today for a groundbreaking ceremony. The 400,000-square-foot
plant will be built on 72 acres in southwest Longmont's Meadow View Business
Park.

   The project is scheduled for completion in 1998. Food and Drug Administration
approval of the plant is expected in 1999.

   Initially, the plant will employ 200 to 300 people, some of whom will
transfer to Longmont from existing Amgen operations in Boulder and Thousand
Oaks.

   Sometime after the turn of the century, Amgen may expand the Longmont plant,
manufacturing several drugs and employing as many as 1,500 people there, Kaye
said.

   The company currently manufactures Epogen in Thousand Oaks. The drug was
approved by the FDA in 1989 as a treatment of anemia in kidney-dialysis
patients. Epogen is a genetically engineered form of eryrthropoietin, a protein
that signals bone marrow to make red blood cells, which carry oxygen to body
cells.

   When the kidneys fail to produce erythropoietin, many dialysis patients
contract anemia, becoming so weak that they find it difficult to function
normally. Epogen supplements the kidneys' supply of erythropoietin, stimulating
production of red blood cells.

   A study published in May's Journal of the American Society of Nephrology said
Epogen improved patients' vitality, social and physical functioning, mental
health and other measures of the quality of life.

   As Epogen sales have flourished, so has Amgen's financial standing. The
company's third-quarter earnings, released yesterday, rose 23 percent from a
year ago, totaling $ 179 million.

   For the quarter, Epogen sales rose 19 percent from a year ago, reaching $ 274
million. Amgen also derives revenue from Neupogen, a drug used largely to treat
infections in cancer patients who are undergoing chemotherapy. Neupogen sales
totaled $ 259 million in the third quarter.

   Despite the company's growing successes, its stock price has faltered in
recent months on news that Transkaryotic plans to start clinical trials next
year of a product similar to Epogen.

   Transkaryotic says it can manufacture erythropoietin through a natural
process, without using the techniques pioneered and patented by Amgen.

   Amgen's patents on Epogen are so broad that they will be difficult or
impossible to get around, regardless of the technology that Transkaryotic uses,
Kaye said.

   "Beyond that, they don't even have a product," he said. "What they have is a
technology    that they think will allow them to make Epogen. They are quite a
bit away from developing it, testing it in humans and bringing it to market."

   That could take years. Meanwhile, Amgen has attained a "fair amount of
credibility in clinical medicine with regard to Epogen's efficacy and safety,"
said Duncan, the Chatfield Dean analyst. Chatfield Dean is a retail brokerage
and investment banking firm.

   "Transkaryotic has a large task in front of it if it is to unseat Epogen,"
said Duncan, who is based in Englewood.

   Amgen also has a variety of other drugs in various stages of testing, he
pointed out. If all are approved by the FDA, they could generate sales of $ 11
billion, Duncan said.

GRAPHIC:  The Denver Post Volatile stock price reflects new competition

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1996


                             2638 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  October 16, 1996, Wednesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: HOUSTON; Big City Beat; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Author to speak on Faberge book

BYLINE: MAXINE MESINGER; Staff

BODY:

   SLOW down for the lowdown: The long-awaited book
''Imperial Easter Eggs"" by Carl Faberge,
co-authored by former Houstonian Lynette Proler and
Tatiana Faberge, is due out any deadline; Faberge is
the great-granddaughter of the late Russian jeweler to
royalty.  Proler, now living in Dallas, will be in Houston Dec.
5 to talk about the book at the Southern Hospitality Luncheon
at River Oaks Country Club.  The annual luncheon benefits the
Museum of Southern History, formerly the Confederate Museum.

   Danielle Ellis is chairing the event, which also
offers fabulous table settings designed by Houston ladies. . .

   .

   Former astronaut and Houstonian Alan Shepard has been
in town this week to play in the Three Amigos Foundation Golf
Tournament Tuesday at Bentwater Country Club.  Golf legend
Gene Sarazen and Miss USA Ali Landry also are
here, all headquartered at the Houstonian. . .

   Longtime Houston magician Walter ""Zaney'' Blaney was
inducted into the Society of American Magicians Hall of Fame
Tuesday in Hollywood; it's the world's oldest magic
organization.  Blaney's daughter, Becky Blaney, has
followed in her dad's footsteps and is a professional magician
and comedian.  She works all over the country.  Right now she's
emceeing Caesars Palace's new Magical Empire in Las Vegas.  She
took the night off Tuesday to be with her dad at his
induction.


   Families Under Urban & Social Attack Inc. (FUUSA) will present
""Motown and Oldies Monday Nite'' at Cody's - In the Village,
featuring Yvonne Washington & the Mix.  FUUSA is an
alcohol and drug prevention/intervention program in the Third
Ward community and was founded by the Holman Street Church.

   Dean Richard Alderman will emcee, and 1996 Man of the
Year Award recipients will be Rice University professor
Lee P. Brown; Bruce Marquis, Houston
Independent School District police chief; the Rev. James
Dixon II; and Don K.Clark, special agent in
charge of the FBI here.  There'll be a silent auction and a
Motown best-dressed contest.  Proceeds go to FUUSA to provide
violence-prevention education and skills enhancement to
minority youths at a high risk of dropping out of school.  For
info, call 747-8872. . .

   Dr. Peter Scardino's second annual invitational golf
tournament will be Nov. 11 at Champions Golf Club.  Eddie
Burke is chairing the tourney, with actor Jerry Lewis
as honorary chair; there's no indication, though, that
Lewis will be here for it.  The event will benefit prostate
cancer research at Methodist Hospital and Baylor College of
Medicine.  In August, Scardino began clinical trials of a
breakthrough treatment for prostate cancer - ""suicide gene''
therapy.  For more info, call 798-8295. . . .

   Dr.Dewey and Lois Campbell celebrated 50
years of wedded bliss recently in Glenbrook United Methodist
Church Fellowship Hall at a reception hosted by their
children.  Some 250 of their nearest and dearest were there,
and the Campbells' close friend, Cantor Robert Gerber,
sang for the crowd - mostly Broadway hits. . . .

   And Len and Lee Jacobs, on hand at the Alley
Gala Saturday night, said they recently celebrated their 50th
at a party hosted for them by their children.  Len has a role
in the Alley's upcoming production of ''Inherit the
Wind. "" . .

   Cherry Whitley celebrated her birthday last week at a
family dinner at the Rivoli.  The high point came when her dad,
Roy Whitley, surprised her with a 1997 BMW.  FYI: She
was elected recently to the board of Citizens for Animal
Protection, which will have its annual black-tie gala Nov. 9
at the J.W. Marriott.  More details on that later.. .

   How time flies!  Milby High School is 70 this year and will
celebrate its birthday with a dinner dance at the Hobby Hilton
Hotel on Oct. 25, followed the next day by an open house at
the hotel from 10 a.m. until 3 p.m. Some of Milby's noted
grads are K.T. Oslin, Felton West, Charles Swindoll,
Adair McGowen, Fentress Bracewell, ex-Houston actor
Ray Stricklyn and former city councilman Frank
Mancuso.  For info, the Milby alumni address is P.O. Box
5463, Houston, Texas 77262-5463.


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1996


                             2639 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 15, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z04; LETTERS

LENGTH: 899 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS

BODY:


   Late-Term Abortions

   I applaud you for publishing David Brown's "Late-Term Abortions: Who Gets
Them and Why" [Cover, September 17]. It reported the facts without any emotional
slant, allowing readers to arrive at their own conclusions.

   I read with particular interest the responses from abortionists and the
related statistics concerning the number of "nonelective" abortions performed
due to "therapeutic indications." This would include any abortion considered
necessary to save the life of the mother or to avoid delivering a child with
genetic defects of some degree.

   In 1954, a woman in Philadelphia was having a very troublesome pregnancy.
Without the benefit of today's sophisticated equipment, the doctor was unable to
determine the cause of the difficulties prior to delivery. In actuality, the
fetus was not in the uterus, but was fertilized and developed in the ovary.

   This rare condition is almost always fatal for the fetus, and the mother is
also in peril. With modern technology, the prognosis would be crystal clear and
would call for a therapeutic abortion.

   Fortunately for me, doctors were not as smart in 1954. I was the baby who
would have been aborted. I'm happy to say that in 1996, mother and daughter (and
two granddaughters) continue to thrive.

   Deborah Marian Warner Toms

   Herndon

   We will always need safe and legal abortion, including late-term. The methods
of performing late-term abortions disturb me. But the thought that, if they get
their way, those opposed to abortion would force a woman to give birth against
her will disturbs me much more.

   Jim Rocca

   Hyattsville

   The discussion of fetal pain during abortion was welcome. To add to the
citations in the article, I offer "Pain and Its Effects in the Human Neonate and
Fetus" by Drs. Anand and Hickey in the New England Journal of Medicine of Nov.
19, 1987.

   The authors cite observations of increases in heart rate and blood pressure
of both pre-term and full-term neonates [less than a month old] undergoing
circumcision or heel lancing. The magnitude of the increases was "related to the
intensity and duration of the stimulus."

   John Naughton

   Silver Spring

   Most anti-abortionists who decry the possibility of causing pain in an
aborted late-term fetus probably do not hesitate to eat meat, thereby killing
creatures who most certainly do feel pain.

   I think our routine, unconscious killing of nonhuman animals for convenience
is morally far worse that the exceptional, considered killing of human fetuses
to preserve women's health and sanity.

   Cecile Lethem

   Alexandria

   I thought the article was an attempt to write in as unbiased a fashion as
possible. I congratulate you for that. I read less than half of it before I
became physically ill.

   I do not know how anyone could not be impassioned about this subject. How can
we, as a caring people, stand by and let these procedures occur?

   I hope your article leads us to a more compassionate view to help make the
right choices: from preventing pregnancies to caring for women who do get
pregnant, along with children.

   Mark Emery

   Herndon

   Hope or Hype?

   Your thoughtful piece "Hope or Hype" [Second Opinion, September 24] helps
bring the biotech/gene therapy story down to earth. I represent an industry
organization of more than 650 companies seeking therapies and cures for AIDS,
Alzheimer's, various cancers, multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease), to name a few.

   The public and, more poignantly, patients are not well served by the enormous
mood and rhetorical swings about "miracles," "revolutions in medicine" etc. We
never use these terms in our efforts to explain biotechnology, gene therapy and
other advances to the public.

   We do talk about hard thinking and hard work in the labs that have begun to
yield results for those who suffer from certain diseases and conditions that up
to now were untreatable.

   I also remind our industry members to not get too exercised about inaccurate
reports in the media about our endeavors. More than 200 years ago, when we made
the choice, we opted wisely for a free over a fair press.

   Your piece was a fine contribution to keeping the record and the readers
straight.

   Carl B. Feldbaum

   President

   Biotechnology Industry Organization

   Washington

   "Hope or Hype" might better have concluded with the message that people
should celebrate the promise and potential of new medical research while
understanding that the results of many of the studies they hear about are
preliminary.

   It is the responsibility of the scientist conducting the research and the
reporter reporting on the results to make this clear. We live in an age when
people want and expect information as soon as possible. Patients deserve the
opportunity to learn about any research that may help their condition, even if
that information is still preliminary.

   Mary Woolley

   Research! America

   Alexandria

   Letters intended for publication must be signed and include the writer's home
address and home and business telephone numbers. Letters may be edited. Although
we are unable to acknowledge all letters, we appreciate the time and value the
viewpoints of those who write. Send letters to Health Section, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071 (FAX: 202-334-6471). Our Internet
address is healthwashpost.com.


GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1996


                             2640 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                        October 14, 1996 Monday, BULLDOG

SECTION: TOWN NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: CHESHIRE MAN ORGANIZES TOURNEY

BYLINE: JOANN W. GODDARD; Courant Correspondent

DATELINE: CHESHIRE --

BODY:

   Paul Drury, a 30-year- old who is afflicted with cystic fibrosis, has
discovered a renewed zest for life.

   Drury had been rendered nearly incapacitated by the disease that slowly
erodes the lungs and digestive tract, breathing only with the help of a
respirator until he received a double lung transplant last May.

   These days, the Cheshire man plays golf and softball. He goes to a local gym
nearly every day where he lifts weights and works out on the aerobic machines.

   "I've got a lot of time to make up for," Drury said. "It's been over four
years since I could do anything."

   Drury's new zest for life includes an interest to help others like him, and
he is organizing and participating in a golf tournament to raise funds for the
statewide chapter of the national Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Drury also hopes
the tournament helps promote awareness of organ donation.

   "100 Holes to a Cure" golf tournament will be held Oct. 21 at the Tower Ridge
golf course in Simsbury. About 15 participants, mostly friends and family
members of Drury, have been seeking donations from sponsors for every hole they
play in the dawn-to-dusk tournament.

   Drury hopes to raise at least $25,000 from the tournament, and all proceeds
will be given to the foundation.

   "Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal genetic disease," said Greg
Hollinger, executive director of the chapter office in Wethersfield.

   The disease is fatal because it causes irreversible damage to the lung and
digestive system. About 30,000 Americans suffer from the congenital disease, and
one in 29 Americans is a symptomless carrier of the recessive gene that causes
the disease, according to Hollinger.

   While there is no cure for the disease, researchers have discovered the gene
that causes the disease, a discovery they hope will lead them to a cure,
Hollinger said. The disease is caused by a genetic flaw that produces an
abnormal protein and causes excessive mucus in the lungs and digestive tract,
Hollinger said. Patients can suffer from frequent infections, which cause
scarring in the organs that further diminishes their capacity, Hollinger said.

   "It can literally make them suffocate within their own lungs," Hollinger
said.

   Possible cures include gene therapy, protein therapy and new pharmaceuticals.
Lung transplants are not considered a cure and are only used in extreme cases,
Hollinger said.

   Drury was diagnosed with the disease when he was 2 years old but he did not
feel the drastic effects until he was a freshman at the University of
Connecticut in Storrs. In the spring of that year, one of his lungs collapsed
and he underwent an operation. The following year, the other lung collapsed.

   Drury's illness kept him out of school for a few semesters but, after six
years, he received his degree in economics.  Also an artist, Drury was never
able to pursue a career because his illness began getting worse.

   "My job was my health," Drury said.

   He believed that his only chance was a transplant, a radical operation that
is usually not recommended for patients as weak as Drury. He traveled to
Chicago, where the waiting list for a transplant was shorter than in other areas
of the country. Shortly after he arrived in Chicago, Drury said he was
hospitalized for respiratory failure and he was placed on a respirator. Several
weeks later, a 28- year-old man died of a brain aneurysm and his family donated
the lungs, which were transplanted to Drury. Drury left Chicago three months
later, able to breathe on his own for the first time in years.

   "I remember that first breath of fresh air," said Drury. "It was wonderful."

   Drury realizes that the transplant is only a temporary remedy for his
illness, but he said he considers himself fortunate to have lived longer than
the average cystic fibrosis patient, who often does not reach the age of 30.

   When he is not playing golf, Drury paints and teaches art classes. He plans
to pursue a career in teaching elementary education.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1996


                             2641 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

          October 14, 1996 Monday, 5E WEST HARTFORD FARMINGTON VALLEY

SECTION: TOWN NEWS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: GOLF OUTING TO AID CYSTIC FIBROSIS GROUP

BYLINE: JOANN W. GODDARD; Courant Correspondent

DATELINE: CHESHIRE --

BODY:

   Paul Drury, a 30- year-old who is afflicted with cystic fibrosis, has
discovered a renewed zest for life.

   Drury had been rendered nearly incapacitated by the disease that slowly
erodes the lungs and digestive tract, breathing only with the help of a
respirator until he received a double lung transplant last May.

   These days, the Cheshire man plays golf and softball. He goes to a local gym
nearly every day where he lifts weights and works out on the aerobic machines.

   "I've got a lot of time to make up for," Drury said. "It's been over four
years since I could do anything."

   Drury's new zest for life includes an interest to help others like him, and
he is organizing and participating in a golf tournament to raise funds for the
statewide chapter of the national Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Drury also hopes
the tournament helps promote awareness of organ donation.

   "100 Holes to a Cure" golf tournament will be held Oct. 21 at the Tower Ridge
golf course in Simsbury. About 15 participants, mostly friends and family
members of Drury, have been seeking donations from sponsors for every hole they
play in the dawn-to-dusk tournament.

   Drury hopes to raise at least $25,000 from the tournament, and all proceeds
will be given to the foundation.

   "Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal genetic disease," said Greg
Hollinger, executive director of the chapter office in Wethersfield.

   The disease is fatal because it causes irreversible damage to the lung and
digestive system. About 30,000 Americans suffer from the congenital disease, and
one in 29 Americans is a symptomless carrier of the recessive gene that causes
the disease, according to Hollinger.

   While there is no cure for the disease, researchers have discovered the gene
that causes the disease, a discovery they hope will lead them to a cure,
Hollinger said. The disease is caused by a genetic flaw that produces an
abnormal protein and causes excessive mucus in the lungs and digestive tract,
Hollinger said.

   "It can literally make them suffocate within their own lungs," Hollinger
said.

   Possible cures include gene therapy, protein therapy and new pharmaceuticals.
Lung transplants are not considered a cure and are only used in extreme cases,
Hollinger said.

   Drury was diagnosed with the disease when he was 2 years old but he did not
feel the drastic effects until he was a freshman at the University of
Connecticut in Storrs. In the spring of that year, one of his lungs collapsed
and he underwent an operation. The following year, the other lung collapsed.

   Drury's illness kept him out of school for a few semesters but, after six
years, he received his degree in economics.  Drury was never able to pursue a
career because his illness began getting worse.

   "My job was my health," Drury said.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1996


                             2642 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       OCTOBER 13, 1996 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1425 words

HEADLINE: THEY OPTED TO DROP OUT OF A DOG-EAT-DOG WORLD< PET-SITTING INDUSTRY IS
PURRING.

BYLINE: Andrea Knox, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Soon after Lynne Morgan quit the rat race, she knew she'd be going to the
dogs.

   As in Baker the poodle puppy. Emma and Winston, black and yellow Labs. Harley
the Bernese mountain dog. Ricki the Pomeranian.

   It was the right choice, says the professional pet nanny, four years after
dumping a 14-year career as a medical administrator.

   So her canine clients jump and slobber all over her? That's fun, especially
compared with the wrenching decisions she had to make in balancing the finances
of an HMO-affiliated medical practice against patients' needs for medical care.

   So she has to clean up the occasional poodle poop? Not a problem for someone
who was twice merged out of jobs and knew how unpleasant that could be.

   So she's still working 12 hours a day, except that now she never gets a day
off? The work is energizing instead of enervating. As owner of Aunt Lynne
Pampers Pets, in Gulph Mills, Morgan spends much of her time outdoors, with
companions who wriggle with excitement when they see her coming. She didn't get
much of that as executive director of a big medical practice and, before that,
as head of several HMOs.

   Pet-sitting isn't a new idea. Neighborhood kids always walked dogs and fed
cats to earn pocket money. But in the last decade, it has become a thoroughly
adult business opportunity, attracting entrepreneurs who range from
stay-at-homes looking for part-time income to corporate dropouts such as Morgan
seeking a saner way of life.

   There are about 2,500 professional pet-sitting firms in the United States
today, up from about 300 five years ago, says Patti J. Moran, the president of
Pet Sitters International, in King, N.C., one of two national trade
associations.

   At least two factors have created openings for adults in the pet-sitting
arena. Kids have ditched dog-walking in favor of after-school activities or jobs
in malls and fast-food outlets. And high-income professionals, who sometimes opt
for pets instead of children, are often inclined to be as fussy about pet care
as parents are about day care.

   "We see pets becoming surrogate children, and you only want the best for your
child," says Moran.

   Although dogs and cats are the mainstays of most businesses, pet-sitters are
also called on to care for rabbits, hamsters, snakes, ferrets, iguanas and
birds. And sitters may do more than walk, feed and clean up after animals. One
of Lynne Morgan's regular jobs is taking a Yorkshire terrier to visit her owner
in a nursing home.

   Moran of Pet Sitters International tells the story of one sitter who complied
with a customer's request to continue his routine of showering with his parrot
and blow-drying the bird afterward.

   To be sure, adult pet-sitters charge more for their services than teenagers.
In the Philadelphia area, the going rate for a visit that lasts 20 to 25 minutes
is $9 to $12 for one pet, and about $2 for each additional pet. For that, the
customer should get a sitter who is insured, perhaps even bonded, and more
reliable than a teenager, advises Pet Sitters International.

   What the sitter gets, besides a more relaxed lifestyle, is a disposable
income that can be as little as a third of what he or she was pulling down in
corporate life.

   Morgan, for example, grossed $49,000 last year but had less than half of that
left to spend after paying for expenses that included her car, business
insurance, health insurance, retirement-plan contributions, and membership in
business associations.

   She shrugs off her pay cut as unimportant.

   "You can only buy so many antiques and things, and I'd already bought all I
cared to have," says Morgan, whose previous job was eliminated in 1992 when Blue
Cross-Blue Shield bought the 31-doctor, 11-site medical practice she was
running.

   'ALL THAT STUFF'

   Since then, she has let others do the killer jobs - doctor, nurse, executive,
lawyer. She's content to walk and sweet-talk their pets, who otherwise might
become rammy from loneliness.

   "Many of these managers aren't different from what I was," says Morgan, 50.

   "I know what they go through. Even those who don't travel may be working
12-hour days and going to business dinners and all that stuff in the evening, or
having doctors' meetings at the crack of dawn. I feel good about making life
easier for them."

   But while the lifestyle may be more relaxed, the responsibilities aren't
negligible.

   In last winter's blizzard, for example, Bob Shuster of Critter Care, in
Wayne, took to the roads in his four-wheel-drive vehicle to get food and water
to his charges. Police who stopped him, because driving was limited to emergency
vehicles, agreed with his assessment that his was truly an emergency mission and
cleared him to continue his rounds.

   Was it hairy? Yes. Was it still an improvement over his previous job as a
$100,000-a-year chief engineer on classified defense projects for General
Electric Aerospace in King of Prussia? Yes.

   "I was working 70 hours a week and traveling constantly, and I realized the
company didn't really care that the job was killing me as long as they could
make another $10 million on my traveling somewhere," he said.

   Shuster, 56, left GE in 1990 because "I knew if I didn't, I'd have a heart
attack or stroke."

   He has built his pet-care business to about 1,000 customers, some of whom use
him every day and some only occasionally, and has one full-time employee, his
son. Shuster's income, before expenses, is half what he made at GE, but he has
lost 30 pounds from walking and becoming a vegetarian, and "I started sleeping
good at night," he said.

   'SO CRUSHED'

   For Ilene Gordon, a turning point was the day she had to say no when her
daughter, Vered, 7, asked her to come to school. "She was just so crushed; I
felt so bad," says Gordon, who in June bought an established service, Creature
Comforts, in Cherry Hill.

   Gordon, who has a bachelor of arts degree in animal science, had supervised
the care of animals used in medical research, most recently at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. "The hours had gotten to be
long, and they just weren't real flexible about my being able to take a day off,
because we were so busy," she says. Another factor in her equation was her son,
Rafael, 10.

   Now, Gordon not only has the freedom to drop in at school, but she also can
take her daughter to work with her when school is out. "She's my clone; she
loves animals," Gordon says.

   And pet-sitters do have to love animals to put up with the hours. Although
Morgan has two part-time assistants, she says she hasn't taken a day off since
she started her business more than three years ago. Even on weekend days, when
she works only six to eight hours, that work is spread over a 12-hour span. She
plans to take a break in mid-October: a four-day vacation.

   In addition, pet-sitters may find themselves called out for extra duty at a
moment's notice.

   "If I get locked in at work or decide to go out for dinner, I can call the
service [Gordon] and say, 'Can you hit them again tonight?' " says Mel Porter, a
two-dog man who manages a medical practice in Woodbury.

   Morgan, who formerly managed a Cigna Co. HMO in Texas, has come full circle
in that one of her clients is a Cigna executive, Geraldine Prusko.

   Prusko, senior vice president and chief claims officer for Cigna Property and
Casualty Cos., leaves home about 7 a.m. and often doesn't return until 10 p.m.
In addition, she frequently travels on business.

   For about a year after she got Jago, a black Labrador retriever, Prusko
relied on a friend to walk him. But it became more difficult to ask that favor
as Jago grew out of his puppy cuteness. Now Morgan walks him every day and
visits him three times a day for feeding and walking when Prusko is away.

   Like most pet-sitters, Morgan also brings in newspapers and mail, waters
plants, and generally makes a house look occupied. For Prusko, there is an added
bonus: Shortly after she hired Morgan, her elderly mother came to live with her,
and having Morgan stop in frequently provides peace of mind about her mother's
safety.

   And having a pet-sitter can pay for itself in other ways, says Porter, who
describes his weekly $55 pet-sitting bill as "a luxury, but not an expensive
luxury."

   Dogs that get lonely or need exercise are wont to chew furniture or piddle on
rugs. Porter's puppy, for example, "chewed to bits" the arms on his antique
Queen Anne chairs. Now that the dog is walked every day, "it's much better," he
says.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO (2)
1. Lynne Morgan, a former medical administrator, with her charges: Jago, a Lab,
and Buie, a Yorkie. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, APRIL SAUL)
2. Lynne Morgan, the owner of Aunt Lynne Pampers Pets, in Gulph Mills, feeds a
Yorkie and a black Lab at the Lab's home. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, APRIL
SAUL)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2643 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   October 12, 1996, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. C-5

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: PITT EXPORTS TRANSPLANT KNOW-HOW;
MEDICAL CENTER TO SUPPLY ORGAN EXPERTISE TO SICILY

BYLINE: STEVE TWEDT, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center will manage and provide staff for
a new specialized medicine program in Palermo, Italy, that will bring Pitt's
organ transplant know-how to Sicily and the rest of southern Italy.

   And that may be just the beginning.

   At a news conference yesterday at UPMC, Palermo Mayor Leoluca Orlando and
Mayor Murphy said the agreement could blossom into other business ventures
between the two cities.

   At present, the nearest liver transplant center to Palermo is in Naples. UPMC
President Jeffrey Romoff said the Sicilian government spent $ 170 million last
year sending its citizens out of the country for transplantation and other
specialized care.

   ''This is an opportunity to deliver this care close to home,'' he said.

   Once the transplant program is established, officials plan to set up similar
programs for oncology, gene therapy, advanced cardiology and orthopedics.

   The Italian government will pay for the $ 75 million construction of a
four-story addition to Civico Hospital. The ground-breaking is scheduled for the
spring and work should be completed in two years.

   UPMC transplant surgeon Dr. Ignazio R. Marino, who grew up in Italy, will
oversee the program as director of UPMC's European Medical Division. He said
yesterday that other Italian liver transplant surgeons welcome the new center,
noting that all of them have trained under Pittsburgh liver transplant pioneer
Dr. Thomas Starzl.

   Romoff said some research projects at Pitt may be moved or expanded to
Palermo, but he emphasized that the center would adhere to strict standards of
patient protection in any research.

   Also, Romoff said, ''our physicians, by and large, will speak Italian. And
when physicians do not speak Italian, their colleagues will, and immediate
translations will be available.''

   Marino said the center would use bilingual medical records, so that progress
notes and other important information will be automatically translated.

   UPMC will be paid a fee by the regional government for its professional
services. In return, the region will benefit from Pitt's medical expertise.

   Orlando said Palermo has been undergoing change, shedding its image as a
center for Mafia operations for one as a major cultural and economic hub in the
Mediterranean basin. He sees the agreement with UPMC as an important step in
that change.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1996


                             2644 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 8, 1996, Tuesday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 445 words

HEADLINE: MD breakthrough reported;
Gene therapy barrier solved

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A major stumbling block in the development of gene therapy for
muscular dystrophy has been the size of the corrective gene.

   Muscular dystrophy occurs because of a defect in the gene that
causes cells to make dystrophin, a protein necessary for the
continued good health of muscle cells.

   It would seem one could simply insert a good dystrophin gene
into cells, but the dystrophin gene is 200 times bigger than
the average gene.

   However Dr. C. Thomas Caskey, of Merck Pharmaceuticals, and
colleagues at the universities of Pittsburgh and Iowa have
found a way to squeeze the huge gene in an adenovirus - a
member of the family of viruses that causes the common cold.

   Caskey, until recently a scientist at Baylor College of
Medicine, said the current work has hurdled some of the
barriers to gene therapy for muscular dystrophy.

   ""However, this is an advance.  It is not the whole answer,'' he
said.  ""The next challenge is to develop techniques to deliver
the gene directly to muscle cells. ''
 The technique seems simple, but it required intensive
laboratory work.

   First, lab experts had to find a way to remove all the genes
from the interior of the adenovirus.  Then they had to squeeze
the dystrophin gene into the vacant space.

   In a report to be published in November's Human Gene Therapy,
Caskey and his colleagues described how they inserted this
lab-engineered, virus-gene combination into the muscle cells
of newborn rats.

   As many as 50 percent of the cells of newborn mice that
received a single injection of the virus-gene combination were
shown to carry the new dystrophin gene, Caskey said.

   The finding should advance the field of gene therapy for
muscular dystrophy, but it is not a complete answer, Caskey
said.

   By removing the adenovirus genes, scientists also eliminated
the immune-stimulating effects of the virus.

   This immune effect has been a stumbling block to adenovirus
gene therapy.  The T-cells and antibodies produced by the
immune system in response to the ""foreign'' adenovirus attacked
the virus-gene combination.

   Eventually, the dystrophin production was shut off as the
immune system killed off the adenovirus-gene combination.

   Dystrophin plays a critical role in maintaining the structure
of muscle cell membranes.  When the protein is absent, the
cells are more likely to become injured and destroyed.

   Boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy usually lose the ability
to walk when they are in their late childhood and die from
respiratory problems when they are in their 20s.  Those with
less severe forms of the disease, such as Becker muscular
dystrophy, have less severe symptoms.


LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1996


                             2645 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 7, 1996, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: Lab on forefront of gene therapy;
Houston researchers seeking cure for cancer, other diseases

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   When Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova agreed in 1993 to spearhead the
development of a laboratory dedicated to making the tools of
gene therapy, he did not know much about the field.

   He was not alone.  No one did.

   Just as gene therapy was new to medicine, the laboratory
procedures needed to manufacture the gene-virus combinations
key to effecting gene transfer are in the infant stages.

   ""Gene therapy today is where computer science was in the
1950s,'' said the gene therapy pioneer, who holds a doctorate
in genetics.

   But late last August, he finally saw the potential of his lab
when doctors at Baylor College of Medicine used a virus-gene
combination he and his workers had made to attempt to cure
prostate cancer with gene therapy.

   It was a fulfilling experience, he said.  But it is only the
beginning.

   Without Aguilar-Cordova's lab, on the top floor of the
Clinical Care Center at Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor gene
therapy attempts would be seriously held back.

   Across the world, scientists are identifying the genes that
cause disease.

   Eventually, they hope to be able to replace defective genes
that cause disease with normal genes.  In this way, they expect
to be able to cure diseases such as cancer, cystic fibrosis
and muscular dystrophy.

   But, first, they must find a way to introduce the new genes
into cells and tissues in such a way that they become part of
the cell's genetic machinery.  In that way, they can tell the
cell to make a protein that is lacking or is defective.

   So far, viruses seem the best bet.  Since they are naked pieces
of genetic material, they only can survive inside cells.  They
are the most primitive living organism.  Because they must live
inside cells, they have developed a number of tricks to get
into them.

   Thus, if scientists hook a gene or piece of gene to a
virus, it will take that gene with it.  Once inside the
cell, the virus hijacks the genetic machinery of the cell to
do its bidding.  If it has a foreign gene attached, the cell
obeys its genetic message.

   The first virus to be used in such a way were retroviruses.

   Retroviruses cause a permanent infection of cells, making the
gene a long-lasting part of the cellular genetic code.

   Researchers say the major drawback with retroviruses is they
can only infect dividing cells.  That means only a few of the
cells in the body receive the corrective gene.

   The second type of virus are adenoviruses, members of the
family of particles that cause the common cold.  These viruses
can infect almost any kind of cell.  However, their infection
is not permanent.  They stimulate an immune response.  The
immune system eventually kills the cell that contains the
adenovirus-gene combination.

   Most virus-gene combinations (or viral vectors as they are
called by scientists) are developed in the laboratory.  They
must be grown in great quantity before they can be used in
patients.

   The site where the viral vectors are grown must be sterile,
and none of the viral vectors can be released into the
atmosphere, where they might contaminate normal living
tissue.

   Creating such an environment is the job Aguilar-Cordova and
his team faced.

   Because the viral vectors are considered drugs, they are
subject to the same safety criteria with which drug companies
must comply.  ""We had to comply with regulations of the (U.S.)
Food and Drug Administration,'' said Aguilar-Cordova.

   Aguilar-Cordova found the FDA had yet to issue
complete rules about the physical requirements for a lab such
as his.  There was disagreement among officials.  One told him,
for example, that the antechamber between the two labs where
virus vectors are made must prevent the material's escape from
the rooms.  Another told him the antechamber had to be a buffer
to prevent contaminants from the outside.

   Eventually, the room at Texas Children's Hospital was designed
to do both.

   And as an academic institution, the lab will be able to help
scientists develop new kinds of vectors, Aguilar-Cordova said.

   In addition, Baylor's lab cuts the costs of developing the
vectors and producing patient-quality material in quantity, he
said.


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. A researcher at the gene therapy laboratory demonstrates a
process of banding that isolates a virus so that it can be collected, stored and
developed into a virus-gene combination; 2. Dr. Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova adds
cells to a cartridge while in his laboratory last month; All by Steve Campbell /
Chronicle photos

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1996


                             2646 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1996 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 3, 1996 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: IN THE TOWNS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: New courses for adults

BODY:

   Life Long Learning, a continuing education program for adults age 60 and
over, will offer five courses during its fall semester.

    The Life Long Learning Center is sponsored by the Essex County Section of
National Council of Jewish Women (NCJW) and the Older Adult Department of JCC
MetroWest. A formal education is not required for participation; NCJW and JCC
members pay reduced course fees.

    The following classes will meet at the Jewish Community Center of
Metropolitan New Jersey, 760 Northfield Ave., West Orange:"Dr. Shenton Front and
Center," will meet for eight Fridays, starting tomorrow, from 10 a.m. to noon.
"Front and Center" features Columbia University history professor James Shenton
interpreting the news and history in current headlines. Course fee is $50;
members pay $30."Health and Wellness," a four-week series will meet Tuesdays
from 10 to 11:30 a.m., beginning Tuesday. Experts will include Dr. Paul Trotta
on gene therapy of cancer, Dr. Jerome Schwartz on virology, Dr. George Miller on
bacterial resistance, and Dr. Robert Colucci on geriatrics and medicine. The
cost is $16; members pay $10."The Influence of the Media on Public Opinion,"
taught by MetroWest Jewish News editor David Twersky, will examine the
publishing world, its effects on the news and how it affects people. The course
will meet for four Thursdays starting Oct. 10 from 1:30 to 2:30 p.m. Cost is
$25; members pay $15. Scholar and opera aficionado John A. Marino will present
"Opera Art of Arts." The series will use lecture and recordings to examine the
history of opera. The class will meet for four Sundays, starting Oct. 20, from
11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. The course fee $25; members $15 includes bagels and cream
cheese. At the Lautenberg Family JCC of Greater Morris, 901 Rt. 10 East,
Whippany, Wallace Greene, a rabbi and director of the Midrasha Institute of
Adult Studies, will teach a course on Maimonides. Greene's course will meet for
six Wednesdays, beginning Monday, from 10:30 to 11:30 a.m. There is no fee for
this course.

    All classes are accessible to people with disabilities. Registration is
required for all classes. For more information, call the JCC, (201) 736-3200,
ext. 223.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                             2647 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  October 1, 1996 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 264 words

HEADLINE: GENE INJECTION IN MICE PRODUCES CURING PROTEIN, RESEARCHERS SAY

BYLINE: PAUL RECER Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Injecting designer genes directly into muscle tissue creates a
natural "pharmaceutical factory" that cures severe anemia in lab mice,
researchers say. The technique may be tested in humans next year.

   Dr. Jeffrey Leiden, director of a University of Chicago research team, said
his group showed genes can be injected into muscle tissue to cause the
production of proteins needed to correct some blood disorders.

   A report on the study is to be published today in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   In the experiment, a gene that tells the body to make erythropoietin, a
hormone that stimulates production of red blood cells, was extracted from mice.
Injections of the hormone are used in humans to treat a type of anemia in
patients with kidney failure.

   A minute dose of the gene was injected into the muscles of lab mice.

   Genes taken into the nucleus of cells in the muscles became a "pharmaceutical
factory" that churned out erythropoietin, said Leiden.

   Tests showed the hormone levels in the mice stayed elevated throughout the
100-day experiment. Red blood cell levels increased by 48 percent to 64 percent.

   Leiden said human trials of the erythropoietin gene injection could start
within a year, but he said the importance of the experiment goes far beyond
anemia.

   "This shows that you can get levels of gene expression by injecting the gene
into muscles," he said. Most gene therapy has involved using viruses to transfer
genes into the body, a technique that has enjoyed little success and is only
poorly controlled.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2648 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    October 1, 1996, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS FIND WAY TO USE GENE AGAINST MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Research groups at the University of Pittsburgh and the University of
Pennsylvania each have taken an early, but important, step toward a therapy to
correct the genetic mistake that causes the severest form of muscular dystrophy.

   In experiments with mice, both groups demonstrated that they can use a
modified cold virus to insert a corrective gene into leg muscle cells. They
showed that the gene will then produce dystrophin, a protein missing in patients
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Perhaps most encouraging, said Dr. Paula Clemens of Pitt's neurology
department, was evidence that the corrective gene had a beneficial effect.

   ''If that weren't true, then pursuing this line of research wouldn't be very
attractive,'' said Clemens, who headed a team that included researchers at the
Baylor College of Medicine and the University of Iowa. Until now, it was unclear
whether adding the gene to muscle cells after birth would improve muscle
function.

   The findings, which will be published today and next month in scientific
journals, reinforce the potential of gene therapy to treat dozens of inherited
disorders, said Dr. Leon I. Charash, chairman of the medical advisory committee
of the Muscular Dystrophy Association, which sponsored both research groups.

   ''The dystrophin gene is approximately 200 times larger than most other genes
and hard to manipulate,'' Charash said. ''As a result, the potential therapeutic
value of this elegant research in crossover applications is huge.''

   Dystrophin is a protein that is an important component in the cellular walls
of muscle fibers. Without the protein, muscle cells deteriorate. Boys with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy lack a functioning dystrophin gene; they usually
lose the ability to walk in late childhood and die in their twenties. Those with
Becker muscular dystrophy have only low levels of dystrophin and are less
severely affected.

   Dr. James Wilson and his Penn colleagues report in today's issue of the
journal Human Gene Therapy that they found between 30 and 40 percent of the
muscle fibers in one experimental group of mice produced dystrophin within two
weeks of treatment.

   Clemens and her group, whose work will be published next month in the journal
Gene Therapy, found that as many as half of the muscle cells produced normal
levels of dystrophin after being injected.

   Since the dystrophin gene was discovered 10 years ago, researchers have
looked for ways to get copies of the gene into muscle cells and get the gene to
start producing dystrophin.

   Both Clemens and Wilson accomplished this task by taking a cold virus called
the adenovirus and stripping it of its own genes. What is left is a viral
package that is able to enter cells, but not cause disease.

   The stripped-down virus can no longer reproduce itself and can only be grown
in culture with the assistance of what is called a helper virus, Clemens said.
In her experiments, both the dystrophin gene and a gene that produces a
bacterial enzyme were inserted into the viral package, called a vector. The
bacterial enzyme, she explained, serves as a marker to tell researchers whether
the genes have been successfully inserted.

   Though some of the mice cells produced dystrophin after being injected with
millions of the vectors, both Wilson and Clemens report that the amount of
dystrophin produced declined as weeks wore on.

   Future research will focus on how to keep the genes working longer. One
possibility is that the body's immune system attacked the inserted genes as
foreign. Clemens said that eliminating the bacterial enzyme gene, which serves
no function other than as a marker for researchers, might reduce this risk.

   It's impossible to say when gene therapy could be attempted in humans, she
said. A better understanding of how the gene behaves when it is inside the cell
and how the cell responds to it are needed and researchers must demonstrate that
the genes can function for significant periods. It also would be desirable to
develop a way to deliver the gene vectors through the blood stream, rather than
by injections into muscle.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1996


                             2649 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               October 1, 1996, Tuesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; IN BRIEF; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Study called gene therapy breakthrough

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: WASHINGTON; LONDON

BODY:


   Injecting designer genes into muscle tissue creates a natural pharmaceutical

 factory that cures severe anemia in lab mice, researchers say. The technique
may be tested in people next year.

   Dr. Jeffrey Leiden, director of a research team at the University of
Chicago, said his group showed that genes can be injected into muscle tissue  to
cause the production of proteins needed to correct some blood disorders.

   Another researcher called the development "a solid breakthrough" in gene
therapy because it demonstrates a new way to put a corrective gene into the
body.

   A report on the study appears today in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.

Traffic lights kit

gives lovers go-ahead

   LONDON - A revolutionary traffic light kit that tells couples when they can
have sex without risking pregnancy could make major inroads into the
contraceptive market, its makers said Monday.

   Unipath, part of Anglo-Dutch consumer giant Unilever, said its Persona
monitoring kit tests the hormones contained in urine.

   "The monitor will indicate a green light when a woman is free to make  love
without using a contraceptive and a red light on the days on which she is  at
risk of becoming pregnant," Unipath said.

   The company claimed 95 percent reliability for the kit, which will cost  $
77.95.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1996


                             2650 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  October 1, 1996, Tuesday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENE TECHNIQUE CALLED BREAKTHROUGH; MUSCLE BECOMES A
PHARMACEUTICAL FACTORY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Injecting designer genes directly into muscle tissue creates a natural
pharmaceutical factory that cures severe anemia in laboratory mice, researchers
report. The technique may be tested in humans next year.

   Dr. Jeffrey Leiden, director of a research team at the University of Chicago,
said his group showed that genes can be injected into muscle tissue to cause the
production of proteins needed to correct some blood disorders.

   Another researcher called the development "a solid breakthrough" in gene
therapy because it demonstrates a new way to put a corrective gene into the
body.

   A report on the study is scheduled to be published today in the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences.

   In the experiment, Leiden and his team extracted from normal mice a gene that
tells the body to make erythropoietin, a hormone that stimulates production of
red blood cells. Injections of the hormone are used in humans to treat a type of
severe anemia common in patients with kidney failure.

   Once the gene had been isolated, a minute dose was injected into the large
muscles of lab mice.

   "It was a small drop, about 10 millionth of a gram," said Leiden. "It is so
small, it is difficult to see."

   Genes in the injection were taken into the nucleus of cells in the muscles
and became, in effect, a "pharmaceutical factory" that churned out
erythropoietin, Leiden said.

   Tests showed that the hormone levels in the mice were elevated quickly and
stayed up throughout the 100-day experiment. Red blood cell levels in creased by
48 percent to 64 percent.

   Leiden said that human trials of the erythropoietin gene injection could
start within a year but that the importance of the experiment goes far beyond
anemia.

   "This shows that you can get (variable) levels of gene expression by
injecting the gene into muscles," he said. Most gene therapy has involved using
viruses to transfer genes into the body, a technique that has enjoyed little
success and which is only poorly controlled.

   Dr. Eric B. Kmiec, head of a gene research team at Thomas Jefferson
University in Philadelphia, called the finding "a solid breakthrough."

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1996


                             2651 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 01, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C01; BIZ: BIOTECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 969 words

HEADLINE: An Industry Veteran Has the Sensors Out for Opportunity

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Heeeeeeeee's back.

   But then, M. James Barrett, who many local executives consider a founding
father of the Washington region's biotech industry, never really left.

   Barrett quietly stepped down Sept. 1 as chief executive of Genetic Therapy
Inc. of Gaithersburg, the company he helped found 10 years ago. Last year, Swiss
drug giant Sandoz AG purchased it for $ 295 million.

   There was no formal announcement, he said, because "Sandoz wanted it that
way." Barrett said he decided to step down as "it was time for a change. A large
company environment is different than working for an entrepreneurial outfit."

   The 53-year-old Barrett, who remains a consultant to Genetic Therapy, also
has been instrumental in the corporate life of Medimmune Inc. of Gaithersburg as
well as Life Technologies Inc., also in Gaithersburg. He's starting another
local venture, which will develop products from a patented invention of a
scientist, Skip Colvin, whom he met in the early 1980s when they both worked for
Life Technologies. Barrett said the product "will be a transforming invention in
sensor technology."

   The invention that the company, which he may call Sensors for Medicine and
Science Inc., plans to make and market is a novel electronic-optical device that
measures the concentration of different substances, such as oxygen, in liquids.
It's being tested by the applied physics lab at Johns Hopkins University to
measure oxygen levels in the Chesapeake Bay, he said.

   Barrett describes a potential application that sounds like the Tricorder that
doctors in the TV show "Star Trek" use: He envisions a device that would be
embedded in the skin, for example, and read glucose levels, allowing diabetics
to wave a sensor wand over the implant to get a reading. This would be much more
convenient than the disposable test diabetics use today, which requires them to
prick their fingers several times a day to draw blood. The device also might be
useful in measuring the telltale levels of oxygen and other gases in the blood
of people undergoing surgery, he said.

   ONE OF THE HOTTEST products in biotechnology is being given away by Life
Technologies. It's a T-shirt depicting the famed double helix of genes through
the eyes of three artists -- Matisse, Da Vinci and Picasso.  This gene humor has
been so well-accepted by biotech professionals that the company, which developed
the T-shirt as a promotional gimmick, has given out "tens of thousands," said
Mita Schaffer, a partner in Martin-Schaffer, the Bethesda ad agency that
designed the shirts.

   Martin-Schaffer has created a niche catering to the marketing and advertising
needs of the region's biotech community. Biotech firms primarily market to other
businesses, not to consumers, and "the business-to-business" market is a
Martin-Schaffer specialty.

   Tina Martin, the agency's other partner and the creative director, said
working for biotech firms is fun because the audience "is smart, and smart
people have good senses of humor." The downside of working for these companies,
many of which are startups, she said, is that "they sometimes pay late; they
sometimes go out of business."

   Yet Life Technologies, a supplier of chemicals, cell lines and other
materials to the biotech community, is doing quite well, ensuring continuing
supplies of amusing T-shirts.

   NIKE INC. of Oregon has awarded the University of Maryland's Biotechnology
Institute Center of Marine Biotechnology in Baltimore a $ 90,000 grant for nine
months to search for a natural alternative to the synthetic chemicals used to
make running shoes.

   Part of a shoe's sole is made with injection-molded plastic. To get the piece
out of the mold, it is sprayed with an oily substance, much as a cook would
spray a pan with oil to keep eggs from sticking. But the oil must be cleaned off
the plastic so that the plastic can then be glued to the shoe.

   Cleaning off the plastic requires harsh chemicals. The job of the scientists
is to determine if microbes found in the ocean could provide a way to "eat" off
the oil, allowing the plastic to be cleaned with water, making the process more
environmentally friendly.

   THE SUIT that Dustin Hoffman wore in the biotech thriller "Outbreak" was an
authentic version of the plastic suits that scientists and soldiers really wear
as protection against lethal microbes and chemicals, either in the lab or on the
battlefield.

   The problem with the suits is that they are hot, hot, hot.

   As a result, the Army has announced it will give Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore $ 1 million a year for up to five years to help it research ways to
manufacture "barrier materials" that could make those suits cooler. The idea is
to learn more about how gases and liquids pass, or don't, through plastic, which
is not well understood, said James W. Wagner, the Johns Hopkins engineer
overseeing the collaboration on the university's side.

   "Sadly, these suits are the modern equivalent of chain mail," Wagner said of
existing barrier fabric. "The real challenge is to have a selectively permeable
barrier that would allow the exchange of clean air and cooling ventilation, but
without allowing germs or chemical agents in."

   Smart materials are another area researchers will study under the grant.
Though not alive, these materials "take their inspiration from biological
systems" and use sensors and switches to mimic some properties of human skin.

   A material might be embedded with sensors that detect changes in temperature
or pressure and then cause the material to change its shape or stiffness. Then,
the item could revert to its original state once the temperature or pressure
returned to its original level. A potential application would be an aircraft
wing that could adjust during flight, much as bird wings do.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell; Photo, James Barrett at a Genetic Therapy
laboratory, where he remains a consultant after stepping down as chief executive
last month.  Life Technologies' T-shirt is what fashionable biotech
professionals are wearing this season.

LOAD-DATE: October 01, 1996


                             2652 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 124;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2721 words

HEADLINE: Behind Closed Doors;
Junior Comes Out Perfect

BYLINE: By Philip Kitcher;   Philip Kitcher is a philosopher of science at the
University of California, San Diego. He is the author most recently of "The
Lives to Come: The Genetic Revolution and Human Possibilities."

BODY:

   The pace and extent of the genetic revolution makes it tempting to speculate
about life at the end of the 21st century. Will sex become completely
recreational, with the serious business of reproduction going on in carefully
monitored tubes? Will the main form of medical treatment consist of gene
therapy, designed to replace defective DNA at the squeeze of a syringe?

   Probably not. Doubtless in the decades to come gene therapy will become more
exact, but unless numerous difficult problems are solved, the possibility of
precisely engineering people who carry mutant genes into people who are
genetically normal is minute. Yet our understanding of the genetics of human
disease does promise to transform medical practice. One hundred years from now,
we shall know the molecular structures of virtually all human genes, the
functions of a significant percentage of them and the molecular mechanisms at
work in a large number of human afflictions. Fantasies aside, the chief novelty
of late-21st-century medicine will lie in its powerful ability to predict and
prevent.

    Disease, it should be remembered, even hereditary disease, does not always
have to be treated by replacing genes. A proper understanding of how a
particular genetic mutation leads to illness or disability can sometimes provide
clues about how to put it right, through dietary modifications, medicines or
surgery. Looking into the next century, we can foresee a continuum of cases. At
one extreme are the diseases for which genetic knowledge will lead to successful
treatment. Many biomedical researchers draw inspiration from the case of
phenylketonuria, or PKU. Children with PKU carry genes that render them unable
to metabolize the amino acid phenylalanine. Left untreated, they build up large
amounts of phenylalanine in their cells (and lack sufficient amounts of another
amino acid, tyrosine) and become severely mentally retarded. By testing a baby
just after birth, however, a doctor can prescribe a diet low in phenylalanine
and high in tyrosine that enables an afflicted child to develop normally.

   At the opposite pole are diseases that, despite enormous molecular insight,
we are at a loss to treat. For example, the structure of the crucial protein
implicated in sickle-cell anemia has been known for decades, but for almost 40
years (at least), that knowledge inspired no significant improvements in
treatment. In between lie diseases like cystic fibrosis, where scientists have
made some progress but so far have not achieved total success. Investing in
molecular genetic research today is like buying tickets in a huge number of
lotteries: we would be exceptionally unfortunate not to win the jackpot in some,
but we cannot tell in advance how many prizes we will obtain or exactly what
they will be.

   Given the trajectory of genetic technology, it is fairly easy to envisage
what a visit to the doctor may be like in 2096. The patient, let's call her Baby
K, has her first checkup when she is an 8-week old fetus. A technician removes a
few fetal cells. Several days later, interviews with the doctor and a genetic
counselor provide a detailed picture: a 250-page printout sums up information
about the DNA at 50,000 regions of the fetal chromosomes -- all those regions
whose functions in human development are at last understood.

   The first pages of the printout are devoted to rare but dreadful disruptions
of early development. To their relief, the parents of Baby K learn that she will
not suffer tragic neural diseases like Tay-Sachs, neurofibromatosis or
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome: at the genetic loci affecting these and hundreds of less
familiar diseases, the sequences in the fetal DNA are reassuringly normal. With
luck, more common genetic diseases -- cystic fibrosis and fragile X syndrome --
are also ruled out. Baby K's susceptibility to the major diseases that develop
later in life, which depend on numerous environmental variables, is described in
probabilistic terms: it turns out she is at average or at low risk for the vast
majority of diseases, the principal exceptions being juvenile diabetes and a
form of breast cancer that usually develops late in middle age. Fortunately, the
molecular underpinnings of these diseases are well understood by the 21st
century; by making mild changes in Mrs. K's diet before she gives birth and
prescribing medicine to Baby K in early childhood, doctors can reduce Baby K's
risk of diabetes to the normal range. As she grows into early adulthood, she
will be well advised to receive regular breast-tissue checks.

   The printout continues with a detailed preview of Baby K's immune system. The
sequencing of bacterial and viral genomes began in the 1990's and will be
elaborated on a grand scale in the coming decades. The resultant knowledge,
combined with enhanced understanding of the workings of the immune system, will
surely offer doctors in 2096 new clues for fortifying a young child against
infectious diseases: changes in diet perhaps, or a schedule of injections
designed to bolster the immune response. Baby K's parents will also learn
something about the looks of their child-to-be: brown eyes and curly hair, say,
maybe slightly over-average height and slender.

   The session concludes with a review of the printout's last pages, the
"behavioral tendencies." The counselor emphasizes the importance of
environmental variables: the probability that Baby K will develop a particular
personality trait might vary quite widely. But, thanks in part to advances made
in neurochemistry in the late 20th century, Mr. and Mrs. K can learn a few
things about their daughter: she does not carry any of the known markers for
same-sex preference; there is no reason to think she will have less-than-average
intelligence; she is not very likely to be hyperactive or suffer from an
attention deficit, and she displays no abnormal propensity for depression. If
the K's are particularly fortunate, the only cause for worry might be a possible
tendency toward alcohol addiction -- another predictive diagnosis stemming from
the pioneering investigations of the 1990's and another case in which forewarned
is forearmed.

   The K's leave the interview with a vivid picture of their child and the
contours of her life. Genetic testing has issued no guarantee against the
ravages of birth trauma, childhood accidents, urban violence, earthquakes or
other acts of God. Yet they don't have to worry about many potential threats to
their child's well-being, and they have been told how to cope with certain
aspects of her genetic inheritance -- aspects that, in an earlier era, would
have been recognized too late.


   That is what we can hope genetic technology will bring. But the real value of
biomedical research will depend not just on what scientists do but on the ways
in which social policy is framed to make use of their contributions. Even in
2096, the news that genetic counselors deliver will not always be good. The
story of Baby K was optimistic partly because her genetic abnormalities could be
addressed with preventive strategies. What options will be available for parents
and patients, and what pressures will they feel, when problems do not come with
solutions?

   Suppose Baby K's parents had learned she has a propensity for muscular
degeneration, which could not be halted, or a tendency to depression, which only
crude therapies could treat, or that she would be blind or deaf. Under these
circumstances, they would have been left pondering a different group of
questions: not the practical details of raising a healthy daughter but wondering
whether they should allow the pregnancy to continue. Although the K's cannot ask
for a baby engineered to their specifications, they can decide, to some extent
-- and to a far greater degree than is currently possible -- what kinds of
children they will have, provided they are prepared to abort fetuses with
characteristics at odds with their wishes.

   So far, the consequences of genetic foreknowledge have been very largely
benign. In the past 20 years, prenatal genetic screening has greatly reduced the
incidence of Tay-Sachs disease, both in the United States and in many other
countries, and the incidence of types of thalassemia (a disease similar to
sickle-cell anemia) in various Mediterranean countries where it once was
prevalent. All except the most devout opponents of abortion should view these
developments as merciful, sparing the parents of a Tay-Sachs child, for example,
the anguish of watching an apparently healthy infant degenerate beyond help. By
2096, it will be possible to spread mercy more widely, forestalling births that
would have revealed grossly disordered development or would have brought pain
without hope of improvement. But it will be possible to do many other things as
well -- terminate a pregnancy because, say, the fetal genes indicate high risk
for a heart attack in middle age, or a predisposition to obesity or blue eyes or
a disease that can only be treated at great expense.

   This is precisely the point at which social pressure comes to bear. We can
rest comfortably, I think, in assuming that our descendants will not institute
some centrally directed eugenics program. Medicine in 2096 will continue to
leave choices in the hands of parents. But reproductive decisions will not be
entirely free: compulsory sterilization and the storm-trooper's gun are only the
least subtle ways of controlling birth. Thousands, perhaps millions, of women in
some parts of the world are already aborting female fetuses because they believe
that their daughters, growing up in cultures heavily biased toward males, will
not lead healthy and happy lives.

   American parents of the late-21st century are unlikely to be pressured into
aborting a healthy female fetus, but unless there are large social changes,
other prejudices could permeate their society. For some, news that their child
will be extremely short, obese or learning-disabled will be received with
distaste or even revulsion. Many others simply may fear their neighbors'
attitudes and believe that a child with one of these characteristics will face
an uphill struggle. Knowing the personal and career difficulties confronted by
those who are very short or obese, the menial jobs often delegated to school
dropouts, otherwise unprejudiced parents may decide, with great reluctance, to
end the pregnancy. "It just wouldn't be fair," they may say, "to bring a child
like that into a world like this." Intense competition and social inequality
already drive middle-class parents to register newborn infants for elite
schools, to select the "right" preschool enrichment programs. Tomorrow, the
struggle for advancement may begin in the womb.

   Genetic discoveries already underscore old prejudices and create new ones. As
news reports were hailing the mapping and sequencing of the first genes
implicated in breast cancer, women from high-risk families were discovering that
the new ability to test had devastating consequences: many who carry abnormal
genes at the pertinent loci have found that some insurance companies will not
cover prophylactic mastectomies, that insurance coverage abruptly stops, that
employers dismiss them. Genetic discrimination has already begun, and it is
likely to become more extensive unless measures are taken to protect people
whose draw in the genetic lottery has been unlucky. Several states have passed
legislation to limit genetic discrimination, but these are only timid and
hesitant first steps. Universal health coverage is necessary to protect the 5 to
10 percent of the population who will find themselves uninsurable because of
accidents in conception.

   Far more is required to insure that the reproductive choices made in 2096 are
free from harsh constraints. Children born with genetic disabilities not only
need the same access to health care and employment as other members of their
society; they also need special support that will enable them to realize their
potential. Unless prospective parents can rely on tolerance and respect for
those who are different, unless they are assured that their community will do
what it can to aid the disabled, then the pressure to view reproduction as a
process in which the "right" products are stamped with social approval and the
"wrong" ones discarded will be irresistible.


   Baby K will surely exist. The pressing question is: How many Baby K's will
there be? In the gloomiest vision of the future, the parents of Baby K are
simply privileged members of a callous society. They have access to
sophisticated medical testing and the results do not pose any hard choices for
them. As middle-class citizens, well-educated and comfortable, they take the
standard course of finding out if the fetus is "defective." Their child's place
in the meritocracy depends on their doing all they can to produce a "perfect"
baby -- and, luckily, they receive good news.

   Economic and genetic differences amplify each other, reinforcing pressure on
the affluent to produce only "genetically correct" children. As long as there is
a wide difference in social and economic status between those who succeed by the
prevailing standards and those who do not, many middle-class parents will feel
compelled only to have children who satisfy the genetic requirements for
success. At the other social extreme will be people whose genetic misfortunes
doom them to unemployment, the people with disabilities whose lives are cramped
by inadequate support, those whose limited insurance coverage or minimal
education denies them the chance to benefit from the new preventive medicines.
Some genetic disabilities, virtually eliminated in the middle class, will
persist at significant frequency in this segment of the population, but because
they lack any powerful constituency, the disabled will find that services to
help them are underfinanced. If we simply extrapolate from today's social
attitudes, from the growing inequality between rich and poor, from the merciless
individualism and competitiveness characteristic of most affluent societies, it
is not farfetched to predict that the medical practices of 2096 will follow
suit. Socioeconomic inequalities will turn victims of the quirks of conception
into a true genetic underclass.

   There are brighter possible futures. The K's might come from any stratum of
society, from any ethnic group: the resources of preventive medicine would be
available to all. Inhabiting a more egalitarian society -- in which people with
many different characteristics are valued and have productive lives, in which
the highly educated surgeon and the manual laborer do not inhabit different
economic and social spheres -- the K's do not have to measure their child
against a standard of "genetic correctness." As they await the detailed report
from their doctor, they know that if the news is less than exceptional, they
will face a genuine choice: government and community support will help them do
the best for their child; prejudice will not sharply constrain the life of a
child who is different from the majority.

   This future is not beyond reach. In recent years, some Mediterranean
countries have shown that it is possible to combat thalassemia while retaining a
compassionate attitude toward those who are afflicted with it. The incidence of
the disease has declined in Sardinia and Cyprus, but those Governments have
continued to invest heavily in treatment and support for sufferers so that the
crucial blood transfusions that are needed are now much more widely available
than before. These countries point a way forward. Prenatal testing need not be a
substitute for the costly business of nurturing those born with diseases and
disabilities: it can be part of a comprehensive community investment in all
citizens.

   It is not easy, of course, to extend policies that work for small,
homogeneous societies to a large, multiethnic nation. But that is the challenge.
The tools for probing the human genome give us the responsibility of deciding
how much to learn about embryonic lives and what to do with that knowledge. The
medicine of the future will be a vivid portrait of our social priorities. The
character of our choices will be measured by the number of people who will live
the fortunate story of Baby K.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Poster by Bruce Mau

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1996


                             2653 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 152;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

HEADLINE: The Next Hundred Years -- Quantum Leaps;
The Medicine Cabinet

BYLINE: By Alexandra Bandon

BODY:

   Never mind gene therapy and robotic spinal-cord microsurgery. Some of the
real miracles of 21st-century medicine, pharmaceutical experts say, will be
found in your medicine cabinet.

   Drugs will be more effective, tailored to the individual and to a wider array
of ailments, as diseases are broken down into distinct strains. Medical
ingredients will come from more sources, too, as scientists plumb the oceans and
rain forests. Homeopathic remedies will shed the stigma that most 20th-century
doctors placed on alternative medicines. And the line between pharmaceuticals
and cosmetics will continue to blur as beauty aids offer more and more medical
relief.

    But no matter what advances medicine makes, it won't eliminate the aches and
pains of everyday life. Where there is stress, there will be headaches and
heartburn, and the fastest remedies analgesics and antacids will be the
simplest. When old-fashioned aspirin stops your head from pounding in mere
minutes, you will still think it's a miracle.   Alexandra Bandon

COSMETICS
Makeup hasn't changed for thousands of years,says William Lauder, president of
Origins. Advances in color technology, however, will enable consumers to
custom-design thousands of hues themselves.

SELF-INJECTOR

   A high-pressure blast delivers injections for everything from migraines to
allergies without needles. Evolved from needle-free devices used currently by
doctors administering vaccines.


   LIVING-SKIN DISPENSER

   This cryogenic dispenser keeps living skin frozen until it is needed for deep
wounds. Researchers can already make sheets of dermis the under layer of skin
for burn patients. (We can grow about six football fields from one neonatal
foreskin, says Marie Burke of Advanced Tissue Sciences.) This dispenser also
supplies the epidermis, or outer layer, genetically engineered to prevent the
immune system from rejecting it.

SKIN-GROWTH FACTORS

   This solution, derived from proteins that the skin naturally produces when it
heals itself, hastens the repair of cuts and scrapes. Speeding up the process
reduces scarring,says Gretchen Johnson, a researcher at Genzyme Tissue Repair.


   TOOTHPASTE

   Won't just remove tartar. It will eliminate the bacteria responsible for
tooth decay, posits Dr. George Poste of SmithKline Beecham.


   MELANIN CREAM

   We need to protect our skin by making it darker, says Horst Rechelbacher, the
founder and chief executive officer of Aveda Corporation. This cream bolsters
the body's natural reserves of melanin, offering a more permanent and effective
option to self-tanning lotions.

PRESCRIPTION PILLS

   The all-in-one strategy: pills that supply an individual's daily prescription
needs in a single swallow. They are custom-made at the local pharmacy and
specific to the exact strain of the disease (indicated by an alphanumeric code)
and the patient's gene type, a broad category similar to blood type.

MOISTURIZER

   Contains sun block and enzymes that repair damage caused by ultraviolet rays.
UVA and UVB rays smash the DNA, says Dr. George Poste, the head of research at
SmithKline Beecham. So we'll try to repair that before cancer develops.


   EYEDROPPER

   Delivers medicine through the eye's membrane, which can absorb it almost as
fast as an IV can deliver it to a vein, according to Dr. Robert Berkow, editor
of the Merck Manuals.


   ANTACIDs

   Quell upset stomachs and kill H. pylori, the bacterium confirmed in 1992 to
cause most ulcers.


   NASAL INHALERS

   Medicine enters the bloodstream faster when it is inhaled through the lungs.
Here, a formula of vitamins and herbal remedies offers a boost.


   VIDEO SCREEN

   Pass the bar code on your prescription bottles over the cabinet's scanner (at
left) and information about the drug and your dosage pops up on the screen; it
can also double as your television or phone, and provide access to your home
computer. The screen appears both inside the cabinet and on the outer mirror.


   SCANNER

   Security system and medical aid in one. A simple touch unlocks the cabinet to
authorized family members. The device also enters transdermal blood readings and
other statistics into a computerized and confidential medical record accessible
to doctors. It reminds you which prescriptions to take and which nutrients you
may be missing each day. It automatically adjusts the water and air temperatures
and the humidity and aromas in the bathroom.


   SKIN GLUE

   Holds minor cuts closed. Already in the testing stage, according to Dr. Ed
Barthell, at the American College of Emergency Physicians, these epoxies contain
some of the same compounds as superglues.


   ANTISEPTIC CREAM

   Contains the infection-fighting agents found in white blood cells. Sold by
prescription, since overuse could lead to resistant strains of bacteria.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1996


                             2654 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 168;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 900 words

HEADLINE: The Next Hundred Years -- Church and State;
Peace Prevails

BYLINE: By Claudia Dreifus;   Claudia Dreifus is a contributing writer for the
Magazine. Her most recent article was on Esther Dyson, the writer and futurist.

BODY:

   In the Buddhist tradition, the future counts for little. Nonetheless, when
Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama and the spiritual and temporal leader of Tibet in
exile, was asked to speculate on the landscape of faith a century from now, he
gave it his best try. He was interviewed in Bloomington, Ind., on a brilliant
summer morning, after having laid the cornerstone for a new Buddhist temple.

 Q: In the next hundred years, thanks to organ transplants and genetic
therapies, people may be able to live much longer lives. If you had the chance
to do that, would you take it?
 Dalai Lama: The mere living is not so important. The important thing is
usefulness. So if I could get another hundred years more and be useful, then . .
. good. Otherwise, you just create more problems for others. And then, from the
Buddhist viewpoint, isn't it better to have another young body [through
reincarnation]? There's a Buddhist story about an old monk who was dying and
everyone was very sad. He said: "Don't be sad. Right now, I have an old,
decaying body. But very soon . . . I get a fresh young body."


    Q: Three years ago, you predicted that the next hundred years would be a
century of peace, hope and justice. Since then, there have been massacres in
Rwanda and Burundi, the Northern Irish peace discussions have been blown apart
and the Chinese have kidnapped the young boy you designated to be the Panchen
Lama. Are you still optimistic about the future?
 A: Oh yes. Of course. A handful of shortsighted people have always existed. But
overall, their day is over because the public's attitude toward war and violence
has become much healthier than at any time in history. People used to be much
more jingoistic and nationalistic compared with the way they are now.

   Recently I was talking with the English Queen Mother. She is 96, and I asked
her, "What changes have you seen in your lifetime?" She answered: "When I was
young, we had not much concern about the outside world. Now people have a great
concern about what is happening all over the world." This is a very positive
change.

   So I believe that due to [the revolution in] information, generally speaking,
any leader, if he tried to mobilize the whole nation for war, would find it
impossible. In previous times, it was quite possible. Well, small-scale wars,
perhaps they can still do it. But large-scale wars, I think, are not likely. I
do believe that in the next century we have to seriously think about putting a
complete stop to the arms trade.


    Q: Buddhism has become quite popular in the West. Could you see a future
American President who is a practicing Buddhist?

   A: No, I think someone in the Judeo-Christian tradition would be better. I
prefer for people in Western countries to follow their own traditions. I have no
desire to propagate.


    Q: A hundred years in the future, what will be the role of women in
religion?

   A: I think improved. Because the women want it.


    Q: Can you see a situation where there might be a woman as Pope, a woman as
Archbishop of Canterbury, a woman as Dalai Lama?

   A: In the Buddhist world, there's not much problem. Some of the Lamas of high
reincarnation are women.


    Q: Is it possible that you, the 14th Dalai Lama, might be the last Dalai
Lama?

   A: It is possible. Not as the result of external force, though. If the
majority of the Tibetan people feel that the Dalai Lama institution is no longer
relevant, then the institution will automatically cease. Now, if that happens
while I'm alive or just after my death, then I am obviously the last Dalai Lama.
But if my death comes in the next one or two years, then most probably the
Tibetan people will want to have another incarnation. Of that I'm quite certain.
Of course, there is the possibility that Tibetans become insignificant in our
land and all decisions are made by the Chinese. It is possible and very sad.


    Q: Are you concerned that you might have a violent death?

   A: It is possible, I don't know. Airplanes trouble me. Dying in the ocean.
And ending up in the stomach of a shark.


    Q: One hundred years from now, what would you like to be remembered for?

   A: As a Buddhist practitioner I have no interest in that. So long as I am
alive, my time and my life must be utilized properly. Then after my death, I
don't care how people remember me.


    Q: Is it true that you like to go shopping when you travel?

   A: I like it. I'm a human being. I think human beings have a lot of
curiosity. I go in Los Angeles, sometimes I shop for myself. Shoes . . . small
electronic equipment . . . cat food. I go to shopping malls just like they were
museums.


    Q: Many people get a sense of God by observing nature. What will religions
be like in a hundred years if there is little nature left on earth?

   A: The world itself is nature. The sun, the moon, they are nature. Even if
there were no more animals, nature would still be here. For those religions that
believe in a creator, they would have to find reasons to explain why our
beautiful blue planet became a desert.

   If you ask me whether it's good or bad, of course it's bad. But in the
Buddhist tradition, something like that would not change our attitude. We
believe the whole world will come and disappear, come and disappear -- so
eventually the world becomes desert and even the ocean dries up. But then again,
another new world is reborn. It's endless.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1996


                             2655 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 27, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: 1% of Caucasians found to be immune to HIV; 2 mutant genes believed to
bar AIDS virus from body cells, study finds

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Adding to a recent surge of AIDS discoveries, scientists are reporting today
that a small portion of the Caucasian population is genetically protected from
becoming infected with the virus that causes the disease.

   Scientists did not find this protection among any of the blacks they studied,
suggesting that the genetic trait has traveled mainly among whites.

   "This opens up a whole new avenue for designing both diagnostics and
therapies," said Dr. Stephen O'Brien, leader of the AIDS genetics research team
at the National Cancer Institute in Frederick. He is the senior author of a
study appearing in today's edition of the journal Science.

   O'Brien said that a better understanding of how the genes protect people
could enable scientists to develop drugs, vaccines, gene therapies and even bone
marrow transplants that give similar protection to others.

   The discovery was made by drawing data from 1,955 people across the country
who have exposed themselves repeatedly to the AIDS virus through high-risk sex,
intravenous drug use and contaminated blood products.

   The team found 17 who had inherited two copies of a mutated gene, one from
each parent; all remained free of infection despite repeated encounters with the
virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

   Others who inherited a single copy were not protected, but progressed more
slowly to AIDS and lived longer once they acquired the virus.

   At the very least, the finding may have solved part of a two-part mystery
that has baffled scientists who have followed the epidemic: Why do some people
remain virus-free despite their high-risk practices? And why do some infected
people live for 10 or 15 years before progressing to AIDS, while others progress
much sooner?

   It also shows that some genetic alterations help people to stay healthy, in
contrast to others that cause diseases such as cystic fibrosis or Huntington's
chorea.

   AIDS is caused by a virus, known as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
that invades important cells of the immune system -- crippling the body's
ability to ward off killer infections. A gene, known as CKR5, produces a protein
that sits on a cell's coat and serves as a doorway through which the AIDS virus
enters.

   But an altered form of the gene seems to impede the virus' entry, O'Brien
said. One copy is enough to slow the pace of infection, while two block it
entirely.

   Based on data collected in the study, O'Brien said it appears that about 11
percent of the Caucasian population has one copy of the altered gene. About 1
percent has both copies.

   A single mutation is present in about 1.7 percent of African Americans, while
the double mutation is absent. Other scientists studying cultures in Africa have
not found any evidence of the altered gene there, suggesting that black
Americans who have one copy probably inherited it from white ancestors.

   The discovery is an outgrowth of recent findings by Dr. Robert Gallo,
director of the University of Maryland's Institute of Human Virology, and other
scientists who identified a class of chemicals known as chemokines that are part
of the body's natural defense against AIDS.

   Gallo, interviewed yesterday, said the altered genes may block entry of the
AIDS virus by boosting the body's production of chemokines.

   "It may be encouraging the overproducing of chemokines, which interfere with
the virus ever getting in the door," he said.

   Gallo said it is likely that many people will want access to tests that can
tell if they are genetically protected. "At the beginning, it would probably be
cost prohibitive," he said.

   The Frederick team drew data from several studies that have tracked the AIDS
epidemic among high-risk populations. These included homosexual men, intravenous
drug users and hemophiliacs.

   Two studies were based at least in part at the Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions. The Alive study, led by Dr. David Vlahov, has followed the
epidemic in a group of intravenous drug users in East Baltimore. That group,
composed largely of African Americans, showed no evidence of natural protection.

   Hopkins also has a major presence in the Multicenter AIDS Cohort, a study of
homosexual men in four cities including Baltimore.

   Pub Date: 9/27/96

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1996


                             2656 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 27, 1996, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1193 words

HEADLINE: Mutant Gene Can Slow AIDS Virus; Cancer Institute Study Indicates Some
People May Be Impervious

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   A genetic mutation common in U.S. whites slows the progression of AIDS in
people infected with the AIDS-causing virus and, in some cases, protects
individuals against the disease, according to a new study.

   Scientists said the new information on the role played by the defective gene
could lead to advances in the fight against AIDS by spurring the development of
medicines or vaccines that mimic the protective mutation's effects.

   "It's a beautiful study," said Robert C. Gallo, head of the University of
Maryland's Institute of Human Virology in Baltimore, who in 1984 co-discovered
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

   The new work shows that about 1 in 7 U.S. whites and about 1 in 59 U.S.
blacks inherit the protective, mutant gene from one parent, along with a normal
copy of the gene from the other parent. This harmless genetic condition
naturally slows the progress of AIDS, giving an average of three extra years of
life to those infected with HIV, according to the study in today's issue of
Science.

   The study also confirms previous hints that about 1 percent of American
whites inherit a mutant version of the gene from both parents, a doubly
protective dose that makes these individuals virtually impervious to infection
even if they are repeatedly exposed to the virus.

   The new research, led by the National Cancer Institute's Stephen J. O'Brien,
Michael Dean and Mary Carrington, helps explain why some people exposed to HIV
fare better than others. It also shows that the protective mutation is extremely
rare in African blacks, which suggests that the genetic glitch may have arisen
in an ancestral Caucasian some time after the two races diverged.

   Researchers praised the findings as an example of the benefits that can
accrue from the dogged and unglamorous work of community-based AIDS
organizations, which have for more than a decade collected blood samples from
thousands of HIV-infected people and kept track of each individual's fate. It
was through the NCI team's genetic analysis of those samples that the naturally
occurring protective factors were found.

   "It's the extensive epidemiological data collected on these patients that
made this work possible," said O'Brien, who directs NCI's laboratory of genomic
diversity in Frederick, Md.

   The work is the latest in a rapid-fire series of discoveries since June that
has shifted AIDS researchers' attention away from the virus itself and onto a
protein studding the surface of some human cells. The protein, known as CKR5 or
CCR5, is part of a portal system that allows the AIDS virus to enter cells of
the immune system. People with mutant CKR5 genes cannot make the crucial portal
protein, and hence are protected to varying extents from viral invasion.

   In collaboration with scientists in more than 20 U.S. cities, the NCI team
analyzed genetic material, or DNA, from 1,955 people known to be at high risk of
AIDS. Some participants already had full-blown AIDS, others were HIV-positive
but not yet ill, and some were HIV-negative despite having been repeatedly
exposed to the virus by having sexual intercourse with an infected person,
sharing needles with an infected intravenous drug user, or receiving infusions
of contaminated blood products used to treat hemophiliacs.

   The researchers focused on the CKR5 gene, which carries instructions for
making a protein on macrophages, the white blood cells that HIV initially
infects. That protein serves as a docking site for an immune system hormone, but
the AIDS virus can usurp the site to infect macrophages.

   Everybody carries two copies of the CKR5 gene. The team found that 282 of the
study participants shared a common mutation in one copy of that gene. In the
mutated version, 32 of the gene's approximately 1,000 DNA coding units were
missing, an absence that interferes with the docking site's construction. Since
the other copy of the gene was intact in these people, HIV still had some
doorways available. But the partial defect apparently slowed the virus's march
through the immune system, lengthening the average time from infection to
illness to 13 years, compared with the national average of 10 years.

   Analysis showed that this slower rate of progression held true only for those
who had become infected by sex, perhaps because the higher viral doses
associated with blood product transfusions or use of injected drugs overwhelm
the modest protection offered by having one copy of the mutated gene.

   However, when the mutation occurred in both copies of the gene, docking site
construction was completely blocked and protection from the virus was total.
Among the 17 people in the study with dual mutations, none was infected with
HIV, no matter what had put them at risk.

   The team also found eight smaller mutations in the same gene that appear to
offer some protection against AIDS. Yet, they note that 97 percent of 622
long-term nonprogressors studied -- people infected with HIV whose health has
not declined as expected -- had none of the nine mutations. That suggests there
are other protective mutations awaiting discovery.

   Scientists said drug developers could now consider testing genetic therapies
that interfere with the normal CKR5 gene's function, or drugs or vaccines that
knock out the CKR5 protein. Since people with doubly mutated copies of the gene
are apparently healthy, they said, it would appear that the CKR5 target is
ideal: it is critical for the virus but unneeded by the patient.

   Some suggested cautiously that bone marrow transplants from AIDS-resistant
donors might prove useful. But they warned that transplants might be useless for
recipients already infected with HIV, and unjustifiably expensive and risky for
disease prevention.

   "I'd rather use a condom than a bone marrow transplant" to prevent AIDS, said
Anthony S. Fauci, chief of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, who otherwise praised the work.

   The new report also holds interest for medical historians. Although about 15
percent of Caucasians of European descent carry one copy of the so-called
delta-32 mutation, only 1.7 percent of African Americans do, according to the
study. The mutation is essentially absent among native Africans, suggesting its
existence in African Americans is the result of bloodline mixing in this
country.

   Those extreme differences in genetic frequencies suggest the mutation arose
in the Caucasian lineage after it diverged from the African one some 150,000 to
200,000 years ago. O'Brien said scientists would not expect to find such a
recently arising mutation in 15 percent of the U.S. white population unless it
offered some benefit to those who acquired it.

   O'Brien hypothesized that the world was once swept by an ancient epidemic
caused by a virus that, like HIV, took advantage of the CKR5 protein. Because
people who had the mutation were more likely to survive than those with the
normal gene, the mutation's frequency in the population grew.

   No one knows what that disease was, or whether it still exists. "It probably
wasn't AIDS," O'Brien said. "But whatever it was, it probably had a high
mortality."


GRAPHIC: Illustration, The Washington Post, HOW THE VIRUS IS BLOCKED Some U.S.
whites inherit two copies of a genetic mutation that prevent the HIV virus from
entering white blood cells.  NORMAL GENE Virus enters through protein receptor
made by gene MUTATED GENE No receptor for virus to enter cell Copies of Can
virus Typical mutated gene infect cells?  progression to AIDS None Yes 10 years
One Yes 10 years for hemophiliacs and drug users, 12 to 13 years for those
infected through sexual contact Two No None

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1996


                             2657 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                          September 26, 1996, Thursday

SECTION: Thersday; Pg.  58

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: PROGNOSIS: POSITIVE
NEW SCIENCE THAT CAN SAVE YOU LIFE

BYLINE: By Colette Bouchez Daily News Medical Writer

BODY:


   While finding your cancer early is still your best defense, fortunately,
medical science will not leave you in the lurch at any stage of your disease. In
the past decade, and especially in the last five years, a number of important
advances have made surviving breast cancer a viable reality for women, who, just
a few short years ago, would have perished without hope.

   As we go forward with breast cancer research, here's what's on the cutting
edge right now :

   Mono-Clonal Antibody Therapy

   This treatment utilizes laboratory created antibodies designed to attack a
protein (called HER2) found on the surface of cancer cells. This, in turn,
reduces the ability of those cells to continue dividing and multiplying at a
rapid rate. As a result, even advanced-stage tumors can stop growing, and some
may shrink in size, or even disappear.

   According to Dr. Larry Norton, chief of the breast service at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, where much of the research is taking place, We have
studied an anti-HER2 antibody that is so precise it can be given repeatedly to
patients with safety and without loss of activity.

   Bone Marrow and Stem Cell Transplantation

   These treatments help patients cope with the extremely high doses of
chemo-therapy necessary to kill advanced stage cancers. The treatment revolves
around preserving our stem cells, which are found in the blood and in bone
marrow. Their purpose is to aid in the manufacturing of life-giving red and
white blood cells. Normally, high doses of chemotherapy damage stem cells, which
in turn can make surviving treatment difficult or impossible.

   But, according to Dr. Jan Dutcher, chief of oncology at Montefiore Medical
Center, by removing some stem cells prior to the chemotherapy treatment, and
then returning them to the body afterwards, we can preserve some of their
life-giving forces.

   "Then the body can begin immediately manufacturing fresh new red blood cells,
says Dutcher. This, in turn, makes recovery from the chemo-therapy treatments
faster and easier.

   Gene Therapy

   A new twist on the stem cell theory, this therapy utilizes harmless viruses
to carry fortifying agents into the bone marrow before it's transplanted back in
the body. According to Dr. Karen Antman, chief of medical oncology at Columbia
Presbyterian Medical Center, should cancer recur, facilitating the need for more
chemo-therapy, the newly fortified bone marrow can withstand the treatment.

   "In this respect, even the most advanced breast cancer patients have a chance
for recovery, says Antman.

   The Breast Cancer Vaccine

   Perhaps most impressive are studies being conducted at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering on what may turn out to be the most startling breast cancer
discovery of all: A vaccine that, at least theoretically, could prevent women
from ever getting this disease.

   Although still in its preliminary stages, the hospital reports the treatment
is being designed to stimulate the immune system to respond to a protein that is
present on the

   surface of some 90% of all breast cancer cells. The vaccine, called MUC-1,
was developed at the Center by Dr. Phillip Livingston, and is currently being
tested on breast cancer patients who are believed to have a high rate of
recurrence. Reports from Sloan-Kettering say that results are promising, and
they plan to continue testing this, and three additional cancer vaccines within
the next several years.


GRAPHIC: HELAYNE SEIDMAN LOOKING FOR THE CURE: Dr. Polly Etkind of Montefiore
Hospital examines petri dishes in the breast cancer research lab.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1996


                             2658 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 26, 1996, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 118 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE IN BRIEF;
SCIENCE FILE;
 Successful Gene Treatment for Cystic Fibrosis Reported

BYLINE: From Times staff and wire reports

BODY:


   A British geneticist said Wednesday that he and colleagues have successfully
used genes to treat cystic fibrosis patients. Eight volunteers with cystic
fibrosis were given one dose of normal genes by Dr. Chris Higgins of Oxford
University to counteract the genetic mutation that causes the disease. Six had
no symptoms of the disease for three weeks, he reported.

   Higgins said the technique used was not strictly gene therapy. "What we are
really doing is gene transfer, not gene therapy. But we believe it can also have
clinical benefit," he said. Higgins, who was preparing to publish his findings,
said the important part was that the therapy was safe. "It did no harm, no
damage whatsoever."

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1996


                             2659 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   September 24, 1996, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: LET'S OPEN NEW FRONTS FOR WAR ON CANCER

BODY:


   Are we losing the war on cancer?

   A U.S. Department of Health and Human Services document states, "There has
been a steady rise in the cancer mortality rate in the United States in the last
half-century." The National Center for Health Statistics tells us that cancer is
the second-leading cause of death in the United States and adds, "In 1950 the
age-adjusted death rate from cancer in the U.S. was 125 deaths per 100,000
population; by 1993 cancer mortality rate was 133 deaths per 100,000."

   In the past 25 years, $ 29 billion has been spent by the National Cancer
Institute on cancer initiatives. Simple logic tells us that if cancer mortality
rates are going up, the surgery/radiation/chemotherapy route now favored is not
working wonders. As a former cancer patient, I checked and found one of my chemo
drugs in category 2a: "probable human carcinogen . . . sufficient evidence in
animal studies," as evaluated by the National Toxicology Program.

   In the June edition of Atlantic Monthly, Dr. David Plotkin, who has treated
breast-cancer patients for 35 years, used this simple logic when discussing
chemotherapy: Chemotherapy wipes out from 95 percent to 99.9 percent of all
cancer cells. The remaining cells are free to grow and further divide because
they innately resist chemotherapy.

   Plotkin asks the following question, "If chemotherapy has little impact on a
woman's chance of surviving either aggressive or indolent tumors, is it any
wonder that it makes few inroads on mortality?" With regard to radiation he
says, "Radiation has no known effect on distant metastases from breast cancer
(nonlocal recurrence). . . . Post-surgical radiation has no demonstrable effect
on survival."

   If chemotherapy doesn't kill all cancer cells and radiation does not help
cancer that has spread beyond its original site, why are these types of
treatment used so extensively? Plotkin admits that chemo can buy patients some
time and that chemo side-effects aren't as bad as they used to be. Others argue
that, as carcinogens and toxic substances, chemo drugs tear down the immune
system and can cause damage to the body's organs. Why are they used so much,
then?

   The multibillion-dollar-a-year chemotherapy industry would be better served
by manufacturing nontoxic cancer treatments.

   Senate Bill 1477 "would enhance availability to new therapies by expanding
access to experimental drugs and medical devices." This bill deserves our
support. U.S. News and World Report sources state that about one-half of all
cancer patients turn to unorthodox treatments for their diseases.

   Legitimate, scientifically sound alternative therapies are in the making or
are already available. Biological-response modifiers and gene therapy, in
general, work against cancer by triggering the body's natural defense
mechanisms. Research in these areas must be adequately funded.

   Cancer research centers such as the Anderson Center in Houston and Roswell
Park in Buffalo should not be allowed to languish while we pay obscene amounts
of money to overprivileged athletes and movie stars. MARCIA A. VanDEWARK West
Seneca

GRAPHIC: RONALD J. COLLERAN/Buffalo News; Toward new therapies: Dr. Yasmin
Thanavala manipulates potato seeds in genetic research at Roswell Park Cancer
Institute.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1996


                             2660 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

HEADLINE: Protein Linked to 3 Nerve Ailments

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

BODY:

   IN two papers representing the work of 19 researchers, scientists reported
last week that they had seen, at a molecular level, the damage to an important
protein that is the cause of three genetic nerve disorders.

   Dr. Thomas Bird, a professor at the University of Washington and chief of
neurology at the Veterans Affairs hospital in Seattle, who is not associated
with the groups who made the reports, said that the papers "are examples of
where medicine has arrived: at the molecular detail of human disease."

    Indeed, using the technique known as X-ray crystallography, researchers were
able to pinpoint how the atoms in one molecule of a very important protein
attach -- or do not attach, when a gene is faulty -- to the atoms of another
molecule of the protein, and they describe how that damage can led to effects
ranging from numbness and stumbling to crippling and death.

   The two papers were published in the September issue of the journal Neuron.
The chief authors are, for one report, Laura E. Warner, a predoctoral student,
and Dr. James R. Lupski of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, and, for
the other, Drs. Lawrence Shapiro and Wayne A. Hendrickson of Columbia University
in Manhattan.

   At the center of the three disorders studied is the white sheath, called the
myelin sheath, which wraps the nerves outside the brain and spinal cord, much as
plastic coats and insulates electrical wires. Myelin is a crucial element in the
bodies of all large animals, part of the insulation that enables nerve signals
to move rapidly over distances of inches and feet, as they must to go from the
spinal cord to the hands and feet.

   The disorders are all examples of what happens when the myelin sheath breaks
down, interfering with electrical nerve impulses to and from the spinal cord.
The key to the breakdown is a protein called P-zero that is the chief structural
element in myelin. When the gene for P-zero is defective, the myelin cannot wrap
itself tightly around the nerve and may break down altogether.

   The paper in Neuron from the Baylor scientists described five new mutations
in the P-zero gene and how they disable the P-zero protein. Depending on how
well the protein functions with each mutation, the authors write, a person with
the mutation may have different levels of damage to nerve function. It is the
severity of damage that determines which of the three disorders a patient has;
they were once thought to be distinct genetic syndromes. Instead, the
researchers say, these syndromes are all linked. They are Charcot-Marie-Tooth
syndrome (named after its discoverers), Dejerine-Sottas syndrome and congenital
hypomyelination. In doing their study, the scientists studied the DNA of the
patients, using sequencing techniques to look for mutations in the P-zero gene.

   When nerve signals fail, illness can result as muscles fail to respond to the
nerves and become numb. In the mildest cases, the neuropathy that results causes
numbness in the hands and feet and some clumsiness. But in the most severe
cases, such disorders can lead to crippling; infants can die when the muscles of
the diaphragm are unable to keep up regular breathing.

   The other paper, from the team led by the Columbia scientists, showed the
molecular details of what may be the trouble with the myelin. That team used
X-ray crystallography, a means for viewing the three-dimensional position of
atoms in a molecule, to see what happened to the myelin when the P-zero protein
was not functioning properly.

   Myelin is produced by Schwann cells, which attach themselves to the nerves
and wrap their myelin-containing membranes around the part of the nerve that
transmits signals.  These sheaths are each wrapped dozens of times around each
nerve.

   For the insulation to stay in place, each layer of the myelin sheath must
stick to the layer laid down before it. Otherwise, the wrapping will unwind like
a loose Ace bandage.

   What makes the layers stick together is the P-zero proteins. They rise up
from the surface of each layer in what might look, under a microscope, like an
array of regular hills. The hills and valleys from one layer match the hills and
valleys of the layer above it in a perfect mesh, a form of molecular velcro.
Then, atoms of the P-zero proteins in one layer snap onto atoms, via atomic
bonds, in P-zero proteins of the neighboring layer.

   When mutations occur that make the layers unable to bind properly to one
another, the myelin can slough off, leaving the axon bare and impeding the
transmission of nerve signals. Different severities of disease are correlated
with how much myelin insulation is lost.

   All of this has no immediate benefit for those who suffer from one of the
three diseases, but in the future it is likely to. People with myelin
deficiencies should be able to determine which type of mutation they carry, both
to predict the severity of their disease or the risks they might run by having
children.

   The most common, and mildest, of the three disorders, Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease, occurs in about 150,000 patients in the United States, and about 40
percent of them have mutations like those described in the paper. Dr. Lupski
said the disease often appeared when a person was in the mid-20's as a failure
of the nerves to send signals to the outside calf muscles. The muscles begin to
atrophy, causing patients to begin walking on the outside edges of their feet
and leading to frequent sprained ankles and tripping on stairs. As the disease
progresses, patients develop the "equine gait," in which patients tend to walk
by lifting the foot from the knee and then putting it down. That leads to back
problems and makes it hard to climb stairs. Still later, numbness sets in, and
the hands can become affected.

   Dejerine-Sottas syndrome involves a more extreme loss of muscle control. It
shows up earlier, usually in the first two years of life, delaying milestones of
development like walking. As the disease progresses, it leads to complete
crippling. Patients may die of related causes, like a failure of the diaphragm
muscles to keep the patient breathing during pneumonia.

   Congenital hypomyelination is the rarest and the most lethal of these
disorders, most often leading to death in the first few weeks of life. When this
occurs, no myelin wraps the nerves at all, and the nerves that control breathing
soon fail. The paper from the Baylor scientists is the first to describe the
gene defect for this disorder.

   Work on these disorders might lead to treatments in which defective proteins
would be replaced through gene therapy or managed through drugs. But any such
treatments would be a decade or more away.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Computer-generated image of crystals of myelin protein P-zero;
arrangement may mirror how it works to link layers of myelin in nature. (Dr.
Lawrence Shapiro); A nerve biopsy from a patient with hypomyelination; "a" is an
axon without myelin; "b" is an axon with an abnormally thin sheath. (Dr.
Stirling Carpenter)

Diagram: "A Flawed Protein"
Nerve fibers are normally insulated by myelin sheathing, arranged like beads on
a string with nodes between them. Nerve impulses are sent speeding along the
fiber, jumping from node to node, getting faster and faster. If the myelin
insulation is missing or faulty, the nerve impulse is not accelerated and the
signal is disrupted.

The myelin is laid down in tightly wrapped layers. In several nerve disorders,
the layers are thin, loose or completely missing.

A protein protrudes through membranes to form links with counterparts on the
next layer. Flaws in this protein's structure, marked with shading and symbols,
are linked to myelin failure. (Sources: Laura E. Werner; Dr. James R. Lupski)

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1996


                             2661 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 24, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z06; SECOND OPINION

LENGTH: 909 words

HEADLINE: Hope or Hype?

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford

BODY:


   One day it's a "miracle" or a "breakthrough." Then, after the dust settles,
the highly touted miracle doesn't pan out quite the way scientists hoped it
would. How can you make personal decisions about your health in the face of
ever-changing news reports? And what's going on here: Did the researchers make
false claims? Did the reporters get it all wrong?

   Sometimes the answer to both questions is yes. But sometimes the media's
roller-coaster coverage reflects the natural evolution of the Hot Story. Take
the reporting on gene therapy. In the five years since the first patient was
treated at the National Institutes of Health, gene therapy has gone from
breakthrough to bust to, well, almost boring.

   In the beginning, before there was any scientific data, gene therapy was
simply labeled a story of hope -- or fear, depending on whether your view of the
future was a Frankenstein nightmare or the dream of a disease-free zone of
genetically correct hominoids.

   But once genetically altered cells flowed into a 4-year-old girl to get her
body to produce a missing enzyme and thus cure her rare immune disorder, gene
therapy became a "new-hope" story. "If the experiment works," the Health section
reported in September 1990, "her fatal disease could be cured at its genetic
roots." The bold experiment "has opened the door to a wide range of new gene
therapies that many scientists believe will eventually revolutionize the
treatment of a large number of illnesses from heart disease to cancer."

   The New Hope phase was quickly followed by a Hype phase. Every time a disease
gene was discovered -- one for retardation, another for colon cancer, breast
cancer, alcoholism, obesity, even bed-wetting -- it made news. Gene therapy
experiments proliferated, creating a group of celebrity patients. When NIH
granted emergency use of an unapproved gene treatment to a brain cancer patient
in 1993, an official explained: "This is what we should all be hoping for -- the
technology is advancing, it's being disseminated more widely and there are more
patients that perhaps can benefit." In 1994, Time magazine headlined a special
report on its cover: "Genetics. The Future Is Now." adding, "New breakthroughs
can cure diseases and save lives, but how much should nature be engineered?"

   Then came the backlash. Gene-bashing stories started dominating the
headlines. Discoveries of some disease genes couldn't be confirmed -- the
Alzheimer's gene, for example. Identifying the gene didn't necessarily translate
into a cure -- Huntington's disease, for example. In the case of widespread
medical problems such as breast cancer and obesity, the discovery of a gene
could help explain only a small proportion of the cases.

   Most important, gene therapy failed to produce any "miracles." Of the more
than 200 people treated with gene therapy for a range of diseases from cystic
fibrosis to a rare fatal liver disorder, no patient has yet been cured. Late
last year, when scientists reported that the first gene therapy patient was
doing well, they said they didn't know if that was due to her new genes or a new
drug she had been taking. These disappointing results, The Washington Post
reported, have "spurred criticism that glory-seeking scientists and profit
seeking companies have moved too quickly into human studies."

   Given the media's predilection to move a story from breakthrough to bust, has
the American public been badly misled on the subject of gene therapy? I don't
think so. My colleague Victor Cohn says there are basically two kinds of medical
stories: New Hope and No Hope. Strides and setbacks are the norm in science.

   To be sure, roller-coaster coverage is not good journalism, but mostly the
coverage of gene therapy has reflected the evolution within the scientific
community. Right from the beginning, most stories included cautionary
paragraphs. But they were often no match for the enthusiastic quotes from
researchers and government officials involved in the experiment. This is typical
of the launching of any grand new project, whether it's landing astronauts on
the moon or changing genes in a person's cells.

   In time, and with real experience, the story comes back down to earth.
Coverage generally becomes more sophisticated, skeptical and critical. While it
is irresponsible of the press to hype a medical story as a miracle, it's also
irresponsible to ignore a story like gene therapy that serves as a lightning rod
for the whole field of molecular medicine.

   Today, the gene therapy story is quieter -- even routine. A recent study on
the experimental use of gene therapy to treat lung cancer barely got noticed. In
a way, gene therapy is back to where it started: a Some Hope story. Like other
promising experiments, some gene therapies may lead to better treatments and
many will not, but that is the nature of cutting edge research.

   In the Health section series on Rebecca Lilly, the Takoma Park teenager
battling brain cancer, her treatment with gene therapy was part of the story --
but not the whole story. It was also one of several experimental therapies that
the doctors have tried against her disease.

   That is how gene therapy should be evaluated -- as a promise, not a panacea.
A hope, but hardly a "breakthrough" or a "miracle."

   The message to the public is this: When you read about a medical miracle or a
breakthrough, beware. The lesson for us in the media is to be wary.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1996


                             2662 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 23, 1996, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 13B

LENGTH: 945 words

HEADLINE: ARE WE READY FOR DESIGNER GENES?

COLUMN: COMMENTARY COLUMN

BYLINE: John Schieszer

BODY:


   Research under way may allow children of future generations to run faster and
jump higher by manipulating their genetic makeup. Genetic discoveries are
occurring daily in scientific labs in St. Louis and across the country. Medical
detectives are identifying specific genes that are believed to be responsible
for specific illnesses. As a result, gene therapy trials are under way with AIDS
patients, cancer patients, arthritis patients and multiple sclerosis patients.
And the list keeps getting longer.

   These therapies fall into a category called somatic gene therapy, which
involves altering specific cells in the body. With somatic gene therapy, the
cells being altered are not being passed on to future generations.

   A second type of gene therapy, though, is called germ-line gene therapy. This
involves permanently altering genetic makeup and altering future generations of
a species. Today, there are mice, pigs, goats and other animals that have
undergone germ-line gene therapy. Technology will soon make possible germ-line
gene therapy in people; that has some scientists and medical ethicists alarmed.

   "When you do germ-line therapy you are changing things for generations to
come. You are experimenting on future generations without their consent," said
Dr. Stephen Lefrak, a professor of medicine and director of the Humanities
Program at Washington University School of Medicine.

   Yet, he, says, there are those who are arguing for doing just that. With
advances in technology, it is possible to envision germ-line gene therapy to
eliminate diabetes or even some types of cancer.

   "People have said, 'Let's not deal with it.' But in the future there will be
societal and scientific or technological pressure to pursue it," said Lefrak,
who believes society's view of gene therapy is changing.

   A survey published in the Journal of Medical Genetics has some scientists
deeply concerned. The survey, conducted in England in 1993 and 1994, involved
almost 1,000 people and it found that the percentage of those who would consider
genetic manipulation to make their children smarter or more beautitul more than
doubled in 12 months - to 11 percent from 5 percent. The 1994 survey also found
that 18 percent thought gene therapy would be acceptable for altering traits for
aggression or alcoholism.

   The authors say the survey showed that a sizable minority of people are not
averse to altering physical or behavioral characteristics. However, tinkering
with fetal genes to make sure kids don't develop diabetes or to insure they grow
up to be smarter or more beautiful is something that is still not yet
technically feasible.

   "People used to laugh at the Nazis for trying to create a super race. But I
don't think it is a joke," said Lefrak. "Certainly down the line it is not
inconceivable that the possibility of enhancement will create lots of pressures.
All parents wants their kid to be the best athlete and brightest kid at school."

   But modifying fetal genes will change a core part of a person. Lefrak and
others say there needs to be a comprehensive debate involving scientists, the
public and other professional groups. Tom Hooyman, Ph.D., a medical ethicist for
St. John's Mercy Medical Center, says messing with the human gene pool calls
into question what it really means to be human.

   "I look at my own children and there are a myriad of possibilities, and that
is what makes it wonderful," said Hooyman. "You can't control life. It is a fine
balance between stewarding and protecting, and I protect and appreciate life. It
is not something that I manipulate."

   Several organizations have made policy statements about germ-line gene
therapy. The European Research Council has come out against it and the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee for the United States will not entertain any
proposals on it. That committee currently is responsible for overseeing gene
therapy experiments.

   "There are no protocols for germ-line therapy. There have been exhaustive
efforts to make sure it doesn't occur," said Dr. Steven Brody, who spent five
years at the National Institutes of Health, where he was involved with the first
cystic fibrosis gene therapy trial.

   Brody, an assistant professor of medicine at Washington University, says some
scientists favor germ-line therapy because it could be advantageo us not to pass
on a gene that is harmful. But he says gene therapy has been greatly oversold.
It is years away from making it from the lab into widespread use.

   However, Lefrak says a race is under way among scientists around the world
involving gene therapy and in many ways it is similar to the arms race. Trying
to police germ-line gene therapy is like trying to police nuclear arms testing.

   Hooyman says that the U.S. should take a lead role in establishing standards
for genetically engineering human beings. "A regulatory process should be set up
and public discourse should determine what is acceptable," said Hooyman.

   The Rev. Kevin O'Rouke, director of the Center for Healthcare Ethics at St.
Louis University, says treating illness is completely different from "improving"
what is human. He says germ-line gene therapy must be handled much more
carefully than any other type of medical research.

   He says manipulating genes is never going to cure all our ills and the
question could become where do you stop. "Would it be better if we were all 10
feet tall? I don't think so. Would it be better if we could grow limbs again
like some of the lizards can? We cannot design how to improve the person," says
O'Rourke.

   Yet, some scientists are working on ways of doing just that through genetic
intervention.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1996


                             2663 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1996 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      September 20, 1996 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-05

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: Team untangles RNA structure CU scientists involved in effort

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:
 After four years of work, the three-dimensional atomic structure of a large
molecule of the genetic material RNA has been cracked by a team of U.S.
scientists.

   The research, which involved University of Colorado scientists, has
implications for both the origins of life and future biomedical research.

   Scientists from CU, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Yale University
grew crystals of a critical region of a ribozyme, or large enzyme of ribonucleic
acid, and then used X-rays to analyze atom positions to reconstruct the
molecule's shape.

   Tom Cech, the Nobel Prize-winning biochemistry professor who led the CU team,
said the new image has "simply stunned" scientists with the beauty of the RNA
molecule.

   The research shows how the double-helix-shaped areas of the molecule are
packed together with "glue" provided by magnesium ions commonly found in living
organisms. Since the ions are common in oceans, they presumably were available
long before life evolved on Earth.

   "Such molecules may have reproduced themselves in a primordial RNA world,"
Cech said.

   Two papers explaining the research were published in today's issue of the
weekly journal Science.

   The RNA imaging work could help efforts to crystallize areas of viral RNA.
Viruses such as HIV-1, polio, cold and influenza all use RNA as genetic
material.

   Ribozymes are being developed as gene therapy agents to repair defective
cellular RNA that causes genetic diseases such as sickle cell anemia, cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

   "Having the detailed structural information provided by the new images may
spur efforts to design molecular repair kits for defective RNA," Cech said.

   The RNA image may help scientists solve the "chicken and egg" question about
the origin of life: whether the informational molecule (nucleic acid) or the
functional catalyst (protein enzyme) came first.

   Cech shared the 1989 Nobel Prize in chemistry with Yale Professor Sidney
Altman for independent discoveries that RNA, like proteins, can act as catalysts
in living cells.

   The discovery indicates that RNA may have played a key role in the origin of
life.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1996


                             2664 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 19, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy tests new treatment; Large-scale trials array gene,
retrovirus against a brain cancer

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Genetic Therapy Inc., the Gaithersburg biotechnology company, and its parent,
Sandoz AG, launched a pivotal, large-scale clinical trial yesterday of what the
companies hope will prove a groundbreaking way to treat an incurable form of
brain cancer -- gene therapy.

   The companies said the trial involves 250 patients suffering from
glioblastoma multiforme at 40 medical institutions in the United States, Canada
and Europe.

   There is a lot riding on the trial for Sandoz, the Swiss pharmaceutical
giant.

   If the trial is successful, Sandoz and Genetic Therapy could be among the
first to show that gene therapy, which involves replacing or inactivating
disease-causing genes at the cellular level, can work.

   There is also a lot at stake financially for Sandoz.

   The company paid $ 295 million last year to acquire Genetic Therapy and will
invest an estimated $ 400 million to $ 600 million to develop and test the gene
therapy for glioblastoma multiforme.

   And Sandoz has staked at least part of its 21st century drug product pipeline
on the emergence of gene therapy as a safe, effective treatment.

   "We are hoping to make a very significant contribution to medicine with this
therapy," said Dr. Stephen Marcus, vice president for clinical and regulatory
affairs at Genetic Therapy.

   Marcus said the company does not plan to show that the treatment cures brain
cancer, but rather that it significantly slows its progression.

   "Our goal is to provide a novel treatment that gives patients longer to live,
and hopefully significantly improves their quality of life and their ability to
work," he said.

   The normal course of treatment for glioblastoma patients is surgery to remove
the tumor, followed by radiation and sometimes chemotherapy. The disease usually
begins progressing again eight to 10 months after surgery.

   The therapy that Genetic Therapy and Sandoz have begun testing will aim to
treat patients with an early-stage malignancy just after surgery to remove the
tumor, Marcus said. It involves saturating the tumor cavity walls, where
cancerous cells are almost always left behind and grow again, with a solution
that contains a gene derived from the herpes simplex virus.

   The gene is encapsulated in a mouse retrovirus that has been rendered
harmless. The retrovirus has been found to attach itself only to cells that are
dividing, which tumors cells do.

   Patients are also given a shot of the anti-viral drug ganciclovir. The
interaction of the drug and an enzyme produced by the herpes gene causes the
dividing tumor cells to die off, or commit "suicide." Normal brain cells are not
affected, Marcus said. It's for this reason that the treatment has been dubbed
the "suicide gene" by some researchers.

   Genetic Therapy found in an earlier study that the treatment did not cause
herpes or any other viral infections in patients, Marcus said.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
American Cancer Society, said the outcome of the trial will be closely watched
because this type of gene therapy could have applications for treating other
types of cancer that are localized, such as ovarian and early-stage prostate
cancer.

   Elizabeth Silverman, a biotechnology analyst and genomics expert with Punk,
Ziegel & Knoell, an investment bank in New York, said the initial market payoff
to Genetic Therapy and Sandoz would not be that large, if the brain cancer
therapy was ever approved by regulators.

   According to cancer experts, about 20,000 people in the United States and
Europe die from brain cancer each year. That's about one-sixth the number who
die from the leading cause of cancer deaths, lung cancer.

   But, Silverman said, Genetic Therapy and Sandoz may have wisely targeted
brain cancer to prove the effectiveness of its gene therapy, with an eye toward
expanding its use into larger disease markets.

   Because the disease is so fast moving and deadly, she said, people diagnosed
with it usually die within 12 months. That so-called "end point" offers the
companies an opportunity to gather data on the gene therapy in a period that
will not be financially prohibitive. Testing the therapy on other cancers, some
of which can last for years, might be hugely expensive.

   A Sandoz spokesman, Harry Rohme, said the company had not determined what the
gene therapy would cost. But Silverman, the analyst, said most experts believe
such treatments will cost more than $ 30,000.

   Pub Date: 9/19/96

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1996


                             2665 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1996 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          September 19, 1996 Thursday
                                 STATE EDITION

LENGTH: 602 words

HEADLINE: Manchester appoints Smith as vice president

BYLINE: BRIDGET MALONE

BODY:

   Manchester Partners International in Princeton has named M. Christine Smith
as vice president.

    Prior to this appointment, Smith served as the director of outpatient
services for the Carrier Foundation in Belle Mead, where she was responsible for
program development, management and marketing relations.

    Smith's background in the health care industry also includes consulting and
affiliation negotiations with health maintenance organizations.

    Before working in the health care field, Smith was a professional golfer.
She also formed her own consulting practice for professional and college
athletes.

    Smith earned a bachelor's degree from Loyola College, a master's degree from
Rutgers University and is currently a doctoral candidate at New York University.
Smith is also an adjunct professor with Rutgers Graduate School of Social Work.
PROVIDENT MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, Philadelphia, named Michael Gorman,
CPA, JD, and James Manhardt, CLU, general managers of the company. Both
previously served as managers with Meeker Sharkey Financial Services in
Cranford. SCELBA, SCELBA, DETITTA & WOLFSON, Montville, named Michael J. Paul of
Randolph, as an account supervisor with the firm's public relations department.
Paul previously served as an account executive with Berry Associates in
Morristown. TRANSWORLD HOME HEALTHCARE INC., Clark, named David Golush and
Robert Zalaznick to the board of directors. Golush is a managing director of
Ranieri & Co. Inc., while Zalaznick is currently the administrator of the Gene
Therapy Core Facility at the New York Hospital, Cornell Medical Center. WITHUM,
SMITH & BROWN, Princeton, said James C. Bourke, CPA, and Richard C. Coyne, CPA,
have joined the firm. CHAMPION MORTGAGE CO. INC., Parsippany, promoted Leigh
Beumee of Morristown, to vice president of marketing. She previously served as
director of marketing and communications. ALEXANDER & RICHARDSON, Warren, named
Kristina Maiwaldt to the account team to oversee data information systems and
telecommunications. FOX, ROTHSCHILD, O'BRIEN & FRANKEL, Philadelphia, named
Thomas D. Paradise of Medford Lakes, was chosen to head the firm's legal
malpractice defense group. He is currently a partner and a member of the
litigation department with the firm. NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF HEALTH
UNDERWRITERS, Washington, D.C., elected Michael J. Rose Sr. of Clifton as the
second vice president. Rose is the founder of Diversified Health Marketers Inc.
KAY CONSTRUCTION, Cherry Hill, named Frank A. Sansone of Voorhees as regional
vice president. MINTZ, ROSENFELD & COMPANY, LLC, Fairfield, named Carol Gabriele
of Roselle Park, as an administrator with the firm. She previously served as
vice president of operations with The Shultz Organization. Michael A. Gould,
CPA, of Mahwah, has been named as a member of the firm, concentrating on
counseling closely held businesses in diverse industries. Prior to this
position, Gould served as the principal owner of MA Gould & Associates, PA,
CPAs. GALSON CONSULTING, Westchester, N.Y., named Gary P. Schwartz, CIH, CSP, of
Livingston, regional director for the greater New York City metropolitan area.
He most recently served as director, environmental health services division with
Clayton Environmental Consultants Inc. in Edison. THE RECORD, Hackensack,
promoted Jonathan H. Markey of Kinnelon to president and chief operating
officer. Most recently, Markey served as executive vice president of
manufacturing and sales. SAINT PETER'S COLLEGE, Jersey City, named Joseph A.
Unanue Sr. to the board of trustees. He is currently the president of the
Secaucus-based Goya Foods Inc.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                             2666 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                  September 18, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2016 words

HEADLINE: Sickle cell often a surprise

BYLINE: Daniel Berger; of The Tampa Tribune

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:


   The genetic disease sickle cell anemia can only be inherited from two parents
who both carry the gene.

   The vast majority of those parents, however, show no symptoms of what they
carry. They may never learn they do until late in the game - after the birth of
their child with the incurable chronic disease.

   Sickle cell advocates say the key lies in greater awareness. Healthy people
who know they carry the gene - people with sickle cell trait, but not sickle
cell disease - can make more informed decisions about having children.

   The Legislature this year created a framework to make that happen.

   Through a bill sponsored by Sen. James Hargrett and Rep. Les Miller, both
D-Tampa, the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services is directed to
work more closely with local sickle cell groups to set up screening and
education programs.

   But Hargrett and Miller acknowledge their bill was disappointing. It didn't
include money needed to track and educate families of babies born with sickle
cell trait.

   More people with the inherited blood disorder now survive to adulthood - some
even into their 40s - because of better treatment, particularly babies getting
antibiotics preventively.

   Meanwhile, the annual medical costs for adults with sickle cell average $
20,000 to $ 30,000, says Kwaku Ohene-Frempong, chief medical officer of the
Sickle Cell Disease Association of America.

   Nationally, about 100,000 people have sickle cell disease and another 7,000
babies are born with it each year. Being a carrier isn't something picked up in
routine blood tests the average person tends to have over the years.

   Sickle cell disease can afflict Asian nationalities, particularly Indians or
Southeast Asians, or those from the Mediterranean basin, such as Greeks, Turks,
Sicilians, Sardinians, Maltese and Saudis.

   But it most frequently strikes blacks, a legacy of their heritage in Africa.
There, ironically, the gene strengthens resistance to malaria, a major killer.

   A relatively small number of Africans wind up with the two copies of the gene
giving them sickle cell disease. Those with one copy merely get the trait, which
also counters malaria. In Central Africa, 40 percent of Africans carry at least
one copy of the gene, protecting them from malaria, but only 4 percent have
sickle cell disease.

   In the United States, about one in 14 blacks - about 7 percent - carries the
gene and about one in 400 gets the disease. By contrast, 20 percent of people in
central Greece and the oases of Saudi Arabia have the gene. In Equatorial
Africa, 40 percent have the gene.

   The Mediterranean and Asian strains, though, are milder than those in Africa,
says Cameron Tebbi, a specialist who sees most of Tampa's sickle cell cases. He
is director of St. Joseph's Hospital's pediatric hematology and oncology
department.

   The most severe African substrain is labeled Central African Republic or
Bantu; the most mild is from Senegal; and the one in between, both
geographically and in severity, is from Benin. A fourth was recently pinpointed
in Cameroon among members of the Etok tribe, says Ohene-Frempong.

   A third of Americans with sickle cell disease have Benin from both parents.
Another third have mixtures of Benin and Bantu, and next most common is Bantu on
both sides, says Ohene-Frempong, also director of the Comprehensive Sickle Cell
Center at Philadelphia's Children's Hospital.

   The gene in question, on the 11th chromosome, codes for hemoglobin, the
oxygen-carrying substance in red blood cells. Only one amino acid in a long
molecular chain differentiates sickle hemoglobin from the normal type.

   That's enough to make it behave differently from normal hemoglobin. In the
absence of oxygen, it gels and forms long cigarlike shapes visible under an
electron microscope, says Tebbi.

   This causes the red blood cell to bow, from its usual shape like a doughnut,
with a hole punched not quite through, to the shape of a sickle or banana.

   Therein lies its original function.

   Malarial parasites lodging in red blood cells die when the cells take the
sickle shape, or when the misshapen cells are picked up by the spleen and
eliminated.

   When the sickle cell is charged with oxygen again the normal shape returns.
But eventually the cell loses its ability to bounce back, Tebbi says.

   Cells shaped like this don't flow well in the tiny capillaries branching off
arteries to deliver oxygenated blood to the body. They jam up, depriving that
area of oxygen. This slowly kills organs.

   Bone is especially susceptible because its blood vessels are very small,
Tebbi says. Sickle cell disease tends to kill off bone, painfully.

   Having such a basic problem sends other effects rippling throughout the body
chemistry.

   Sickle cells die faster, forcing the body to make up to eight times more of
them. Gallstones form and spleen problems develop from the sludge of all those
dead red blood cells.

   Eyes are vulnerable to retinal detachment. Wounds heal slowly in the
extremities, where less blood flows, causing sores in the feet. Joints corrode,
necessitating artificial joints later in life.

   Obstructed blood vessels in the head cause strokes. Patients suffer pain in
the abdomen, chest, spine and joints. Most common is bone pain in teenage boys.

   Nearly half of male sufferers endure painful, involuntary erections,
unrelated to sex, when blood without oxygen fills the penis, Tebbi says. It must
be treated with fluids and painkillers.

   Those with sickle cell trait may never get any symptoms - one reason they may
not learn they carry the gene, Tebbi says. Half their hemoglobin is sickle while
the other half is normal, transporting enough oxygen to supply the body except
at high altitudes or in unpressurized airplanes.

   Their cells also carry enough oxygen to keep sickle hemoglobin from gelling
and distorting the cell.

   This effect, and understanding what happens in the earliest days of life, has
led to promising avenues for treatment, Tebbi says.

   "The earliest symptom of sickle cell anemia," he says, "is a letter arriving
in the mail from the state of Florida" - one informing parents that routine
blood screenings show their newborn may have sickle cell disease.

   Until then, the baby has probably shown no signs. Its hemoglobin at birth is
neither sickle nor normal - but a third type, fetal hemoglobin, unaffected by
the disease. It isn't replaced until about seven months after birth.

   The most promising research now, Tebbi says, lies in prodding the body to
start or keep making fetal hemoglobin. That would give those with the disease
the same protection those with sickle cell trait draw from their half-share of
normal hemoglobin.

   Two drugs, hydroxyurea and arginine butyrate, have been found that do this,
but both have major side effects, he says.

   Gene therapy, which would fix the errant gene, and chemical substances that
would keep cells from sickling are also being studied, he says.

   Bone marrow transplants cure the disorder, but patients must take
anti-rejection drugs indefinitely. Despite recent news stories about successful
bone marrow transplants, they are considered for only the sickest 10 percent of
patients, Tebbi says.

   Transfusions can help but are justified only in certain cases, Tebbi says.
Side effects include the risk of transmission of hepatitis, HIV and
cytomegalovirus, a disease also common in AIDS patients.

   And there's another problem: Most blood donors are white and have certain
blood characteristics blacks don't, causing black blood recipients to form
antibodies and suffer reactions, Tebbi says.

   Babies with sicklecell disease, although they show no symptoms early on, need
treatment fast because they are prone to potentially fatal infections.

   Their spleens, which normally filter bacteria from the blood, start failing
after a few months and generally become ineffective within the first year,
allowing disease to proliferate, Ohene-Frempong says.

   Infection killed many of them before the effect was understood. But a 1986
study proved preventive antibiotics helped keep the babies healthy, establishing
the worth of large infant screening programs.

   "A marriage of carriers is where most patients come from, because neither
parent knows they have it," Tebbi says.

   Carriers who conceive can have the fetus's blood tested in the womb, and some
choose to abort if it has the disease, he says. Parents who test positive for
the gene sometimes choose to adopt.

   Following up children with sickle cell trait so they'll know the score as
adults was a goal of the Hargrett-Miller bill, which requires HRS to work more
closely with local sickle cell organizations.

   The bill succeeds one filed by Hargrett two years ago. That one was
unsuccessful, he says, although the Legislature to placate him allocated $
100,000 for that purpose to HRS in Pinellas and Hillsborough counties.

   "That did not, in my opinion, address the huge problem statewide," he says.

   This year's bill, Hargrett says, did make some progress. It told HRS how to
spend the Hillsborough-Pinellas money, working with local foundations to set up
screening and education programs.

   And it laid down the factual basis that a problem exists, Hargrett says: "It
puts the "whereas' clauses into law ... We put this on the radar screen."

   Miller, who knows several people with sickle cell trait, says the bill, had
it authorized spending, would have died in committee. "We wanted it debated on
the floor," he says.

   In a year when HRS funding dropped $ 417 million, the full bill would have
cost more than $ 1 million, says Mary Beth Vickers, infant screening coordinator
for the HRS Children's Medical Services program.

   Sickle cell is the most common of five genetic disorders the state screens in
each of the roughly 200,000 newborns born here annually, Vickers says.

   All are also tested for phenylketonurea, congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
galactosemia and congenital hypothyroidism. Testing for these four began eight
years earlier, although four times more babies have sickle cell disease than the
other four combined.

   Testing for sickle cell wasn't done earlier under the argument that nothing
could be done anyway. New York was the first state to start screening newborns
in 1975, Ohene-Frempong says.

   A 1986 study proved treating sickle cell infants with antibiotics daily could
reduce the number of infections they got. States then began testing; now 44 of
50 states screen all newborns, target certain groups, or have pilot or planned
programs under way, Ohene-Frempong says.

   About one in 800 Florida babies - 250 annually - test positive preliminarily
for sickle cell disease, and about 150 are confirmed with follow-up tests each
year, Vickers says.

   The money the Hargrett-Miller bill didn't win would have paid for staff to
track the 6,000 children - one in every 33 - born in Florida each year with
sickle cell trait.

   Right now, the parents of those children get a letter urging them to contact
their local Sickle Cell Association.

   Babies with the disease are tracked down through seven hematology-oncology
centers statewide, including one at USF and another at All Children's Hospital
in St. Petersburg, to make sure they get treatment promptly, Vickers says.

   The centers work with the families and their own doctors, if they have them.
Tracking them down is difficult; many of the families are transient, Vickers
says.     (Chart) Study gives statistics on sickle cell trait   A recent
California study found that of 1.8 million babies born in that state over three
years, sickle cell trait was found in:  - 8,924 blacks, one in 14.  - 4,365
Hispanics, one in 182.  - 964 whites, one in 660.  - 66 Asians, one in 1,077.
While whites, Hispanics and Asians face much lower odds, 38 percent of the
California babies born with sickle cell trait were not black.   Source: Sickle
Cell Disease Research Foundation     (Chart) (C) Genetic transmission of sickle
cell anemia.   The biggest problems come when both parents have either the trait
or the disease

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2C); MAP; CHART 2(1C),
 (Map) The emigration of sickle cell anemia Sickle cell anemia shows up in two
major varieties. The African strain moved to the Americas through slave trade
and then on to European nations through emigration. It is also found in the
Mediterranean. The Asian strain, less common in the Western Hemisphere, is found
in the Persian Gulf and India.  CAITLIN HOPE WRIGHT, Tribune map

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1996


                             2667 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                     SEPTEMBER 17, 1996 Tuesday PM EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS MONEYTALK; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 142 words

HEADLINE: FIRM TO OPEN HQ IN PHILLY

BYLINE: Daily News Staff Reports

BODY:

   A startup genetic research operation is opening its corporate headquarters on
Walnut Street near 30th.

   Genovo hopes to employ 180 within three years.

   Mariann Grossman, the company's president and chief executive, said yesterday
the company is the beneficiary of a $37 million investment from Biogen a
biotechnology company based in Cambridge, Mass.

   The Pennsylvania Industrial Development Authority, provided $1.9 million in
financing for the project.

   Genovo's focus will be on gene therapy.

   At a news conference, Mayor Rendell said he hoped Genovo will serve as the
vanguard of new research companies locating here to take advantage of the city's
academic expertise.

   "I always wondered why with the great universities in West Philadelphia, why
we couldn't take this type of approach here in West Philadelphia," Rendell said.

NOTES: RESEARCH

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2668 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    September 17, 1996 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: GENES MAY HELP UNCLOG ARTERIES

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   Last year, researchers began the first study of gene therapy for
cardiovascular disease, adding genes to clogged arteries in the hope of getting
patients to grow their own bypasses. If it worked, the method could
revolutionize the treatment of cardiovascular disease, but gene therapy has been
characterized by great promise and little proof of success.

   This time, however, researchers are reporting the first tantalizing evidence
that the cardiovascular gene therapy could work. An elderly woman whose artery
in her leg was so clogged that she was developing gangrene in her foot was given
gene therapy and grew new blood vessels that increased the blood flow in her leg
by 82 percent.

   The researchers caution that the blood-vessel growth was not a cure. The new
blood vessels were not sufficient to reverse the course of the gangrene that had
set in, and the woman had to have her leg amputated below the knee. The
importance of the finding, researchers say, is that it shows that the
fundamental process involved in the gene therapy works.

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and Tufts University
School of Medicine near Boston, did the research, publishing his results in the
Aug. 10 issue of The Lancet, a British medical journal. The work was part of a
clinical trial he is conducting with a gene that can stimulate blood vessel
growth.

   Other doctors involved in cardiology research were intrigued by the report.
"This is really monumentally important," said Dr. Steven E. Nissen, vice
chairman of the division of cardiology at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation. "This
is an entirely new approach," he added, with "implications that are very broad."

   But Dr. Judith Swain, a professor and the chief of cardiovascular medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania Health System, was more wary. "This is an
interesting anecdotal experience," she said, "and I think it is suggestive that
this technology might really work. But you have to be cautious about a study
with one patient."

   Dr. Stuart H. Orkin, a professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School and
co-chairman of a committee convened by Dr. Harold Varmus, director of the
National Institutes of Health, to advise him on gene therapy research, said that
he was encouraged by the results. Although, he said, "they obviously didn't cure
the patient, that may be asking for too much" because she was so severely ill.
The finding, he said, leaves him with "cautious optimism."

   The research leading up to the clinical trial began several years ago when
investigators discovered a substance, called vascular endothelial growth factor,
or vegF, that appears to be the body's signal to grow new blood vessels. Isner
reasoned that vegF genes might allow patients with clogged arteries to grow
blood vessels to bypass the blockages.

   The system seemed almost too good to be true. In other sorts of gene therapy,
researchers wrestle with the vexing problem of how to get genes into cells and
how to avoid adding genes to cells that do not need them. Most cells will not
take up genes unless they are packed in a virus or wrapped in a membrane.

   But smooth muscle cells, like those lining an artery wall, will take up and
use so-called naked DNA, the raw genes themselves. Any naked DNA that does not
enter the muscle cells is degraded in the bloodstream, so it is not swept away
to places where it is not wanted.

   Moreover, the added genes stay active in the muscle cells for only several
weeks, just long enough for vegF genes to coax new blood vessels to sprout but
not long enough to cause lingering and unwanted side effects.

   Experiments in rabbits showed that vegF worked; the animals grew vessels to
direct blood around blockages within three weeks.

   The ensuing clinical trial involved patients who had clogged arteries in
their legs and who could not be treated with bypass surgery or balloon
angioplasty. Each year, as many as 30,000 to 40,000 Americans have blockages so
severe that they have unrelenting pain or sores that will not heal. They face
amputations, a risky operation. About 20 percent of the patients die in the
hospital and 40 percent are dead within a year of their surgery.

   The first few patients were treated with 100 micrograms of vegF, roughly
equivalent to 16 trillion genes, then the dose was increased to 500 micrograms,
with no results.

   Then three patients with unrelenting pain each got 1,000 micrograms of the
genes. All three had marked improvement in the blood flow in their leg and
remain free of pain a year after their gene therapy, Isner said. But angiograms,
which are X-rays of the arteries, did not show new blood vessels. That may be
because vessels grew but were too small to be detected with this method, Isner
said.

   Angiograms can show only vessels that are at least a half-millimeter in
diameter, but animal studies have indicated that most of the vessels that grow
after vegF treatment are less than a fifth of a millimeter in diameter.

   On the other hand, Isner said, it is possible that the experiment did not
succeed and that the patients were free of pain because of a placebo effect.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1996


                             2669 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 16, 1996, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1747 words

HEADLINE: Building blocks of tissue engineering;
Growing human ears on mice just the beginning, experts say

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Last October, the world was amazed to see a tiny, hairless
mouse with what appeared to be a human ear growing out of its
back.

   The ear was only human-like - calf cartilage cells seeded onto
a polymer-type framework grew in the shape of a human ear in a
test-tube.  The final product was transplanted to the back of
an immune-deficient mouse.

   The rodent's skin adhered to the ear, keeping it in place.  Its
creators at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology watched
its activities with pride in a job well done.

   But for the public, it heralded a future in which body parts,
skin, bone and human organs could be cultured and grown for
transplantation.

   At a meeting at Rice University here in August, various
so-called tissue engineers described their works-in-progress
and made predictions about the future.

   Tissue engineering involves a combination of engineering,
polymer chemistry and life sciences to grow living human
tissues and organs, said Dr. Larry McIntire, professor of
chemistry and biomedical engineering and chairman of the
Institute of Biosciences and Bioengineering at Rice
University.

   Lab-grown skin and cartilage tissues most likely will be the
first to be used in human beings, McIntire said.  But means of
replacing breast tissue, livers, pancreas and other organs are
being considered.

   In some instances, he said, the patient's tissues could be
expanded in culture.

   In others, they might be encapsulated animal cells secreting a
specific growth factor or hormone.  The capsules allow the
small chemical molecules to escape while keeping out immune
cells that would destroy foreign animal tissue.

   One Houston-based company actually is growing a liver-cell
line in culture, encapsulating it in tubes and using it as a
temporary artificial liver.  Unlike artificial kidney dialysis
machines, this procedure is cell-based technology, McIntire
said.  That means cells carry out metabolic as well as
membrane functions, he said.

   In other diseases, McIntire foresees a time when physicians
can remove deficient cells, alter them genetically and return
them to the body to correct an inborn defect.  That process is
called gene therapy.

   Even pain treatment can go the cellular route, he said, with
clusters of cells implanted next to the pain's source.  The
cells deliver high doses of endorphins that will alleviate
pain before they are metabolized.

   Eventually, McIntire said, he envisions inserting genes into
the cell cultures so tissues can replace missing enzymes or
proteins.  He even foresees engineering marrow cells to help in
treatment of young hemophiliacs.

   All these represent the possibilities of tissue engineering
and there are more as yet undreamed, he said.

   But various biotech companies have gone beyond dreaming and
actually are using such creations in patients.  The first way
in which the creations are being used is as skin.

   There are two potential sources of skin to be used in wound
healing or to cover large burns, said Janet Hardin Young, a
senior scientist in the immunology and transplantation
sciences division of Organogenesis Inc., in Canton, Mass.

   The first source would be from the patient, whose skin could
be removed and transplanted.  But that source is limited, and
often doctors must ""skin'' a patient to cover a large wound,
she said.

   Growing skin from an unrelated donor is a possibility, but it
carries with it the risk that the skin will be rejected, she
said.

   ""The goal is to have no immune response,'' she said.  ""The goal
is for your graft to take. ''

   Her company started with foreskins from newborns.  The skin
lacks many of the usual immune components that lead to
rejection, she said.

   A newborn's skin product is two-layered, carrying the dermis
and the epidermis - layers vital to healing.

   The epidermis stimulates healing and is needed for biological
wound closure, Young said.  It also forms a layer that provides
a protective barrier against infection and the air.

   The dermis is important because it makes sure healing results
in regrowth of skin layers.

   ""The question is how skin-like should it be? '' she said.

   A single foreskin can generate 1 million square millimeters of
skin, she said.

   The work is painstaking.  Cells are grown on a matrix of
acid-treated bovine collagen, Young said.  Because one side
contains dermis and the other epidermis, workers must keep in
the mind which side of the skin with which they are working.

   In studies of patients with chronic sores that will not heal,
the cultured skin acted as a skin graft for some and a
biological wound dressing for others.  It appeared to stimulate
the natural wound healing process and acted as a scaffold or
precursor for further skin growth, Young said.

   Dr.Michael J. Miller, an associate professor at the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, said plastic
surgeons must rely on patient tissue for much of the
reconstruction work.  For example, he said, women who undergo
mastectomy for breast cancer often want their breasts
reconstructed.

   Much of that reconstruction work is done with a flap of skin
and tissue taken from the patient's abdomen, he said.

   But despite advances in microsurgery, problems remain.  For
example, many patients develop swelling in their arms after
breast surgery because the lymphatics, the vessels of the
lymph system, are damaged.

   ""What we need here are new lymphatics'' that could be made of
cultured cells grown on a polymer matrix, he said.

   That will be possible someday, Miller said, because of tissue
engineering.  ""Tissue engineering is a natural evolution of
plastic and reconstructive surgery,'' he said.

   Another evolving field is the use of encapsulated cells to
deliver drugs or hormones directly to an affected area - such
as the brain, said Dr. Frank Gentile, a scientist at
CytoTherapeutics Inc., in Providence, R.I

   In a recent report in Nature Medicine, Gentile's group
described its delivery of a growth factor called ciliary to
the brains of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou
Gehrig's disease).  The disease destroys the patient's ability
to move, eat, swallow and breathe while leaving most
intellectual functions intact.

   So far, he said, the study shows that patients receiving the
encapsulated cells have high levels of the nerve factor in
their blood.  However, it will be months before he knows if it
has worked.

   The cells the company is using are laboratory-cultured animal
cells.  The cells are known to secrete the proteins and
hormones needed for the study.  Ordinarily, they would be
destroyed by the immune system.

   However, they are isolated from destruction by a semipermeable
membrane that allows the chemical molecules to leave the
capsule but keeps the molecules of the immune system out, he
said.

   The encapsulated cells are placed directly in the lower back,
near the spinal cord, he said.  This way, they eliminate the
problem of the blood-brain barrier, which provides a natural
protection for the brain against drugs taken into the system.  Gentile said the
technology has promise in treating
neurological disorders such as ALS, multiple sclerosis,
epilepsy, Parkinson's disease and others.

   A similar study using cells to produce endorphins (the body's
natural opiates) can relieve pain.  The endorphin-producing
cells are implanted in the back, near the spinal cord.  The
study has shown evidence of pain relief in the first patients,
Gentile said.

   But while such cellular therapies are showing promise,
treatments at the molecular edge - those that alter the DNA
blueprint for life - have reached a stumbling block.

   Gene therapy is at a crossroads, said Dr. Kenneth K.Wu,
director of the hematology and vascular biology research
center at the UT Medical School at Houston.

   While much is understood about how to modify genes to produce
desired results, researchers have yet to produce a good way of
getting the altered genes into the cells that need them.

   ""However, within the next five to 10 years, this will become a
reality,'' Wu said.


GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. British Broadcasting Corporation reporter Vivienne Parry gets
a first-hand look at a laboratory-grown ear, grafted into the back of a ""nude
mouse''; 2. Drawing: Scientists are trying to grow . . .; 1. Associated Press,
2. Court Smith/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1996


                             2670 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 16, 1996 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1039 words

HEADLINE: SMALL WEST CHESTER FIRM THRIVING IN TOUGH TIMES< CFM TECHNOLOGIES IS
OUTPERFORMING BIGGER RIVALS. IT'S ONE OF 22< AREA FIRMS THAT RECEIVED 2D-QUARTER
VENTURE-CAPITAL INVESTMENTS.

BYLINE: Dan Stets, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   CFM Technologies Inc. of West Chester is a small company that is doing well
in a business in which many larger companies have had lots of problems this
year.

   It manufactures equipment used to make semiconductors and the flat-panel
displays for notebook computers and other electronic products.

   The general malaise afflicting semiconductor manufacturers since last fall
has had a severe impact on industry-leading equipment makers such as Applied
Materials Inc. of Santa Clara, Calif., and Kulicke & Soffa Industries Inc. of
Willow Grove.

   The leaders have seen a decline or postponement of new orders, and their
stock has suffered. Applied Materials shares are off 38 percent this year, while
Kulicke is down 62 percent.

   But little CFM dared to have its initial public offering in June. The shares
began trading at $10 on June 18 and closed Friday at $10.25 - not obviously a
gain to brag about if you are an investor, but a substantial feat for a company
in a sector that has been clobbered.

   On Aug. 22, CFM announced that sales for its third quarter (which ended July
31) were up 68 percent, compared with the same period a year earlier, and that
net income had risen 27 percent, to $633,000.

   CFM also happens to be one of 22 Philadelphia-area companies that received
venture-capital investments in the second quarter of 1996.

   In a way, CFM's recent success is a reflection of the overall success that
suddenly struck start-up and small companies in the region last quarter.

   The 22 companies received a total of $57.2 million in venture investments - a
whopping 32 percent increase over the funding received by companies in the same
period a year ago, according to The Inquirer/Price Waterhouse Venture Capital
Survey.

   "The second quarter 1996 is the largest we've seen - both national and in
Philadelphia - since we began the survey," said Gene Katz, Price Waterhouse
technology industry partner in the firm's Philadelphia office.

   "It shows venture capitalists have a great deal of confidence in
technology-based companies in this area - particularly biotechnology and
software industry segments, which represented over 50 percent of investment
dollars locally," said Katz.

   Actually, 15 technology companies received 86.8 percent of the $57.2 million.

   Philadelphia's under-recognized high-technology "asset base" is "increasingly
getting the deserved attention of the venture-capital community," said Gary J.
Anderson, managing general partner of TL Ventures, a venture capital firm in
Wayne.

   Nationally, total venture investments reached $2.83 billion in the second
quarter, compared with $2.12 billion for the same period a year earlier - an
increase of 33.5 percent.

   The Silicon Valley retained its position as the national leader in attracting
venture investment, hauling in $769.3 million - or 27.4 percent of all
investments. The New England region, which encompasses six states, was second,
with $367.6 million; the Midwest was third, with $344.2. million, or 12.3
percent.

   In the Philadelphia area, Montgomery County led the pack with nine venture
investments, followed by Delaware County with seven. Chester County had three;
Philadelphia, two; and Burlington County, one.

   Oddly, while CFM is a successful company, its venture investment was one of
the smallest received by any firm in the area. CFM, which employs 270 people,
got just $68,000 from the Ben Franklin Technology Center of Southeastern
Pennsylvania. The money is being used for CFM to experiment with a new process
for stripping silicon nitride from silicon wafers.

   CFM's main technology is wet-processing equipment for cleaning and etching
semiconductor wafers and flat-panel displays. The technology is patented and
replaces dry-cleaning processes, which CFM customers think were less efficient.

   CFM continues to prosper while other equipment makers suffer for three
reasons, said chairman Christopher McConnell.

   First, many of CFM's customers are doing better than other manufacturers
during the current downturn. Second, because CFM's technology is new,
manufacturers are still adopting it - and in many cases, can use
research-and-development funds, rather than regular capital funds, to buy the
equipment. Finally, many of CFM's customers are in the flat-panel business,
which is booming even as the semiconductor business stutters.

   "It is three stars crossing at the same time, which allows us to be pretty
prosperous at the moment," he said.

   The region's largest venture investment went to Recombinant BioCatalysis Inc.
of Sharon Hill, which received $13.2 million. The biotechnology firm
manufactures enzymes.

   Collegis Inc. of Exton received $11.5 million. The company provides and
manages computer services for colleges and universities.

   Apollon Inc. of Malvern, another biotechnology firm, received $9.7 million.
The company develops genetic vaccines and gene-therapy products for treating and
preventing disease.

   Apollon has been able to raise more than $25 million in equity capital since
it was founded in 1992. It is working on vaccines for the prevention and
treatment of herpes and the AIDS virus.

   Another area company, Omnia Inc. of Blue Bell, is an example of how quickly
the medical field is changing. Omnia, which received $4.46 million in venture
funding, is putting together networks of women's health-care professionals.

   Omnia already has set up networks of physicians and nurse-midwives in
Philadelphia, Chicago and New Jersey, and is working to form networks in
Cincinnati, Dallas and St. Louis. The Philadelphia network includes 225
professionals.

   The networks allow the physicians to retain their own practices while
reducing the potential risks of providing fixed-cost medical services. The
doctors and nurses also do not end up working directly for a hospital or health
maintenance organization. The networks contract with the hospitals and HMOs to
provide services.

   Omnia is part of a national trend among medical specialists, said John A.
Knapp, the company's senior vice president and general counsel. Other companies
are forming specialized networks in oncology, cardiology and radiology, he said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO (1)
1. Christopher McConnell is chairman of CFM Technologies Inc. The company
manufactures equipment used to make semiconductors. (For The Inquirer, BOB
WILLIAMS)
CHART (1)
1. The Inquirer, Price Waterhouse Venture-Capital Survey

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2671 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 12, 1996, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
 HAS SICKLE CELL MET ITS MATCH?;
 PROMISING NEW FORM OF GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE FOR AN EFFECTIVE TREATMENT

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   The discovery of the abnormal gene that causes an inherited disorder is
normally viewed as the first--and most important--step toward developing an
effective treatment, perhaps even a cure, for the disorder.

   Except for sickle cell disease.

   Sickle cell was the first disease for which scientists knew the precise
genetic defect at its root. More than 30 years ago, researchers discovered that
the disabling disorder is caused by the presence of a wrong link in the long
chain of chemical bases that form the gene for hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying
component of red blood cells.

   Despite that knowledge, it has only been recently that physicians have been
able to contemplate a cure--or even an effective treatment--for this disorder,
which affects an estimated 80,000 African Americans.

   Last month, a multi-center team of surgeons reported that bone marrow
transplants--a "brute force" form of gene therapy--can cure the disease in the
most severely affected children who are lucky enough to have a sibling who is a
compatible donor.

   And last week, researchers at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia
reported the discovery of a simple technique to trick the blood cells of sickle
cell victims into repairing themselves, an approach that could have much wider
applicability than bone marrow transplants. Clinical trials of this gene therapy
could begin in as little as a year, according to Jefferson's Dr. Eric Kmiec.

   "We have a very strong need for new treatments," said Dr. Kwaku
Ohene-Frempong of Philadelphia Children's Hospital, chief medical officer of the
Sickle Cell Disease Assn. of America. And gene therapy, he added, "is the
strongest hope for a universal cure."

   Sickle cell disease strikes one in every 375 African American children. But a
single copy of the gene for it--two copies are necessary to develop the
disorder--is carried by one in every 12 blacks, making it one of the most common
genetic disorders.

   The disease manifests itself only in periods of emotional or physical
stress--during exercise or an infection, for example--when the body requires
more oxygen. The defective red blood cells of patients with the disorder assume
a sickle shape and clump together, blocking the passage of blood through small
capillaries and drastically diminishing the body's supply of oxygen. That oxygen
deprivation, in turn, causes tremendous pain and organ damage, which can
eventually lead to disability or death.

   Aside from analgesics to control the pain and antibiotics to prevent
infections, little treatment is currently available, according to Richard
Leavitt of the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.

   The best current therapy in adults is an anti-cancer drug called hydroxyurea,
which stimulates dormant genes to produce a type of non-sickling hemoglobin
normally found only in fetuses. Hydroxyurea reduces the number of sickling
crises, acute chest pains and hospital visits by 50% in adults.

   A trial of hydroxyurea in children will be completed next year, according to
Duane Bonds, who is in charge of sickle cell research at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute.

   Although researchers are confident that hydroxyurea will be effective in
children, Ohene-Frempong said, "People wonder whether it will be safe for
long-term use." The drug, like many other anti-cancer medications, can itself
cause cancer in high doses. It also suppresses bone marrow development and may
affect growth. "It is not a cure," he said.

   Other promising drugs, such as arginine butyrate, have also been found to be
less effective than hoped, he added.

   "There is a real need for new therapies," Leavitt said.

   Bone marrow transplants are a cure for some patients with the disease,
according to a team led by Dr. Keith M. Sullivan of the Fred M. Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center in Seattle. In the procedure, surgeons use radiation and
chemotherapy to kill the patient's bone marrow--the source of red blood
cells--and replace it with marrow from a healthy donor.

   Sullivan's team reported on 22 severely ill patients who received such
transplants. Two years after the operations, 16 were free of sickle cell
symptoms, four had rejected the donor tissue and two had died. Ohene-Frempong
estimates that about 50 children have received such transplants in the United
States and another 100 in the rest of the world.

   But the procedure can be dangerous. In addition to the risk of death from
infection during the procedure, patients run an increased risk of cancer and
loss of fertility years after the transplant. For this reason, physicians
reserve it for patients who have suffered a stroke or who have severe organ
damage or lung complications.

   Perhaps the major limitation is that patients must also have a compatible
sibling donor. Consequently, only about 7% of sickle cell victims qualify for
the procedure.

   Researchers have greater hope for the unusual approach to gene therapy
revealed last week by Kmiec. Most gene therapy studies involve inserting a
healthy form of the defective gene into the patient to produce a protein that is
missing in the disease. Kmiec induces the patients' cells to heal themselves.

   The key is an artificially constructed short chain of DNA and RNA that
researchers dissolve in fat globules that carry it into the cell. The
DNA--deoxyribonucleic acid, which encodes the blueprint of life--binds to the
defective region of the gene and indicates what repairs should be made. The
RNA--ribonucleic acid, which normally serves as an intracellular messenger for
genetic information--apparently stabilizes the chain so it is not rapidly
destroyed.

   Although Kmiec does not know precisely how the process works, the artificial
DNA/RNA binds to the defective gene--in effect acting like a neon sign that
tells the cell's own repair machinery that it needs fixing.

   The Thomas Jefferson team reported last week that it had removed blood cells
from a sickle cell patient and treated them with the new procedure. Between 20%
and 30% of the treated cells were then found to have the healthy form of the
hemoglobin gene. Kmiec estimated that this degree of repair would provide
sufficient normal hemoglobin to alleviate symptoms.

   To be an effective therapy, however, Kmiec says the procedure will have to be
performed on stem cells, the bone marrow components that produce blood cells.
Preliminary results from his lab indicate that such cells can be repaired as
effectively as blood cells, he noted, and the team hopes to begin treating
patients in 1997.

   For more information: Sickle Cell Disease Assn. of America, (800)421-8453;
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, (800) 367-6630.


   New Approaches for a Cure

   Bone marrow transplants have been successful, but they are reserved for the
sickest patients and as many as 10% of patients die. Researchers hope to begin
trials of gene therapy next year.

   TWO TECHNIQUES

   Bone Marrow Transplant

   1. Physicians use chemicals and radiation to kill the patient's own bone
marrow, the source of blood cells.

   2. Bone marrow from a healthy donor is infused into the patient.

   Gene Therapy

   1. Physicians extract some of the patient's bone marrow.

   2. Outside the body, it is treated with a DNA/RNA fragments, dissolved in fat
globules to get them into cells, which corrects the genetic defect.

   3. The marrow is infused back into the patient.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-CHART: New Approaches for a Cure, Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1996


                             2672 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          September 12, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F12

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: UO STAFFERS DISCOVER STRUCTURE OF GLOWING JULLYFISH PROTEINResearch
Notebook

BYLINE: Compiled by Richard L. Hill, of The Oregonian staff<

BODY:

   Thursday, September 12, 1996 UO STAFFERS DISCOVER STRUCTURE OF GLOWING
JULLYFISH PROTEIN

   Research Notebook

   Researchers at the University of Oregon's Institute of Molecular  Biology
have determined the structure of a protein in a Northwest jellyfish  that emits
a green glow when illuminated with a violet or blue light.

   The green fluorescent protein, called GFP, is a popular research tool for
biologists because it allows them to see genes turning on or proteins moving
around inside living cells.

   By revealing the protein's GFP's three-dimensional structure, improved GFP
could be developed that would be of even greater practical value in research.

   For example, it GFP might be used to monitor the effectiveness of gene
delivery during gene therapy. Doctors would introduce not only the gene that
eventually could cure the disease but also the GFP gene. By checking the
fluorescence, they should be able to tell whether the genetic package was
correctly delivered.

   GFP's The protein's ability to show whether genes are being turned on or  off
also should be helpful in the search for new drugs.

   In the original jellyfish, Aequorea victoria, GFP takes blue light
chemically emitted by another protein and converts the energy into green  light.
No one knows why the jellyfish glow or why green light is better for  them than
blue light.

   UO co-authors of the study in the Sept. 6 issue of the weekly journal
Science were Mats Ormo, S. James Remington and Karen Kallio. Other researchers
were from Aurora Biosciences Corp., the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and  the
University of California at San Diego.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2673 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          September 12, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F12

LENGTH: 1753 words

HEADLINE: THE RACE TO CONQUER FANCONI ANEMIA

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN, of the Oregonian Staff<

BODY:

   Thursday, September 12, 1996 THE RACE TO CONQUER FANCONI ANEMIA

   Summary:   The Frohnmayer research fund drives advances that may   help their
family and others

   Medical science is gaining on the rare disease that afflicts the Dave and
Lynn Frohnmayer family.

   But it's a race against time.

   In 1991, their daughter Katie, 12, died of complications of Fanconi anemia,
an inherited blood disease.

   Last year, a second daughter, Kirsten, 23, was at the top of the list for
promising gene therapy. But she developed leukemia, a blood cancer common in
Fanconi patients, which made her ineligible. Instead, she had a daring new
bone marrow transplant. Today she is home with her family in Eugene, coping
with the side effects of chemotherapy.

   And now, Amy, 9, is showing early blood count changes characteristic of
Fanconi. Her family is optimistic that a life-saving treatment will be
possible before she becomes ill.

   ``Science is racing ahead,'' Lynn Frohnmayer said, pointing to Kirsten's
transplant and other therapies that are now available.

   As with every Fanconi family, the looming dread over the Frohnmayers is
that their affected children will develop deadly complications before new
life-sustaining treatments can be found.

   Mainly because of the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund the Frohnmayers founded
in 1989, clinical studies and laboratory experiments promise better
treatments. The work also might lead to insights into more common blood
diseases.

   The fund, based in Eugene, raises money for research and supports the
development of new treatments. Each year it sponsors an international meeting
of Fanconi researchers and an international meeting and camp of Fanconi
families. Donations come from all over the world but primarily from
Oregonians.

   ``Without the philanthropy of thousands of Oregonians, research into this
very important scientific question that relates to cancer and leukemia simply
wouldn't be occurring,'' said Dave Frohnmayer, who is president of the
University of Oregon.

   In 1983, a cascade of heart-rending events irreversibly changed the
Frohnmayers' lives: Kirsten was diagnosed with Fanconi, and in testing the
family for a donor for her, the Frohnmayers found that Katie, too, had the
disease.

   In 1985, Dave Frohnmayer, a former Oregon attorney general, dropped out of
the 1986 governor's race to search for bone marrow donors for Katie and
Kirsten. The frantic search turned up hundreds of relatives, many of them in
Nova Scotia, but no bone marrow match.

   It was the Frohnmayers' futile search and their founding of a donor
registry that brought Fanconi anemia international attention. People who were
in no way related to the family offered their bone marrow. A bone marrow
match, especially from a sibling, is the most successful treatment for the
disease.

   In February 1987, the couple's fifth child, Amy, was born, and Dave
Frohnmayer acknowledged that the hope the child could be a bone marrow donor
figured in their plans. ``But we wouldn't have children unless we loved
them,'' he said.

   Initial tests indicated that Amy did not have the disease, but the family
soon learned that the tests were wrong, and Amy, too, was afflicted.

   Fanconi anemia is rare, afflicting about 2,000 to 3,000 people in the
United States. But Linda M. DeSpain, executive director of the research fund,
said the numbers have more meaning with the realization that one in 100 to one
in 600 people carries the defective Fanconi gene.

   Although diagnostic tests exist for Fanconi anemia, unsuspecting carriers
of the gene might not know their children are at risk until the children are
ages 3 to 12 and suddenly begin to feel fatigue, continual colds, viral
infections, bruising and frequent nosebleeds. Some people are not diagnosed
until adulthood. Scientists say the condition is underdiagnosed.

   ``You can conceive your entire family and not know you have this problem
until your first child or your second child, or whatever, begins to show bone
marrow failure,'' DeSpain said.

   Fanconi anemia can lie dormant for generations, but when both parents carry a
recessive gene for the disease, the chances are one in four that any of   their
children will inherit the defect. Males and females are at equal risk.

   - Breakthrough in 1992

   The most significant Fanconi breakthrough was the 1992 discovery of the
Fanconi-C gene by a group of Toronto researchers. They also developed mice
that are a research model for the disease.

   Researchers know there are at least five genes responsible for Fanconi
anemia, and they are looking for the genes that affect most patients. The FA-C
gene is responsible for only about 13 percent of Fanconi cases, but it is one
the Frohnmayers have.

   The genetic flaw destroys bone marrow, the tissue inside bone that is
responsible for making all of the body's blood cells. The bone marrow
gradually stops making red and white blood cells and platelets, so patients
become anemic and weak.

   Their blood cannot clot properly, and they have difficulty fighting off
infection. Their risk of developing leukemia is 15,000 times greater than that
of than general population, DeSpain said.

   The Fanconi fund has raised nly $3 million for research seeking effective
treatments and a cure for the disease. Some of the fund's research projects
have gone on to get volunteer organization and federal dollars.

   In 1994, the National Institutes of Health awarded Oregon Health Sciences
University researchers a $6 million, five-year grant to investigate the root
causes of Fanconi anemia.

   At OHSU, Dr. Markus Grompe's research team is the first in the United
States to engineer mice with the FA-C defect. His laboratory is working on
several aspects of Fanconi research. And he has set up a repository of
patients' cells and skin samples that are used by about 30 research
laboratories in the United States and Europe.

   Last month, the Leukemia Society of America awarded Dr. Grover C. Bagby and
his OHSU group $216,000 to study how to prevent leukemia in Fanconi patients.
Initial studies will be done in the FA-C mice, and his group plans to start
gene therapy in humans in about three years.

   - Sensitive to protein

   In trying to understand what Fanconi does to cells, Bagby and Grompe
studied the bone marrow of FA-C mice and found it to be hypersensitive to a
natural protein, gamma interferon.

   Translating that to humans, the scientists reason that children might
develop bone marrow failure because gamma interferon, which does not harm
normal people, kills off their stem cells, which make blood. A report on that
work appeared in the July issue of the journal Blood.

   The discovery of the FA-C gene, supported by money from the research fund,
allowed researchers at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., to
begin gene therapy experiments. The process involves putting normal genes back
into the blood-making cells of sick children. The hope is the normal gene will
take over blood production and fix the condition.

   Three children have had the gene therapy so far, and the transferred genes
seem to be functioning correctly, said Johnson Liu, head of the institutes
trial.

   Two of the children, an 11-year-old boy from California, and a 14-year-old
boy from England, have better blood counts and seem to be thriving clinically.
But an 11-year-old Oklahoma girl, who was sicker than the others, does not
seem to have had much benefit from the therapy, Liu said.

   Although the trial is not turning out dramatic results, it is one of the
most promising of the gene therapy studies going on for a number of hereditary
diseases, Liu said. ``The main thing it teaches us in terms of the biology of
blood cells is how genes can be transferred into blood cells,'' he said.

   Lynn Frohnmayer is eagerly watching the strides Liu's group is making, but
she is concerned that at this point in the research, only a few flawed cells
can be corrected.

   ``That means that you are leaving behind a large number of FA cells. And as a
lay person and not as a scientist, it seems to me those FA cells still have  the
potential to become leukemic cells at some point down the line,'' she   said.

   Although most of Kirsten's blood-making cells are those of her donor,
persistent leukemia cells can cause a huge drop in her blood count, Lynn
Frohnmayer said.

   - Hope with transplant

   In February 1995, Kirsten was the first Fanconi patient to survive a new
type of major mismatch bone marrow transplant from an unrelated donor. The new
technique she had at the University of Minnesota offers hope for patients who
cannot find a bone marrow match and for Fanconi patients who have developed
leukemia.

   ``If she had not had leukemia to start with, she'd be home free by now
because she breezed through the transplant,'' Lynn Frohnmayer said.

   But Kirsten, who graduated from Stanford University last year, has vision
and problems. Her mother attributes the problems to the high dose of
chemotherapy Kirsten received to fight leukemia cells the transplant left
behind.

   ``So if we were able to do a transplant with Amy before she gets leukemia,
she wouldn't get leukemia after the transplant,'' Lynn Frohnmayer said.

   Since Kirsten's pioneering transplant, a group of bone marrow transplant
specialists in this country and Europe agreed to explore the new procedure and
gather statistical information about what works and what does not, Lynn
Frohnmayer said.

   Another advance that the Frohnmayers are looking at is transplant of
umbilical cord blood. Although the procedure is relatively new in Fanconi
patients, researchers are finding a greater level of mismatch can be tolerated
in mismatched cord blood transplants. The cord blood can be used to replace
stem cells affected by Fanconi.

   The Frohnmayers have located cord blood for Amy that is a slight mismatch,
``and that may be our best option,'' Lynn Frohnmayer said. ``Or gene therapy
may be our best option if someone figures out a more efficient way of getting
cells with the healthy normal gene into all the cells.''

   But for now, Amy's condition is stable. Her blood counts are adequate, her
mother said.

   ``I would prefer right now to wait and see what develops scientifically
over the next few years and hope that Amy will be stable for yet a period of
time,'' Lynn Frohnmayer said.

   ILLUSTRATION: Sidebar - Q&A  Fanconi Anemia  Telephone

   Color Photo by Robert Kaiser - for The Oregonian staff

   2 BW photos by Benjamin Brink  - of The Oregonian staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2674 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 11, 1996 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 3230 words

HEADLINE: Fragile lives;
Mental disorder's symptoms can be hard to detect, but the consequences are real
-- and last a lifetime

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The signs were there but Cindy de Gruchy could not read them. Her infant son,
Scott, did not seem to embrace life.

   He cried constantly, woke up screaming in the night.

   He was colicky and racked by bouts of croup, a constricting respiratory
ailment that leaves infants hacking for air and which once put Scott in a
hospital incubator for 13 days. "Whenever he got croup," said Scott's father,
Brendan, "it was just about a `911' call." At the time, they were living in
Australia, where Brendan was born and where he worked as a dental prosthetics
technician.

   Cindy met Brendan while both were vacationing in Chicago.

   A flurry of letters followed during the next few years while Cindy finished
school, first at San Diego State, then at the University of California Davis.

   There were occasional visits.

   In 1984, they married. Five years later, Scott was born.

   It was the beginning of a new life, but it was not the new life either parent
expected. "As a very young baby, Scott seemed OK," said Cindy.

   "He cooed and smiled at the right times.

   He babbled at the right times.

   He seemed normal." The crying, she figured, was just bad luck.

   "He would cry so much.

   You couldn't comfort him.

   We would walk out of the house and he would just burst into tears, sobbing
madly.

   It happened all of the time.

   After a while, I was barely coping.

   I was just so scared." As Scott got older, however, "little nagging things"
struck Cindy.

   Scott was a voracious eater but seemed exceptionally long and skinny, with
arms and legs "that sort of flopped around."

   At 9 months old, he still could not sit up. He didn't behave much like other
toddlers either.

   He wouldn't wave bye-bye. He didn't play the same games as other youngsters,
but seemed unduly fascinated by spinning objects.

   He crawled backward.

   He didn't begin walking until he was nearly 2. Cindy took Scott to several
Australian doctors and clinics.

   "I remember feeling concerned, that maybe I just wasn't working as hard with
my son as other parents, that maybe I had done something wrong," she said.
Nurses suggested that Scott might be developmentally delayed but offered no
reason why.

   Doctors ordered tests, including one that looked for visual signs of
chromosome damage.

   The results all came back negative.

   The doctors could find no cause. "They told me 90 percent of developmental
delay is never explained," Cindy said. In 1991, de Gruchy gave birth to a second
son. Unlike Scott, Jeff seemed more content, more capable.

   "Until Jeff came, I didn't really know why people had children.

   Everything that was just so hard with Scott was easy with Jeff," the mother
said. But caring for both of them was daunting.

   With Brendan at work much of the time, Cindy was required to stay home with
the children.

   "I didn't get out much.

   Basically I was with the kids 24 hours a day." Australian doctors, meanwhile,
continued to offer no cause for Scott's cognitive and behavioral problems. [] []
[] It is called Fragile X syndrome, the most common form of inherited mental
retardation known, and yet it's so poorly understood that the genetic basis for
the disorder was only discovered five years ago. The symptoms of Fragile X are
numerous but often maddeningly subtle, nonspecific or conflicting. "If you
suspect somebody has Fragile X, it's easy to diagnose it now with the
appropriate DNA testing," said Dr. Lawrence Shapiro, a professor of pediatrics
at the New York Medical College in New York City.

   "But first you have to suspect it, and the problem is that in the first three
or four years of life there are few physical features to suggest it." In time,
though, children with Fragile X, particularly males, usually begin to exhibit
one or more distinctive physical characteristics.

   They may have long, narrow faces, broad foreheads, crossed eyes, prominent
ears and chins, calluses, highly arched palates, indented chests, flat feet,
extremely flexible joints and chronically poor muscle tone. By themselves,
perhaps, those individual traits do not point directly to Fragile X. And often
the physical clues are so tenuous that they're easily overlooked or ignored.
"One doctor said there was something about Scott's face, something that wasn't
right," said his mother, "but he couldn't pinpoint it." The list of behavioral
or psychological characteristics is longer and, in some ways, more confusing.

   Fragile X children can be hyperactive, extremely sociable, hungry for
attention.

   Or they can appear almost autistic, withdrawing into themselves, avoiding eye
contact, biting their hands. Often they have short attention spans but also may
possess excellent memories.

   Scott, for example, has memorized all or part of almost every children's book
ever read to him, said Cindy.

   He needs only to see a dance step once to remember and mimic it precisely.
Conversely, Fragile X patients tend to be slower to develop motor skills such as
walking, or cognitive abilities like putting together a simple puzzle. Fragile X
children typically learn to speak later than unafflicted peers. They are more
prone to mumbling, spouting jargon, repeating the same words or phrases over and
over.

   Some talk at an unusually fast rate. Frequently, however, they possess
relatively good vocabularies and understand most of what they hear.

   Their real problem lies with expressing their thoughts. [] [] [] Brendan,
Cindy, Scott and Jeff moved to the United States in 1993 and settled in a modest
tract home in La Mesa. Cindy was born and raised in San Diego.

   She had family here and was hopeful that the American medical establishment
could solve the mystery of Scott's ailment. At first, it could not.

   Doctors seemed stumped, in part because earlier genetic studies in Australia,
including a chromosome screening, had produced negative results. (Such tests,
called cytogenetic analysis, have since been shown to be far less accurate than
newer DNA studies done from blood samples.) Cindy had never seriously considered
Fragile X, a disorder few people apparently knew much about, until a
special-education teacher at SDSU remarked that Scott seemed much like another
boy she had taught. That boy had been diagnosed with Fragile X syndrome. "I
started reading material about Fragile X, and it was just like I was reading
about my son," she said.

   "I had given up on finding a reason why, and here it was.

   It was a relief.

   At least now I had a name." But not, it seemed, a treatment.

   She struggled to convince doctors that Scott might have Fragile X syndrome.

   One physician declined to order a $500 DNA analysis because Scott's
Australian medical records showed no evidence of such.

   Other doctors proposed vague treatments or offered no guidance at all.

   Some of them seemed to know less about Fragile X than Cindy. "Fragile X is
only now being routinely discussed in medical schools," said David Nommensen,
executive director of The National Fragile X Foundation, an information
clearinghouse and support group.

   "So it's correct when most parents say they end up educating their doctors.

   We commonly hear stories of people going to doctors or pediatricians or HMOs
10 to 15 times before something finally clicks and somebody suggests Fragile X."
[] [] [] The precise incidence of Fragile X is unknown, though the National
Institutes of Health estimates that the syndrome affects one in every 1,000
people. (By comparison, Down syndrome strikes one in 800 people and cystic
fibrosis one in 2,500.) Significant research into the cause and treatment of
Fragile X is relatively new.

   Indeed, the disorder was not formally recognized until the early 1980s.
Before, said Shapiro of the New York Medical College, doctors simply lumped
Fragile X patients with others suffering mental retardation, or failed to
identify the problem at all. Fragile X occurs because of the failure of a single
gene.

   That gene, called FMR-1, is located at the bottom end of the long arm of the
X chromosome.

   In 1991, researchers at Emory University in Atlanta pinpointed FMR-1's
location and noted that, in cases of Fragile X patients, the gene appeared to
spew out excessive copies of guanine and cytosine, two chemical building blocks
called nucleotides that, along with adenine and thymine, make up the DNA code. A
normally functioning FMR-1 gene typically produces a sequence of between five to
50 nucleotide triplets of cytosine-guanine-guanine (or CGG), with the average
being around 29 to 33. A geneticist reading part of this DNA code would see
something like this: CGGCGGCGGCGGCGG But afflicted FMR-1 genes produce more than
50 repeats of CGG. Usually many times more.

   And the longer the sequence of repeating CGG triplets, the worse the
disorder.

   Carriers of Fragile X syndrome without any obvious intellectual disability
tend to have pieces of DNA with between 52 and 200 CGG repeats, according to The
National Fragile X Foundation.

   These are called pre-mutations.

   More than 200 CGG repeats is called a "full mutation" and results in the
FMR-1 gene essentially turning off. In the case of Scott, doctors measured his
CGG repeats at 493 -- a full mutation.

   By comparison, his 4-year-old brother, Jeff, is a pre-mutation carrier with
150 repeats and no apparent disabilities.

   Cindy's DNA sequence repeats 77 times. Fragile X is a sneaky and sly
disorder.

   It can lie unnoticed for generations within a family until the number of
repeats reaches critical mass in a person's genetic makeup. Both males and
females can be carriers, but the consequences tend to be more pronounced in
males.

   The reason is basic biology.

   Females result from the combination of two X chromosomes, one from each
parent.

   A girl can inherit a mutated X chromosome from one parent, but overcome most,
if not all, of the genetic deficiency, because the second X chromosome
compensates. Males, who possess one X from their mother and one Y chromosome
from their father, enjoy no such luxury.

   If the X chromosome is faulty, there is no fallback.

   Eighty percent of all males with a full Fragile X mutation have distinct
learning and behavioral problems.

   The figure is just 30 percent for girls. [] [] [] The de Gruchy home in La
Mesa looks much like any house with two young boys.

   There are toys on the floor and a back yard littered with balls and
playground equipment. Scott, now 6 years old, is a great fan of certain
children's shows like "The Big Couch" on public television.

   He plays videotapes of episodes constantly, replaying favorite segments again
and again. Home is where he is most comfortable, where he can tinker with
computer games and seemingly become lost in another world.

   When a visitor arrives, Scott scarcely acknowledges the new presence,
essentially looking through the person standing just feet away. Later, however,
he will offer a "hello" five or six times. Such quirky bits of behavior are not
unusual, but inexplicable.

   Only Scott knows what goes on inside his mind or how he sees the world. "He
seems to have this incredible sensitivity to his surroundings at times," said
Cindy.

   "There are times when it overwhelms him." Frustration seeps into her voice.

   There are times, too, when the 32-year-old mother feels overwhelmed.

   "It's like climbing mountain after mountain, fighting battle after battle.

   It never stops." There is isolation as well.

   Scott's condition evokes sympathy, but also distance.

   Fragile X is something most people have never heard of.

   It makes them uncomfortable.

   Friends and neighbors will invite Jeff to visit, but never mention Scott.
"It's hard to go places or leave Scott with others because we just don't know
how he'll react.

   If people have a certain manner, if they're non-threatening, he can be open
and comfortable.

   But he can also behave poorly.

   I'm afraid to take him to other people's houses because he might throw
things." And public places, with their crowds and noise, tend to be out of the
question. [] [] [] The importance of the FMR-1 gene lies in what it produces --
a protein called FMRP. Not much is known about the exact purpose of FMRP, but it
appears to be involved in the development of brain cells, binding to messenger
RNA, the chemical that translates the genetic code of DNA into proteins used to
build new cells.

   FMRP also seems to help fine-tune the growth of dendrites, the branchlike
extensions that connect nerve cells to each other. When neurons are used, they
tend to grow stronger and more elaborate, leading to better efficiencies and
longer-lasting learning results, said Michael R. Tranfaglia, a
Massachusetts-based psychiatrist and medical director of the FRAXA Research
Foundation, a funding organization for Fragile X research. "This process is
disrupted when FMRP is missing," Tranfaglia said.

   "The growth of the dendritic `tree' is more haphazard, less finely tuned." A
typical Fragile X male patient essentially produces no FMRP. His developing
brain cells struggle to find sustenance.

   They are like seeds planted in poor soil, their roots vainly searching for
all the necessary nutrients to good health. FMRP isn't necessary just during
fetal development.

   It is present in the brain throughout life, concentrated primarily in the
hippocampus, where learning and memory take place.

   That fact suggests that FMRP also helps maintain normal neuronal health and
operation in adulthood. At the moment, there is no cure for Fragile X syndrome.

   Current treatment depends on the time of diagnosis: the earlier in life, the
better.

   Children with Fragile X syndrome generally undergo various forms of
traditional physical and speech therapy, along with later vocational training.
Sometimes drugs are prescribed to control specific forms of behavior, such as
Ritalin for hyperactivity or Prozac for anxiety or overt aggressiveness. "As
with other disorders, medication may help control excitability or anxiety,
things that can get in the way of a child coping," said Tillie Young, a genetic
counselor with the Center for Human and Molecular Genetics in Newark, N.J.

   "Medication doesn't cure anything, but it helps contain the problem." The
long-term prognosis for finding a cure for Fragile X is unclear.

   There is some hope that gene therapy, in which a defective FMR-1 gene is
fixed or replaced, might eventually succeed.

   Researchers at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, are exploring
the possibility of using a harmless virus to carry copies of a healthy Fragile X
gene to brain cells.

   Once introduced, it is hoped the gene will function normally, producing
necessary levels of FMRP. "The fact that FMRP is present in adults suggests that
if additional amounts of it could be provided to brain cells, the therapy could
do some good for Fragile X patients," said Pamela Mellon, a UCSD neuroscientist
and board member of the FRAXA Research Foundation. But there are at least two
significant obstacles. First, scientists must find a way to deliver the gene or
protein into the brain effectively and safely, Mellon said.

   Second, they must better understand the purpose of the protein. "We know that
it binds to RNA and that it's localized in the tips of dendrites, but what FMRP
does exactly isn't known," Mellon said. Currently, gene therapy for Fragile X is
strictly experimental.

   It has not been tried on humans. [] [] [] Scott graduated from kindergarten
at Maryland Avenue Elementary School in La Mesa in June. It was an anxious time
for Cindy and Brendan, who worried about how Scott would behave. But things
turned out OK. Scott occasionally wandered from his seat, his interest drawn
elsewhere.

   But soft talk and nachos generally lured him back. Summer proved a happy
time, too.

   After much searching, Cindy found a public program in Tierrasanta that was
willing to accept Scott.

   Other programs had been reluctant to assume any responsibility. Scott loved
it and thrived.

   He went swimming, played with others. Scott is now in the first grade,
attending regular first-grade classes. (A teacher's assistant provides him with
extra help.) Cindy says he is doing well, happy to be back among old friends,
hugging them constantly. His future, however, is less well-defined. On the plus
side, Fragile X syndrome is not degenerative.

   "It doesn't look like the disorder creates any particular health problems,"
said Young, the genetic counselor.

   "Patients seem to live average life spans." Some research, however, suggests
that while boys such as Scott may be only mildly impaired in their youth, their
mental retardation worsens as they age because their rate of learning slows.
Cindy is optimistic, though.

   Scott has shown he can handle public school. He is doing so without any
medication.

   And while a Fragile X patient's learning ability may slow over time,
researchers say acquired skills don't appear to deteriorate with age. "I would
hope that, when it comes time to get a job, Scott will do something of his own
choosing," said Cindy.

   "It might take some support, but I definitely envision him working. "And I
hope that he will be able to move out someday.

   He would probably need someone to help, someone living with him or coming in
occasionally. But I think it can happen.

   I just want him to be happy." A hereditary condition Fragile X syndrome is
the most common form of inherited mental retardation, affecting one in 1,000
people.

   It is caused by a break or weakness in the FMR-1 gene, located near the end
of the X chromosome.

   Hence the name: Fragile X. When this mutation occurs, the gene shuts down,
cutting off production of a protein necessary for neuronal development. Most
body cells contain 46 chromosomes.

   Human egg and sperm cells, however, contain just 23 chromosomes, or one
member of each chromosome pair. Fertilization of the egg by sperm creates the
full complement.

   Both parents can carry the Fragile X gene mutation but only mothers can pass
it along to their sons. MARK NOWLIN / Union-Tribune Where to turn to learn about
Fragile X Fragile X syndrome is relatively new as a medically recognized mental
disorder.

   Nonetheless, research and information on the condition have grown
substantially in the last few years.

   Here are a few sources for more information and assistance. Books: [] "The
Fragile Child," edited by Betty Schopmeyer and Fonda Low. Singular Publishing
Group; (800) 521-8545; $39.95. [] "Educating Boys With Fragile X Syndrome."

   Order for $10 from Gail Spiridigliozzi, Child Development Unit, Box 3364,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710; (919) 684-5513. [] "Fragile X
Syndrome: Diagnosis, Treatment and Research," by Randi Jenssen Hagerman and Amy
Cronister (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996). Newsletters: [] FRAXA Research
Foundation Newsletter.

   Published four times annually by FRAXA. P.O. Box 935, West Newbury, MA 01985.
Cost: $25/year (with membership). Send e-mail to: fraxa@seacoast.com [] National
Fragile X Advocate Newsletter.

   Published six times annually by The National Fragile X Advocate, Chapel Hill,
N.C. Cost: $36/year. On the Internet: These Web sites represent organizations
providing information, advocacy and support services to Fragile X patients,
parents and medical professionals. Each also contains links to related sites.
http://www.fragilex.org/final/ -- Home page of the National Fragile X
Foundation. http://www.worx.net/fraxa/ -- Home page of the FRAXA Research
Foundation. http://TheArc.org/welcome.html -- Home page of The Association for
Retarded Citizens. Regional organizations: Fragile X Association of Southern
California Mary Seward: (818) 845-5877 Fragile X Resource Center of San Diego
Betty Gabriel: 722-8821 Cindy de Gruchy: 697-6468

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 1 DIAGRAM; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. The X Factor: Scott de Gruchy
ponders a computer game, one of his favorite pastimes. The 6-year-old has
Fragile X syndrome, the most common form of inherited mental retardation but a
disorder that some experts say is still grossly underdiagnosed. 2. A hereditary
condition 3. Outward bound: Fragile X patients frequently display extreme fear
when confronted by new surroundings. Scott, dressing for summer camp with his
mother, Cindy, found more fun than anxiety. (E-4) 4. (E-4) A summer gone
swimmingly: Cindy de Gruchy worried that Scott would not cope well with the
strangeness of a new summer-recreation program. But Scott enjoyed himself
immensely. 5. Active life: Despite inherited physical problems such as poor
muscle tone, Scott is extremely energetic. Here he plays on a trampoline with
his father, Brendan, and younger brother, Jeff. (E-4) 6. Where to turn to learn
about Fragile X; PHOTOBY: 1,3,4,5. DON KOHLBAUER / Union-Tribune 2. MARK NOWLIN
/ Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2675 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 7, 1996, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 944 words

HEADLINE: Gallo meeting opens today, a foxhole for AIDS fighters; 800 scientists
to swap data here at conference that can get quirky

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Twenty-four years after its start in a windowless conference room in
Bethesda, Dr. Robert Gallo's prestigious and slightly quirky gathering of AIDS
and cancer researchers makes its home today in Baltimore.

   Unlike the sprawling International Conference on AIDS, an annual event that
attracts policy-makers, activists and hordes of reporters, the yearly "Gallo
meeting" is largely a scientists-only affair held in circum- stances of relative
quiet.

   It has taken place on a farm, in a state park, at a suburban hotel.

   Yet scientists who count themselves as regulars say this may be the one
meeting to attend during the year. It is a place to renew friendships, make new
ones, set up research collaborations -- and mainly, to discuss ideas that don't
always get an airing in more conventional settings.

   This year's meeting, which runs through Friday at the Hyatt Regency Hotel,
has drawn about 800 scientists from about 20 countries -- with sizable
contingents from France, Belgium, Italy, Sweden and Japan.

   "Scientifically, it's just a great meeting," said Dr. Robert Yarchoan, chief
of the retroviral disease section at the National Cancer Institute.

   He has been attending since 1984.

   "Bob has a knack of bringing together people in different disciplines who
have a fair amount of overlap. So you tend to get real productive
cross-fertilization," he said. "I always come out with great ideas, a feeling
that I've learned something."

   Gallo, co-discoverer of the AIDS virus, has spent the past year setting up a
new Institute of Human Virology at the University of Maryland's graduate campus
in West Baltimore. He had spent the previous 30 years at the National Cancer
Institute in Bethesda.

   Academic leaders along with Gov. Parris N. Glendening had waged a long
campaign to lure Gallo to Baltimore, banking on him to enhance the university's
stature in AIDS research and related areas. With a promise of about $ 10 million
in public funds, Gallo agreed in May 1995 to establish his center in the city.

   He plans its formal dedication in November.

   Moving his laboratory to Baltimore also meant moving his annual meeting here.
Some observers said the yearly meeting would do as much as his laboratory to
make people associate the University of Maryland with AIDS research.

   A major topic will be chemokines, a class of proteins that appear to play an
important role in the body's attempts to repel the AIDS virus. In December,
Gallo and several colleagues identified these chemicals as natural AIDS fighters
-- raising hopes that they may hold the key to an effective therapy.

   Other topics include a "gene therapy" for AIDS; the theory that a herpes
virus may be a contributing cause of Kaposi's sarcoma, an AIDS-related cancer;
and the possible viral origins of multiple sclerosis.

   Daily schedules include a dizzying line-up of presentations, many lasting
only 15 minutes. Gallo said he also plans a barbecue and softball game near the
Inner Harbor, and an Italian dinner featuring pastas made by some of the Italian
scientists.

   The gathering began modestly in 1972, with Gallo and two dozen associates
meeting in a conference room near his lab at the National Cancer Institute.

   "Then, close collaborators wanted to come, and collaborators of
collaborators," recalled Gallo. "We decided a windowless room wasn't the right
thing, so then there was a cheap hotel in Gaithersburg, a farm in Frederick and
Blackwater Falls State Park in West Virginia."

   In 1980, Gallo attracted worldwide attention when his laboratory discovered
the link between a rare leukemia and a retrovirus that he called HTLV-1.
Interest in his meeting intensified a few years later when Gallo and a French
scientist announced that a related retrovirus -- later named the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -- lay at the root of the exploding AIDS epidemic.

   For most of the last 15 years, Gallo has staged his meeting at a hotel in
Bethesda. He now views Baltimore as its home base, with occasional forays into
other parts of the state -- possibly Annapolis.

   "There's always been a tremendous amount of interaction with colleagues and
friends from all over the world -- getting the latest information,
re-evaluating," Gallo said. "Basically, it's meant education. It's a place where
you can get a massive amount of information in a very small amount of time."

   Dr. William Haseltine, founder and chief executive officer of Human Genome
Sciences Inc., a Rockville biotechnology company, has been attending since 1975.
He said many people show up year after year.

   "Some may call it clubbiness, but it's camaraderie," he said. "It's like
people in the same foxhole."

   Haseltine, an internationally known AIDS expert who directed the retrovirus
division at Harvard's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, said the meeting is
distinguished by its openness.

   Participants are encouraged to criticize each other, and they feel
comfortable discussing unpopular theories -- even ones ridiculed in the greater
scientific community.

   "It's characterized by its frankness, a real give and take," he said.

   Most of the talks are off-the-record -- off limits to press coverage without
the permission of scientists presenting the ideas.

   Haseltine recalls discussions in the 1970s about retroviruses that infected
cows, sheep and monkeys -- causing no symptoms, seemingly disappearing, until
disease emerged many years later. Haseltine said the idea that retroviruses
might also cause human disease had fallen out of favor in scientific circles,
but was discussed seriously at the early lab meetings.

   By the mid-1980s, he said, the idea was dogma.

   Pub Date: 9/07/96

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, REUTERS, Scientists only: The University of Maryland's Dr.
Robert Gallo started his prestigious conference 24 years ago.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1996


                             2676 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1996, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 37;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
GENZYME PLANS TO BUY NEOZYME II FOR $109 MILLION

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

BODY:

   The Genzyme Corporation said yesterday that it planned to buy the Neozyme II
Corporation for $45 a unit, or about $109 million in cash. The acquisition
protects Genzyme shareholders from dilution of their interest because Neozyme
units include Genzyme stock warrants. Genzyme has an option to buy Neozyme,
which is headed by Genzyme's chief executive, Henri Termeer, that expires at the
end of the year. If Genzyme did not exercise the option, Neozyme would have been
free to sell the gene therapy technology it is developing to treat cystic
fibrosis. Holders of Neozyme units would also have been able to exercise
warrants for Genzyme shares. The units gained 68.75 cents yesterday, to $44.75,
in Nasdaq trading.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1996


                             2677 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  September 6, 1996 Friday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 272 words

HEADLINE: GENE MANIPULATION FIGHTS SICKLE-CELL ANEMIA IN TESTS

BYLINE: PAUL RECER Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene mutation that
causes sickle-cell anemia could be ready to test on human patients within a
year, researchers say.

   The gene-repair molecule that has proved itself in laboratory cultures was
developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. They
have already tested it on blood cells from patients with sickle-cell anemia, a
severe blood disorder that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most of them
black.

   Eric Kmiec, head of the Jefferson team, said Thursday that this type of
molecule may also repair genes that cause other inherited diseases such as
cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   The team is now talking with U.S. Food and Drug Administration officials as a
first step toward getting approval to try the technique in patients, he said,
adding that it could be ready for human testing within 12 months.

   "This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy in a new way,"
said Dr. Donald Kohn, a gene therapy expert at Children's Hospital in Los
Angeles. A report on the study is to be published today in the journal Science.

   Sickle-cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in a gene that
directs the production of red blood cells. The mutation consists of a
substitution of a single chemical in a nucleotide base, which is a fundamental
element of a gene. This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino
acid.

   The disease is inherited by about one in every 400 U.S. blacks, but also is
common among people of Arabian, Caribbean, East Indian, Mediterranean and South
American descent.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2678 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 6, 1996, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Sickle cell gene therapy nears testing

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene
mutation that causes sickle cell anemia could be ready to test
on human patients within a year.

   The gene repair molecule that has proven itself in laboratory
cultures was developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson
University in Philadelphia.  They already have tested it on
blood cells from patients with sickle cell anemia, a severe
blood disorder that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most
of them black.

   Eric Kmiec, head of the Jefferson team, said the same type of
molecule may also be used to repair genes that cause other
inherited diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's
disease.

   ""We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia,'' Kmiec said.

   ""We were trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy
inside a chromosome by correcting a specific mutation. ''

   The team is now talking with Food and Drug Administration
officials to get approval to try the technique in patients.  It
could be ready for human testing within 12 months.

   ""This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy
in a new way,'' said Dr. Donald Kohn, a gene therapy expert at
the Children's Hospital in Los Angeles.  ""I think this is
exciting and very important. ''
 A report on the study is to be published today in Science.

   Sickle cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in
a gene that directs red blood cell production.  The mutation
consists of a substitution of a single chemical in a
nucleotide base, which is a fundamental element of a gene.

   This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino
acid, glutamic acid, instead of the normal amino acid,
valine.

   This change is enough to cause the body to make red blood
cells that are shaped like a crescent or a sickle, instead of
the flexible, rounded shape normal for such cells.

   Because of their shape, the sickled red blood cells become
stuck in capillaries, creating a blockage.  This cuts off blood
flow to tissues and organs and causes bouts of severe pain.

   The sickled cells also are quickly eliminated from the body,
leading to anemia, or a shortage of the oxygen-carrying blood
cells.  Many patients are crippled in their youth and are dead
by the age of 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about one in every 400
American blacks but also is common among people of Arabian,
Caribbean, East Indian, Mediterranean and South American
descent.

   In the study, Jefferson scientists created a molecule, called
a chimeraplast, that activates the gene correction machinery
inside a cell.

   ""If you think of the genetic code as a sentence, then you can
imagine that inside a patient who has sickle cell anemia there
is one word misspelled,'' said Kmiec.  ""What we have devised is
a synthetic molecule that is able to go into the cell and
find the misspelled word. ''

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1996


                             2679 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1996, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: Advance Reported on Sickle Cell Anemia

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5

BODY:

   In laboratory tests, a synthetic molecule has been found to correct the gene
mutation that causes sickle cell anemia, researchers say.

   The gene-repair molecule was developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson
University in Philadelphia. They tested it on blood cells from patients with
sickle cell anemia, a severe blood disorder that affects more than 50,000
Americans, most of them black.

    Dr. Eric B. Kmiec, head of the university's team of scientists, said the
same type of molecule might be used to repair genes that cause some other
inherited diseases, like cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   "We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia," Dr. Kmiec said. "We were
trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy inside a chromosome by
correcting a specific mutation."

   A report on the study is to be published on Friday in the journal Science.

   The team is now talking with the Food and Drug Administration as a first step
toward getting approval to try the technique in patients, he said, adding that
it could be ready for human testing within 12 months.

   Dr. Donald B. Kohn, a gene therapy expert at Children's Hospital in Los
Angeles, said: "This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy in
a new way. I think this is exciting and very important." Dr. Kohn cautioned,
however, that the work had been done only in laboratory cultures. "A lot of
things work well in a cell line, but not in a patient," he said.

   Sickle cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in a gene that
directs red blood cell production. The mutation consists of a substitution of a
single chemical in a nucleotide base, which is a fundamental element of a gene.
This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino acid, glutamic acid,
instead of the normal amino acid, valine.

   This change is enough to cause the body to make red blood cells that are
shaped like a crescent or a sickle, instead of the flexible, rounded shape that
is normal.

   Because of their shape, the sickled red blood cells become stuck in
capillaries, creating a blockage. This cuts off blood flow to tissues and organs
and causes bouts of severe pain. The sickled cells are also quickly eliminated
from the body, leading to anemia, or a shortage of the oxygen-carrying blood
cells. Though the severity of the disease varies widely, many patients are
crippled in their youth and are dead by the age of 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about 1 in every 400 American blacks, but
is also common among people of Arabian, Caribbean, East Indian, Mediterranean
and South American descent.

   In the study, the university scientists created a molecule, called a
chimeraplast, that activates the gene correction machinery inside a cell.

   "If you think of the genetic code as a sentence," Dr. Kmiec said. "then you
can imagine that inside a patient who has sickle cell anemia there is one word
misspelled. What we have devised is a synthetic molecule that is able to go into
the cell and find the misspelled word."

   Once the error is located, the chimeraplast tells the cell "to proof read and
fix that misspelling," he said, adding, "The cell's own DNA repair system then
removes that incorrect letter and puts in the correct letter."

   In laboratory experiments, the researchers proved that the molecule could
cause red blood cells to correct the sickle mutation. Next, the researchers did
the same process in stem cells, which are bone marrow components that produce
blood cells. In that study, Dr. Kmiec said, the stem cells created red blood
cells that were normal.

   For treatment of patients, the sickled red cells would be removed, treated
with the chimeraplast and then reinjected into the patient. Dr. Kmiec said that
if just 10 percent of the flawed red blood cells could be replaced with normal
cells, it would greatly relieve the symptoms of sickle cell anemia.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1996


                             2680 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                      SEPTEMBER 6, 1996 Friday PM EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: SICKLE CELL FIX REPORTED< TESTS ON PATIENTS POSSIBLE IN A YEAR

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene mutation that causes sickle cell
anemia could be ready for testing on human patients within a year, researchers
say.

   The gene repair molecule that has proven itself in laboratory cultures was
developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. They
already have tested it on blood cells from patients with sickle cell anemia, a
severe blood disorder that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most of them
black.

   Eric B. Kmiec, head of the Jefferson team, said the same type of molecule may
also be used to repair genes that cause some other inherited diseases, such as
cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   "We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia," said Kmiec. "We were
trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy inside a chromosome by
correcting a specific mutation."

   The team is now talking with Food and Drug Administration officials as a
first step toward getting approval to try the technique in patients, he said,
adding that it could be ready for human testing within 12 months.

   "This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy in a new way,"
said Dr. Donald B. Kohn, a gene therapy expert at the Children's Hospital in Los
Angeles. "I think this is exciting and very important."

   Sickle cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in a gene that
directs red blood cell production. The mutation consists of a substitution of a
single chemical in a nucleotide base, which is a fundamental element of a gene.
This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino acid, glutamic acid,
instead of the normal amino acid, valine.

   This change is enough to cause the body to make red blood cells that are
shaped like a crescent or a sickle, instead of the flexible, rounded shape
normal for such cells.

   Because of their shape, the sickled red blood cells become stuck in
capillaries, creating a blockage. This cuts off blood flow to tissues and organs
and causes bouts of severe pain.

   The sickled cells also are quickly eliminated from the body, leading to
anemia, or a shortage of the oxygen-carrying blood cells.

   Though the severity of the disease varies widely, many patients are crippled
in their youth and are dead by the age of 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about one in every 400 American blacks.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2681 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 6, 1996 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COULD TAME SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

BYLINE: Paul Recer, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene mutation that causes sickle cell
anemia could be ready to test on human patients within a year, researchers say.

   The gene-repair molecule that has proven itself in laboratory cultures was
developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson University. They already have tested
it on blood cells from patients with sickle cell anemia, a severe blood disorder
that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most of them black.

   Eric B. Kmiec, head of the Jefferson team, said the same type of molecule
might also be used to repair genes that cause some other inherited diseases,
such as cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   "We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia," said Kmiec. "We were
trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy inside a chromosome by
correcting a specific mutation."

   The team is talking with Food and Drug Administration officials about getting
approval to try the technique in patients, he said.

   "This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy in a new way,"
said Donald B. Kohn, a gene therapy expert at the Children's Hospital in Los
Angeles. "I think this is exciting and very important."

   A report on the study was published today in the journal Science.

   Sickle cell anemia is caused by an inherited mutation in a gene that directs
red blood cell production.

   The change is enough to cause the body to make red blood cells that are
shaped like a crescent or a sickle, instead of the normal, flexible, rounded
shape. That shape causes the red blood cells to become stuck in capillaries,
creating blockages and cutting off blood flow to tissues and organs and causing
severe pain. Such cells also are quickly eliminated from the body, leading to
anemia, or a shortage of the oxygen-carrying blood cells. Though the severity of
the disease varies widely, many patients are crippled in their youth and are
dead by age 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about one in every 400 American blacks,
but also is common among people of Arabian, Caribbean, East Indian,
Mediterranean and South American descent.

   In the study, Jefferson scientists created a molecule, called a chimeraplast,
that activates the gene correction machinery inside a cell.

   Once the error is located, said Kmiec, the chimeraplast tells the cell "to
proofread and fix that misspelling. The cell's own DNA repair system then
removes that incorrect letter and puts in the correct letter."

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2682 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     September 6, 1996 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 16A

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: GENE REPAIR TESTING DUE FOR SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

BYLINE: By PAUL RECER; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene mutation that causes sickle cell
anemia could be ready to test on human patients within a year, researchers say.

   The gene repair molecule that has proven itself in laboratory cultures was
developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. They
already have tested it on blood cells from patients with sickle cell anemia, a
severe blood disorder that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most of them
black.

   Eric B. Kmiec, head of the Jefferson team, said the same type of molecule
might also be used to repair genes that cause some other inherited diseases,
such as cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   "We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia," said Kmiec. "We were
trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy inside a chromosome by
correcting a specific mutation."

   The team is talking with Food and Drug Administration officials about getting
approval to try the technique in patients, he said, adding that it could be
ready for human testing within 12 months.

   "This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy in a new way,"
said Dr. Donald B. Kohn, a gene therapy expert at Children's Hospital in Los
Angeles. "I think this is exciting and very important."

   A report on the study is to be published today in the journal Science.

   Sickle cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in a gene that
directs red blood cell production. The mutation consists of a substitution of a
single chemical in a nucleotide base, which is a fundamental element of a gene.
This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino acid, glutamic acid,
instead of the normal amino acid, valine.

   This change is enough to cause the body to make red blood cells that are
shaped like a crescent or a sickle, instead of the flexible, rounded shape
normal for such cells.

   Because of their shape, the sickled red blood cells become stuck in
capillaries, creating a blockage. This cuts off blood flow to tissues and organs
and causes bouts of severe pain. The sickled cells also are quickly eliminated
from the body, leading to anemia. Many patients are crippled in their youth and
are dead by the age of 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about one in every 400 American blacks,
but also is common among people of Arabian, Caribbean, East Indian,
Mediterranean and South American descent.

   In the study, Jefferson scientists created a molecule, called a chimeraplast,
that activates the gene correction machinery inside a cell.

   "If you think of the genetic code as a sentence, then you can imagine that
inside a patient who has sickle cell anemia there is one word misspelled," said
Kmiec. "What we have devised is a synthetic molecule ... that is able to go into
the cell and find the misspelled word."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1996


                             2683 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 September 6, 1996, Friday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: SICKLE CELL TEST ENCOURAGES RESEARCHERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene mutation that causes sickle cell
anemia could be ready to test on human patients within a year, researchers say.

   The gene repair molecule that has proven itself in laboratory cultures was
developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. They
already have tested it on blood cells from patients with sickle cell anemia, a
severe blood disorder that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most of them
black.

   Eric B. Kmiec, head of the Jefferson team, said the same type of molecule
also might be used to repair genes that cause some other inherited diseases,
such as cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   "We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia," Kmiec said. "We were
trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy inside a chromosome by
correcting a specific mutation."

   The team is now talking with Food and Drug Administration officials as a
first step toward getting approval to try the technique in patients, he said. A
report on the study is being published today in the journal Science.

   Sickle cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in a gene that
directs red blood cell production. The mutation consists of a substitution of a
single chemical in a nucleotide base, which is a fundamental element of a gene.
This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino acid, glutamic acid,
instead of the normal amino acid, valine.

   This change is enough to cause the body to make red blood cells that are
shaped like a crescent or a sickle, instead of the flexible, rounded shape
normal for such cells.

   Because of their shape, the sickled red blood cells become stuck in
capillaries, creating a blockage. This cuts off blood flow to tissues and organs
and causes bouts of severe pain. The sickled cells also are quickly eliminated
from the body, leading to anemia, or a shortage of the oxygen-carrying blood
cells. Though the severity of the disease varies widely, many patients are
crippled in their youth and are dead by the age of 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about one in every 400 American blacks,
but also is common among people of Arabian, Caribbean, East Indian,
Mediterranean and South American descent.

   'One Word Misspelled'

   In the study, Jefferson scientists created a molecule, called a chimeraplast,
that activates the gene correction machinery inside a cell.

   "If you think of the genetic code as a sentence, then you can imagine that
inside a patient who has sickle cell anemia there is one word misspelled," Kmiec
said. "What we have devised is a synthetic molecule . . . that is able to go
into the cell and find the misspelled word."

   Once the error is found, he added, the chimeraplast then tells the cell "to
proofread and fix that misspelling. The cell's own DNA repair system then
removes that incorrect letter and puts in the correct letter."

   In lab experiments, the researchers showed that the molecule could cause red
blood cells to correct the sickle mutation. Next, the researchers did the same
process in stem cells, which are bone marrow components that produce blood
cells. In that study, Kmiec said, the stem cells created red blood cells that
were normal.

   For treatment of patients, the target cells would be removed, treated with
the chimeraplast and then reinjected into the patient.

   Kmiec said that, if just 10 percent of the flawed red blood cells could be
replaced with normal cells, that would will greatly relieve the symptoms of
sickle cell anemia.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1996


                             2684 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    September 6, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FLORIDA/METRO, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: Brain center no longer just a thought

BYLINE: JIM TUNSTALL; of The Tampa Tribune

BODY:


   SUMMARY: Construction of the University of Florida's Brain Institute will
allow expansion of research on head and spinal cord injuries.

   GAINESVILLE - Things you won't find at the Brain Institute:

   1) Albert Einstein's lobes preserved in formaldehyde while researchers try to
find a way to make the rest of us brilliant.

   2) A think tank working on life's greatest mysteries, including the nagging
question: Does the Mars rock really have evidence of life forms or just a glob
of fossilized Silly String?

   3) A building.

   The latter will be remedied today when ground is broken on the $ 57.3 million
first phase of an institute that already (in borrowed quarters at the University
of Florida) is knee-deep into research on brain and spinal cord injuries,
Alzheimer's and dozens of other diseases.

   Forgive UF officials if they gush a little. In 1992, they beat out 22 other
universities competing for an $ 18 million Defense Department grant that's the
financial cornerstone of the cutting-edge center.

   Four years of fundraising later, the first shovel will hit the ground.

   "We've worked on this well over a decade," says William Luttge, director of
the Brain Institute. "This is one of a kind - there is nothing like it in the
world - and it has a huge impact on our health center."

   The institute will allow expansion of research on:  - Spinal cord
regeneration. UF scientists have transplanted healthy tissue into the spinal
cords of surgically injured cats, which developed near normal walking abilities.
It's hoped the research will eventually help restore motor functions in
paralyzed humans.  - Gene therapy for recurrent, inoperable brain tumors. The
goal is to kill cancer cells in humans by genetic alteration and anti-viral drug
treatments.  - Alzheimer's disease, which afflicts 4.4 million Americans and
costs the nation's health-care systems, taxpayers and patients $ 100 billion
annually.  - Parkinson's disease, drug and alcohol addictions, AIDS and
epilepsy.

   Patients are being sought for some of the research.

   In addition to the initial grant, UF received a $ 13 million grant from the
Defense Department and Department of Veterans Affairs. The defense agency wants
to use the institute's research to train military health specialists to treat
spinal cord and head-trauma injuries.

   "They are the most common battlefield wounds," says Renee Buchanan, a
spokeswoman for UF's Health Science Center.

   UF's College of Medicine and Shands Hospital added $ 26 million in matching
funds. The $ 57.3 million is for the building and equipment.

   Buchanan says another $ 10 million in private funds is earmarked for endowed
professorships, eminent scholars and research in neurology and neuroscience.

   The first phase is primarily a research center.

   The 200,000-square-foot building should be completed by fall 1998, the same
year the institute hopes to begin the two-year job of building a
38,000-square-foot second phase. The second phase would be a clinical center
that includes operating rooms, intensive- and acute-care beds, labs and teaching
areas.

   The cost of the second phase has not been determined.

   Fundraising efforts are continuing.

   You can donate:  - A building for $ 15 million.  - An eminent scholar chair
for $ 2 million.  - A major laboratory for $ 500,000.  - A faculty office for $
25,000.

   Of course, smaller gifts are welcome.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO,
 Ground will be broken today on the $ 57.3 million first phase of the UF Brain
Institute, shown in an artist's drawing. Photo from the University of Florida

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1996


                             2685 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        September 6, 1996 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: GENE-REPAIR MOLECULE MAY CONTROL SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

BYLINE: By PAUL RECER AP science writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A synthetic molecule that corrects the gene mutation that causes sickle cell
anemia could be ready to test on human patients within a year, researchers say.

   The gene-repair molecule that has proven itself in laboratory cultures was
developed by scientists at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. They
already have tested it on blood cells from patients with sickle cell anemia, a
severe blood disorder that affects more than 50,000 Americans, most of them
black.

   Eric Kmiec, head of the research team, said the same type of molecule also
may be used to repair genes that cause some other inherited diseases, such as
cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.

   "We were not after a cure for sickle cell anemia," Kmiec said. "We were
trying to demonstrate that you can do gene therapy inside a chromosome by
correcting a specific mutation."

   The team is talking with Food and Drug Administration officials as a first
step toward getting approval to try the technique in patients, he said, adding
that it could be ready for human testing within a year.

   "This is a very important first step toward doing gene therapy in a new way,"
said Dr. Donald Kohn, a gene therapy expert at Children's Hospital in Los
Angeles. "I think this is exciting and very important."

   A report on the study was published today in the journal Science.

   Sickle cell anemia is caused when people inherit a mutation in a gene that
directs red blood cell production. The mutation consists of a substitution of a
single chemical in a nucleotide base, which is a fundamental element of a gene.
This substitution causes the production of the wrong amino acid, glutamic acid,
instead of the normal amino acid, valine.

   This change is enough to cause the body to make red blood cells that are
crescent- or sickle-shaped, instead of the flexible, rounded shape normal for
such cells.

   Because of their shape, the sickled red blood cells become stuck in
capillaries, creating a blockage. This cuts off blood flow to tissues and organs
and causes bouts of severe pain. The sickled cells also are quickly eliminated
from the body, leading to anemia, or a shortage of the oxygen-carrying blood
cells. Though the severity of the disease varies widely, many patients are
crippled in their youth and are dead by age 30.

   Sickle cell anemia is inherited by about one in every 400 black Americans,
but also is common among people of Arabian, Caribbean, East Indian,
Mediterranean and South American descent.

   In the study, scientists created a molecule, called a chimeraplast, that
activates the gene correction machinery inside a cell.

   "If you think of the genetic code as a sentence, then you can imagine that
inside a patient who has sickle cell anemia there is one word misspelled," Kmiec
said. "What we have devised is a synthetic molecule . . . that is able to go
into the cell and find the misspelled word."

   Once the error is located, the chimeraplast tells the cell "to proofread and
fix that misspelling," Kmiec said. "The cell's own DNA repair system then
removes that incorrect letter and puts in the correct letter."

   For treatment of patients, the target cells would be removed, treated with
the chimeraplast and then reinjected into the patient.

   Kmiec said that if just 10 percent of the flawed red blood cells can be
replaced with normal cells, it will greatly relieve the symptoms of sickle cell
anemia.

   Kohn cautioned that although the work looks promising, it has been done only
in laboratory cultures. "A lot of things work well in a cell line, but not in a
patient," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1996


                             2686 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 5, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: $ 21 million in aid to businesses OK'd; Legislators approve use of
'Sunny Day' funds for 9 projects

BYLINE: Michael Dresser, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   On a cloudy day in Annapolis, the sun shone brightly on the Glendening
administration's economic development strategy yesterday as lawmakers gave their
blessing to nine projects worth a combined $ 21 million.

   The projects approved by the General Assembly's Legislative Policy Committee
include an $ 11.5 million "welcome mat" for Northrop Grumman Corp., which
acquired Westinghouse Corp.'s Linthicum-based electronic systems division in
January.

   The committee, which reviews grants and loans from the state's "Sunny Day"
fund, gave its OK to the Northrop Grumman project after the Assembly's chief
legislative auditor called it "a classic illustration" of how the fund was
intended to be used.

   William S. Ratchford II, director of the Assembly's Department of Fiscal
Services, said the package of loans and grants would leverage about $ 12 in
private investment for each dollar in private funds.

   The Northrop Grumman project is the largest ever funded under the state's
Sunny Day fund, which was set up under the Schaefer administration to let the
state offer incentives to companies to do business here.

   The Fiscal Services Department estimated that if all the goals under the
project are reached, the investment would help stem the hemorrhage of jobs at
the former Westinghouse facilities and create 1,500 jobs in addition to Northrop
Grumman's current work force of 7,282 in Maryland.

   "This is no potato chip factory," Republican Sen. John A. Cade of Anne
Arundel County said in a good-natured gibe at Sen. Walter M. Baker, a Cecil
County Democrat. The Senate Republican leader was referring to a $ 15 million
tax break adopted in order to keep Frito-Lay doing business in Baker's corner of
the state.

   Ratchford urged legislators to approve the financing with the condition that
Northrop Grumman retain a "meaningful" presence in Maryland. But Cade
successfully moved that the package be approved without strings as "a gesture of
good faith and goodwill" toward Northrop Grumman.

   Legislators granted $ 1 million in financing for STX-William T. Burnett Inc.
over Ratchford's recommendation that it be rejected. The manufacturer of foam
products and lacrosse equipment was seeking assistance to renovate its facility
at 1500 Bush Street in a Baltimore empowerment zone.

   Ratchford said the investment is expected to create only 15 new jobs and that
the company would match the state's investment with only about $ 1.2 million of
its own money -- far short of the 5-1 private-to-public money ratio in the
Assembly's own guidelines.

   But legislators accepted arguments from James T. Brady, secretary of business
and economic development, that STX was the "anchor company" of the economically
distressed area. Brady also cited the company's "long and storied history" in
the lacrosse equipment industry and noted that the Assembly's guidelines don't
officially take effect until Oct. 1.

   Other financing approved by the committee included $ 2.7 million for Staples
Office Supply for a Hagerstown distribution center; $ 1.5 million for Canam
Steel to expand its steel products plant in Point of Rocks; and $ 600,000 to
Johns Hopkins Health Systems' Dome Corp. for a genetic therapy research center
in East Baltimore.

   Other payouts approved were $ 1 million for Filtronic Comtek to expand its
cellular telephone component plant near Salisbury; $ 1.5 million to Metro Center
Inc. to help renovate a building in Hyattsville to house the Federal Emergency
Management Administration; $ 750,000 to help Principal Health Care Inc.
consolidate its operations in Montgomery County; and a $ 500,000 contribution to
a revolving loan fund to encourage economic growth in the Lower Eastern Shore.

   Pub Date: 9/05/96

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1996


                             2687 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    September 4, 1996 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 10B

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: AIDS AND THE 'SUICIDE GENE'

BODY:

   A Cleveland Clinic research team is employing a bit of the past and a bit of
the future in its quest for a vaccine against the human immunodeficiency virus.

   By using a live but weakened version of HIV - the virus that causes AIDS -
the clinic's scientists hark back to medicine's battle against a number of
frightening and arguably more contagious diseases, one especially that many
Americans alive today remember very well: polio.

   A live-virus vaccine began rolling back that crippling disease in 1961, and
banished Americans' fears of a contagion whose results were iron lungs, leg
braces, wheelchairs and, for thousands, death. Polio still stalks many of the
world's underdeveloped countries, but crops up only rarely on these shores.

   Today's plague is AIDS, and once again scientists' creativity is being
tested. The clinic researchers - Harry W. Kestler, Bimal K. Chakrabarti, Ratan
K. Maitra and Xu-Zhong Ma - are taking the approach that the virus that causes
AIDS will have a harder time hurting people if it has a malady of its own.

   A 'suicide gene' created by Kestler and company makes HIV susceptible to
ganciclovir, a drug used to treat herpes. It is far too early to tell whether
these researchers are on the trail of a vaccination that works for humans - or
even more miraculous yet, a cure.

   But it is encouraging to see medicine - especially medicine right here in
Cleveland - working to add to its arsenal against infectious diseases.

   A breakthrough that consigns AIDS to the status of polio, a rare and easily
preventable disease, would be enormously important. Wider still, and more
profound, would be the implications of such a discovery for the field of gene
therapy.

   The clinic's researchers deserve every Greater Clevelander's prayers for
success.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1996


                             2688 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 3, 1996, Tuesday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 5B; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: VENTURA COUNTY ROUNDUP / BARBARA MURPHY;
AMGEN AWARDED PATENT FOR ANEMIA TREATMENT

BYLINE: BARBARA MURPHY

BODY:


   Amgen Inc. has received a patent for its drug to treat anemia in patients
undergoing kidney dialysis. However, a Cambridge, Mass., company has announced
plans to go forward with the development of a competing product.

   Amgen's patent for the drug, marketed under the name Epogen, provides
protection against the unauthorized making, importation, use or sale of
recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) in the United States.

   The Thousand Oaks biotechnology company said it already has patents covering
DNA and host cells and the manufacturing process for recombinant EPO.

   However, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it will sell shares in an initial
public offering and expects to begin human tests of its erythropoietin product
in the first half of next year.

   If successful, analysts said the product could compete with Epogen, which is
used to spur red blood cell growth in kidney disease patients and is expected to
have sales of about $ 1 billion this year.

   Oppenheimer & Co. analyst Matt Geller said Transkaryotic believes it can
avoid Amgen's patents on Epogen since it claims to have a natural way of making
the compound.

   Epogen is used to treat anemia associated with chronic renal failure in
people on kidney dialysis. The drug is a form of the protein that tells the bone
marrow to make the red blood cells that carry oxygen to the body's other cells.
Lack of red blood cells causes anemia and fatigue in dialysis patients.

   Transkaryotic's erythropoietin may be far from reaching the market, since it
has yet to begin human tests and is likely to face lawsuits from Amgen, said
Bear Stearns analyst David Molowa.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1996


                             2689 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk;  Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1347 words

HEADLINE: An Oddly Shaped Molecule Is Used To Switch New Genes On and Off

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   USING drugs with exotic shapes, molecular biologists have tackled a
fundamental problem of gene therapy: once a gene is added to cells, how can it
be controlled? With the new drugs, researchers have successfully switched genes
on and off at will in animal experiments.

   If the technique proves workable in humans, it could change the landscape of
gene therapy and affect how research in this field will progress.

    The idea in gene therapy is to add properly functioning genes to cells to do
the work of nonfunctioning or malfunctioning ones, or to make cells into
drug-producing factories so that patients would, in essence, make their own
pharmaceuticals.

   The main struggle has been to find ways of reliably adding working genes to
cells, and while scientists have made progress in that struggle, they have not
actually cured anyone of a genetic disease. Even in the midst of this work,
however, researchers have been plagued by the nagging fear of too much success.
What if the new genes worked too well, and could not be turned off? The
scientists would have genetically engineered a biological Sorcerer's Apprentice:
genes run amok.

   Attempts at gene therapy have been made without a method for controlling
doses, researchers said, because scientists purposely focused on genes that can
simply be turned on all the time. These include genes needed by patients with a
rare disorder that results in a nonfunctioning immune system or by those few
patients whose cells are genetically unable to take up cholesterol.

   But, said Dr. Michael Gilman of Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc., a biotechnology
company in Cambridge, Mass., who directed the company's work on gene control,
those diseases are rare exceptions in medicine. "If gene therapy is ever going
to work, it has to be dosage-controlled," he said.

   And a means for dosage control is just what scientists at Stanford and
Harvard Universities and at Ariad say they have devised. They have developed a
drug that can turn genes on and off, and, depending on the dose, make them more
or less active. The scientists reported that the system worked beautifully in
studies with human skin cells implanted in mice.

   In an editorial in the current issue of the journal Nature Medicine, where
the Ariad researchers published their work, Dr. James Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania, called it "a
pharmacologic rheostat for gene therapy."

   Dr. Wilson wrote that the work was "a shining example of the use of the
fundamental concepts of biology to attack what may appear to be insurmountable
problems." It is not the first such attempt, he said, but it is one that seems
more practical than other methods that have been suggested. Other investigators,
for example, used proteins from bacteria to control genes added in therapy,
making it likely that if such a system were used in a whole animal, rather than
in laboratory dishes, the animal's immune system would recognize the bacterial
proteins as foreign and destroy the cells with the added genes.

   But the new system uses only human genes and human proteins, Dr. Wilson said.
In an interview, he said he envisioned patients' eventually receiving genes that
would lie dormant until they took a pill. A patient with multiple sclerosis or
with hepatitis who now is injected with interferon, a child who needs injections
of growth hormone, a dialysis patient who needs injections of erythropoetin to
correct anemia, all might eventually have this new sort of gene therapy, Dr.
Wilson said.

   But, he and others noted, there are many hurdles between the experiment
reported by the Ariad scientists and the actual control of genes in a human.

   Dr. Ronald Crystal, who directs gene therapy research at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, said, the work was "very, very
pretty." It is, he said, "nice, elegant molecular biology applied to a clinical
situation." But he cautioned that the Ariad experiment was an idealized form of
gene therapy.

   The idea for the pharmacological rheostat originated with Dr. Stuart
Schreiber, a chemist at Harvard, and Dr. Gerald R. Crabtree, a molecular
biologist at Stanford. They were investigating a different question, how certain
drugs suppress the immune system, when they discovered that three commonly used
drugs, cyclosporin, rapamycin and FK506, all had highly unusual dumbbell-shaped
molecules.

   The researchers were inspired by the shapes of these molecules, and convinced
that they could be used in a complex system to switch genes on and off. If they
were right, the immunosuppressive drugs could turn out to be nature's gift to
gene therapists, Dr. Crabtree said.

   The drugs had several qualities that led the researchers to this hope. First,
the drugs enter cells easily. They "melt into a cell's membrane like butter
melts into olive oil and then they melt out the other side," Dr. Crabtree said.
But more important was their ability to grasp two different proteins, one at
each end.

   Genes of all sorts have to be turned on, and this is done by proteins within
the cell. Usually, different parts of a protein molecule must act on different
parts of the DNA molecule that holds the gene. Perhaps, the investigators
reasoned, they could snap a gene's switching protein in two so that it could not
function properly. Then they could activate the protein by putting it back
together. This was to be the role of the dumbbell molecule, to grasp the two
halves of the switching protein and put it back together. Without the drug, the
protein fragments would float helplessly in the cell. With the drug, they would
unite and turn on the gene.

   Of course, in order to do this, the researchers would have to insert a
package of genes into an organism. One would be the new gene that they wanted to
activate, modified in such a way that it could be turned on only by a new
protein, not the one normally found in the cell. Two other genes would be
introduced, each to make one half of the switching protein. These genes would be
close enough to ones normally found in the cell that normal switching proteins
would turn them on. The drug would close this tangled biochemical cat's cradle,
and set the system in motion.

   The strategy worked, Dr. Crabtree said. Testing the system in cells growing
in laboratory dishes, Dr. Crabtree said, "we could turn the activity of a gene
up and down and do it very quickly."

   Dr. Crabtree and Dr. Schreiber licensed the technology to Ariad and the
company set out to try the method with genes for human growth hormone, a prime
example of a gene that, if it were to be used in gene therapy, would have to be
controlled. Too much growth hormone and a person develops gigantism. Too little
and it is ineffective. Moreover, the hormone is normally produced at night, so,
to mimic the natural situation, doctors would like to provide it then. Gene
therapy is not available for growth hormone deficiency and children who produce
insufficient amounts of the hormone are treated with growth hormone injections.

   The Ariad investigators put together a modified gene for human growth
hormone, a modified switching protein and a modified dumbbell drug, in this case
rapamycin, that would grasp the two pieces of the switching protein.

   The Ariad investigators added this system to human skin cells growing in the
laboratory. They gave the cells the human growth hormone gene, with its modified
controls and genes that would direct the cells to make the two halves of the
activation protein. Then, the investigators implanted the skin cells into mice.
The cells did not make growth hormone because they could not bring together the
two fragments of the gene switching protein.

   But when the mice received the modified rapamycin, the drug seeped into the
human skin cells, the protein fragments came together and the implanted cells
immediately began producing human growth hormone. The more drug the mice
received, the more hormone the cells produced.

   "It worked great, better than we had any right to think it would," Dr. Gilman
said.

CORRECTION-DATE: September 4, 1996, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

   A diagram caption in Science Times yesterday about the use of drugs to
control therapeutic genes misidentified the outer layer of a human cell. It is a
membrane, not a cell wall.


GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Using a Drug to Control Therapeutic Genes"
When a therapeutic gene is introduced into human cells, it is not always
desirable to have it working full time. In test-tube experiments with human
cells, researchers have found a way to turn such genes on and off by linking or
severing a switching protein. Below is a simplified diagram of the key
mechanism.

A typical protein has two domains, one to control its location, the other its
acitivity.

When its domains are separated, the protein cannot perform its function, in this
case switching on a therapeutic gene.

The special dumbbell shape of three drugs, cyclosporin, rapamycin and FK506, and
the fact that they can easily cross cell walls suggested to researchers that
they can be used to link the domains of the switching protein.
(Source: Dr. Gerald R. Crabtree/Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University)

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1996


                             2690 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                September 2, 1996, Monday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: IN PERSON;
UCI RESEARCHER PLUMBS DEPTHS OF THE GENE POOL

BYLINE: RUSS LOAR, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:


   Luis Villarreal did not grow up pondering the riddles of human existence.

   He grew up in the rough and ragged streets of East Los Angeles, spending his
high school years pondering the intricacies of motorcycle engines.

   That he is now pushing out from the edge of what is known about the genetic
mechanisms of the human body is more a result of boredom than ambition, as he
tells it.

   "I never envisioned myself doing what I'm doing now," said Villarreal, 47, a
UC Irvine molecular biologist who founded the Center for Viral Vector Design on
campus five months ago. "I sort of backed into this career by avoiding all the
things I didn't want to do. Somehow, I ended up doing this."

   The center is a workshop of sorts, where Villarreal and other researchers are
developing specialized viruses to be used as "vectors" or "delivery systems" for
genetic material cloned in the campus lab.

   The advances of recombinant DNA technology during the last two decades have
raised public expectations that such gene transfers will soon provide a cure for
a number of inherited and acquired diseases. But the creation of a biological
delivery system that will effectively counteract genetic deficiencies and not be
rejected by the human host remains a significant problem, said Villarreal, who
finds the challenge a sufficient cure for boredom.

   "I've always been curious about how things work. I've been a tinkerer
forever. When I was a kid, I took apart my brother's 10-speed bike, including
the derailleur, and hundreds of ball bearings fell all over the garage floor.
Somehow, I managed to get it all back together. I guess that's a characteristic
I have that has been useful in problem-solving."

   Villarreal's flair for improvisation was not always appreciated. In high
school, his ability to devise solutions to problems on a physics exam was called
into question by a mistrustful teacher.

   "I used a method that I now know is called analytical geometry, but I didn't
have a clear sense of what I was doing back then," he said. "I analytically
determined what the answers should be, and I got the highest score in the class
by doing that.

   "If I had a student these days who had come up with an innovative way to
solve a problem like that, that would be someone to really encourage. But in my
case, I was told, 'There's no way you could have beat these other students
because you have not taken trigonometry. You must have cheated.' They couldn't
prove that I cheated, but they never really accepted my grade."


   *

   Villarreal grew up in a family of three brothers whose parents had not gone
beyond the fourth grade. After high school graduation, Villarreal enrolled at a
community college, looking for the training that would earn him a steady job as
a medical technician.

   "After one year of taking courses at a junior college, I was bored to tears
with it. It was just memorization."

   His search for intellectual intrigue led to a doctorate in biology from UC
San Diego and a research fellowship in 1976 with genetic researcher Paul Berg at
Stanford University, who won the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1980 for his
pioneering work. Shortly before Villarreal arrived at Stanford, Berg had called
for a moratorium on genetic research over concerns about the potential for
abuse.

   "It was an important event because it was the first time, as far as I can
tell, that scientists had contemplated that what they were doing could have bad
consequences."

   Though the scientific community's fears have largely been assuaged,
Villarreal said there is a persistent public perception that genetic engineering
amounts to a violation of the laws of nature.

   "There are these parasitic wasps that don't make nests. When they find an
insect larva, they inject an egg into it and the egg will develop inside it. In
order to grow in another organism, you have to turn off the immune system of
that organism. And the way the wasp does it is that it makes a virus that gets
into the larva and turns off the immune reaction in the insect larva so the egg
can grow. That's gene therapy. People keep thinking they've discovered things
that nature hasn't done. Then we find out, sure enough, it is a natural process
after all."


   Profile: Luis Villarreal

   Age: 47

   Hometown: Los Angeles

   Residence: Irvine

   Family: Two school-age children

   Education: Bachelor's degree in biochemistry from Cal State Los Angeles;
doctorate in biology from UC San Diego

   Background: Postdoctoral fellowship with genetic research pioneer Paul Berg
at Stanford University; taught at the University of Colorado School of Medicine
for seven years; came to UC Irvine in 1985, where he is now a professor of
molecular biology; director of the Minority International Research Scientist
Training Program; founded the 5-month-old Center For Viral Vector Design at UCI
to advance genetic research

   On genetic researchers: "The prevailing public view of people in science is
the stereotype of the mad scientist. Yet, if you look at the contributions of
scientists toward the well-being of the planet, they've been very active.
They're right up there at the top of the list."

   Source: Luis Villarreal; Researched by RUSS LOAR / For The Times

   Los Angeles Times

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (A1) Listen: "I've been a tinkerer forever. When I was a kid, I
took apart my brother's 10-speed bike, including the derailleur, and hundreds of
ball bearings fell all over the garage floor. Somehow, I managed to get it all
back together," Luis Villarreal, a UC Irvine molecular biologist PHOTOGRAPHER:
AURELIO JOSE BARRERA / Los Angeles Times PHOTO: UCI molecular biologist Luis
Villarreal sits at microscope at the Center for Viral Vector Design he founded.
PHOTOGRAPHER: AURELIO JOSE BARRERA / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1996


                             2691 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          September 2, 1996 Monday All

SECTION: Health Pg. 2

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Brain surgeons add precision with $1 million Zeiss microscope
 The tool, coupled to a computer, displays 3-D images of tumors

BYLINE: JOE MANNING

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   A $1 million microscope that displays a three-dimensional computerized image
of a patient's brain tumor to a surgeon during an operation is being used at St.
Luke's Medical Center.

   The Carl Zeiss microscope, coupled to a computer, creates a projected image
using digital information from CT or MRI scans taken before the operation, said
Daniel Suberviola, one of the surgeons using the new microscope.

   A Zeiss MKM system microscope has been used four times in the last month at
the University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics in Madison, according to a
hospital spokesman.

   "The microscope will certainly not change survival time not with malignant
tumors," Suberviola said.

   "But it will improve the quality of survival time by shorter hospital stays
and fewer complications," he said.

   "Most of us believe that the solution to malignant brain tumors will not come
with surgery but through genetic therapy or a chemical treatment," he said.

   With benign tumors, he predicted, complication and survival rates would be
better than with traditional brain surgery.

   Suberviola said a surgeon looking into the Zeiss MKM system microscope sees a
computer display of the tumor superimposed on the patient's brain tumor.
Surgeons can follow the outline of the projection to remove the tumor.

   Images are scaled to actual size and location of the tumor.

   Surgeons can also use the 3-D image in planning the operation, he said.

   "Because the tumor can be pinpointed within less than one millimeter,
surgeons are less likely to interfere with healthy, unaffected brain tissue,"
Suberviola said.

   The opening made in the patient's skull to reach the tumor need only be
"slightly larger" than the tumor itself, the surgeon said.

   "In the past, you (surgeons) just figured out in your mind where the tumor
was. This thing tells you were it is. It does everything for you," Suberviola
said.

   He said he and four other surgeons have used the device in a dozen operations
at St. Luke's this summer.

GRAPHIC: Photo
CARL ZEISS INC. PHOTO

   This $1 million microscope system allows surgeons to visualize brain
tumors cancerous or benign more clearly than before.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1996


                             2692 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           August 31, 1996, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 200 words

HEADLINE: 'WEAK MARKET' HANGS UP PROGENITOR PUBLIC OFFERING

BYLINE: From staff reports

BODY:


   Progenitor Inc. yesterday decided to postpone its $ 37 million initial public
offering because of ''weak market conditions.''

   The 2.5 million-share offering had been expected to go to market this week.
Vector Securities International Inc. was the lead underwriter.

   ''Market demand was soft'' for new issues, said Douglass Given, president and
chief executive of Progenitor. ''It's what we've been watching occur in the
market (for new stocks) in the late summer.''

   The market for new issues has slowed recently, in part because the overall
market has stagnated, but also to allow investors to digest the flood of public
offerings earlier in the year

   Progenitor, 1507 Chambers Rd., was formed in 1992 to make cellular and
genetic therapies that were developed by researchers at the Edison Biotechnology
Institute at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio.

   The Columbus company is a subsidiary of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals of
Lexington, Ky. The parent company will continue to support Progenitor
financially until the subsidiary has its public offering.

   Progenitor officials don't know when they will go back to the market.

   ''We're going to evaluate it moving forward,'' Given said.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1996


                             2693 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                August 29, 1996, Thursday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 03G

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
Injected gene fights tumor, preliminary study suggests

BYLINE: Amanda Husted; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A small study holds hope for shrinking or destroying cancerous tumors by
using gene therapy.

   In an experiment with nine patients, scientists injected their lung tumors
with a gene called p53 that acts to slow cell growth. When the gene is missing
or damaged, cells grow out of control and tumors develop.

   Inserting the gene wiped out a lung tumor in one patient, shrank tumors in
two others and made cancers stop growing in three more.

   However, all the patients died because their tumors had spread to other sites
and those tumors continued to grow. But all patients in the study were
terminally ill with advanced cancer that wasn't responding to conventional
treatments.

   The work is very preliminary, but it does show that the treatment is safe and
that the gene can kill cancer cells, said researcher Dr. Jack Roth of the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.

   Bigger studies will be needed to determine how much good the treatment does
for patients, he said, and whether it might be a cure for patients whose cancer
hasn't advanced. The gene therapy might also work for other types of cancer,
including breast and colon tumors, researchers said.

   The study is reported in the September issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   -MORE ON GENES: Scientists were able to insert a human gene in mice and
adjust its activity, an experiment that one day might lead to treatments by
pills instead of shots for diseases such as diabetes, anemia, dwarfism, muscle
wasting from AIDS, cancer and multiple sclerosis. The report, in the September
issue of the journal Nature Medicine, said it was the first time scientists have
been able to implant a gene in a live animal and control how active it was. In
the experiment, researchers took millions of human cells and put three altered
genes into them: one to let the cells produce human growth hormone, one to
produce part of a protein that turns the growth hormone gene on, and one to
produce the remaining part of this activating protein. These parts are useless
unless joined together. Each mouse got 2 million of these cells, then
researchers turned on production of human growth hormone by joining them
together with a drug called rapamycin, which can be taken by mouth.

BRIEFLY

   - STOPPING THE ITCH: The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved
over-the-counter sales of a lotion that can block the oils of poison ivy, oak
and sumac. The lotion, called IvyBlock, contains bentoquatam, which blocks the
oils and dries to form a visible coating so users can see which areas of their
skin are protected. The product is expected to cost about $ 10 and be on store
shelves in three to six months. The product must be applied every four hours
during contact with poison leaves and can be washed off with soap and water.

- From staff, news services and published reports

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1996


                             2694 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 29, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 4C

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: Beverage, drug firms dip in slow market; Computer shares helped by
strong forecasts for IBM, Sun Microsystems

SOURCE: BLOOMBERG BUSINESS NEWS

BODY:


   NEW YORK -- Stocks were mixed yesterday as big drug and beverage companies,
favorites in recent months for their relatively stable earnings growth, declined
amid concern that their prices overestimate profit potential.

   Forecasts of strong earnings growth at International Business Machines Corp.
and Sun Microsystems Inc. boosted computer shares.

   The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 1.11 to 5,712.38, after gaining
15.91. The Dow industrials would have fallen for the day without IBM's surge,
which contributed 8.51 points.

   The Nasdaq composite index gained 4.86 to 1,153.88, boosted by Sun
Microsystems, Microsoft Corp. and Dell Computer Corp.

   The broader Standard & Poor's 500 index fell 1.59 to 664.81, dragged down by
PepsiCo Inc. and Amgen Inc. The Russell 2,000 index of smaller shares gained
1.86 to 335.61; the Wilshire 5,000 index, a gauge of stocks traded on the New
York and American stock exchanges and the Nasdaq market, dropped 1.43 to
6,534.14; the American Stock Exchange market value index rose 1.34 to 563.39;
and the S&P midcap index rose 1.24 to 234.41.

   Advancing shares outnumbered those that declined by 1,258 to 1,032. Trading
was among the slowest full sessions this year on the New York Stock Exchange at
296.4 million shares.

   Amgen shares fell $ 1.625 to $ 60 amid concern about possible competition for
one of its best-selling drugs from a rival medication in development at a
start-up company. Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s product would compete with
Amgen's Epogen, used to help kidney disease patients.

   PepsiCo sank $ 1 to $ 30 in trading of 13.9 million shares. Merrill Lynch &
Co. analyst Allan Kaplan said yesterday that lower sales in Venezuela, Japan and
Saudi Arabia will hurt the soft-drink company's earnings this year and next.
Kaplan reduced his 1996 earnings estimate to $ 1.40 a share from $ 1.45, and cut
his long-term growth forecast to 14 percent from 15 percent.

   Drugmaker Pfizer Inc. slid 37.5 cents to $ 73.50; Johnson & Johnson lost 50
cents to $ 50.375; and American Home Products Corp. retreated 87.5 cents to $
60.25.

   Coca-Cola, the top soft-drink maker, fell 37.5 cents to $ 51.25, its third
slide in four days. Coke stock is trading at almost 37 times estimated earnings.

   Salomon Brothers' upgrade of IBM to "strong buy" from "buy" boosted the No. 1
computer-maker's shares $ 4.125 to $ 115.875, including after-hours trading off
the NYSE floor. IBM ended trading on the NYSE, whose quotes are used in
calculating the value of the Dow industrials, at $ 114.625, up $ 2.875.

   Sun Microsystems Inc. gained $ 2.625 to $ 56.375 after Alex. Brown Inc.
raised its fiscal first-quarter profit estimate to 65 cents a share from 55
cents for the quarter ending next month.

   Digital Equipment Corp. climbed 87.5 cents to $ 38.125 after the company said
it would sell a stake in its AltaVista Internet Software Inc. to the public for
about $ 50 million.

   Shares of Fleetwood Enterprises Inc., the nation's largest maker of
recreational vehicles and manufactured housing units, said its fiscal
first-quarter earnings jumped to 64 cents from 44 cents in the same quarter a
year earlier. The increase topped analysts' average estimate of 58 cents. Shares
of Fleetwood rose 50 cents to $ 29.25.

   Disappointing earnings couldn't stop Baby Superstore Inc., which rose $ 1.375
to $ 16 after falling to $ 13.125. The retailer said it lost 61 cents a share in
the second quarter, compared with net income of 15 cents a share in the same
quarter a year ago. Investors saw brighter prospects ahead.

   Cable Design Technologies, a maker of copper cables, rose $ 3.9375 to $
34.0625 on top of Tuesday's 37.5-cent gain, after it said its earnings would
come in the upper range of estimates. The company is expected to earn between 34
cents and 39 cents a share, according to Zacks Investment Research.

   Pub Date: 8/29/96

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1996


                             2695 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 29, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 456 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy destroys tumor in lung cancer patient; Tumors in 5 other
patients shrank or stopped growing

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   NEW YORK -- Scientists have destroyed or shrunk tumors in lung cancer
patients by injecting the cancers with a gene that acts like a brake on the
disease. The approach might work with other kinds of tumors, too.

   The gene wiped out a tumor in one patient, shrank tumors in two others and
made cancers stop growing in three more.

   The work is preliminary, but it does show that the treatment is safe and that
the gene can kill cancer cells, said Dr. Jack Roth, a researcher at the
University of Texas' M. D. Anderson Cancer Center.

   Bigger studies will be needed to figure out how much good the treatment does
for patients, he said.

   The nine patients in the study had advanced cancer that could not be helped
by conventional treatments, Roth and colleagues reported in the September issue
of the journal Nature Medicine. All the patients are now dead because the cancer
had spread beyond the treated tumors.

   Colon and breast cancers might also respond to injections of the gene, said
Dr. John Minna of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas,
who wrote an accompanying commentary on Roth's work.

   "I was quite excited by the result," Minna said.

   The gene is called p53. In its normal state, it keeps cells from turning
cancerous. When it is missing or mutated, this brake is lost. That's often what
happens in cancer of the colon, breast and lung.

   Prior studies have shown if cancer cells lack a working version of p53, an
injection of the gene can make the cells commit suicide. Roth and colleagues
found signs that this happened in the patients they treated.

   Researchers used a virus to carry the p53 gene into tumor cells. They
delivered it to the tumor by either slipping a tube down the patient's throat or
inserting a needle through the skin.

   One patient died four months after the treatment because of cancer elsewhere
in his body. An autopsy found no sign of cancer where the treated tumor had
been.

   In another patient, the tumor shrank and tissue samples from the treated area
showed no evidence of cancer. But Roth said the area could not be examined as
completely as in the patient with the autopsy.

   A third patient's lung tumor shrunk more than 50 percent a month after
treatment. He died of another cancer and pneumonia.

   In the three other patients whose tumors stopped growing for at least eight
weeks, untreated cancer elsewhere in the body continued to grow.

   If the gene treatment can be used in patients in earlier stages of disease,
it might let doctors control the initial tumor better and prevent spread of the
cancer, Roth said.

   In patients where the cancer has spread to just a few areas, each of those
areas could be treated, he said.

   Pub Date: 8/29/96

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1996


                             2696 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 29, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: Scientists monitor human gene in mice, exploring advance for gene
therapy; Pills may replace shots for anemia, diabetes

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   NEW YORK -- Scientists planted a human gene in mice and then controlled how
hard it worked through a sort of chemical dimmer switch -- an advance that might
one day allow the use of gene therapy to treat diseases like anemia and even
diabetes.

   It's the first time that scientists have been able to adjust the activity of
a gene given to an adult animal, one expert said.

   The dimmer-switch approach may mean pills instead of shots for people who
take regular doses of proteins for such diseases as dwarfism, muscle wasting
from AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis, anemia and, after much more research,
diabetes.

   Such proteins can't be taken as pills because they are destroyed by the
digestive tract.

   The new strategy would get around that problem by having the person's body
make the protein using an implanted gene that responds to a drug taken by mouth.

   The approach worked in mice, researcher Michael Gilman of ARIAD Gene
Therapeutics Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and his colleagues reported in the
September issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Dr. James Wilson of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy in Philadelphia said
the gene study marked the first time scientists have been able to implant a gene
into a whole animal, rather than into an egg, and then control how active that
gene was.

   The approach might expand the range of diseases treated through gene therapy,
he said.

   If a gene's activity can be regulated, diseases like anemia and dwarfism due
to deficient growth hormone could be treated by inserting genes into people, he
said.

   Theoretically, diabetes could also be treated with a regulated gene, but
scientists would first have to make the regulation of the gene work faster and
more precisely, he said.

   In the mouse experiment, researchers took millions of human cells and put in
them three altered genes. The genes included one to let the cells produce human
growth hormone, one to produce part of a protein that turns the growth hormone
gene on and one to produce the remaining part of this activating protein. These
three parts are useless unless they are joined together.

   Each mouse got 2 million of these cells injected into its leg muscles. To
activate the production of human growth hormone, the researchers gave the mice a
drug called rapamycin, which can be taken by mouth.

   The rapamycin made its way to the cells injected with the altered genes and
played the role of matchmaker: It grabbed one part of the activating protein and
joined it to another part to make the full protein.

   This complete protein then turned on the production of growth hormone.

   After a single dose of rapamycin, the hormone could be detected for about two
days. The activating protein naturally falls apart on its own once the dose of
rapamycin is gone.

   The more rapamycin the mice got, the more hormone they showed in their blood.

   Gilman said rapamycin could not be used in people because it cripples their
immune system, which fights against diseases.

   So researchers want to design a chemical cousin of rapamycin. Several
candidate substances have already been created, he said.

   He also said that in people, it's not clear whether the genes would be
packaged in cells as they were in the study with mice, or delivered on their
own.

   Pub Date: 8/29/96

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1996


                             2697 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 29, 1996, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1053 words

HEADLINE: Injections of genes halt tumors in study

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Boosting hopes that gene therapy can help fight cancer, scientists have
stopped and even shrunk advanced lung tumors by injecting them with the human
genes that normally block cancer.

   It was the first experiment in people to show that gene therapy can repair
cancer-causing mutations, the damage to cells' DNA that allows tumors to grow,
and thereby squelch the tumors.

   In six of seven patients, lung tumors that received the gene implants stopped
growing or, in three cases, shrank by more than 50 percent over the succeeding
months. One tumor appeared to be eradicated, the researchers from M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston report in today's issue of the journal Nature Medicine.
Dr. Jack A. Roth, chairman of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery, led the
research team.

   "It's a really important start," said Dr. Stephen B. Baylin at the Johns
Hopkins Comprehensive Cancer Center in Baltimore. Noting that the small
experiment was intended mainly to check for toxic side effects - there were none
- he added, "It's certainly encouraging any time that you see this kind of tumor
response this early in a study."

   Despite the experiment's success, all the patients died from cancer that had
spread elsewhere in the body and couldn't be treated.  A major limitation of the
gene technique, the authors noted, is that so far it is limited to use in tumors
that can be reached with a needle or other instrument.  In most advanced
cancers, microscopic clumps of malignant cells spread into many organs, where
it's impossible to destroy them all.

   "Scientifically the results are interesting, but a lot more work needs to be
done," cautioned Dr. Glenn Dranoff, a gene therapy researcher at the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute.

   The results come at a time when efforts to treat a wide range of diseases
with gene therapy have been disappointing, sending scientists back to their labs
in search of better methods. Today's report is the strongest suggestion yet that
a gene therapy approach might work for cancer.

   Scientists know that damage to a number of different genes can trigger cancer
in humans.  Of those genes, p53 is by far the most common, implicated in about
half of all cases of cancer. The genetic damage can be present in a cell when
the person is born, but more often it occurs when cells make mistakes in
dividing or are damaged by environmental chemicals, radiation or substances in
the diet.

   The p53 gene - more specifically, the p53 protein made by cells under the
gene's instruction - plays a key role in keeping cells and their DNA healthy. It
has been termed "the guardian of the genome," the name for the whole set of
genes in a cell.  The p53 protein regulates the speed of cell division; it also
helps the cell repair damaged DNA or, if necessary, directs such damaged cells
to destroy themselves, a process called apoptosis.

   When p53 itself is damaged, the cell can go out of control like a car that
has lost its emergency brake.  A Johns Hopkins researcher, Bert Vogelstein,
showed several years ago that colon cancer cells grown in the lab could become
normal cells with implants of a healthy p53 gene.

   Roth and his colleagues at M.D. Anderson in Houston undertook the human
experiment after showing that gene therapy with p53 reversed tumors in rodents.
Ethical considerations required them to choose terminally ill volunteers for the
first gene therapy trials.

   The scientists first inserted the p53 genes into harmless retroviruses, which
are commonly used to transfer genes into cells.  In some patients, the
researchers injected the lung tumors directly through the chest wall; in others,
they used a flexible instrument snaked through the throat and bronchial passages
into the lungs.

   Remarkably, the treated tumors halted or shrank (except for one in which
there was no effect) even though the viruses infected at most 20 percent of the
cells of the tumor.  Roth said a large number of other cells apparently were
killed through the "bystander effect," a little-understood process by which
cells near those that got the gene implants also died - perhaps from some lethal
substance released by the cells.

 Firm says it has method to regulate genes' activity

    A Cambridge biotech company says it has devised a novel method for turning
genes on and off, or varying their activity like a light with a dimmer switch,
after they've been implanted into an animal or person.

   A good way to regulate genes has been sorely lacking as researchers have
tried to transfer healthy genes into patients with genetic diseases, or implant
genes that make cells manufacture medical proteins.

   Thus, they've had to limit their efforts to therapies in which the implanted
gene doesn't need to be precisely controlled.

   Researchers from Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. are reporting today that they
have created a system for regulating any implanted gene, using an oral drug to
turn the gene's activity higher or lower or even to make it self-destruct.

   The key to their system, described in today's issue of the journal Nature
Medicine, is the unique characteristics of an antifungal drug called rapamycin.
This drug naturally brings together two proteins that, in combination, stick to
a gene and regulate how fast it makes copies of its genetic message.

   Neither protein alone can affect the gene.  But when bridged by rapamycin,
they become an ideal control unit for any gene they bind to.  Ariad researchers
exploited this relationship, devising a system in which a gene that is to be
transferred into a patient's body is accompanied by the two regulatory proteins
- but without rapamycin.

   The two proteins - named FKBP12 and FRAP - remain separated from each other
and from the gene because there is no rapamycin around.  And the gene itself
remains turned off.

   But when the patient takes a pill containing rapamycin, the drug brings the
proteins together and enables them to bind to the growth hormone gene.  The
amount of rapamycin in the pill controls the gene's rate of activity - like a
rheostat, or dimmer switch, on a light.

   Michael Gilman, the Ariad researcher who led the project, said that before
the company can create a product based on this system it must first tinker with
the rapamycin molecule, because the drug in its normal form suppresses the
immune system.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1996


                             2698 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  August 29, 1996 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS FIND GENE THERAPY EFFECTIVE AGAINST LUNG CANCER

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   Doctors are adding years to the lives of people with inoperable lung cancer,
the nation's deadliest and most common cancer.

   The advances include promising news from the world's first gene therapy
treatment for lung cancer, announced Wednesday in the journal Nature Medicine.
The therapy destroyed or shrank tumors in six of nine patients treated at the
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

   A related editorial in the journal described the study as an "important
milestone" in cancer research and noted that the treatment might work even
better in people whose lung cancer is detected early. It also might help with
other kinds of tumors, researchers said.

   The announcement caps several years of progress against lung cancer, which
will be diagnosed this year in about 177,000 people, including soaring numbers
of female smokers.

   For nearly a decade, lung cancer has surpassed breast cancer as the leading
cancer killer in women. This year, 94,400 men and 64,300 women are expected to
die in the United States from the disease.

   For years, lung cancer was primarily a male disease, largely because men once
smoked at much higher rates than women.

   But now, doctors are making inroads.

   In the gene therapy work at M.D. Anderson, Dr. Jack Roth, principal
investigator of the study, cautioned that the work is preliminary, but it does
show the treatment is safe.

   The treatment wiped out a tumor in one patient, shrank tumors in two others
and stopped the growth of cancers in three more. Only three of the nine patients
were not appreciably helped by the treatment; all nine have since died.

   Just in the last two years, chemotherapy advances have doubled survival after
diagnosis from one year to two, according to Dr. Laurie Gaspar, associate
professor of radiation oncology at Harper Hospital and the Barbara Ann Karmanos
Cancer Center, both in Detroit.

   About 30 percent of patients with inoperable tumors are alive two years
later, with chemotherapy and standard radiation, Gaspar said.

   In a new study started in June, Gaspar added neutron radiation to
conventional radiation and chemotherapy to further extend survival. Neutron
radiation -- a sophisticated type of radiation available at only a few centers,
including Detroit and Seattle -- has four times the cell-killing capacity of
conventional radiation.

   "Even small improvements are important when talking about lung cancer,
because it affects so many people," Gaspar said.

   Gaspar's challenge is to avoid the combination treatment's side effects,
including weight loss, vomiting, depleted white blood cell counts and increased
risk of infection.

   Gene therapy studies involve small numbers of patients because the work is
considered so preliminary. The first studies, including the one announced
Wednesday, primarily aim to determine if the treatment has unacceptable side
effects. Now, larger studies will be conducted to gather data on its
effectiveness.

   In gene therapy, doctors try to correct a genetic defect that turns normal
cells into cancerous ones.

   In some cancers -- colon, breast, lung and perhaps others -- the p53 gene
acts like a car's braking system to control the rate of cell growth. When the
gene is missing or defective, abnormal cells multiply, turning into cancer.

   In the M.D. Anderson research, scientists used a virus to carry the p53 gene
into tumor cells. They delivered it to the tumor by either slipping a tube down
the patient's throat or inserting a needle through the skin. Patients got one
treatment a day for five days.

   If the gene treatment can be used in patients in earlier stages of disease,
it might let doctors control the tumor better and prevent spread of the cancer,
Roth said.

   To enroll in the Harper study, call 1-313-745-1699, 9-5 weekdays. The
Associated Press contributed to this report.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2699 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   August 29, 1996, Thursday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Gene therapy is feasible lung cancer treatment

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Transferring a normal form of a gene that halts malignant
change into a patient's lung cancer cells is feasible and
potentially beneficial, a Houston team reported today.

   The nine patients with advanced lung cancer treated by gene
therapy all died of their disease, often because untreated
tumors continued to grow, said Dr.Jack Roth, chairman of the
department of thoracic surgical oncology at the University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.

   The experiment was not designed to determine if the treatment
is effective against the cancer.  It was basically to find out
if it was safe, and it did that, Roth said.

   In the study published in the September issue of Nature
Medicine, Roth and his colleagues described how they
transferred the normal form of a gene called p53 into the lung
cancer cells in an attempt to stop tumor growth.

   The gene p53 is a tumor suppressor gene.  It prevents cells
from becoming malignant.  However, when the gene is mutated, it
loses its ability to halt cancerous change.

   The p53 gene is mutated in approximately half of the million
cases of cancer diagnosed annually in the United States.

   Roth said that in his study there was some evidence that the
normal p53 gene could stop tumor growth.  Tumors in three
patients actually shrank after the treatment, he said.  In
three more, he said, the treated tumor remained the same
size.

   ""These were very sick people,'' Roth said.

   Roth's study is one of the few to actually inject cancer
patients with a gene in hopes of correcting defects in cells
that can lead to malignancy.

   In an editorial accompanying the report, Drs.  John Minna and
Adi F. Gazdar of UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas
wrote, ""While local p53 gene therapy represents an early step
in a long journey, it is an important milestone . . . and one
that has been reached remarkably rapidly. ''

   In laboratory and animal studies, Roth and his colleagues at
Anderson proved that putting a normal p53 gene into the cell
stopped the malignancy.  But he was among the first to take the
treatment directly to patients, injecting their tumors with a
solution containing a retrovirus to which the gene was
attached.

   Once in the tumor, the retrovirus took the gene into the cell.

   The retrovirus actually became part of the cell's DNA.  When it
did that, it made the normal p53 gene a part of the cell's
genetic blueprint as well.

   Minna and Gazdar, in their editorial, wrote that the genetic
differences in normal and malignant tissues are real but that
Roth had to prove that a mutation of p53 is an important step
in the malignant process.

   In addition, they wrote, he had to prove that he could put the
normal p53 gene into tumor cells and that enough cells would
be infected to help the patient.

   ""The answers to these questions appear to be 'yes' '', the
researchers wrote.

   They wrote that the experiments are ""proof of principle'' that
introducing the p53 gene into tumor tissues actually can
benefit the patient.

   The tumor shrinkage actually surprised Roth.  ""We didn't get
the gene into many tumor cells,'' he said.

   However, more tumor cells were killed by the ""bystander
effect,'' a poorly understood phenomenon in which adjacent
cells die, perhaps because of chemicals released by other
dying tumor cells.

   Roth now is trying a smaller dose of the gene-virus mixture to
see if he can achieve the same effect with less.

   Betty Kurz, 65, is one of the patients in that study.  Her
advanced lung cancer was diagnosed last April, and
chemotherapy has not been able to eradicate the tumor.

   When her son read about the gene therapy treatment in an
airline magazine, she asked her doctors in Palestine to refer
her to Anderson.

   The treatment has not been hard to take, she said.  ""I hope it
will buy me a little more time.  There are things I'd like to
do; babies I'd like to hold. ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: Getty Kurz has her blood pressure checked by registered nurse
Sherry Wright (color); John Everett / Chronicle

NOTES: One in an occasional series

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1996


                             2700 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 29, 1996, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 106 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE IN BRIEF;
SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE, MEDICINE
AND THE ENVIRONMENT.;
 Gene Therapy Success Against Lung Tumors May Help Treat Other Cancers

BYLINE: From Times staff and wire reports

BODY:


   Texas researchers have destroyed or shrunk tumors in lung cancer patients by
injecting the cancers with a gene called p53 that acts like a brake on the
disease. The approach, the first demonstration that gene therapy may halt
tumors, might work with other kinds of tumors.

   Dr. Jack Roth and his colleagues at the University of Texas reported in the
September Nature Medicine that the gene wiped out a tumor in one patient, shrank
tumors in two others and made cancers stop growing in three more. All the
patients eventually died, however, because the physicians were unable to treat
their metastases in the preliminary study.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1996


                             2701 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         August 29, 1996 Thursday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 5

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: Tumors halted, shrunk in gene therapy tests
 Human experiments seen as a breakthrough

SOURCE: Boston Globe, Associated Press, Scripps Howard News Service

DATELINE: New York

BODY:

   Boosting hopes that gene therapy can help fight cancer, scientists have
stopped and even shrunk advanced lung tumors by injecting them with the human
genes that normally block cancer.

   It was the first experiment in people to show that gene therapy can repair
cancer-causing mutations, the damage to cells' DNA that allows tumors to grow,
and thereby squelch the tumors.

   In six of seven patients, lung tumors that received the gene implants stopped
growing or, in three cases, shrank by more than 50% over the succeeding months.
One tumor appeared to be completely eradicated, the researchers from M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston report in Nature Medicine.

   "It's a really important start," said Stephen Baylin at the Johns Hopkins
Oncology Center in Baltimore. Noting that the small experiment was intended
mainly to check for toxic side effects there were none he added, "It's certainly
encouraging any time that you see this kind of tumor response this early in a
study."

   Despite the experiment's success, all the patients died from cancer that had
spread elsewhere in the body and couldn't be treated. A major limitation of the
gene technique, the authors noted, is that so far it is limited to use in tumors
that can be reached with a needle or other instrument. In most advanced cancers,
microscopic clumps of malignant cells spread into many organs where it's
impossible to destroy them all.

   "Scientifically the results are interesting, but a lot more work needs to be
done," cautioned Glenn Dranoff, a gene therapy researcher at the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute.

   In other health news:

   Poison ivy: The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved
over-the-counter sale of a solution of bentoquatam, which can block the oils of
poison ivy, oak and sumac the first time the agency has approved such a product.

   IvyBlock, marketed by EnviroDerm Pharmaceuticals of Louisville, Ky., is
expected to be available in three to six months.

   It must be applied at least 15 minutes before exposure to the poisonous
plants and should be reapplied every four hours as long as contact with the
plants is likely.

   Milk: A new study suggests that drinking cow's milk has little effect on
whether infants who are genetically prone to juvenile diabetes will develop the
disease.

   A baby's entire diet may affect the likelihood of getting the illness, said
the lead author of the study, published in the Journal of the American Medical
Association.

   Heart disease: Strengthening suspicions that infections often trigger heart
disease, doctors found that artery-clearing angioplasty frequently fails to work
in people who carry a common virus.

   The culprit is cytomegalovirus, or CMV, a seemingly harmless bug that quietly
infects most people if they live long enough. A study published today found that
the risk of angioplasty failure is five times higher than usual if people are
infected with CMV.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1996


                             2702 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy for Lung Cancer Shows Promise, a Study Finds

BODY:

   The first study of gene therapy in people with lung cancer has shown that
such treatment can shrink some tumors or halt their growth without toxic side
effects, scientists announced yesterday.

   No patients in the experiment were cured, but researchers said that the
findings indicated that gene therapy worked in principle and deserved further
study in lung cancer and other tumors, including those of the colon and the
breast.

    The study, published in the September issue of the journal Nature Medicine,
involved nine patients treated last year at the University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, where it was described at a news conference
yesterday.

   "It's an important milestone," said Dr. John Minna, a cancer researcher at
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, who wrote a commentary on
the study in the same issue of Nature Medicine.

   The study was the first of its kind, Dr. Minna said, in making a tumor shrink
by correcting a specific genetic flaw in the cancer cells themselves. "Other
gene therapy studies have been done in cancer patients," he said, "but those
involved trying to manipulate the immune system to attack the cancer cells."

   The therapy tested in this study consisted of injecting the patients' tumors
with normal copies of a gene known as p53, which was known to be missing or
defective in their tumor cells. The treatment reached only the regions where it
was injected, and was not expected to treat distant tumors in other parts of the
body.

   In healthy cells, p53 functions as a tumor suppressor. It directs production
of a protein that can either shut down excessive cell division or trigger the
death of cells that have gone awry. Defects in p53 are involved in about half of
all cancers, and 55 percent of all lung cancers.

   "This is the first study to address the genetic mechanisms that make a cell
cancerous," said Dr. Jack A. Roth, who directed the study. Dr. Roth is chairman
of the department of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery at M.D. Anderson.

   "Here, we can replace a defective gene," he said, "and it's like
reprogramming a computer in the cancer cells." Even though lung cancer cells may
have a variety of genetic defects, he added, correcting just the one in p53
seems to have a powerful effect.

   But Dr. Roth also said the experiment involved only a small number of
patients, and was what researchers call a phase I study. This kind of study is
not meant to measure the effectiveness of the treatment or to compare it to
other forms of therapy, but rather to assess its safety, determine whether the
gene would be taken up by the tumor cells, and to look for evidence that it can
kill the cancer cells or stop their growth.

   As is common with such preliminary studies, patients were eligible only if
they had advanced cancer that did not respond to standard treatments, including
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.

   The patients who volunteered for the study were nine men 51 to 73 years of
age who had the most common type of lung tumor, non-small-cell lung cancer. All
had advanced disease that had spread to other parts of the body despite
treatment.

   "In each of them," Dr. Roth said, "we felt there was a specific tumor site
that was a direct threat to the patient's life, and that was the area we
treated."

   Copies of p53, carried by a retrovirus not harmful to people, were injected
directly into those sites, which included the lungs, other parts of the chest,
and in one case the adrenal gland. A month later the patients underwent biopsies
and chest X-rays to determine whether the treatment had worked.

   In three patients, the treated tumors had shrunk, and in three others the
tumors had stopped growing. In another, the tumor kept growing despite the gene
therapy. The two remaining patients could not be studied, one because he died
too soon after the study began, and the other because he could not undergo the
medical procedures needed to complete the treatment. In all eight patients who
did complete the treatment, the p53 gene was incorporated into their own genetic
material.

   Even though the gene therapy did appear to fight the cancer in six of the
patients, all nine died three to 22 weeks after the treatment. Cancer progressed
in parts of the body that had not been treated, or tumors returned to the
treated sites weeks or months later.

   "They showed this is a relatively safe method of gene therapy," said Dr.
Curtis Harris, chief of the laboratory of human carcinogenesis at the National
Cancer Institute. "But they haven't shown it's efficacious. That will require a
much larger study."

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1996


                             2703 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                      AUGUST 29, 1996 Thursday PM EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: GENE IMPLANT HAILED< FOR 1ST TIME, DOCS ABLE TO CONTROL HOW IT
FUNCTIONED

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists planted a human gene in mice and then controlled how hard it
worked through a sort of chemical dimmer switch - an advance that might one day
allow the use of gene therapy to treat diseases like anemia and even diabetes.

   It's the first time that scientists have been able to adjust the activity of
a gene given to an adult animal, one expert said.

   The dimmer-switch approach may someday mean pills instead of shots for people
who take regular doses of proteins for such diseases as dwarfism, muscle wasting
from AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis, anemia and, after much more research,
diabetes.

   Such proteins can't be taken as pills because they are destroyed by the
digestive tract. The new strategy would get around that by having the person's
body make the protein, using an implanted gene that responds to a drug taken by
mouth.

   The approach worked in mice, researcher Michael Gilman of ARIAD Gene
Therapeutics Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and his colleagues reported in the
September issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Dr. James Wilson of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy in Philadelphia said
the study marked the first time scientists have been able to implant a gene in a
whole animal, rather than in an egg, and then control how active it was.

   The approach might greatly expand the range of diseases treated through gene
therapy, he said.

   If a gene's activity can be regulated, diseases like anemia and dwarfism due
to deficient growth hormone could be treated by inserting genes into those
affected, he said.

   Theoretically, diabetes could also be treated with a regulated gene, but
scientists would first have to make the regulation work faster and more
precisely, he said.

   In the mouse experiment, researchers took millions of human cells and put
three altered genes into them: one to let the cells produce human growth
hormone, one to produce part of a protein that turns the growth hormone gene on,
and one to produce the remaining part of this activating protein. These parts
are useless unless joined together.

   Two million of these cells were injected into the leg muscles of each mouse.
To turn on production of human growth hormone, the researchers gave the mice a
drug called rapamycin, which can be taken by mouth.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2704 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               August 29, 1996, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: STOCKS MIXED AS BEVERAGE SHARES FALL FLAT

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   U.S. stocks were mixed Wednesday as big drug and beverage companies,
favorites in recent months for their relatively stable earnings growth, declined
amid concern that their prices overestimate profit potential.

   Forecasts of strong earnings growth at International Business Machines Corp.
and Sun Microsystems Inc. boosted computer shares.

   "The market is particularly skittish, and it's looking for a low-risk home,"
said David Katz, chief investment officer at Matrix Asset Advisors.

   Those buying the likes of Coca-Cola Co. and Johnson & Johnson at today's
prices may regret it, Katz warned. "If history is a guide - and it almost always
is - these things are going to come back to haunt investors."

   The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.11 to 5712.38, after gaining 15.91.
The Dow industrials would have fallen for the day without IBM's surge, which
contributed 8.51 points.

   The Nasdaq Composite Index gained 4.86 to 1153.88, boosted by
computer-industry wheels Sun Microsystems, Microsoft Corp. and Dell Computer
Corp. The broader Standard & Poor's 500 index fell 1.59 to 664.81, dragged down
by PepsiCo Inc. and Amgen Inc.

   Amgen shares fell 1 5/8 to 60 amid concern about possible competition for one
of its best-selling drugs from a rival medication in development at a start-up
company. Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s product would compete with Amgen's
Epogen, used to help kidney disease patients.

   Drugmaker Pfizer Inc. slid 3/8 to 73 1/2. Johnson & Johnson fell 1/2 to 50
3/8 and American Home Products Corp. retreated 7/8 to 60 1/4.

   PepsiCo sank 1 to 30 in trading of 13.9 million shares. Merrill Lynch & Co.
analyst Allan Kaplan said Tuesday lower sales in Venezuela, Japan and Saudi
Arabia will hurt the company's earnings this year and next.

   Coca-Cola, the top soft-drink maker, fell 3/8 to 51 1/4, its third slide in
four days. Coke stock is trading at almost 37 times estimated earnings.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC; Post-Dispatch Graphic/linegraph - Dow Jones Industrial Average
5712.38 (slightly up from yesterday)

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1996


                             2705 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    August 29, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 15

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: Mice research may yield clues to gene therapy

SOURCE: An Associated Press report

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   Scientists planted a human gene in mice and then controlled how hard it
worked through a sort of chemical dimmer switch - an advance that might one day
allow the use of gene therapy to treat such diseases as anemia and even
diabetes.

   It's the first time scientists have been able to adjust the activity of a
gene given to an adult animal, one expert said.

   The dimmer-switch approach may someday mean pills instead of shots for people
who take regular doses of proteins for such diseases as dwarfism, muscle wasting
from AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis, anemia and, after much more research,
diabetes.

   Such proteins can't be taken as pills because they are destroyed by the
digestive tract. The new strategy would get around that by having the person's
body make the protein using an implanted gene that responds to a drug taken by
mouth.

   The approach worked in mice, researcher Michael Gilman of ARIAD Gene
Therapeutics Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and his colleagues reported in the
September issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   James Wilson of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy in Philadelphia said the
study marked the first time scientists have been able to implant a gene in a
whole animal and then control how active it was.

NOTES: HEALTH

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1996


                             2706 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        August 29, 1996 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: 'GENE THERAPY' WORKS IN MICE

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists planted a human gene in mice and then controlled how hard it
worked through a sort of chemical dimmer switch - an advance that might one day
allow the use of gene therapy to treat diseases like anemia and diabetes.

   The dimmer-switch approach may lead to pills instead of shots for people who
take regular doses of proteins for such diseases as dwarfism, muscle wasting
from AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis, anemia and, after more research,
diabetes.

   Such proteins can't be taken as pills because they are destroyed by the
digestive tract. In the new strategy, the person's body would make the protein
using an implanted gene that responds to a drug taken by mouth.

   The approach worked in mice, researcher Michael Gilman of ARIAD Gene
Therapeutics Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and his colleagues reported in the
September issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Dr. James Wilson of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy in Philadelphia said
the study marked the first time scientists have been able to implant a gene in a
whole animal, rather than in an egg, and control its activity.

   The approach might expand the range of diseases treated through gene therapy,
he said.

   If a gene's activity can be regulated, diseases like anemia and dwarfism from
deficient growth hormone could be treated by inserting genes into people, he
said.

   Theoretically, diabetes could be treated with a regulated gene, but
scientists first would have to make the regulation work faster and more
precisely, he said.

   In the mouse experiment, researchers took millions of human cells and put
three altered genes into them: one to let the cells produce human growth
hormone, one to produce part of a protein that turns the growth hormone gene on
and one to produce the rest of the activating protein. These parts are useless
unless joined together.

   Each mouse got 2 million of the cells injected into their leg muscles. To
turn on production of human growth hormone, the researchers gave the mice a drug
called rapamycin, which can be taken orally.

   Gilman said rapamycin could not be used in people because it cripples the
disease-fighting immune system. So researchers want to design a chemical cousin
of rapamycin. Several candidate substances have been created, he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1996


                             2707 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                 August 27, 1996, Tuesday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 1027 words

SERIES: This article appeared in the Sports Final of The Atlanta Constitution.

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF;
Jupiter mission hits new snag

BYLINE: From our news services

BODY:


   Another computer glitch aboard the troubled Galileo spacecraft was puzzling
engineers Monday, 10 days before the probe was scheduled to pass by one of
Jupiter's moons. "We've got a ways to go to figure out what happened here," said
William O'Neil, project manager at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,
Calif.

   Galileo is supposed to be transmitting information about the moon Ganymede.
The spacecraft took black-and-white photographs of Ganymede on June 26 during
the first of four flybys of the planet and its four major moons. But a computer
problem Saturday knocked Galileo into "safe mode," where only essential
functions are up and running. It was the 11th "safe mode" for the spacecraft
since it was launched in 1989.

   Galileo should be ready to gather more information during a Sept. 6 flyby of
Ganymede, but transmitting the data home may have to wait for a fix.

GOVERNMENT Reparations sought

   People of Japanese ancestry who were taken from Latin-American nations
against their will and detained in camps in Texas during World War II plan to
file suit in Washington this week seeking an apology and reparations. In
addition to the estimated 120,000 Japanese-Americans who were held in camps, the
Roosevelt administration ordered the detention of more than 2,200 people of
Japanese ancestry from 13 Latin-American countries. Most were from Peru. The
U.S. government has apologized and given $ 20,000 to each of the surviving
60,000 Japanese-Americans who were held in camps. The Japanese-Latin Americans
want a similar deal.

Official resigns

   Richard Moose, the State Department's fifth-ranking official, resigned
abruptly to head a private Council on Foreign Relations study on the impact of
declining U.S. government foreign policy spending. The Washington Post reported
that Moose, undersecretary of state for management, decided to resign after
acknowledging a personal relationship with a woman on his staff. Moose, 64, was
said to have increased his overseas travel accompanied by the woman, triggering
an investigation by the State Department.

CRIME 3 fatally shot

   An employee who was fired from his job Monday at a truck dealership in
Wykoff, Minn., shot and killed a son of the owner, a customer and himself,
authorities said. Two mechanics also were wounded. Authorities did not have
contact with the gunman before he died, said Leroy Eickhoff, the city's
ambulance director and mayor. The gunman's body was found in an upstairs parts
area of the Thompson Motor Co. The body of Chris Thompson, the owner's oldest
son, was found in the dealership's parking lot next to his truck, and the
customer's body was found at the parts counter. Eickhoff said the gunman had
just been fired.

University shooting

   Gunfire erupted at the library of the University of Texas' San Antonio campus
in what appeared to be a murder-suicide on the first day of fall classes. The
shooting occurred Monday evening on the second floor of the John Peace Library
Building, university spokeswoman Roxanne Llewellyn said. The identities of the
two men weren't immediately revealed, although one, a middle-aged man, was
believed to be a library employee. School officials hadn't determined whether
the other victim, a younger man, was a student.

COURTS Simpson wrangling

   O.J. Simpson's lawyers filed a flurry of last-minute motions in Santa Monica,
Calif., seeking to block evidence about violence in his marriage from being
introduced in his civil trial. The lawyers also sought to prevent courtroom
references to prior drug use or infidelity by Simpson and any witness comments
on whether they believe him guilty of murder. Plaintiffs' lawyers filed an even
larger stack of motions. Lawyers for Nicole Brown Simpson's estate asked that
jurors be prevented from hearing that Brown family members may have sold
photographs and other materials to the tabloid press.

ANIMALS Grizzly kills hiker

   A 33-year-old hiker in Alaska who apparently surprised a grizzly feeding on
salmon was fatally mauled when the bear tried to protect her cub. Robert Bell of
Washington, D.C., and a companion were trekking in tall brush along the Kugrak
River in remote northern Alaska when the attack occurred. The brush hid the
men's approach, and the feeding bear reacted instinctively to protect the cub,
said David Mills, superintendent of Gates of the Arctic National Park and
Preserve. Bell's companion escaped unhurt.

Tainted fish kills bear

   A polar bear at the San Diego Zoo died of food poisoning, probably from the
live trout in the animal's pool. Castor, a 26-year-old male, had an intestinal
illness that was believed to have come from eating fish in the Polar Bear
Plunge, a $ 5 million exhibit that opened two months ago to allow visitors to
see polar bears catch fish the way they do in the wild.

MEDICINE Blood vessel therapy

   Researchers last year began the first study of gene therapy for
cardiovascular disease, adding genes to clogged arteries in hopes of getting
patients to grow their own bypasses. Now, researchers are reporting the first
tantalizing evidence that the process could work. An elderly woman whose leg
artery was so clogged that she was developing gangrene in her foot was given
gene therapy and grew new blood vessels that increased the blood flow in her leg
by 82 percent. The researchers, from St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and Tufts
University School of Medicine near Boston, say the new blood vessels were not
sufficient to reverse the course of the gangrene and the woman had to have her
leg amputated below the knee. But the importance of the finding, they say, is
that it shows that the fundamental process involved in the gene therapy works.

EDUCATION D.C. schools probed

   Financial overseers put District of Columbia school officials on notice
Monday that the city's education system is broken and action will be taken to
fix it. Andrew Brimmer, chairman of the D.C. Financial Responsibility and
Management Assistance Authority created by Congress, said the board was
reviewing the performances of Superintendent Franklin Smith and the 11-member
school board.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Teachers striking the 20,000-student Pulaski County School
 District gather Monday outside district headquarters in Little Rock as
 their walkout went into a sixth day./ SPENCER TIREY / Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1996


                             2708 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                 August 27, 1996, Tuesday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 1082 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF;
Jupiter mission hits new snag

BYLINE: From our news services

BODY:


   Another computer glitch aboard the troubled Galileo spacecraft was puzzling
engineers Monday, 10 days before the probe was scheduled to pass by one of
Jupiter's moons. "We've got a ways to go to figure out what happened here," said
William O'Neil, project manager at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,
Calif.

   Galileo is supposed to be transmitting information about the moon Ganymede.
The spacecraft took black-and-white photographs of Ganymede on June 26 during
the first of four flybys of the planet and its four major moons. But a computer
problem Saturday knocked Galileo into "safe mode," where only essential
functions are up and running. It was the 11th "safe mode" for the spacecraft
since it was launched in 1989.

   Galileo should be ready to gather more information during a Sept. 6 flyby of
Ganymede, but transmitting the data home may have to wait for a fix.

GOVERNMENT NIH found lax

   Government regulators have proposed a $ 2,500 fine against the National
Institutes of Health for failing to safeguard radioactive materials used in
research. Officials of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in Washington said
small amounts of radioactive materials were kept inside unlocked refrigerators
and laboratories last year with no one present to control access - a violation
of regulations. The commission has been investigating security at the NIH for
about a year.

Official resigns

   Richard Moose, the State Department's fifth-ranking official, resigned
abruptly to head a private Council on Foreign Relations study on the impact of
declining U.S. government foreign policy spending. The Washington Post reported
that Moose, undersecretary of state for management, decided to resign after
acknowledging a personal relationship with a woman on his staff. Moose, 64, was
said to have increased his overseas travel accompanied by the woman, triggering
an investigation by the State Department's inspector general.

CRIME 3 fatally shot

   An employee who was fired Monday from his job at a truck dealership in
Wykoff, Minn., shot and killed a son of the owner, a customer and himself,
authorities said. Two mechanics also were wounded. Authorities did not have
contact with the gunman before he died, said Leroy Eickhoff, the city's
ambulance director and mayor. The gunman's body was found in an upstairs parts
area of the Thompson Motor Co. The body of Chris Thompson, the owner's oldest
son, was found in the dealership's parking lot next to his truck, and the
customer's body was found at the parts counter. Eickhoff said the gunman had
just been fired.

COURTS Simpson wrangling

   Lawyers in the O.J. Simpson case expressed concern about publicity by each
side before the judge imposed a gag order on participants. At a pretrial hearing
in Santa Monica, Calif., Simpson attorney Melissa Bluestein said she wanted more
information about letters being circulated on behalf of Fred Goldman, father of
slaying victim Ronald Goldman, suggesting the letters could have a significant
impact on prospective jurors in the wrongful death lawsuit against Simpson.
Goldman lawyer Daniel Petrocelli said he thought it was more important to focus
on the fact that Simpson has produced a lengthy video for sale and has written a
book - both proclaiming his innocence.

ANIMALS Grizzly kills hiker

   A 33-year-old hiker in Alaska who apparently surprised a grizzly feeding on
salmon was fatally mauled when the bear tried to protect her cub. Robert Bell of
Washington, D.C., and a companion were trekking in tall brush along the Kugrak
River in remote northern Alaska when the attack occurred. The brush hid the
men's approach, and the feeding bear reacted instinctively to protect the cub,
said David Mills, superintendent of Gates of the Arctic National Park and
Preserve. Bell's companion escaped unhurt.

Tainted fish kills bear

   A polar bear at the San Diego Zoo died of food poisoning, probably from the
live trout in the animal's pool. Castor, a 26-year-old male, had an intestinal
illness that was believed to have come from eating fish in the Polar Bear
Plunge, a $ 5 million exhibit that opened two months ago to allow visitors to
see polar bears catch fish the way they do in the wild. The fish were removed
after Castor and three other bears became sick and veterinarians found evidence
of a microorganism called rickettsia, which often is carried by a parasite
inside trout. The bears now are eating dog food, horse meat, vegetables and
frozen fish.

MEDICINE Blood vessel therapy

   Researchers last year began the first study of gene therapy for
cardiovascular disease, adding genes to clogged arteries in hopes of getting
patients to grow their own bypasses. Now, researchers are reporting the first
tantalizing evidence that the process could work. An elderly woman whose leg
artery was so clogged that she was developing gangrene in her foot was given
gene therapy and grew new blood vessels that increased the blood flow in her leg
by 82 percent. The researchers, from St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and Tufts
University School of Medicine near Boston, say the new blood vessels were not
sufficient to reverse the course of the gangrene and the woman had to have her
leg amputated below the knee. But the importance of the finding, they say, is
that it shows that the fundamental process involved in the gene therapy works.

Research fraud charged

   An AIDS researcher accused of diverting more than $ 570,000 in federal grant
money to his own use surrendered Monday to authorities in Miami and vowed to
continue his work. Dr. Lionel Resnick was charged Aug. 21 with 49 federal counts
of mail fraud and three counts of money laundering. He was released on $ 100,000
bail. Resnick is accused of using Mount Sinai Medical Center's laboratory, staff
and equipment to do virus tests for other facilities while billing his own
company, Vironc Inc., for work done from 1989 to 1994.

EDUCATION D.C. schools probed

   Financial overseers put District of Columbia school officials on notice
Monday that the city's education system is broken and action will be taken to
fix it. Andrew Brimmer, chairman of the D.C. Financial Responsibility and
Management Assistance Authority created by Congress, said the board was
reviewing the performances of Superintendent Franklin Smith and the 11-member
school board. Smith, superintendent of the 80,000- student school system since
1991, said he did not plan to leave voluntarily.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Teachers striking the 20,000-student Pulaski County School
 District gather Monday outside district headquarters in Little Rock as
 their walkout went into a sixth day./ SPENCER TIREY / Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1996


                             2709 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 27, 1996, Tuesday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
The deciding factor;
'Suicide gene' is tested on cancer;
Drug's effects studied on prostate patient

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Houston physicians Monday used a deactivated adenovirus
usually associated with colds and sore throat to infect
prostate cancer cells with a ""suicide gene'' - the first use of
this virus in gene therapy for cancer.

   The patient, Dan Tindall of Bayview, will then receive a drug
attracted to cells that carry the suicide gene.  The hope is
the drug, ganciclovir, will kill the tumor.

   Tindall, 71, incurred prostate cancer in 1990 and underwent
radiation.  However, he recently suffered a recurrence of the
disease.

   He has opted for the gene therapy because, he said, ""The
alternatives are not all that great. ''

   The treatment has been in the planning stages by researchers
and scientists at Methodist Hospital and Baylor College of
Medicine for nearly three years.

   Plans are under way to use the treatment in brain tumors,
too.

   Tindall was glad to have a cutting edge treatment available
because, since he had radiation, he could not have the
prostate removed surgically.

   He was not thrilled with cryosurgery, in which the prostate is
frozen.  The other options were hormone treatment or
castration.  ""All you do is prolong it ''he said.  ""They do not
get rid of the disease. ''

   Dr. Peter Scardino, chairman of the urology department at
Baylor and chief of urology at Methodist, said Tindall was a
good candidate for the treatment because his cancer was not
yet extensive.

   The study is designed to determine if the treatment using the
adenovirus - a member of the family of viruses that causes
colds - is toxic, he said.

   ""We hope to prove this is a safe form of gene therapy when
used by direct injection into the prostate,'' Scardino said.

   Technicians under the direction of Dr.Estuardo
Aguilar-Cordova produced the deactivated adenovirus in a
special laboratory at Texas Children's Hospital and attached
the ""suicide gene'' to it.

   The ""suicide gene'' is actually a gene usually found in a
herpes virus.  It causes cells to produce an enzyme called
thymidine kinase - known in biological shorthand as TK.

   TK is a molecular beacon for ganciclovir, used to treat herpes
virus infections.  When the drug is attracted to tumor cells,
it kills them.

   The TK-ganciclovir approach has been used with another virus
called a retrovirus in treating brain cancer.

   However, retroviruses can only infect dividing cells - a small
percentage of tumor cells overall.  As a result, only a few
cells in the brain tumors produced the TK-signal that
attracted ganciclovir.

   However, adenoviruses are highly infective - even of cells not
dividing.  The hope is it will infect most of the cancer, and
that many more tumor cells will be killed by the ganciclovir.

   Scardino injected the adenovirus-TK gene combination directly
into the prostate, using a needle just a little smaller than
the one he uses to obtain biopsy material.

   As he withdrew the needle from the prostate, he let the
material out of the syringe so it would be distributed
throughout the tumor area.

   ""This is our first step,'' he said.

   Eventually, Scardino said, he expects to use several needles
to make sure the virus-gene is evenly spread through the
mixture.

   When the procedure was over, Tindall got up off the table by
himself.

   He will remain in Methodist for two weeks while he receives
the ganciclovir.  Physicians will be monitoring his blood
counts and his general physical condition.

   Tindall, a retired builder, said he was not apprehensive about
the procedure.

   He knows that what is learned will be useful in treating the
disease, which many friends and acquaintances have.

   For himself, he said, ""This is a chance to get rid of it.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Dan Tindall (color); Buster Dean / Chronicle

TYPE: Series

NOTES: One in an occasional series.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1996


                             2710 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk;  Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1257 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Shows First Signs Of Bypassing Arterial Blockage

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   LAST year, researchers began the first study of gene therapy for
cardiovascular disease, adding genes to clogged arteries in the hope of getting
patients to grow their own bypasses. If it worked, the method could
revolutionize the treatment of cardiovascular disease, but gene therapy has been
characterized by great promise and little proof of success.

   This time, however, researchers are reporting the first tantalizing evidence
that the cardiovascular gene therapy could work. An elderly woman with leg
arteries so clogged that she was developing gangrene in her foot was given gene
therapy and grew new blood vessels that increased the blood flow in her leg by
82 percent.

    The researchers caution that the blood-vessel growth was not a cure. The new
blood vessels were not sufficient to reverse the course of the gangrene that had
set in, and the woman had to have her leg amputated below the knee. The
importance of the finding, researchers say, is that it shows that the
fundamental process involved in the gene therapy works.

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and Tufts University
School of Medicine near Boston, did the research, publishing his results in the
Aug. 10 issue of The Lancet, a British medical journal. The work was part of a
clinical trial he is conducting with a gene that can stimulate blood vessel
growth.

   Other doctors involved in cardiology research were intrigued by the report.
"This is really monumentally important," said Dr. Steven E. Nissen, vice
chairman of the division of cardiology at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation. "This
is an entirely new approach," he added, with "implications that are very broad."

   But Dr. Judith Swain, a professor and the chief of cardiovascular medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania Health System, was more wary in her views.

   "This is an interesting anecdotal experience," she said, "and I think it is
suggestive that this technology might really work. But you have to be cautious
about a study with one patient."

   Dr. Stuart H. Orkin, a professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School and
co-chairman of a committee convened by Dr. Harold Varmus, director of the
National Institutes of Health, to advise him on gene therapy research, said that
he was encouraged by the results.

   Although, he said, "they obviously didn't cure the patient, that may be
asking for too much," because she was so severely ill. The finding, he said,
leaves him with "cautious optimism."

   The research leading up to the clinical trial began several years ago when
investigators discovered a substance, called vascular endothelial growth factor,
or vegF, that appears to be the body's signal to grow new blood vessels. Dr.
Isner reasoned that vegF genes might allow patients with clogged arteries to
grow blood vessels to bypass the blockages.

   The system seemed almost too good to be true. In other sorts of gene therapy,
researchers wrestle with the vexing problem of how to get genes into cells and
how to avoid adding genes to cells that do not need them.

   Most cells will not take up genes unless they are packed in a virus or
wrapped in a membrane. But smooth muscle cells, like those lining an artery
wall, will take up and use so-called naked DNA, the raw genes themselves. Any
naked DNA that does not enter the muscle cells is degraded in the bloodstream,
so it is not swept away to places where it is not wanted.

   Moreover, the added genes stay active in the muscle cells for only several
weeks, just long enough for vegF genes to coax new blood vessels to sprout but
not long enough to cause lingering and unwanted side effects.

   Experiments in rabbits showed that vegF worked; the animals grew vessels to
direct blood around blockages within three weeks.

   The ensuing clinical trial involved patients who had clogged arteries in
their legs and who could not be treated with bypass surgery or balloon
angioplasty. Each year, as many as 30,000 to 40,000 Americans have blockages so
severe that they have unrelenting pain or sores that will not heal. They face
amputations, a risky operation. About 20 percent of the patients die in the
hospital and 40 percent are dead within a year of their surgery.

   The first few patients were treated with 100 micrograms of vegF, roughly
equivalent to 16 trillion genes, then the dose was increased to 500 micrograms,
with no results.

   Then three patients with unrelenting pain each got 1,000 micrograms of the
genes. All three had marked improvement in the blood flow in their legs and
remain free of pain a year after their gene therapy, Dr. Isner said. But
angiograms, which are X-rays of the arteries, did not show new blood vessels.
That may be because vessels grew but were too small to be detected with this
method, Dr. Isner said.

   Angiograms can show only vessels that are at least a half-millimeter in
diameter, but animal studies have indicated that most of the vessels that grow
after vegF treatment are less than a fifth of a millimeter in diameter.

   On the other hand, Dr. Isner said, it is possible that the experiment did not
succeed and that the patients were free of pain because of a placebo effect.

   The first direct evidence that new blood vessels grew after vegF treatment
came with the eighth patient treated; she was the first person to receive 2,000
micrograms of vegF.

   The patient is a 70-year-old woman who had first sought medical attention a
year earlier because her right foot hurt with a sort of cramping pain. Her
doctors removed several corns from her foot, gave her anti-inflammatory drugs
and fit her with inserts for her shoes. But the pain got worse; finally,
gangrene developed in her right toe. Tests showed that the arteries to her leg
were occluded.

   A month after the vegF treatment, angiograms showed new blood vessels growing
at the woman's knee, halfway down her calf and at her ankle. Blood flow in her
leg increased by 82 percent.

   At first, Dr. Isner hoped that the treatment would allow the woman to avoid
an amputation. Her gangrene stabilized for about two months after her gene
therapy. "We would not have expected that, but gangrene can be fairly
unpredictable," Dr. Isner said. After two months, the gangrene began to worsen,
and the patient had to have her leg amputated below the knee.

   Now Dr. Isner is awaiting results from three other patients who had the
2,000-microgram dose, and he is planning a better gene-delivery method for
future patients. He has discovered in animal experiments that he does not have
to put the genes directly onto the smooth muscle cells of the artery wall. He
can inject them into skeletal muscle, like leg or chest muscles, and they will
migrate to the nearest artery wall and take up residence in cells there. The
Food and Drug Administration has given Dr. Isner permission to inject vegF genes
into patients' leg muscles.

   "We could distribute the genes over the entire leg," Dr. Isner said. "If
we're using 2,000 micrograms, we can give 500 micrograms in 4 different places."
With the other method, putting the genes onto the artery wall wherever a
catheter could be inserted, "we were limited to transferring genes to a site
that might be two feet from where we want it to be," Dr. Isner said.

   Of course, Dr. Isner said, he cannot claim to have cured anyone with gene
therapy. But, he said, "the patient was the proof of the pudding at this point
in time, given our level of ignorance, given that we have no idea about doses,
route of administration or frequency of treatment. I would consider this a
success."

GRAPHIC: Photo: An arteriogram of the leg arteries of a 70-year-old woman with
severe blockage before (top) and a month after she received a high dose of genes
in an effort to stimulate new arterial growth. Blood flow was increased by 82
percent, though she later lost the leg. (St. Elizabeth's Hospital, Boston)

Diagram: "Helping the Body Do Its Own Bypass"
In an experimental treatment for blockage in a major leg artery, the gene for a
protein that stimulates growth of new blood vessels is inserted. In one patient,
new growth to bypass the blockage was apparent. (Jeffrey M. Inser/St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1996


                             2711 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A3-8

PILGRIMAGE TURNED TO PANIC

   Survivors in Kashmir told how about 50,000 Hindu pilgrims in the Himalayas
made their way in a panic through a blizzard and rain with little shelter to try
to escape a storm that struck their route. A1

The pilgrimage in Kashmir is an important one for Hindus. A3

PEACE EFFORTS FOR CHECHNYA

   The Russian national security adviser met with the Prime Minister to try to
rally support for a peace effort in Chechnya, and while peace looked closer, it
will require critical Russian concessions. A8

FRENCH IMMIGRANTS RELEASED

   Most of the people arrested in a raid of anti-deportation protesters on a
church in France were released, but polls indicated that public opinion was
split on how the country is handling immigration. A8

U.S. WARY OF SANCTIONS

   The news that China may be helping Pakistan produce missiles may require
sanctions under American law, but officials have no appetite for a confrontation
with China. A6

FOR SOUTH KOREA, SIGN OF CHANGE

   A death sentence for one former President of South Korea and a prison term
for another were controversial, but they showed the distance the country has
come from the era of military rule.  A4

NUCLEAR BALANCE IN ASIA

   Signs that China may be aiding a secret missile factory in Pakistan shows its
determination to thwart Indian domination of the region, but it may invite
sanctions from the United States. News analysis. A6

Manila Journal: From Mexico, love, sex and a talking dog. A4

National A9-15

DEMOCRATS OPEN CONVENTION

   Returning to Chicago, the Democrats opened their 42d convention with a
program that featured not politics but personal stories of tragedy and triumph.
A1

News Analysis: Another convention with emotions, not ideas.  A1

CLINTON BENEFITS FROM MEDIA

   As the President traveled by train to the convention in Chicago, the local
press has been covering him with a largely uncritical eye.  A1

Already in Chicago, Hillary Clinton responded to critics.  A11

How the two parties' platforms compare. Chart.  A11

The President spoke about crime and gun control.  A12

Man in the News: The keynote speaker, Gov. Evan Bayh.  A14

MOVING AGAINST CHILD MOLESTERS

   The California Legislature has nearly completed action on what legal experts
say is the most punitive child molestation measure ever adopted in this country,
one that would permit "chemical castration" of repeat sex offenders.  A1

REFERENDUM ON BEAR HUNTING

   If an unusual coalition of landowners and animal-rights advocates has its
way, this autumn may be the last time that Michigan hunters with hounds scramble
through swamps in pursuit of bears.  A10

SUSPECT'S MOTHER PLEADS

   Barbara Jewell, the mother of the man who was named as a suspect in the
bombing of Centennial Olympic Park, begged President Clinton to clear her son's
name and asked the news media to spread the word that her son is innocent.  A9

WHITHER THE REDWOODS?

   Negotiations to save the country's largest privately owned stand of virgin
redwoods, a 3,000-acre forest near in northwestern California, have reached a
critical stage.  A9

DOLE VACATIONING, SORT OF

   Reporter's Notebook: Bob Dole, the Republican Presidential nominee, has
chosen Santa Barbara for a semi-working vacation.  A14

Metro Report B1-5

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C9-14

Circle in the Square files for bankruptcy.  C9

When classical musicians are injured.  C9

Theater: "Keats," the final days.  C12

Music: Critic's Choice C9

Helene Grimaud at Mostly Mozart.  C10

Mozart's "Messiah." C10

Three faces of rockabilly.  C12

Forum Music Group.  C14

David S. Ware.  C14

Pantera and White Zombie.  C14

Dance: Urban Artworks.  C13

Books: "The Insult,"a novel.  C13

Sports B9-14

Baseball: Mets fire Green, hire Valentine.  B9

Yanks lose to Mariners.  B9

Columns: Araton on the Mets B9

TV Sports B12

Football: Giants gird for the blitz.  B12

Golf: The risks and rewards of Woods turning pro.  B9

Tennis: Agassi wins at U.S. Open.  B9

Science Times C1-8

What's behind periodic fish kills? A killer cell the prime suspect.  C1

The lightning-fast origin of species in Lake Victoria.  C1

Traces of African religion in foundations of Annapolis houses.  C1

First evidence that gene therapy helps artery blockage.  C3

Nitric oxide and the question of malarial virulence.  C4

Q&A C7

Personal Computers C6, C8

Fashion B6

 A runway that connects Laguna Beach to Wall Street.

Obituaries B8

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Platform politics.

South Korea judges its past.

Golf's new tiger.

Letters

Russell Baker: Putting the boot into smoke.

A. M. Rosenthal: Stopping the music.

Stephan-Gotz Richter: How America stiffs the third world.

Michael Massing: Reefer madness strikes again.

Chronicle A15

Chess C8

Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1996


                             2712 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                            August 25, 1996, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 1, Part B

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy treatment for diseases now available in San Antonio Don
Finley Express-News Medical Writer


BODY: Gene therapy, for years a controversial and - until recently - highly
speculative idea for treating some of mankind's most stubborn diseases, has come
to San Antonio.

   The Institute for Drug Development, a research arm of the Cancer Therapy and
Research Center, has begun two gene therapies in people - one for head and neck
cancers, and another for ovarian cancer.

   A special two-bed gene therapy isolation unit has been constructed on the
third floor of St. Luke's Baptist Hospital.

   However, negotiations between the institute and the Baptist Memorial Health
System over nurses and other staff for the unit have delayed its opening.

   Still, a handful of patients already have been treated at a clinical research
unit of Audie Murphy VA Hospital, and two at St. Luke's. But the researchers
want the new unit up and running, because they believe the number of
experimental gene therapies needing testing will become more numerous.

   "The whole point behind this is with gene therapy you have to get started,
get your facilities set up - sort of plant the seed so you then attract more
trials," said Dr. S. Gail Eckhardt, who heads the gene therapy program.

   Perhaps the more promising of the therapies is ONYX-015, a substance that is
injected into patients with head and neck cancers.

   ONYX-015 is a type of common cold virus that has had genetic material
removed.

   For a reason the scientists don't entirely understand, the altered virus,
which will infect all cells, only multiplies in and destroys tumor cells with a
missing or broken tumor-suppressor gene called P-53.

   While the P-53 gene is missing or broken in a high percentage of many
cancers, it is almost universally defective in head and neck tumors.

   "We brought it here and tested it against animals bearing human tumors, and
the stuff is remarkable. You inject the tumor, the tumor goes away," said Dr.
Daniel Von Hoff, president of the Institute for Drug Development.

   "So we have a clinical trial right now with three patients so far," Von Hoff
said. "I'm not at liberty to say how many patients are responding yet. Let me
just say it's very promising. Not just promising, but very promising."

   Still, the limitation of the drug, Von Hoff said, is that it must be injected
directly into a tumor that has not spread elsewhere in the body. But local
researchers are working on a way to infuse it into the bloodstreams of patients
whose cancer has spread.

   ONYX-015 was developed by a company called ONYX Pharmaceuticals in Richmond,
Calif. The only other location it is being tested is in Glasgow, Scotland.

   Another six San Antonio patients have been treated with a therapy called
antisense.

   While antisense therapy has been tried for several years in a number of ways,
the basic idea is to interfere with the defective gene in the cancer cell.

   The idea works in one of two ways. If the genetic material in human cells is
like a bar code at a check-out counter, then a substance called messenger RNA,
or ribonucleic acid, is what scans the bar code and carries out the task the
cell is designed for.

   But in cancer cells, the genetic bar code is faulty. The antisense therapy
being used by the local researchers attaches to the messenger RNA and prevents
it from reading the faulty part of the bar code.

   Another way antisense therapy works is to attach itself to the defect part of
the genetic bar code itself, so the messenger RNA can't read it.

   "Antisense therapy is interesting, and you can give it like a drug by IV. You
don't have to worry about a lot of other stuff," Eckhardt said.

   Researchers plan to launch a third therapy soon. That will involve replacing
a protein that is missing in many cancers when another tumor-suppressor gene,
called the retinoblastoma gene, is missing or defective.

   Wen-Hwa Lee, who heads the University of Texas Institute for Biotechnology at
the Texas Research Park, was the first to identify and clone the gene in the
mid-1980s.

   The researchers want to try the therapy in patients with bladder cancer.

   "We're getting tooled up because we know this is only the tip of the
iceberg," Von Hoff said. "We have tons of new gene therapies coming down the
line."

   medicine genes genetics study

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2713 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   August 22, 1996, Thursday, Home Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE,
MEDICINE AND THE ENVIRONMENT.;
 HEART DISEASE;
 THE MILANO DEFENSE;
 A CHANCE MUTATION GAVE ONE MAN AND HIS DESCENDANTS THE ABILITY TO WITHSTAND THE
RAVAGES OF CHOLESTEROL BUILDUP. NEW RESEARCH SHOWS IT MAY BE POSSIBLE THROUGH
GENE THERAPY TO GIVE OTHERS THE SAME BENEFITS.
FOR THE RECORD

BYLINE: Marnell Jameson, Special to The Times

BODY:


   Usually, genetic mutations mean bad news. But in the case of Giovanni
Pomaroli, his defective gene spawned a lineage that appears invincible to the
ravages of heart and vascular disease and may hold a clue to preventing the
scourge in others.

   A chance genetic mutation endowed Pomaroli, who was born in the remote town
of Limone, Italy, in 1780, with an unusual protein that prevented cholesterol
from building up in his arteries. It allowed him and his descendants to eat
massive quantities of fatty foods, smoke to excess, avoid exercise and still
live well into their 90s.

   Now a research team at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles is using
the protein from this mutant gene to prevent cholesterol buildup in the arteries
of rabbits and mice that were not naturally endowed with it. Perhaps as early as
next year, they will try to do the same in humans.

   If all goes well, among the first people who could benefit are those who have
vascular disease but are not candidates for surgery or angioplasty. Another
group would be those who have trouble lowering their cholesterol levels through
diet and medication. Patients who have undergone angioplasty to clear their
arteries might receive it to prevent further clogging.

   "We are on the trail of something that could substantially impact vascular
disease," said UCLA's Dr. Prediman K. Shah, director of cardiology at
Cedars-Sinai and principal investigator on the study.

   However, Dr. Jon Kobashigawa, medical director of UCLA's heart transplant
program, is concerned that injecting the mutant protein into humans might
produce unexpected side effects or that recipients will produce antibodies
against the protein that will quickly nullify its effects. "Very small changes
in molecules can trigger a whole cascade of reactions in the body that may not
be too desirable," he said.

   Apo A-1 Milano, the protein created by the aberrant gene, was discovered in
Pomaroli's descendants in 1980 by Cesare Sirtori of the University of Milan, who
was treating one descendant for a stomach problem when he noted the discrepancy
between the man's horrible eating and smoking habits and his remarkably clear
arteries. The mutant gene was eventually isolated and produced in relatively
large quantities by researchers at Pharmacia AB, the Swedish drug company that
now supplies it to researchers.

   Apo A-1 Milano is, in a sense, a biological garbage truck that removes
cholesterol from the arteries and dumps it in the body's waste stream.

   Humans have three types of cholesterol in their blood--the so-called "good
cholesterol" (high density lipoprotein, or HDL), "bad cholesterol" (low-density
lipoprotein, or LDL) and triglycerides.

   LDL carries cholesterol through the body, but it tends to fall apart, leaving
plaque deposits on the walls of blood vessels. Triglycerides are converted into
LDL. HDL, in contrast, binds cholesterol tightly and carries it to the liver for
disposal.

   Apo A-1 is a key building block of HDL, and the Milano variant seems to make
it work better, said Dr. Jack Oram of the University of Washington School of
Medicine.

   In Shah's first study, the team fed rats a high-fat diet and scratched the
insides of some arteries, a technique that accelerates the formation of
atherosclerotic plaque. After plaque built up, the researchers performed
angioplasty, in which a balloon is inserted and inflated to compress the plaque.
Half the animals received an injection of the Apo A-1 Milano protein before and
after angioplasty.

   When the team examined both groups three weeks later, they reported in 1994,
they found that rabbits that received the mutant protein had 70% less thickening
of the artery wall from plaque buildup. Sirtori has reported similar results.

   In their latest study, Shah's group set out to see whether they could
reproduce the results in mice, and more important, to see whether they could
reverse plaque that had formed. This study used a type of mouse whose arterial
disease closely resembled that in humans.

   "The results are pretty spectacular," said Shah, who plans to publish the
findings this year.

   At the end of the five-week study, mice receiving a low dose of Apo A-1
Milano had 60% less plaque than the control group. In those mice receiving a
high dose, plaque was reversed by nearly 80%. Furthermore, in the plaque that
remained, the fat was virtually nonexistent.

   In the coming year, Shah's team hopes to determine the lowest dose needed to
be effective, how long the protein has to be administered, whether the body
develops antibodies against it and whether the effects are permanent.

   "We have proven the concept," Shah said. "The gene does protect rabbits and
mice by both preventing the formation of fatty plaque and also reversing plaque
once it's formed."

   Despite his concerns about potential side effects, Kobashigawa also remains
optimistic. "Knowing that the Milano family has done very well, I would be
optimistic but reserved until the clinical data come out," he said. "The notion
that adding a protein could change the outcome of heart disease is very exciting
and could lead to dramatic changes in the way we view artery disease."

   Researchers are further buoyed by the fact that, unlike most scientific
models, this model first occurred successfully in humans and not in a lab. But
critics argue that the Apo A-1 Milano gene may be just one of several mutant
genes in the Pomaroli lineage and that all such changes are required to prevent
heart disease.

   In the coming year, Shah and his research team, which includes Drs. Jan
Nilsson of the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm and Hans Ageland of Pharmacia,
and Drs. Bojan Cercek and Sanjay Kaul of Cedars-Sinai, plan to begin testing the
protein on humans for safety. They hope to start clinical trials on humans the
following year pending approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

   Meanwhile, researchers are trying to understand precisely how the mutant
protein functions in the hope of designing a drug that can do the same thing,
Oram said. "Ultimately, injecting a large protein like this into people is not a
very practical solution," he added.

   In the future, Shah sees gene therapy as the ideal solution. Instead of
injecting the Apo A-1 Milano protein into people, researchers would insert the
gene for it into the liver, allowing the body to make its own protein.

   "We will basically fool cells into thinking they carry the gene; that will
trigger the liver to begin producing the mutant protein ," he said. "If we can
get the liver to produce Apo A-1 Milano indefinitely, then we may have a
permanent answer."

CORRECTION-DATE: August 29, 1996, Thursday

CORRECTION:
In last week's Science File, a photo caption affiliated Dr. Prediman K. Shah
with UCLA. Dr. Shah is affiliated with both UCLA and Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
in Los Angeles, as the story stated. The story also stated correctly that the
genetic research project was performed at Cedars.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: UCLA's Dr. Prediman K. Shah is the principal investigator in the
study.  PHOTOGRAPHER: BOB CAREY / Los Angeles Times PHOTO: Below, cross sections
of rabbit blood vessels show plaque buildup (top photo) and after treatment with
the Apo-A-1 Milano protein.  PHOTOGRAPHER: BOB CAREY / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1996


                             2714 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      August 20, 1996 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: CANCER CENTER AMONG TOP 14 ;
RENEWAL OF NCI STATUS BRINGS FIVE-YEAR GRANT

BYLINE: By JOHN FUNK; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: CLEVELAND

BODY:

   The National Cancer Institute has renewed its designation of the Ireland
Cancer Center at University Hospitals as a clinical cancer center. The renewal
includes a five-year grant for $8.8 million.

   The NCI designation marks the center as one of an elite network of 14
clinical cancer research and treatment centers across the nation.

   The center, begun in 1985, is a partnership between University Hospitals and
the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. It has received two
previous grants, each for three years, from the NCI.

   Dr. James Wilson, director of the center, said the grant is about equally
divided between basic research, development of new treatments based on that
research, and preventive efforts, including educating the public.

   "This [grant] is the infrastructure upon which we build the research and
therapy," said Wilson.

   In recent years, the center's researchers have begun developing new therapies
for colon and prostate cancer and conducted research in gene therapy and
photodynamic therapy.

   Last year, the center's researchers confirmed a genetic link for colon
cancer.

   Wilson said the center's 160-member staff had to compete for the grant and
designation much as CWRU/UH scientists compete for research grants awarded by
the National Institutes of Health. In this case, however, the competition
included a review of treatment and educational efforts as well as basic research
initiatives.

   Wilson said the educational mission of the center includes working with the
UH network of primary-care physicians to see that they are aware of the latest
cancer treatments and devising informational programs to make the public aware
of preventive practices such as the importance of regular mammograms.

   The center staffs a cancer hot line (1-800-641-2422) 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
weekdays and by computerized phone mail after hours.

   The 14 centers in the nation share their clinical results, said Wilson.

   He said the center uses the research portion of the grant as matching funds
to leverage other cancer research grants. Last year, the center's researchers -
spanning 29 departments at the medical school and hospital, received more than
$32 million in research funds, mostly from the NIH.

   Some of the researchers are affiliated with the center work at MetroHealth
Medical Center and the Cleveland Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1996


                             2715 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 18, 1996, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1459 words

HEADLINE: Anderson's LeMaistre to retire

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Charles A. ""Mickey'' LeMaistre has never allowed himself to
be defined by titles or job descriptions.

   It is that openness that has allowed him to follow the course
he has - from practicing infectious disease doctor to longtime
administrator in a cancer hospital.

   As a child in Alabama, he had no early commitment to becoming
a doctor.

   In his youth, he suffered the usual ills, including bones
broken playing football.  But an accident that scratched his
left eye kept him from accepting an appointment to West
Point.

   With that door closed, he chose another, entering the
University of Alabama to major in pre-med.

   Thus began a career that spanned the decades of greatest
progress in medicine.  But taking on the job as only the second
president of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center 18 years ago was probably his most daunting task

   Now, on the eve of his Aug. 31 retirement, LeMaistre, 72,
remembers well the trepidation he felt when he agreed to take
the job.

   Since its beginning, the name of Anderson had been almost
synonymous with that of its first president, the late Dr. R.
Lee Clark, whose dedication to the hospital was as well-known
as was his ability to twist arms in the Legislature to keep
the state-funded hospital alive.

   LeMaistre - Mickey to his friends - had never sought to become
an administrator.  He began his career in infectious disease
and had expected to stay in that field.

   The youngest of six children, LeMaistre was only 17 at the
start of World War II.  His four older brothers were eager to
enter the war, and he was chosen to stay home with their
widowed mother.

   He received his medical degree in 1947 from Cornell University
Medical College and did his internship and residency at New
York Hospital.

   Later, he finished a two-year postdoctoral fellowship in
infectious disease.  He joined the Cornell faculty, but he was
also recruited into the unit of the epidemic intelligence
service of the U.S.Public Health Service - dealing with
volatile, often secret public health issues that arose around
the world.

   During that period, he also worked on the development of new
antibiotics.

   He was particularly interested in tuberculosis and other
air-borne diseases.

   In 1952, he married the former Joyce Trapp and in 1954, he
moved to Atlanta where he joined the faculty at Emory
University School of Medicine, eventually becoming chairman of
its preventive medicine and community health department.

   Five years later, he moved his family to Texas where he joined
the faculty of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical
School in Dallas.

   In 1965, he became an associate dean of the school, beginning
a long stint of administrative health posts.

   The 1960s were a turbulent time on Texas campuses, as they
were across the United States.

   In 1966, LeMaistre became vice chancellor for health affairs
for the University of Texas System.

   At the time, the school had two medical schools - UT Medical
Branch in Galveston and UT Southwestern.

   But two more were in the offing as were other UT-associated
medical components.

   By the time LeMaistre became UT chancellor in 1971, the Austin
campus was deep in the throes of an anti-war movement.

   Students were demanding a greater role in running the
university, demands that put them smack in opposition to the
late Frank Erwin, the chairman of the UT board who took an
active role in running the university.

   ""Much of what I did was to prevent things from happening,''
LeMaistre said.  But the experience in Austin was invaluable
when he took over in Houston.

   ""I would not have been able to help this institution without
my experience as chancellor.  It taught me a lot about working
with a team.  It taught me to say, 'Come, let us reason
together. ' ''

   It also taught him the value of audacity.  When UT decided to
purchase a perfect Gutenberg Bible, LeMaistre and a UT board
member, flew to New York City with checks totaling $ 2.4
million.

   LeMaistre and the board member, Art Dilly, carried the two
volume Bible back to Austin in zippered carry-on luggage.

   Although the UT post proved valuable, he was relieved to go to
Anderson, returning to his first love -medicine.

   While in Dallas, he had switched his interest from infectious
diseases to cancer.

   ""I was struck by the enormous amount of lung cancer at
Parkland and Woodlawn hospitals (in Dallas),'' he said.

   He was part of the task force that wrote the first U.S.
Surgeon General's report on smoking and health.

   That 1964 landmark report first officially indicted tobacco
cigarettes as a major cause of lung cancer.

   That was no news to LeMaistre who had already noticed that his
patients routinely smoked.

   ""Even though I was working in respiratory diseases of all
kinds, I couldn't get out of my mind the tragedy of lung
cancer,'' he said.

   The disease is still a tragedy with little improvement made in
the effectiveness of treatment since the 1970s.

   But he has great hope for gene therapy experiments now being
undertaken by Dr. Jack Roth and prevention efforts by Dr. Waun
Ki Hong at his own institution.

   ""It is a dream come true,'' he said.  ""We are taking another
look at what can be done in lung cancer. ''

   In addition, Anderson has pioneered outpatient treatment for
cancer, a move he credits to Dr.Fred Conrad, the hospital
vice president who was shot in his office in 1982, the victim
of a never-identified assassin.

   ""He helped us find out how to treat patients as well or better
while they were still living at home,'' LeMaistre said.

   Many factors have contributed to the success of institutions
such as Anderson, he said.

   It started with the 1971 approval of the National Cancer Act
that allowed establishment of comprehensive cancer centers.  It
is there that the most forward-looking research goes on as
well as the training of new oncologists for the future, he
said.

   But two years ago, LeMaistre faced the most difficult
administrative task of his career.  For years, the institution
had received flat funding from the state of Texas - a little
more than $ 100 million.

   It amounted to no more than one-half of the charity care given
by the state institution.  As managed care squeezed the dollars
that Anderson was receiving and the numbers of private
patients dwindled, the institution in 1994 faced a potential
total deficit of $ 750 million by the year 2000.

   LeMaistre took his problems to the Legislature while turning
to his staff to come up with cost-cutting measures.

   He does not shrink from admitting there have been substantial
layoffs.

   But he also persuaded the Legislature to change the
institution's enabling legislation.

   While Anderson maintains its promise to make sure that any
Texan with cancer gets treatment regardless of ability to pay,
counties who send a disproportionate number of patients to
Houston will find themselves liable for some of the costs.

   In Harris County, Anderson is helping staff a clinic at Lyndon
B. Johnson Hospital where indigent cancer patients can go.

   And he has spread a wide net to sign cooperative agreements
with institutions across the state.

   ""It is unwise for comprehensive cancer care centers to try to care for all
cancer patients,'' he said.

   Instead, his institution has committed to sharing its
expertise statewide and even farther.  There is an Anderson
affiliate in Orlando, Fla.

   Some patients will continue to need all the resources that a
comprehensive cancer center can bring to their problems, he
said.

   ""The continuation of comprehensive cancer centers is vitally
important,'' he said.  ""We are state of the art for treatment of
this disease. ''
 But as a patient undergoes treatment, he or she may be moved
where the disease can best be treated.

   Officially, LeMaistre's last day on the job is Aug. 31.

   He is unable or unwilling to point to one action on his part
for which he is most proud.

   But one of his boldest was one that generated considerable
legislative heat.

   ""I cite the fact that this institution, without a whimper,
accepted the city's first AIDS patients in 1981. ''

   At a time when the hospital was very full and the fear of the
disease was heightened, ""these people were sick and needed
help,'' LeMaistre said.

   ""Our doctors saw them as people who needed help. ''

   Those doctors - Peter Mansell and Adan Rios, among them -
""were unsung heroes of the early epidemic,'' LeMaistre said.

   His retirement is the end of an era for Anderson, but the
institution will carry on.

   ""Our goal should be to put ourselves out of business.  Wouldn't
it be a wonderful world with no or only a minimal amount of
cancer?

   ""I think that's possible. ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Charles A. LeMaistre, only the second president of the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, retires Aug. 31.; Houston
Chronicle file photo

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1996


                             2716 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     August 18, 1996, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 952 words

HEADLINE: RSVP / THE SOCIAL CITY;
FUN IN BAGHDAD BY THE BAY;
 Angelenos Are in the Middle of All the Glitter as Jenica Rosekrans Is Presented

BYLINE: MARY LOU LOPER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Los Angeles designers Tony Duquette and Hutton Wilkinson can't count the
hours they labored to create decorations for a most unconventional Arabian
Nights Ball on Friday night at the Palace of the Legion of Honor Museum in San
Francisco.

   Dodie and John Rosekrans hosted the occasion for the debut of their
granddaughter Jenica Rosekrans. It was far from the usual white-flowers and
long-gloves affair. Rather, Duquette/Wilkinson fashioned an "Oriental Bazaar on
Baghdad by the Bay." The duo also is decorating a Paris apartment for Dodie
Rosekrans, who flew around the world to collect decorations for the Baghdad
evening.

   The museum site was definitely first choice. After all, it was built by John
Rosekrans' grandmother, the late Alma Spreckles. For the party, the museum
facade was transformed with a backdrop painted to resemble the Amber Palace in
Jaipur, India. Tents and tablecloths were appliqued and embroidered in the
bazaar in Delhi, and the waiters' gold coats and turbans were ordered in Jaipur.

   There was a battalion of carved Indian soldiers with rifles and a red
lacquered bandstand for Peter Duchin and his Orchestra.

   Gordon and Ann Getty flew in guests from Europe. Angelenos fortunate to be
invited planned their costumes for months. Peter and Kacey McCoy were potentate
and princess. Their son Patrick and daughter Shane also attended. Diane and Mark
Hopkins McNabb were dressed as nabobs during the Raj. Penny and Adam Bianchi
went as Salome and the head of John the Baptist. More in Oriental costumes were
Noorna Eversole and her son and daughter-in-law, Harry and Mary Eversole,
Eleanor Phillips Colt, Shannon and Pamela Clyne and Tom (in black tie and
turban) and Travis Kranz. Actress Sharon Stone dressed as a maharani. Duquette
wore a tunic of gold brocade with a headpiece covered in turquoise. Wilkinson
came dressed in blue in the style of Ningbo, China, with wife Ruth in beaded
pink gauze and a jeweled headdress from Burma.


   *

   Portuguese Bend: Fall's equestrian high spot--the 39th annual Portuguese Bend
National Horse Show--is looming for the weekend after Labor Day, Sept. 6-8, at
Ernie Howlett Park in Rolling Hills Estates. To Pacific Coast equestrians, the
show is the site of the Pacific Coast Horse Shows Assn. Horsemanship Medal
Finals.

   Betty Learned, the first president of the Peninsula Committee Childrens
Hospital, and friend Betty Davidson fought the first-year prediction in 1958
that "horse shows don't make money."

   The critics were wrong. The committee has raised more than $ 3 million for
the hospital. And will raise more for its continuing commitment to gene therapy,
cancer biology and molecular biology research.

   According to tradition, members lasso their husbands and children to hammer
and paint at work parties before the show. Everyone learns to flip hamburgers in
style.

   Betsy Miller, show chairwoman, has been working with current Peninsula
Committee President Terry Durham since February. Miller's daughter, Molly, will
participate in the show on her horse Palet. Shannon Rooney, 7, a
third-generation member of a longtime Portuguese Bend Horse Show family and
granddaughter of Jody Murdock, mayor of Rolling Hills (and a committee member
for 14 years), will also ride.


   *

   Coronet Debutantes: While a harpist played, the Coronet Debutante Ball Board
announced its debutantes at a mother-daughter luncheon at the Bel Air Country
Club.

   To be presented in November: Elizabeth Abramson, Christina Caan, Carolyn
Carlson, Kathleen Citron, Maureen Dowling, Amanda Kaplan, Katherine
Kuchenbecker, Holly Markovitz, Courtlan McClintock, Kelley McEachern, Courtney
Miller, Alison Neiman, Kara Older, Emily Olsen, Christina Purdy, Allyson
Rinella, Elisabeth Salz, Sloane Starke, Robin Ure, Caroline Van Oosterom and
Adina VerBrugghen.

   Applauding were Barbara Harris, board president; Janet Walther, president of
the National Charity League, Los Angeles Founder chapter; Linda McCann, ball
director; and Eileen Nahigian, luncheon chairwoman. Ball proceeds will help
support the NCL-USC Teacher Center.


   *

   Sundown Festival: Metropolitan Associates have been picnicking on the grass
at Pasadena homes all summer, rubbing on insect repellent and watching favorite
films as the stars come out. There's one more affair to go. On Saturday, Kittie
and Bill Ballard, and Peggy and Jim Class will host before the film "Funny
Girl." Proceeds will help underwrite a Los Angeles Music Center Opera
performance and fund bus transportation for San Gabriel Valley students who
attend.


   *

   Elsewhere on the Social Circuit

   Honors galore: Lea Ann King, past president of the Volunteer Center, South
Bay-Harbor-Long Beach, received the Gloria Deukmejian Founder's Award at the
National Community Service Conference in San Francisco . . . Hal Kanter was
saluted by the University Women of the University of Judaism at their 30th
annual author-artist luncheon . . . The Braille Institute Auxiliary honored
retired attorney Max G. Kolliner at the Riviera Country Club for his 17 years of
dedication as a reader for the blind.

   * Ellie Cortese chairs the celebration Monday night for the opening of the
newly renovated Bally shop at South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa. The event
benefits the AIDS Services Foundation/Orange County . . . The goal to keep
musical theater in Ventura County a reality at Cabrillo Music Theater energized
last week's "Stagelight Serenade" dinner auction . . . L.A. Dodger pitcher Tom
Candiotti and his wife, Donna, teamed with the LAPD Swat Unit for a game at
Dodger Stadium celebrating kids at Orthopaedic Hospital. More than 800 children
and parents attended.

   * Mary Lou Loper's column is published Sundays.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Coronet debs: Adina VerBrugghen, left, Holly Markovitz, Caroline
Van Oosterom and Kelley McEachern.  PHOTOGRAPHER: LEE SALEM / For The Times

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1996


                             2717 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    AUGUST 18, 1996, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ;Pg. 3/Z1; SUNDAY INTERVIEW

LENGTH: 1638 words

HEADLINE: DAVID BOTSTEIN
 A Map for An Incredible Journey
 Geneticist David Botstein of Stanford University

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    S ome revolutionary changes seem to sneak up on us, their key events
occurring in bits and pieces out of the public eye. One under way right now is
the Human Genome Project.

   Its impact on medicine should exceed that 100 years ago of X-rays, which gave
doctors their first view inside the intact, living body. Until recently, few
scientists could even imagine the ambitions of a project to describe atom by
atom the genes that, like combinations of blueprint and computer code, make
fertilized human eggs grow into people, not cows or salmon or oak trees.

   For an update from the genome front, The Chronicle interviewed Dr. David
Botstein, chairman of the Department of Genetics at Stanford University. A
native of Switzerland with a degree in biochemistry from Harvard and a Ph.D.  in
genetics from the University of Michigan, Botstein is a pioneer in genetic
engineering and studies of heredity. He participated in the 1975 meeting at
Asilomar, where scientists first openly debated the potential dangers and
benefits of then-new powers to move genes among species.

   His many consulting positions have included membership on the Advisory
Council of the National Center for Human Genome Research and the Advisory Board
of the Human Genome Center at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.  He was
interviewed at Genentech, Inc., in South San Francisco, where he is a member of
its Scientific Resource Board.

   Q: Is there any one thing about the project that you would most like the
public to understand, or some misunderstanding that needs clearing up?

   A: Yes. I think that knowing all the genes, and even having the ability to
intervene in some kind of future gene therapy, does not mean that we can design
people.

   What is being talked about here is really an extension of medicine as we know
it, of having the blueprint of not only disease but also its ultimate cause in
our hands. That is not the same as being able to substitute ourselves (medical
scientists) for the traditional and very difficult tasks of reproduction and
bringing up children and providing them not only with their genetic endowment
but also with reasonable circumstances and good health and, of course, all the
environmental influences that make them into decent human beings. This (Human
Genome Project) has nothing to do with that.

   .

   Q: How can you say that? If one knows the entire blueprint for a human,
doesn't that leave the door open someday to alter the plans so that new
characteristics are put into people?

   A: Yes, by the ones and twos, it does. But if you think of 100,000 genes,
doubled (one set from each parent), and the risk that's involved in manipulating
the DNA even under the best circumstances, the idea that you might intervene
more than once or twice is, at the moment, inconceivable.

   It would be a very, very complicated undertaking, one much more likely to
fail than to succeed each time you do it. And then if you can imagine doing it
tens of thousands of times, you can forget about it. The second thing is that
for things like our personalities and our abilities and our athletic prowess and
things like that, it is not at all clear what the relationship between the genes
and those behaviors are.

   Just compare a trained runner to an untrained runner, and the speed with
which they can cover 100 yards, and you will immediately see the difference.
We're learning about the genetic side, the mechanistic side. But the teaching
side and the environmental side, that side still remains.

   .

   Q: How do you envision doctors of the mid-21st century, our children and
grandchildren, taking advantage of the Human Genome's details?

   A: I'm putting on my grand vizier's hat. My imagination is that we will have
custom medicine. Right now we have mass medicine. Everybody gets the same remedy
for the same disease. Doctors already know that all gall bladder attacks are not
the same, all heart attacks are not the same, all cancers certainly are not the
same. And many of those differences have to do with what genes you were born
with and which genes, by the luck of the draw, went wrong when you smoked too
many cigarettes and stuff like this.

   What we do now is employ a generic answer, as if we are dealing with generic
diseases. And the Genome project's primary impact on health is to make it really
simple to decide which genes are in which form in a particular individual as
they wander into the hospital, and use that information to refine the treatment,
to individualize it for the actual case at hand and not one of the thousands of
different cases.

   .

   Q: So, drug cocktails might be concocted just for every specific person?

   A: That's right. So, for example, right now people ask you, ''Do you know
whether you're allergic to penicillin?'' And the answer is you may or may not
know. But it certainly should be possible to look at a person's genes, to just
take a little tiny sample somewhere and look at which genes are expressed and
say, ''Yes, this person has antibodies against penicillin. We are not going to
give this person penicillin. We're going to give him something else.''

   .

   Q: We hear this called a project to make a map. Can you make any analogies
with regular maps to illustrate how much of the job has been done and the kind
of detail you expect to get in the next 10 years?

   A: The inherited part of what you are and how you differ from other humans is
all encoded on chromosomes made of DNA. That is one of the central discoveries
of the 20th century in biology. The Human Genome Project is basically organizing
the infrastructure for finding genes on human chromosomes.

   To do that, you make a map just as you would make a map if you wanted to find
something on an acre or 100 acres or 1,000 acres of land. To find a particular
spot, and find it repeatedly, you would make a map. You would survey your acre
or 1,000 acres, relative to landmarks, to make it easy to find stuff. So that,
for example, if somebody were lost in your 1,000 acres and you wanted to find
that person, you could either send a volunteer in at random, or you could
organize the search by having each sheriff's deputy search a particular 100-yard
square. And in order to do that, you have to have a map of the territory to give
each of the sheriff's deputies so that they know where to look.

   What we're in the business of doing is finding disease-causing genes, of
which there are many. They cause both rare, obscure diseases and very common
diseases, like cancer. To find those genes, you want to have the same kind of
map that you would have to find a lost dog or a lost child on 1,000 acres of
woods.

   .

   Q: How well is this map now drawn? How much detail do you expect to get?
Please extend that metaphor of a normal map.

   A: The map is actually more than a metaphor. What is being produced is
literally a map in every sense of the word. But where we are now is that the
infrastructure is in place to be able to find any gene to within about half a
million bases (molecular units) out of 3 billion. So that's roughly one part in
10,000. That is where we are now. We know roughly where the genes are. The
immediate goal is to go five- to 10-fold better than that.

   Now the ultimate goal is to get the actual sequence of all 3 billion bases.
And under those circumstances we will know, molecule by molecule, where each of
the proteins that makes up our body is made, and on which chromosome (is the
gene for the protein), and stuff like that. Then the goal is going to be to
understand what all of those proteins do. And we only understand a tiny fraction
of the proteins at the moment.

   .

   Q: From your personal point of view, what are the Human Genome Project's
potential payoffs for science?

   A: Well, the payoff for science is already quite obvious. When methods for
finding disease genes, such as studying inheritance patterns in families, were
first brought into use in the early 1980s, it was estimated that once you found
a gene like the one for cystic fibrosis on chromosome seven, it would cost
somewhere between two and five years and $ 50 million to actually get the gene
and its sequence in your hand. And now, this is a graduate student program
project that would cost considerably less than $ 1 million.

   It's very much like the difference between driving to Butte, Mont., now as
opposed to the way Lewis and Clark got to the same place. The first time is
really hard and thereafter it gets easier.

   .

   Q: How will this help an individual enhance his health or prevent disease?

   A: It really comes in two stages. The first stage is the diagnostic stage.
For example, it is well known that certain kinds of cancer run in families.
Usually, once you have the genes in hand, it is possible in those families to
distinguish one by one which individuals are at risk and which individuals are
at no more risk than the rest of the population. There's good news and bad news
about that.

   The good news, of course, is for people who, for example, don't have any
higher risk of colon cancer than anybody else. They don't have to be examined
every few months. And the other good news is that those who are at risk will be
given the kind of care that is required to catch it as early as possible. The
bad news is that lots of people will learn things where there is not much you
can do. In other inherited diseases, knowing in advance doesn't help at all. And
then you only potentially stigmatize and give people bad news about which they
can do nothing. And that's the bad aspect of it.

   The second stage is that as we understand the genes whose failure causes
diseases, we understand more about how they work. And understanding more about
how they work, we can devise therapies that wouldn't be possible before. And
those therapies are of different kinds: Those that address the protein.

CORRECTION-DATE: AUGUST 25, 1996, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

CORRECTION:

    Last week's interview with Stanford University geneticist David Botstein was
conducted by Chronicle Science Writer Charles Petit. His byline was
inadvertently omitted in some editions of The Chronicle.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2),(1-2) PHOTOS BY Deanne Fitzmaurice, The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1996 October 24, 1996


                             2718 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     August 18, 1996, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. W11

LENGTH: 10333 words

HEADLINE: Tangled Lifeline; The cord blood in a newborn's placenta looks to
researchers like a fountainhead of new lifesaving therapies.  But who owns a
baby's blood, and who should profit from it?

BYLINE: Susan Cohen

BODY:


   Two years ago, a doctor stopped Ingrid Major as she walked through a corridor
at Children's National Medical Center, where her 6-year-old son, Michael, was
being treated for leukemia. The doctor, a bone marrow transplant specialist, had
noticed that Major was pregnant. Had she heard about a new procedure? When she
gave birth in a few months, would she consider collecting and storing the blood
flowing from the placenta through the umbilical cord, in case Michael needed it?

   It so happened that Major had read an article about cord blood: That it might
be used to replace the bone marrow transplants that doctors deploy as last-ditch
weapons against the most severe blood and immune system diseases. That both cord
blood and bone marrow contain stem cells, which generate all the various types
of cells that make up blood. That a stem cell transfusion is essentially an
immune system transplant.

   The doctor who stopped Major in the hallway, Patricia Dinndorf, performed the
only cord blood transplant done so far in the D.C. area. In 1993, Dinndorf
transfused stem cells from baby Jennie Longo into her 1-year-old sister, Callie,
who suffered from an especially rare and deadly form of leukemia, which is a
cancer of the blood. The Longo family has since moved away, but on Dinndorf's
desk is a Christmas card showing both little girls, beautiful and thriving.

   Even after that gratifying success, Dinndorf would not normally recommend
storing umbilical cord blood on behalf of a child with the most common form of
leukemia, which is what Michael Major had. Not unless something put that child
at especially high risk of relapse after chemotherapy. But in the Major case
there was another factor: Michael is of mixed race. His father, Robert, a
plumbing contractor in Gaithersburg, is African American, with a touch of
Seminole. His mother's ancestry is Dutch and Indonesian. This distinctive
heritage gives Michael his silky black curls and would make it extraordinarily
difficult to match the proteins on the surface of his cells with anyone else's.

   At Children's they have seen more than one child die while waiting for a bone
marrow transplant, especially African American and racially mixed children. They
have seen others endure an extra round of chemotherapy to buy time during the
desperate wait for a match, and watched parents on a wild ride of hope and
despair. In spite of recruiting efforts, the National Marrow Donor Program still
lacks enough donors, particularly those who are black, Hispanic or Asian.
African Americans are especially difficult to match because of their mixed
lineage, a legacy of slavery.

   And so the Majors didn't really need to think much about Dinndorf's
suggestion to collect something that otherwise would be thrown away and that one
day might offer Michael's only chance at life. When Martina Christina Major was
born on September 1, 1994, the obstetrician, using a kit and instructions
supplied by Children's, delivered the healthy girl. Then, before delivering the
placenta, he inserted a needle into the umbilical cord and withdrew as much
blood as he could. It was, Ingrid Major recalls, "very painless, very quick."
The tiny sample was placed in a special box and hand-delivered to Children's.

   So far, Michael takes a pill every day and visits the hospital every month,
but he is in remission and doing all the things that an 8-year-old boy enjoys:
rollerblading, bicycling, playing street hockey. He seems not to think of his
disease, though his parents think of it daily.

   To his mother, the stored cord blood represents a reassuring thought. "If
Michael should ever need it and if there's trouble getting a matched bone
marrow, we have this option," she says. "Right now it's in deep freeze on dry
ice in Children's Hospital. It's like insurance."

   This being the 1990s, there are plenty of people who would like to make a
profit by selling that insurance to every new parent in America. In fact, behind
the hallway encounter that led the Majors to place their hopes for their son in
a freezer full of cord blood lies a complex and controversial tale of medical
technology and ethics in the Biotech Age. It's a story about the evolving role
of commerce and government in research and treatment. It's also about society's
embryonic attempt to strike a balance between the rapid delivery of innovation
and the unrestrained marketing of fear.

   BREAK In the Biotech Age, researchers can transfer genes from people to
animals and organs from animals to people. They can bioengineer tomatoes or mice
to specification. They can find a tribesman in the Papua New Guinea jungle who
is infected with a benign variety of leukemia-causing virus, patent his blood
and use it to grow a cell line in a Washington lab, hoping to develop a vaccine
against deadlier versions of the disease. Each week another group of scientists
declares yet another piece of the human genome deciphered. A company urges women
to buy a test telling them whether they harbor the gene that increases the
likelihood they'll develop breast cancer. Other genetic screening tests, whether
for alcoholism or Alzheimer's, may also hit the market long before the cures.
Doctors are experimenting with gene therapy -- so far with mixed results -- but,
at some point, will almost certainly be able to tinker with the physical
qualities that we pass on to our children.

   Each of these innovations stirs up abundant hopes and agonizing issues: What
privacy rights apply to medical information? Should society guarantee fair
access to treatment? What are the consequences of turning the human body into a
commodity? Even in a society of Solomons, it would be difficult to decide which
of the things we ultimately can do we should do.

   But not only do we not have King Solomon, we don't have a centralized health
care system or any federal agency charged with regulating medical ethics to make
these decisions. We do have the most technologically advanced and
profit-oriented health care in the industrialized world. So where do the social
and ethical questions raised by new medical technologies get answered? So far,
by a varying combination of scientists, doctors, patients, courts, legislatures,
regulators, professional organizations, hospital review boards, insurance
companies and marketing departments.

   The controversy over cord blood is just one prime example of predicaments
emerging in an era when medical technologies fly out at us, challenging our
values over and over, ready or not.

   That's because placentas and umbilical cords, once thrown away as casually as
clippings from a haircut, suddenly look like the stuff of which both medical
miracles and profits are made. Even as the earliest successful transplants took
place, companies began marketing the idea of banking cord blood to expectant
parents using videos and brochures illustrated by soft-focus pictures of mothers
and infants, and lines like these:

   "One of nature's few guarantees.  DON'T THROW IT AWAY! "

   "Your new choice. A potentially lifesaving decision."

   "Cord blood, once discarded as useless, now can be described as priceless . .
."

   For a processing fee and yearly payments adding up to several thousand
dollars, any parents can have their newborn's cord blood collected and stored
indefinitely in the deep freeze, just in case. Childhood leukemias might be
rare, one brochure concedes, but cancer still is the leading cause of death
among children 1 to 14. Another company notes that 1 in 2.5 people get invasive
cancer over a lifetime, implying that what's stored away now could prove a
lifesaver in adulthood. Placental stem cells might be used to cure a growing
list not just of cancers but of inherited blood and immune disorders. Perhaps a
mother with breast cancer could save her own life with her baby's cord blood,
one company suggests -- not mentioning that there is no evidence for this. Stem
cells might be used for gene therapy. The sales pitches stress that whatever the
future holds, cord blood can only be collected in the 15 minutes after birth.
It's a point tailor-made for ad copy about once-in-a-lifetime chances.

   And the future is, indeed, promising. The first cord blood transplant in the
United States only took place in 1990. Since then, there have already been more
than 200, for diseases ranging from childhood leukemias to deadly inherited
anemias. The results encouraged the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute --
a part of the National Institutes of Health -- to launch a $ 30 million study
that will include the establishment of a handful of centers to bank cord blood
from donors for use by anyone who needs it, in what may be the beginnings of a
public system akin to blood banks. The same study will fund transplant centers.
No one knows how many private banks have sprung up, but there are at least four,
with more entrepreneurs poised to jump in. There is already competition in the
delivery suite, like a rush for biological gold.

   But while cord blood transplants are full of potential and moving fast, many
more questions remain to be answered than the private placental bank brochures
imply: scientific questions such as how long can a sample be frozen and remain
usable; and what's the smallest amount that works; and since so little is
collected compared with bone marrow, can transplants be done successfully in
adults? And ethical questions. Who owns the blood in an umbilical cord? Who gets
to use it? If it is so valuable, should anyone be paid for it? Who should be
told the results of screening for infectious and genetic diseases, the most
private information there is on the future of a newborn, whose future all lies
ahead?

   Many other medical technologies provoke similar questions. Yet it remains
unclear how and where questions like these get asked on behalf of society, let
alone answered.

   The resulting controversy about how one human body product is moving into the
marketplace is "a paradigm to some degree," says Michael Grodin, a pediatrician
and ethicist at Boston University's Center for Law and Medicine. Once,
scientists in search of knowledge (and reputations) pushed medical technology
forward. Now, Grodin says, "money drives this whole system -- products looking
for a market." As recently as four or five years ago, ethicists like Grodin
devoted themselves to protecting the right of patients not to be experimented
on. But, especially since the AIDS epidemic, patients now demand instant access
to experimental drugs and procedures.

   "There's been a confluence of interests between patients who see everything
that's new and experimental as better and the company that wants you to have it
and pay for it," Grodin says. "It's like a new world."

   BREAK Most obviously, it is a world of changing relationships in medical
science. Public research funds have ebbed and venture capital has flooded in.

   In the mid-1980s, Edward Boyse, a researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center in New York City who studied stem cells in mice, called
hematologist Hal Broxmeyer into his office. Boyse had been thinking about how
umbilical cord blood might contain useful cells for transplanting. Broxmeyer
agreed, adding that cord blood might contain the earliest blood-forming cell of
all, the hematopoietic stem cell.

   The hematopoietic stem cell is a formidable name for what researchers more
informally, even reverentially, call the "mother of all blood cells." ("As close
to God as we can get," one doctor puts it.) This mommy cell in our marrow not
only generates the red cells, platelets and white cells that enable us to
breathe, to clot and to fight infection, but it reproduces itself indefinitely
over a lifetime, keeping the body awash in new blood. Researchers have found it
in mice and they know it exists in people. But no one has actually isolated a
human hematopoietic stem cell under a microscope; knowing the company it keeps,
they find the more mature cells around it and assume it's there. And, on the
basis of those markers, it's there in especially rich amounts in the blood that
pumps from the placenta to the umbilical cord.

   Broxmeyer, now a professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine,
recalls the upshot of the conversation in Boyse's office: "We were saying it
seems a shame to throw out cord blood."

   Bone marrow transplants are useful in two ways. They can introduce a source
of healthy cells to displace diseased ones in disorders involving the blood and
immune systems. And, in desperate cases of cancer in other organs, transplants
allow doctors to wield extraordinarily toxic doses of chemotherapy or radiation,
knowing they can replace the bone marrow they destroy. In a transplant, doctors
first collect marrow from a donor under general anesthesia, poking a long needle
repeatedly into the hips. They destroy the recipient's own marrow, then replace
it with the donor's, hoping the recipient's body won't reject the new stem
cells. (Even with a good match, 40 percent of patients develop a potentially
lethal reaction called graft versus host disease). If the cells engraft, the
patient survives with a new, self-renewing, presumably disease-free blood
supply. The more stem cells the better.

   Placentas looked like a yet-untapped source of this gift of life.

   So Broxmeyer spent a year and a half working out how to freeze cord blood and
defrost it so that the cells survived. Meanwhile, Boyse proved that cord blood
stem cells, like those from bone marrow, could be successfully grafted from one
mouse to another. They didn't yet know whether this would work on humans.

   To find out, "we had to pick a particular disease," Broxmeyer says. They
learned that there was a registry of families with children who had Fanconi's
anemia, a rare, inherited red blood cell disorder that typically kills a victim
by age 12 unless treated with a successful bone marrow transplant. This would be
their disease. Through the registry, they found a North Carolina couple with a
6-year-old son afflicted with Fanconi's anemia. In hopes of saving their boy
with matching bone marrow, the couple had conceived another child earlier than
planned, and were expecting a baby. Now the researchers had their patient. In
1988, the mother gave birth to a healthy girl.

   Broxmeyer's assistant flew the frozen blood in a container of liquid nitrogen
on a separate seat next to him to France, where the researchers had located a
doctor with an impressive track record of treating Fanconi's anemia with
transplants. The boy's own blood-forming cells had been purposely killed off
with toxic chemotherapy and radiation so that they could be replaced by his
newborn sister's healthy ones. Broxmeyer flew over to supervise the thawing of
the umbilical blood collected at the birth. "It had never been done before. In
order to transplant somebody you have to almost kill them. If you don't have the
right cells to put back, that patient's going to die." In his Paris hotel room
Broxmeyer was nervous. "It's very scary when you're doing something that's never
been done before. The night before I woke up in a sweat, thinking they unfroze
the cells and they were all dead." But this only happened in his nightmare. The
cells thawed. The transplant grafted. The boy lived, cured, and his infant
sister was spared the painful procedure that would have been used to collect her
bone marrow had her cord blood not been available.

   Now the medical research could really take off -- and the profit-making could
begin.

   Until the 1980s, it was uncommon for academic researchers to be involved with
private companies. But all that changed with the discovery and commercial
application of recombinant DNA techniques. "Most of those companies were started
by scientists in the early '80s," Broxmeyer notes. Those
scientists-turned-entrepreneurs also stampeded to the patent office in order to
attract investors, outraging other researchers worried about the traditionally
free flow of information. (Even though no one has isolated the human
hematopoietic stem cell, it has been patented by a Stanford University
immunologist who founded SyStemix Inc., a company using the cells to develop
therapies. The patent identifies the elusive cell by the markers around it. When
SyStemix went public, the researcher made a widely reported $ 24 million.)

   Broxmeyer, Boyse and other Sloan-Kettering scientists -- including Lewis
Thomas, the late biologist renowned for his philosophical essays -- went to
financier Rodman Rockefeller and proposed the idea of a for-profit cord blood
bank. They named the company Biocyte Corp.; took out patents on the collecting,
storage and use of cord blood; arranged to use the facilities of a Pittsburgh
blood center; and began to introduce the public to the newly exploited virtues
of placentas. Biocyte officials didn't patent the process in order to impede
others from doing research, Broxmeyer says. "They just didn't want someone else
to start a company and make money."

   In various metropolitan areas, including Washington, couples began to receive
videos and brochures, and pediatricians and obstetricians began to receive both
questions and complaints. When one recent father -- writing with outrage in The
Washington Post Magazine in January about the Biocyte video he and his wife were
mailed -- phoned local doctors, they condemned private cord blood banking for
exploiting parents' fears.

   "I know there was criticism," Broxmeyer says. Pediatricians noted that cord
blood transplants from siblings were proving themselves primarily for treating a
few extremely rare genetic blood diseases and leukemia, which strikes only 1 in
10,000 children. (Paul McCurdy, director of the Blood Resources Program at the
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, recently calculated the chances of a child
needing a transplant for leukemia at 1 in 200,000, when he subtracted those
cured by chemotherapy.) Even in the most awful eventuality, doctors might not
want to use the child's own, or autologous, frozen cells. An autologous
transfusion might contain cells which already harbor the disease or the
propensity for it. Also, autologous cells don't perceive the patient's body as
foreign and attack, which is good because it eliminates graft versus host
disease but bad because such an attack would also kill malignant cells. So, the
question remains whether a child receiving an autologous transplant for leukemia
might be more prone to relapse than if he received cells from an unrelated
donor.

   These were complex issues that didn't make their way into Biocyte's
marketing. But Broxmeyer defends the autologous banking concept.

   "It's a service that I think is a very valuable service. People say what if
the kid never needs it -- I say great, I would hope the kid never needs it. But
what happens if the kid does need it and you can't get a match? I think there's
a place for autologous banks." As for the price Biocyte charged, $ 1,500, plus a
$ 75 annual storage fee: "Nobody's gonna do this for nothing."

   There were, however, plenty of people willing to do it for something, now
that the scientists had pointed out the potential.

   BREAK In Washington, two of the agencies involved in promoting the nation's
health spotted a very different potential.

   At the Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, scientists were especially interested
in the promise cord blood held for unrelated donors. Headquartered in Bethesda,
the institute's primary mission is to fund and promote research having to do
with hearts, lungs and blood. At one point the agency also administered the
National Marrow Donor Program, which was established by Congress. So scientists
there knew that a bone marrow harvest is painful, time-consuming, and expensive,
costing about $ 25,000. Not infrequently, people who put their names on the
donor list in a spirit of generosity back out when faced with undergoing the
arduous procedure for a stranger. In contrast, placentas and umbilical cords are
simply tossed away by the thousands every day, all over the country, seemingly
free for the asking.

   In other words, the same accessibility that made cord blood an attractive
business for entrepreneurs made it potentially valuable to the public.

   Placental blood would carry fewer infections. Additionally, stem cells are
not only more plentiful in cord blood than in bone marrow, but they are more
naive -- meaning that they might not attack the new host with the same ferocity
as mature cells, lowering the heartbreaking rate of lethal graft versus host
disease. And most exciting of all, because of this immaturity, cord blood
transplants might not have to match as closely as bone marrow. Instead of
needing hundreds of thousands of names on a donor list, perhaps tens of
thousands of units on ice would serve the whole country.

   At the institute, scientists were well aware of the problem with recruiting
donors, especially among minorities, which had led to sometimes agonized debates
over how to nurture the fragile spirit of giving and whether donors should be
paid. Now here was an exciting new source of precious stem cells -- but
literally frozen out of the public domain, set aside by families that can afford
to pay the costs.

   In 1992, the Heart, Lung and Blood Institute funded a pilot program
establishing a public cord blood bank at the New York Blood Center. Women from
the heavily minority communities around Mount Sinai Medical Center who came to
deliver their babies were solicited to donate placentas. They were asked
detailed questions about their ethnicity and medical histories. The blood was
typed for transplant matching and stored for anyone in medical need of it.

   Researchers assured the mothers that no names would be attached to their
donations. As the only public "unrelated donor bank" -- where blood is stored
for use by people who are not relatives -- the New York Blood Center soon began
to supply cord blood for patients from around the country. The institute tracked
the results, seeking answers to some of the basic scientific questions --
starting with developing the most effective storage and collection methods.

   Paul McCurdy, the doctor who oversaw this pilot project, was also aware of
the brochures touting the miracle of cord blood. That is one reason the agency
moved as quickly as it could, he says. "Many of us at the institute worried that
you'd have a whole legion of believers out there before you had the data on
whether it was good or bad."

   Meanwhile, not far away from McCurdy's office, the Food and Drug
Administration had its own reasons to wish things were not moving quite so fast.
In an era when patients organize and demand access to the newest treatments, "a
whole legion of believers" is not something to take lightly in Washington. The
FDA is under intense pressure from industry and Congress to speed up access to
new medical technology. But it is also charged with ensuring safety and
efficacy. The potential they worried about most at the FDA was that thawed stem
cells could kill someone.

   Around 1993, says Liana Harvath, chief of the laboratory of cellular
hematology at the agency's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, the FDA
began getting phone calls: from prospective parents complaining they felt
harassed, or wondering if the advertising claims were true; from doctors being
quizzed by patients who received the videos; from researchers worried that
dangerous practices could lead to some disaster and stop the field in its
tracks.

   "A lot of people were very concerned about the commercialization of an area
before there's a clear body of evidence on safety and efficacy," Harvath says.
Most blood products, she points out, are stored for 30 days or less, not for a
decade or more. There wasn't "any data yet to prove it would be viable in 10
years." The agency worried about tracking systems to ensure the right person
gets the right unit -- a complicated undertaking in a large bank and literally a
matter of life and death. They were concerned about bacterial contamination and
the chances of passing on not just infectious diseases like AIDS and hepatitis
and cytomegalovirus (CMV), but genetic ones. "There are groups collecting and
storing this that really have no expertise," she says.

   Since the AIDS epidemic, which hit blood banking like a left hook, the public
has demanded more and more assurance of safety. Memories of having to unload
freezers full of blood products and retroactively test them or throw them away
are still fresh. In the last 10 years, the FDA has stepped in and heavily
regulated blood banks, including autologous ones, and FDA Commissioner David
Kessler has pledged a safe blood supply. Cord blood, too, could transmit disease
-- especially because the donor is a newborn, literally without a medical
history, and genetic disorders might not manifest themselves for years.

   In contrast to these tightly controlled blood products, bone marrow has
escaped unregulated, although it can also potentially transmit disease. Bone
marrow transplants were developed in an earlier era, when ethical decisions were
more likely to be left to individual physicians and researchers; when faith in
the wisdom of doctors and the beneficence of progress abounded, and patient
protections did not. A researcher tried the first bone marrow transplants on
patients in the 1960s, personally called a moratorium when a series of them
died, experimented more on dogs till he felt ready to try again, then finally
succeeded with human beings. He won a Nobel prize.

   Because the National Marrow Donor Program was later established by an act of
Congress (in 1986), it does not fall under FDA jurisdiction. Any doctor is
allowed to do a bone marrow transplant. The stem cells are, in some hospitals,
still processed in research labs rather than in blood banks, with a cocktail of
unlicensed compounds that come out of cans labeled: "Not for Human Use." Some of
these compounds, used for keeping the cells viable before the transplant, are
animal products -- including bovine serum -- raising fears they may be
transmitting viruses like the notorious "mad cow disease" across species.

   At least with cord blood, the agency had a chance to regulate safety from the
very beginning, before risky practices became entrenched. "It's extremely early.
We want to develop it in the best way," Harvath says. Typically, the FDA waits
until it gets a complaint that someone has been harmed before it acts on a new
procedure. "In this case we've tried to be proactive."

   The agency had the option of regulating cord blood like blood banking, where
the establishments are inspected and licensed to ensure safe procedures. Or like
blood products, where the product is licensed to guarantee purity and efficacy.
Or like a pharmaceutical, where Investigational New Drug applications and
lengthy controlled trials are required before any licensing. The FDA needed more
information. An agency task force was formed, consisting of lawyers, consumers,
doctors and scientists.

   At the same time, more companies were plunging into the cord blood banking
business, with marketing budgets to create whole legions of believers.

   BREAK One of those companies was Viacord, a Boston-based firm started in 1993
by a Harvard MBA married to the wealthy owner of Boston Beer. Earlier this year,
Viacord quietly took over Biocyte's clients. Biocyte, drained by a prolonged,
expensive and unsuccessful defense of its patents, departed the umbilical
banking business it created.

   Hal Broxmeyer, who stored the units for the first five American cord blood
transplants in his laboratory freezer, now consults for Viacord and discusses
the pioneering days of Biocyte somewhat wistfully. "We did something that we're
proud of, we did something good. Yeah, it would have been nice to make some
money at it. But every time a kid is cured we know it was because of us, even if
no one else knows it."

   Commercialization pushed experimentation with cord blood transplants along
faster, Broxmeyer believes, and few dispute this. What they dispute is whether
speed has come at too high a price. The perspective differs mightily if you're a
parent of a cancer-stricken child running out of options or a federal official
charged with protecting the nation from unproven therapies; if you're a
bioethicist worried about broad social issues or an entrepreneur gambling
millions or a researcher staking a career on a field. Broxmeyer, who has both a
professional and financial interest in seeing things move forward, fears that
the FDA will apply the brakes too hard; but even he believes some braking is in
order, when he hears about the autologous placental banks popping up in various
parts of the country. "There are a lot of people out there doing bad things,
it's scary . . . There are companies who just want to freeze the blood and don't
care; they don't test it to see if the cells are viable or did you freeze and
kill them, and is there bacterial or viral contamination. There are companies
that are just out there to make money." He hears that some collect only 5 to 10
ccs of blood and still charge to store it when "you can't transplant somebody
with that amount."

   Viacord is maintaining the blood Biocyte stored in Pittsburgh. But in another
of the academic/private enterprise arrangements increasingly common in the
Biotech Age, it also banks cord blood for its own clients at the University of
Cincinnati's Hoxworth Blood Center. "There are a lot of good research ideas that
are being underfunded," says Hoxworth medical director Jay Menitove, explaining
how he helped talk the university into accepting the contract. "Viacord came
along. There were things we'd planned but had no funding for." Viacord could
"make a buck" and make use of Hoxworth's credibility in its marketing.
Meanwhile, the university's researchers would get to be players in an emerging
technology.

   An increasing number of hospitals where there are transplanters -- who also
want to be players, as well as to save lives -- are keeping cord blood units in
freezers on behalf of patients like Michael Major, victims of leukemia and other
diseases who have newborn siblings. (Georgetown University Medical Center does
this, as well as Children's Hospital). Some hospitals contract with Viacord to
do this for their patients. And there are uncounted new companies springing up
in Biocyte and Viacord's footsteps, since the field has been unregulated so far.

   In California about a year and a half ago Paul Billings, an internist and
medical geneticist who administers some programs at the Veterans Administration
Hospital at Stanford, met two men socially who were biotech entrepreneurs in
search of a startup. They asked his opinion on a list of possible ventures.

   "I told them they were dumb ideas," he says -- except for one. Looking into
the literature on the potential uses of cord blood, he told the entrepreneurs
"this was likely to be a winner." Billings is not a hematologist, transplanter
or blood banker, so in some ways he was an unlikely adviser but in other ways he
was an interesting choice. He has written extensively on the potential social
misuse of genetic information, most recently speaking on behalf of two soldiers
who were court-martialed for refusing to contribute to a military DNA bank.

   So, looking at cord blood banking, he advised the businessmen that there were
"a lot of interesting issues which might be called social, political and
economic around the questions: Who owns the cells? Should there be a market in
these cells? Privacy issues." These questions were not insurmountable, he told
them, but they needed to be addressed by the nascent industry, and for a very
pragmatic reason. Otherwise, consumers would not buy the product. An example, he
points out, has been the attempt to market genetic testing. People haven't
plunked down their money in droves because they fear the intimate information
could wind up in the hands of employers or insurers. So Billings advised that
the issues around placental banking "were issues that many industries were
beginning to grapple with and that they needed to be dealt with from the
beginning." The California entrepreneurs listened to him, and started Cord Blood
Registry (CBR), a privately held company that plans to make a public stock
offering this year.

   But along with this for-profit business, Billings persuaded them to add a
charitable side, an unrelated donor bank like the one at the New York Blood
Center but privately funded. Billings now heads this nonprofit effort, called
the International Cord Blood Foundation, to which CBR donates staff, space and a
percentage of the fees it collects from autologous banking.

   While the foundation could look like a public relations gimmick for CBR,
Billings insists there is more involved: a "bioecology" issue, "the wastage of a
human product which there are clear indications has substantial value in terms
of saving people's lives."

   In his office at the VA Hospital, on the lapel of his navy blue blazer, he
wears a button with the words "Cord Waste" and a red slash through them. The
publicity for Cord Blood Registry informs parents that they may choose to bank
privately with CBR or to give their baby's cord blood to the foundation's
unrelated donor bank. Either way, the units will be stored at the University of
Arizona. Families are told to send the blood they collect to the bank, using a
carrier such as Federal Express. Banking privately will cost them $ 1,090
upfront and $ 75 per year.

   Donating cord blood to the foundation is free, though would-be Good
Samaritans are warned that since collection and storage is expensive, they may
be notified that there is no money available to process their donation and asked
for a monetary contribution.

   There is only one "wrong" decision they are told, and that is to throw the
umbilical cord blood away.

   Billings, who takes pride on having sold CBR on this anti-waste campaign,
says he is only bowing to the realities of American medicine in the 1990s,
whether you like those realities or not. But he believes government can no
longer afford to pay for something as costly as establishing a cord blood
banking system large enough to serve the whole country, and that bureaucrats are
relying on antiquated thinking if they try. In this way, getting CBR or other
autologous banking companies to finance an unrelated donor bank isn't much
different from getting Apple or Microsoft to pay for computers in schools.

   "There's a segment of the market, like there is in all of biotechnology,
which is more or less entitled, wealthy people who basically want to have
everything for themselves," he says. "So they want every genetic test and they
want gold-plated ultrasound machines on their abdomens and they want to save
their cord blood . . . They don't care whether the chances of them using it is
one in a million or one in ten million or one in a thousand." Let this "boutique
side" of the market pay for those who cannot afford private banking, Billings
argues. Ultimately he forecasts that a market will develop in stem cells and
that the unrelated donor bank will "be funded by other industries who want to
use this product."

   Specifically, biotech companies might pay for cord blood to use in gene
therapy, assuming that a new gene could be inserted into stem cells and
delivered into patients with a defective one. If this becomes reality rather
than theory, the new gene would be replicated over and over by the self-renewing
mother of all blood cells. [See article, Page 27.]

   Ethical questions about gene therapy will loom large in the coming years, but
Billings is already dealing with some of the issues surrounding cord blood now.
His foundation keeps the names of donors, who must agree to be contacted later
for more information on the baby's health, including screening for genes that
will be discovered in the future. Since that kind of information could be a
"gold mine for third parties," like insurance companies, Billings acknowledges,
the consent forms he has written assure that "they would have to break our legs
to get any of this information out to anybody."

   The public can rely on the private sector to deal with such issues, Billings
argues, because industry is recognizing that dealing with public doubts and
fears involving new technologies is the only way to sell a product. "Just
because there's money to be made and we're living in a market-driven society . .
. you can't simply jam the stuff down people's throats."

   The International Cord Blood Foundation's publicist, Larry Andreini, bubbles
with plans to address any public doubts by organizing a "town-hall-type meeting"
with "a Larry King type" moderator. Also, he plans to find a "Cicely Tyson type
person" for the board of directors to reach out to minorities.

   BREAK But should it be left to private industry to hash out the social issues
raised by new medical technologies, on the basis of which marketing strategies
work?

   What's the alternative? Although neither the FDA nor the Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute is charged with overseeing medical ethics, both agencies found
themselves bumping up against questions that were as much social as scientific.

   By the time the federal funding for the New York Blood Center pilot project
came to an end last year, it was clear that cord blood stem cells were likely to
become part of the medical arsenal. While only a handful of such transplants
took place before 1992, the New York bank supplied the material for more than
100 in just the next three years. This evidence suggests that cord blood does
not need to match as closely as bone marrow, though it is still too early to
know whether the lower incidence of graft versus host disease also means more
patients will relapse. A dozen or so cord blood transplants have been tried on
adults -- and the early results look promising. Some genetic diseases of the
blood and immune systems have been treated in children, as well as leukemias and
other cancers. In the first attempt at using this for gene therapy, a Los
Angeles doctor took cord blood at the births of three babies with a fatal immune
system defect known as adenine deaminase deficiency (ADA), inserted normal genes
into the stem cells, and transplanted them back into each baby at 3 days old.
For these children, too, there have been encouraging preliminary results.

   These experiments encouraged the private banks, too, filled their consumer
kits with heartwarming stories of children cheating death, and added to their
list of claims.

   Last November, the FDA announced that it intended to regulate cord blood.
First on the agency's list of reasons: the "vigorous commercial activity in cord
blood stem cell banking."

   Impressed by the potential shown by the New York pilot project, the Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute also decided on a bold move, announcing that it would
fund out of its own budget two to four unrelated donor banks and six to eight
transplant centers in a five-year study. These would provide the regulators with
the scientific information they need to write rules about the best collection
and storage methods. Clearly some doctors hoped they would also become
permanent, and keep cord blood from going only to families with an extra few
thousand dollars.

   But how would these publicly funded banks, too, handle informed consent,
genetic screening, privacy, the issue of ownership, fair access? Not everybody
in the field was comfortable with the way the New York Blood Center recruited
donors during labor, or separated their names from their donations so no
follow-up could be done once the family left the hospital.

   Jointly, says the FDA's Liana Harvath, "we decided to pull the pioneers in
the field together to discuss safety and ethical issues."

   On December 13, more than 200 participants met, in an auditorium in Bethesda,
called together in a "Workshop on Cord Blood Stem Cells" co-sponsored by the
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and the FDA. In the audience were researchers,
blood bankers, transplanters, representatives of companies in the autologous
banking business and those considering the business, and companies using stem
cells to devise therapies.

   Among the speakers, perhaps the most thought-provoking was Jeremy Sugarman,
assistant professor of medicine and co-director of the Program on Medical Ethics
at Duke University. Sugarman lugged a suitcase with him, carrying 300 copies of
an article he'd co-authored and which had appeared in the Journal of the
American Medical Association that very day, titled: "Ethical Aspects of Banking
Placental Blood for Transplantation." He'd been drawn to the topic by
pediatrician Joanne Kurtzberg, who has done more cord blood transplants than
anyone in the United States, and who sought his advice when she wanted to
establish an unrelated donor bank at Duke. "She wasn't finding anything in the
literature that gave her guidance," Sugarman says.

   As an ethicist Sugarman is intrigued by the issues cord blood banking raises,
not least because when his sister had a baby she received a mailing from a
placental bank. What struck Sugarman was that "this stuff might be used a lot"
and also that many of the same issues were involved as when HIV first emerged
and blood was screened for the virus. Only here, he says, "it's an unborn person
giving consent." And the information collected on cord blood is even more
far-reaching. "If you know someone has HIV, you know about them. If you know
someone has the gene for breast cancer, you know about their entire family."

   Five years from now, as more of the human genetic code is unraveled, do you
tell parents that their child is bearing the gene for some disease, especially
if it's a disease for which there is yet no treatment? "I think the most
interesting thing is how simple it seems at the outset and how difficult it
becomes the more you look at it," he says. So he was delighted to attend a
scientific meeting where these issues would be discussed. "For the first time in
my life, I've publicly applauded the FDA because the conference included ethics
from the outset."

   The first issue Sugarman addressed at the workshop was ownership. Hospitals
traditionally assumed placentas were theirs to dispose of. "However, as the
material becomes more and more valuable" the ownership claims "become a little
more complicated," Sugarman noted. The infants have a claim, since biologically
the blood is theirs. What if the stem cells were used to save a sibling or a
parent, or were given away, and were not there for the child they came from? If
a family fell behind in payment of fees to a private bank, the bank might claim
a right to sell the cord blood and recover costs. For that matter, the parents
might want to sell it to help pay their obstetrician bills, although: "We sort
of get a little queasy when we talk about buying and selling organs."

   Given the audience, most people there already knew that the United States,
along with other major industrialized nations, has agreed not to allow doctors
to use organs obtained from paid donors, in a not-entirely-successful effort to
keep the Third World from becoming a biological flea market for richer
societies. Instead, U.S. hospitals are required by law to request organ
donations from the dying, also less than fully successfully. Paid donors have
been phased out of most -- but not all -- segments of the blood supply system as
well, because people desperate enough to sell blood are more likely to carry
hepatitis and other diseases. Yet many attendees had reason to know that as a
society we are not consistent. Sperm donors can be paid. Our courts allow
patents on human cells and genes, and people make money with patents --
including one California doctor who established a company to manufacture
pharmaceuticals using cells taken from one of his patients without the man's
knowledge. An appeals court ruled the patient had the right to share the profits
from the products of his body; the California Supreme Court said he did not, but
that he did have the right to be told what his discarded tissue would be used
for.

   Where in this confusion over whether body parts and products can be
commodities do cord blood stem cells belong? Sugarman argued his personal hope
that they would come to be regarded primarily as gifts, that society would
exercise its claim to ownership on behalf of the common good.

   It is clear they can no longer be regarded as waste. "They have a value,"
Sugarman said. "They have a medical value. They have a commercial value. They
have moral weight."

   So what constitutes informed consent, which obviously must come from the
parents during one of the most fearful, excited, vulnerable and exhausting
moments of their lives? Mothers should not be asked to store or donate cord
blood, Sugarman told the crowd, "if they are in the middle of probably, you
know, 10 centimeters of cervical dilation and pushing." And obstetricians or
hospital staff -- who may have a stake in collecting units for either public or
private banks -- should not coerce the about-to-be parents financially or with
scare tactics. "They cannot be coerced that 'I will not deliver your baby here
unless you give us that blood.' "

   Next, he tackled screening. To keep the cord blood supply safe, doctors must
be able to check on the baby down the line and make sure it is thriving, which
means that, contrary to the practice at the New York Blood Center, the stored
material in unrelated donor banks should be identified by name. And, as new
tests become available, doctors will also want to reexamine the stored material,
especially as the Human Genome Project identifies more and more genes. "It is
quite conceivable that there is going to be some disease that we can screen for
where there is going to be a cure that is available, and someone is going to say
should we look backwards," Sugarman said. "The question is, what is our
responsibility going to be to people in the future to cure preventable disease?"

   But once names are attached, privacy and confidentiality must be protected.
He referred to the "tragic social history" of the early AIDS epidemic when
people were denied housing and jobs, and of sickle cell anemia screening in the
1970s, when African Americans who tested positive not just for the disease but
for sickle cell trait lost opportunities in the military and elsewhere. This
experience left a bitter taste and a distrust of doctors who come around asking
sensitive questions. Though scientists do not yet know which genetic diseases
they will screen cord blood for, one certainly will be sickle cell anemia, which
could be inadvertently transferred in a transplant of hematopoietic stem cells.

   When it came to the question and answer sessions, most of the questions
concerned the issues raised by Sugarman. Over and over people tiptoed around how
to recruit and track minority donors, which depends on asking questions for
motives that might easily be misinterpreted, and collecting financially valuable
information that could easily be misused. Especially given the "taboo," as one
questioner put it, of paying for donations.

   Would offering incentives like well-baby checkups or even bus fare count as
payment?

   Doesn't insisting on following up on people limit donations "from communities
where people are hard to locate?" (Sugarman responded to that one: "I think we
are making a lot of assumptions about who will come back and who will not come
back . . . People continue to surprise us.")

   And the jackpot question: How does society get involved in these decisions?

   "Society probably owns this as a gift and as a good, and not as a commodity.
I think that is what . . . is going to eventually fall out of this -- and
whether we need a complicated series of law cases and horrible cases to get
there, I am not sure. I hope we do not."

   By the end of the day there was no consensus on the answers to the social
questions surrounding this new technology and no clear idea about how the
answers would eventually be arrived at. One lone speaker, Naomi Luban, the
doctor in charge of the blood bank at Children's Hospital, spoke up for the
newborn baby, pointing out that there is increasing evidence that premature
infants and those small for their gestational age thrive better when
obstetricians delay clamping the umbilical cord -- a practice, widely used in
Europe, which would preclude collecting cord blood. In the face of all the
excitement over stem cells, Luban also dared to suggest that even in normal
births the blood might better be reserved in case the baby needed a safe
transfusion during the first few weeks of life, rather than processed and stuck
in a freezer indefinitely. What she hated to see was the brawl developing over
blood that everyone suddenly recognizes as valuable, but which has been valuable
all along -- to the infant.

   The day felt for the most part like a well-meaning intellectual group grope.
But there was one moment of tension. A member of the audience identifying
herself as Cynthia Fisher from Boston asked whether the informed consent for the
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute donor banks should include letting a mother know
that she could be storing cord blood for her own family rather than giving it
away.

   A D.C. area obstetrician shot back in anger: "I think it was somewhat
inappropriate for someone from a commercial setting to introduce themselves from
Boston and talk about putting things about other choices" into the consent forms
for public cord blood banks -- when the purpose of setting up those banks is "to
increase the supply of potential donors, particularly for minority settings."

   Later Fisher responded that she was proud to identify herself as the
president and chief financial officer for Viacord.

   "Dear FDA:

   ". . . My husband and I had decided as soon as I got pregnant that we would
bank our child's cord blood with Biocyte when she/he arrived. We had read
several articles discussing the process that could allow us to give her a 'life
insurance' policy that was like no other . . .

   "I received a letter from Viacord informing me of the intent of the FDA to
regulate the cord blood as a new drug. This would mean Rachel's blood would be
unavailable for over 10 years! So, our choice to protect our daughter could be
made useless! . . ."

   "To Whom It May Concern,

   ". . . I am appalled by the fact that the FDA would attempt to interfere with
a procedure which saves lives and SAVES insurance companies millions of dollars
. . . Could it possibly be some type of moneymaking venture to profit the FDA?"

   Liana Harvath has been hearing from the legions of believers for months, as
the FDA held a public comment period -- then extended it -- on the proposed
regulations for cord blood. The phone rings almost constantly in her narrow
office on the NIH campus, its shelves lined with books on cell classification,
in a '50s building with green tile walls.

   Harvath is a cell biologist in her forties, with a Midwestern diction and
blunt way of speaking. Bluntly, she puts the agency's position this way:

   "Cord blood does not have a track record for safety, nor does it have a track
record for efficacy."

   What the FDA has proposed is to treat cord blood just like any new drug.
Anybody collecting and storing it for ultimate use in humans would be required
to file an Investigational New Drug application. Eventually, when there is more
information, cord blood stem cells would be licensed as a product. The
establishments collecting and storing them would be licensed as well.

   The first problem being, what exactly is the product? Presumably it is some
volume of the hematopoietic stem cells, or mother cells, but nobody yet knows
the smallest volume that will work. "We can't define the product," Harvath says.
"The question then arises, how well established is the methodology, how well
established is the therapy that's being used?"

   It may seem odd to the public that human blood should be considered a drug,
but Harvath notes that many blood products require FDA licensing. Until the
agency can collect enough information to establish licensing standards, the new
drug approach "is the only mechanism we have that will allow people to proceed."
That means the private companies would file an application, as would a medical
center planning a cord blood transplant. "We'd say, let us know what happens
when you use it," Harvath says. Although the FDA's mission is safety, it would
also review such matters as the procedures to protect the confidentiality of the
data, the consent forms and plans for how parents might be informed if screening
turned up a genetic disease. The intention would not be to stop lifesaving
procedures, she argues -- "if an oncologist has no other choice, we are not
going to stop them" -- but to make sure banks properly collect, store and
catalogue cord blood and that transplanters keep track of what does and does not
work.

   Unfortunately for the autologous banks, however, during the development of an
Investigational New Drug companies are not permitted to promote their product.
They are not always allowed to recover costs. And they are never allowed to make
a profit.

   Harvath acknowledges that the Investigational New Drug process is perceived
as onerous, but she argues that the agency could choose to come down much harder
since shipping cord blood across state lines is already, in the FDA's view, a
violation of the Public Health Act.

   "We've received complaints from consumers that these kits have failed,"
Harvath says. Some banks tell parents to ship the blood back using commercial
carriers. "We know it's temperature sensitive. It cannot be sitting on some
loading dock at 100 degrees."

   "We could have been very heavy-handed, when people are approaching expectant
parents, telephoning them when they haven't responded." There are "false
advertising, violations of interstate commerce that we know exist."

   Finally, in exasperation, she says: "It'll take just one HIV-contaminated
unit or one genetic disease transmission and Congress will be beating down the
door saying why didn't the FDA act earlier."

   But what Congress, at the moment, is hearing from the cord blood banking
companies is that the FDA is being overzealous, attempting to put them out of
business. The companies have lobbied to add cord blood to the FDA legislation
now under consideration, and to require licensing only for the establishments
where cord blood is stored. No Investigational New Drug application. No product
license. The standards would be set by professional organizations.

   "We want it to be regulated," says Viacord founder and president Cynthia
Fisher. But the Investigational New Drug process would cost them "millions and
millions of dollars" and "definitely limit development of the field." Fisher
says the FDA is "rightfully" concerned with the practices of some companies and
that "it's important that the bad apples are dropped out of the field." But she
adds, "Let's not throw out the baby with the bath water."

   If the autologous banks get their way, the standards used would most likely
be those developed by the North American Task Force, made up of representatives
from organizations of blood bankers, transplanters and researchers. Participants
agree that standard procedures are needed, says Viacord consultant Jay Menitove,
who chaired a recent task force meeting. But that's about the extent of the
agreement so far. As chairman, he didn't attempt to force a consensus on
questions like informed consent and donor privacy. "These are societal issues
that are handled in a zillion ways," Menitove says. "I think it's too early.
We're focused on just trying to collect the best possible product for sick
patients at this time."

   While the fate of the private part of the cord blood banking industry is
still being decided, the Health, Lung and Blood Institute is moving ahead with
its five-year study and next month plans to name the cities where unrelated
donor banks will be established and the centers where transplants will be done.

   The institute intends to work out some of the broader issues with the help of
the FDA, says McCurdy, the scientist in charge. For the first months of the
study, a steering committee, including a bioethicist, will tackle some of the
basic questions. But he already knows that names of donors will be kept. "That's
an absolute."

   McCurdy also plans to provide results of infectious-disease testing to the
baby's family. If other disorders are found later, every effort would be made to
contact the family. The institute will seek the strongest protections of privacy
that it can -- perhaps adding cord blood specifically to the Transplant
Amendments Act of 1990, which levies a criminal fine and penalty for breaching
the confidentiality of a bone marrow donor.

   With cord blood potentially being the gift of life, and matches being so hard
to come by, he knows it will prove very tempting for a patient whose life was
once saved but who has relapsed to try to find the child whose cord blood stem
cells matched and plead for bone marrow. He has decided that should not be
allowed at least for the first five or 10 years of the child's life. "You put
the parent in a rather difficult position. As you get into the teenage years my
preference would be to say no."

   McCurdy also believes "it probably will be important that donors not be paid
. . . It's important as a basic issue."

   When the study is over, what then? McCurdy clearly hopes that, however it is
funded, the system of unrelated donor banks continues. If it turns out to be
true that cord blood stem cells need to match less closely than those from bone
marrow, "you may be able to cover the country with 50,000 to 100,000 cords in
the bank."

   "I personally would like to see a single system with one-stop shopping . . .
so you don't need to call 20 different banks." But he adds, realistically, "I'm
not sure we have that much in medicine that's nationally coordinated."

   In whatever system develops, if commercial autologous banks continue to
exist, he believes "they're likely to be a small part. If somebody has the
resources and they wish to put this away for a child's use or a sibling's, I
think they have the right to do this," providing they really understand how very
small the chances are they will need it and that all the answers are not yet
available.

   Paul McCurdy is a genial, red-haired 70-year-old man with a twinkle in his
eye that says there isn't much that's new to him. He remembers, as a young
doctor, sitting around with other doctors debating whether it was right to give
children with leukemia a new "magic cure" that only bought them a short
remission, and at the cost of many horrible side effects. He watched bone marrow
transplants develop, along with the advent of institutional review boards in
hospitals that decided some of the ethical questions and court cases that
decided others. Technologies that raise large ethical and social questions are
not new to the Biotech Age, he comments, "just more frequent."

   He hopes the study he is about to launch will "develop the answer to the
important questions" on cord blood. And then he adds, sounding less hopeful,
"I'd just as soon not have any side, commercial or not, go forward too fast in
this."

   That is perhaps the largest question of all in this new world: whether any
medical technology can be slowed down until society is wise enough to use it.

   * Great Expectations

   Many of the uses for cord blood that autologous banks tout still lie in the
future, and depend on the success of the biotech companies trying to develop
cellular therapies.

   These companies manipulate living cells in the laboratory to develop them
into a new type of drug. The hope is that human stem cells that have been
nurtured, expanded or altered could combat diseases ranging from cancer to
hemophilia and AIDS to diabetes.

   For example, at SyStemix Inc., scientists are inserting HIV-resistant genes
into the DNA of hematopoietic stem cells. The idea is that all blood cells that
arise from the altered stem cell will carry the new gene and resist replication
of the AIDS virus.

   SyStemix also hopes to use a patented method to purify stem cells to restore
human immune systems after chemotherapy, or allow organ transplantation with
less risk of rejection, or "reset" the immune system in the case of autoimmune
disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis.

   But SyStemix's chief financial officer, Wendy Rodemann Hitchcock, notes that
the development of therapies from cord blood stem cells is still in its infancy.
As to private placental banks, Hitchcock says: "In cord blood, the business is
outrunning the science a little."

   One of the questions is whether cord blood stem cells, which are collected in
such tiny amounts that the whole sample is used up for just one transfusion,
could be nurtured and grown outside the body.

   Ronald Sacher, a medical professor at Georgetown University, envisions
finding the right nutrients so that the mother of all blood cells could be
brought to flower like a seed -- and ensure a constant blood supply. "You could
have stem cells in giant factories making blood," including a particularly hard
to obtain blood type. "We might not need to rely on volunteer donors."

   Most doctors see the ultimate use in gene therapy, because cord blood stem
cells are young and divide frequently and therefore might be induced to readily
accept the transfer of new genes. The stem cells would then be used as vehicles
to deliver genes to a patient, even to a patient still in the womb. For example,
"If you could insert genes into these [stem cells], then you would have cells
that supply the gene that's missing in cystic fibrosis," Sacher says.  - S.C.


GRAPHIC: Photo, david barry, When Ingrid Major gave birth to Martina in 1994,
umbilical cord blood was frozen for potential use in treating her older brother
Michael, who has leukemia.  Government scientist Paul McCurdy: "I'd just as soon
not have any side, commercial or not, go forward too fast" on cord blood
technology.  Naomi Luban, a doctor at Children's Hospital, has expressed concern
about the rights of the infant with regard to cord blood collection.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1996


                             2719 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              August 14, 1996, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; PG; Parental Guidance; THE DOCTOR'S OFFICE; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: Blood disorder that devastates young children

BYLINE: BRUCE EPSTEIN

BODY:


   New parents would be rightfully concerned if they opened the mail to learn
that their baby's blood test showed the presence of Bart's hemoglobin. Reading
on, the letter states that the child has "alpha thalassemia," a form of mild
anemia (red cell deficiency).

   Although the letter adds that parents have nothing to worry about, being
told that an apparently healthy newborn has any disease can be quite  upsetting.
Parents will be surprised to learn that a condition of which they  have never
heard is one of the most common inherited blood diseases in the  United States.

   Thalassemia is a peculiarity of the blood that is found in many countries
around the world, particularly in people of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern or
Asian origin. It occurs in as many as one in five people of certain Italian  and
Greek populations. The condition affects males and females in equal  numbers.
The two main types of the disease are called thalassemia minor  (thalassemia
trait) and thalassemia major. Children with thalassemia trait are  absolutely
healthy and normal, but can pass the trait on to their children.  They sometimes
are called healthy carriers of thalassemia. Most adults with  thalassemia trait
do not even know that they have it until their child tests  positive for the
condition.

   Thalassemia major, on the other hand, is a very serious blood disease that
begins in early childhood. About 100,000 babies worldwide each year are born
with the severe form of the disease. During the first year or two, they become
pale, listless, fussy and have a poor appetite. They grow slowly and before
long become thin and skinny. The facial bones usually are affected; children
who have thalassemia major often resemble one another. Physically they are
underdeveloped and cannot keep up with their peers. Without treatment, the
spleen, liver and heart soon become greatly enlarged. Often the spleen has to
be removed, even though it plays a major role in fighting infection. Heart
failure and infection are the leading causes of death among children with
untreated thalassemia major.

   Children with this form of thalassemia are treated with frequent
transfusions (generally every 3 to 4 weeks) to keep their hemoglobin levels
near normal. This form of treatment, referred to as hypertransfusion, enhances
the child's growth and well-being and usually prevents complications.
Unfortunately, repeated blood transfusions can lead to a buildup of iron in  the
body, which can damage the heart, liver and other organs. Medical therapy  that
chemically removes the extra iron buildup may be required. Gene therapy  and
bone marrow transplants may one day be the main methods of treatment of  this
condition.

   When a newborn blood test shows that a baby is a carrier of the thalassemia
trait (remember, carriers lead completely normal, healthy lives), it means  that
the infant has one normal gene and one thalassemia gene in every body  cell. It
also indicates that one or both of the parents are carriers. Since  people with
thalassemia trait are completely healthy, they can pass on the  trait through
many generations without anybody realizing that it is in the  family.

   Those considering having children should probably be tested to determine
whether they are carriers. Should both parents have the thalassemia trait,
there is a one in four chance with each pregnancy that the child will have the
severe form of the disease. There is a two in four chance with each pregnancy
the child will be a carrier like the parents and a one-in-four chance with  each
pregnancy that the child will be completely free of the disease. If only  one
parent has the trait, none of the children will have thalassemia major,  but the
thalassemia syndromes are another group of anemias that are inherited.

   Blood tests and family genetic studies can show whether an individual has
thalassemia major or is a carrier. In addition, prenatal testing can detect or
rule out thalassemia in the fetus. Early diagnosis of thalassemia major is
important so that treatment can prevent as many complications as possible. The
disease can't be prevented, but a program of health education, testing for the
trait, genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis can provide families with  full
medical information to help them have healthy children.

   Thalassemia research will continue to provide new solutions and treatments
for this condition. In the meantime, newborn screening will help identify
carriers, producing a greater public awareness and concern - a good step  toward
conquering the disease.

This column is meant to draw attention to the issues discussed and should not
be relied upon as medical advice. It is not intended to replace the advice of
your child's physician. Dr. Bruce A. Epstein has practiced pediatrics in St.
Petersburg since 1973. He is a member of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  He
is married, has three grown children and two grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1996


                             2720 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    August 13, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

NAME: Rebecca Lilly

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z09

LENGTH: 4189 words

HEADLINE: AFTER SURGERY, RADIATION AND GENE THERAPY, REBECCA LILLY TAKES THE
NEXT STEP AGAINST HER STUBBORN BRAIN TUMOR.

BYLINE: Don Colburn

BODY:


   Rebecca Lilly didn't get what the big deal was. Why did she have to go to a
church banquet when she felt so crummy?

   She was on the 13th floor of the National Institutes of Health Clinical
Center in Bethesda, and she was throwing up. Her dad had brought her in for a
blood test because the next morning she was due to start a new round of
treatment for her brain tumor.

   All day she had felt headachy and blah. The thought of another needlestick
didn't help. When she got sick to her stomach they put her to bed with an
intravenous line in her arm, and now she just wanted to sleep.

   So why was Dad insisting they drive to Silver Spring for dinner if she
couldn't even keep lunch down? Besides, didn't they already hold that CYO thing?

   "SURPRISE!"

   As Becca pushed open the door to the St. Bernadette's parish hall, more than
100 people erupted into a standing ovation. Her 4-year-old sister Sarah made a
beeline for her and delivered the first hug. The disc jockey dished up "Only
Sixteen," as Becca, wide-eyed and smiling, waded into the jubilant crowd.

   Minutes later, she was out on the dance floor, boogieing with the rest.

   "She looks a lot better now," said her dad, Joe Lilly, looking a little
relieved himself.

   Becca Lilly, of Takoma Park, who turned 16 on July 18, has lived with brain
cancer for five years. She has undergone open-brain surgery four times -- twice
with follow-up radiation. Each time, the tumor has grown back. Becca has a
high-grade malignant glioma, one of the most relentless and hard-to-treat
tumors. She has beaten steep odds already; of the children diagnosed with that
type of tumor, only one in five is alive three years later.

   Last November, Becca became the first child to undergo gene therapy for a
brain tumor. In a nine-hour operation at Children's National Medical Center,
surgeons removed her tumor and then injected into her brain a harmless virus
carrying a gene designed to trick any remaining tumor cells into
self-destructing. Gene therapy did not work a miracle for her. A brain scan in
May showed that the tumor had returned.

   On May 28, surgeons at Children's operated again on Becca, knowing that this
time they could not remove the whole tumor without causing unacceptable brain
damage. The hope was to "debulk" the tumor, relieving pressure on her brain and
buying time for an experimental therapy.

   Then Becca and her parents, Joe and Maureen Lilly, faced an agonizing
question: What next? Recurrent brain cancers -- tumors that grow back despite
treatment -- often do so with malignant abandon. The Lillys and their doctors
had to decide soon what else -- if anything -- to try.

   Always before, there had been a clear medical choice, a therapy that stood
out from the others, offering at least a reasonable chance of fending off the
tumor for a while. This time was different. The phrase "reasonable chance"
seemed misplaced, or cruel.

   "This is a desperate field," said neurologist Roger Packer, director of the
brain tumor program at Children's.

   When a child has a life-threatening illness and her doctors have run out of
proven options, how do parents choose?

   On the Internet, at the library and in detailed discussions at Children's and
NIH, the Lillys investigated numerous possible experimental therapies for Becca.

   At Packer's suggestion, they visited NIH in June to discuss two unproven
treatments being tested in studies, or protocols, that Becca seemed eligible
for. One combined a proven anti-cancer drug -- carboplatin -- with a new
substance called RMP-7 designed to help it get inside the tumor. The other was
phenylacetate, a natural "maturing agent" that in very high concentrations had
shown some ability to disable tumor cells by making them mature too fast to
multiply.

   Both treatments were in the earliest stage of testing in children. One had
been tried in 17 children; the other in none.

   "It basically comes down to: They just don't know," Joe Lilly said after the
NIH meeting. "Crapshoot" was a word both Joe and Maureen Lilly would use over
the next few weeks.

   Each year, in laboratories at NIH and around the country, researchers
supported by the National Cancer Institute check about 10,000 chemical compounds
for possible anti-cancer activity. Only about a half dozen show enough promise
to merit further testing in humans -- a Phase 1 clinical trial.

   Phase 1 trials are designed to observe a promising drug in human patients for
the first time and determine the safe dose. Phase 2 trials measure effectiveness
by testing that dose on several dozen patients with the same diagnosis. A drug
that shows good results in Phase 2 moves on to a much larger Phase 3 trial,
where it is tested against existing treatment in hundreds or even thousands of
patients, to see if it can match or outperform standard therapy.

   Unfortunately, the only experimental drugs for Becca's tumor were in Phase 1,
their effectiveness still unknown.

   What made the Lillys' choice all the more frustrating was that Becca was
feeling quite well, better than at any time since her May surgery. She had
bounced back impressively from an operation that not only wore her out but
triggered several seizures and temporarily disturbed her balance, memory and
ability to use language. At first, Becca had trouble remembering her sister's
name. Her conversation was halting and she mixed up common words.

   But two weeks out from surgery, she attended a family wedding in Maine. With
the help of massive intravenous antibiotics, she fought off an attack of spinal
meningitis from an infection in her incision.

   By early July, Becca was once again active and steady on her feet. She
regained command of her conversation. She was more "with it," more expressive,
more like herself. She couldn't wait to complete the antibiotic course and get
to the pool or the beach.

   "Look at me," she said one day in the clinic waiting room at NIH. "I'm so
disgusting! I've got like no tan."

   With the healing slowed by her infection, the last stitches did not come out
until early last month. To be safe, her doctors continued the IV antibiotics for
a few more days, ruling out swimming over the Fourth of July. "And no whitewater
rafting!" joked neurosurgeon Steven Schiff. But at least she could wash her
hair.

   Becca moved on to a checkup by neurologist Packer, who seemed delighted with
her reflexes, vision and balance.

   "How are the words coming?" he asked.

   "Better."

   "Can you say, 'No ifs, ands or buts'?"

   She nailed it, first try.

   "You've been practicing," he said in mock accusal.

   Busted! Becca smiled and shrugged sheepishly.

   "You look wonderful," Packer said. "I think you're doing great." It was
amazing, he said, how she had shaken off the meningitis.

   He asked if she had any questions -- she didn't -- and then explained that he
needed to give her parents a turn. While Becca sat paging through Vogue in the
waiting room, Packer and the Lillys talked.

   For nearly an hour, they weighed ponderables and imponderables: doses,
response rates, age limits, side effects. They discussed half a dozen
treatments, but focused on the two experimental chemotherapy protocols at NIH:
RMP-7 versus phenylacetate.

   "I don't want to mislead you," Packer told them. "None of these is a panacea.
I don't know what will work."

   To a patient or a parent considering such protocols, the fact that jumps out
is their frighteningly low success rate against the cancer -- often between zero
and 5 percent. Packer tried to explain that judging a Phase 1 trial by its
"response rate" could be misleading. Those preliminary studies were designed not
to assess the effect on tumors, but to test toxicity and determine the safe
dose.

   There were no new brain tumor drugs in Phase 2 testing, let alone phase 3,
and the Lillys couldn't wait around.

   "How much time do we have?" Maureen Lilly asked.

   Another imponderable.

   "My gut feeling is, you have to do something as soon as she stabilizes -- if
you're going to do anything," Packer said.

   Given that her tumor was in the part of the brain that controls speech and
vision, Maureen Lilly asked, would it cause her more problems soon?

   Yes, if the tumor kept growing, Packer said. They had bought some time by
removing perhaps 80 percent of the tumor by surgery in May. "But sooner or later
that runs out." After the last surgery, he noted, they had seen some of what can
happen.

   "You're really at a hard point," Packer said. "You were at a hard point when
we decided to do gene therapy. Maybe you're at a harder point now."

   They compared the two main choices.

   Phenylacetate was slightly further along in testing -- it was near the end of
Phase 1 in children, whereas RMP-7 was just starting. Its side effects were
milder -- mainly sleepiness and lethargy. But it would keep Becca hooked to a
portable IV pump for 28 days in a row. And it wasn't clear -- even if
phenylacetate worked -- that it could do more than stabilize the tumor. At best
it would slow the growth, not kill the cancer.

   RMP-7, given in a "big bang" monthly dose followed by several weeks off,
would likely drop her blood counts low enough to put Becca in the hospital.
RMP-7 had never been tried in a child; Becca would be the first. She would get a
lower dose than had been tried in adults, to make sure it was safe in children.
The Lillys worried that the lower dose might not be sufficient to have maximum
effect.

   The RMP-7/carboplatin combination has the typical toxic side effects of
standard chemotherapy, such as nausea, mouth sores and hair loss. On that basis
alone, her parents knew, Becca was leaning toward phenylacetate.

   Packer made clear that either choice was medically responsible. If he had a
therapy available that was clearly superior, he would nudge them toward it. He
didn't.

   Meanwhile, he would order another brain scan to see how fast the tumor was
growing. Packer shook hands with them and left the room. Maureen Lilly stood up
and looked at Joe and shrugged.

   "Flip a coin?" she said.

   The question every parent asks about a Phase 1 trial, said Peter Adamson, a
pediatric cancer specialist at NCI, is one he cannot answer: What's the chance
of this working for my child?

   Adamson aims for the fine line between hope and false hope. "There's always
excitement about new drugs, but you have to temper that excitement with the
knowledge of how difficult the disease of cancer is," he said.

   Adamson also tries to reassure parents that in such cases there's no
incorrect choice. "Since we don't know which drug is more effective, or even
whether either is effective, you don't make the wrong decision by picking Drug A
instead of Drug B," he said.

   "You only try an experimental therapy if there's no standard treatment
available and you have reason to believe the experimental drug might help,"
Packer said. "Those are the guideposts. You don't want to hurt anyone and you
don't make anyone a guinea pig."

   When medicine lacks a proven weapon against a tumor, as in Becca's case,
quality of life considerations loom larger than ever. Decisions about
experimental protocols often turn on questions about side effects, scheduling
and lifestyle.

   "We're in very uncharted waters," Packer said. "Families have to decide
ethically what they are willing to go through looking for this unproven cure for
their child." Different families have different priorities.

   The Lillys' decision took into account such factors as Becca's fear of losing
her hair, her upcoming birthday and the potential disruption of the family's
vacation at Ocean City, Md.

   The likelihood of a cure from a Phase 1 trial is not zero, Adamson said, but
it's very small. "And when the chance of a cure is very small, things like
family vacations take on increasing priority."

   There was another issue: The whole idea of chemotherapy freaks Becca out. To
an adolescent or teenage cancer patient, the benefits of chemo can seem rather
abstract while the possible side effects -- hair loss, nausea and mouth sores --
seem anything but.

   "Chemo sucks," she said.

   Standard chemotherapy tends to be ineffective against most brain tumors,
because such drugs cannot easily get across the blood-brain barrier, the ability
of blood vessels to keep toxic chemicals from leaking out of the bloodstream
into the brain.

   Before coming to a decision, the Lillys needed one more piece of information:
an up-to-date brain scan. It showed a slight increase in the size of the tumor
since her surgery in May. But the cancer did not appear out of control.

   "You learn to expect bad news," Maureen Lilly said. "You're braced to hear
it's doubled in size. It's kind of like the good news is there's no bad news."

   After the scan, Joe and Maureen Lilly talked it over one more time and made
the decision they had been leaning toward: phenylacetate. Becca would start
treatment the week after her birthday, as soon as they got back from Ocean City.

   The plan was to try phenylacetate for 28 days and then see how she was doing.
After a couple of weeks off, if neither the tumor nor the side effects were out
of control, she'd start another round.

   Even though Packer told the Lillys he would back either choice for Becca,
they could tell that his own hunch would have gone the other way, toward RMP-7.
That made them uneasy, for he was the doctor who knew Becca best, and they
trusted his judgment and had always followed his lead.

   "We may be wrong from a medical point of view, but I feel like this is right
for Rebecca and what's going on right now in our family," Maureen Lilly said.

   As a doctor who has treated hundreds of children with chemotherapy, Packer
knows that while its side effects are not pleasant, many children tolerate it
quite well. But given that avoiding the side effects of chemotherapy was "at the
top of the list" for the Lillys, he said, phenylacetate was "absolutely the
right choice for now."

   Besides, they could change their minds if the phenylacetate didn't work or
its side effects proved too great. If the tumor continued to grow, they might
even reconsider RMP-7/carboplatin.

   If, however, the phenylacetate could somehow stabilize her tumor and slow its
growth, that might allow more time for other experimental treatments to become
available. "The family is very smart about this," Packer said. "They know this
may buy some time."

   The drug drips from a pint-sized plastic bag into a tube that enters Becca's
bloodstream directly through a tiny incision above her breastbone and threads
through a large vein to the entrance to her heart. A portable battery-operated
pump the size of a Walkman keeps the drug flowing steadily around the clock, one
bag a day. She carries the pump in a little canvas pack wherever she goes.

   Technically, it's a form of chemotherapy, but as far as Becca is concerned,
it isn't chemo at all. She has a point. The phenylacetate is a
super-concentrated form of a substance that occurs naturally in animals and
humans. The dose she receives is about 1,000 times as potent as the natural
form.

   Most anti-cancer drugs are toxic chemicals designed to kill fast-growing
cancer cells. Many also affect fast-growing healthy cells -- such as those in
the intestines, mouth and hair. That is why chemotherapy can cause temporary
nausea, mouth sores and hair loss.

   Because phenylacetate is derived from an amino acid, a building block of
proteins that are necessary to all life, it is less toxic than standard chemo.
In laboratory tests on animal tumors, phenylacetate also seems to make some
cancer cells mature faster and grow old before their time. Theoretically, that
could stop them from dividing and multiplying out of control.

   When the medical team at NIH explained the phenylacetate protocol to Becca,
she was interested less in such theory than in practical details.

   Phenylacetate is called a maturing agent, social worker Barbara Beall told
Becca. "It somehow causes cancer cells to grow up and stop dividing."

   "What do you mean?" Becca asked.

   "They get old," Maureen Lilly said.

   "Just like me and Mom," Joe Lilly interjected. "We get old and don't have any
more kids."

   The idea was "to stop the tumor from growing and wait until we see what else
can be used to kill it," her father added. "This is not going to make it
disappear."

   They explained that while it didn't have the usual toxic effects of
chemotherapy, she would have to be on an IV for 28 days in a row.

   Becca sat quietly in her Camp Funshine T-shirt and her Bugs Bunny cap, with
her chin on her left hand, mulling.

   "So I'd never be able to swim?" she said. She was sniffling.

   Swimming would be taboo while the IV was running, they told her.

   "How long will I have it?" Becca asked.

   "Till the cancer goes away, Becca," her dad said.

   Becca stayed quiet. "How will I wear shirts?" she said finally.

   "Just like you do now," her mom assured her. The catheter in her chest
wouldn't show, except in a bathing suit, and they could go shopping for a new
one with a higher cut.

   Becca stared down at the pamphlet in front of her. She started to cry, moving
her left hand up to cover her face. Her Bugs Bunny cap fell to the floor.
Maureen Lilly leaned over and put an arm around her.

   "What upset you, Becca?"

   "Not being able to swim."

   The Lillys had noticed last spring that Becca reacted more and more to
anticipated pain. The fear of pain was as bad as the actual hurt -- or worse. At
the dentist's, she got so upset at the prospect of having a small cavity filled
that her mom had to take her home. During the meningitis scare, she handled the
first spinal tap like a trouper, but the mere mention of another one last month
brought tears. Sometimes they had to give her Valium when her IVs broke down and
they searched for another vein.

   Her dad in particular, the ex-football coach, instilled in Becca the
importance of positive thinking. What was the use of fretting about the future
-- especially when she was feeling pretty good right now?

   "Just pretend you're on the beach, with waves breaking," he would tell her
when she cringed in anticipation of another needle stick. "Don't start thinking
now about how it's going to hurt later," he advised as a spinal tap was
scheduled. "What it does, it'll do. It doesn't hurt now. So wait until it
happens."

   "And then scream real loud if you need to," added Maureen Lilly.

   The last time the Lillys had put money down on a beach house was in 1991.
That was the summer Becca's tumor was diagnosed, and they never made it to the
shore. Five years later, they had finally gotten up the courage to try again,
and they were determined to get to the beach this time.

   "You can make plans," Maureen Lilly said, "but you're never sure you're
actually going to get to that point."

   This time they made it. They arrived in Ocean City a few hours after
Hurricane Bertha blew through and spent a welcome unmedical week: no IVs, no
scans, no stitches, no waiting rooms.

   There were still reminders. The day before Becca's birthday (the family
celebrated her actual birthday at the beach, a few days before the surprise
party), it was hot with no breeze, even by the ocean. The fierce, shimmering
glare overwhelmed her. Becca was wading in the surf with her brother, Joe, when
the beach began to wobble and she started seeing double. They took her back to
the apartment, where she napped for two hours and woke up refreshed.

   That evening they cruised the boardwalk. She bought a T-shirt and a toe ring.
With her brother, she even went on a series of carnival rides: not just Bumper
Cars and Teacups, but Wipeout and the double Ferris wheel. (She drew the line at
the roller coaster.)

   By the time she got up the next morning, the place was full of balloons and
the ceiling fan festooned with crepe paper. On the kitchen counter was a
chocolate cake decorated by her brother.

   After a leisurely morning at the beach, they went out for fried shrimp,
Becca's choice for her birthday lunch. Later, the family headed to the mall,
where Becca could pick out an iron-on decal for her new sweatshirt and -- this
was the big one -- check out the puppies at the pet store down the block.

   Joe let her in on a family secret: Their parents had signed off on the
purchase of a dog. There were a couple of conditions, he told her. It couldn't
be yippy or huge, and although Becca could pick the name, she had to accept
suggestions.

   An hour after her stunned, triumphant entrance to the surprise birthday party
at St. Bernadette's -- after the dancing and the candles and the cake cutting,
Becca sat down.

   The party was winding down, and so was she. There would be time later to open
the gifts and page through the scrap book her sister Anne Marie had arranged for
the crowd of guests to put together: a fat bundle of snapshots, cards and
scribbled wishes.

   "Happy Sweet Sixteen!" wrote Anne Marie's college roommate, Shannon Masson.
"We haven't really known each other very long, but one thing I've noticed about
you is that your personality really brings out the best in people and maybe
causes them to look at things a little differently. . . .

   "That's a special gift -- don't ever lose it. . . . Don't ever change."

   But for now, Becca was pooped. She hadn't even tasted her own birthday cake.

   "I have to go back to NIH," she said to her mom.

   The new treatment would begin in the morning.

   After a Wedding in Maine, Getting Home Was the Hard Part

   When her cousin Alexa got married in Maine last June, not even brain surgery
could keep Becca from being there. The Lilly clan was gathering -- including 43
of 49 cousins on her dad's side. Even though Becca was still recovering from her
operation, and her incision still not healed, she was determined to go.

   It was an upbeat, whirlwind day.

   That morning at the hotel, Becca's aunt Candace helped her with her toenail
polish and her hair, combing it down gently on the left to cover the stitches
and the question mark-shaped scar above her ear. When Candace Lilly was
diagnosed with breast cancer last year, Becca had sent her a handmade card, with
three balloons on the front and a note inside.

   "I think I understand how you feel," she wrote. "In a way, we're going
through cancer together. Hang on, we can get through it together. . . . If you
need someone to talk to, I'll be there. . . . "

   The wedding was in Yarmouth, near Portland, and the reception on an island
nearly two miles offshore. Becca hung out with her cousins, danced up a storm
and for the first time since her surgery went all day without a nap.

   But the next morning she woke up with a splitting headache. She wouldn't eat.
As the rest of the family relaxed over a late breakfast, she turned suddenly
worse. She had an anguished look, and her neck was stiffening. A few stitches
above her left ear were leaking yellowish drops.

   By the time they reached the emergency room of the Maine Medical Center in
Portland, Becca was feverish and throwing up. The doctors could tell she had a
serious infection. Fearing the worst -- spinal meningitis -- they pumped a
massive antibiotic dose into her, restitched her incision and put her in an
isolation room where visitors had to don face masks.

   Once again, the Lillys were camped out in a hospital -- this time, 500 miles
from home.

   Meningitis can be lethal if not treated promptly, and other rare wound
infections can kill within hours. "That's why they loaded her with antibiotics
the minute she hit the door," said neurosurgeon Steven Schiff. If they had
waited for the lab reports to pinpoint the infection, it might have been too
late.

   The infection in her scar -- unrelated to her cancer -- turned out to be
meningitis, but the antibiotics worked. Within 24 hours, Becca started to rally.

   The problem now was how to get her home. She had to be hooked up to an IV
every six hours, and the drive home might take 12.

   After long-distance negotiations with neurosurgeon Schiff and Kaiser
Permanente, their health insurer, the Lillys decided to fly Becca home.
Immediately following her noon antibiotic infusion, Becca and her dad boarded a
flight from Portland to Newark, with a connection to Washington National. To
cover up the catheter in her arm -- the Lillys had been warned that airlines had
a right to refuse anybody who might require intravenous treatment en route --
Becca wore her older sister's long-sleeved shirt and her brother's windbreaker.
If all went right, they'd get to Children's in time for the 6 p.m. dose.

   All didn't go right. They landed in Newark and got grounded by thick fog.
Their connection to National was canceled. Joe Lilly called Schiff, who alerted
doctors at Newark's Children's Hospital that they might have to start an IV in
the airport or hospitalize her overnight.

   Becca and her dad finally got on a flight that landed -- in a thunderstorm --
a little after 10 p.m. She was in bed at Children's by 11, antibiotics flowing
into her arm.

   Becca came through the fiasco "better than her doctors," quipped neurologist
Roger Packer. "Not good for my stomach lining," he chided her.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, Rebecca Lilly's brain tumor stubbornly
persists, and she and her parents choose another experimental treatment.  On her
16th birthday, Rebecca Lilly's family walks along the beach north of Ocean City,
Md.  On her 16th birthday, Becca and her father enjoy a swim during a visit to
Ocean City.  Becca follows the lead of her sister Anne Marie, left, dancing the
Macarena at her surprise 16th birthday party.  As her mom and dad comfort her,
the last stitches from Becca's brain surgery in May come out. The healing of the
incision had been slowed down by a bout of meningitis.  Becca blows out the
candles, as her parents hold back her hair to keep it from getting singed. At
right, Becca and her dad dance to the tune of "Sixteen Candles." At a family
wedding reception in Maine last June, Becca, still recovering from brain
surgery, dances with her cousin Drew Berkery.  Joe and Maureen Lilly discuss
possible experimental treatments for Becca with neurologist Roger Packer. All
the options involved therapies that are in the earliest stage of testing.  On
the first day of her drug treatment at NIH, nurse Dana Newberry explains to
Becca and her mother how the catheter and portable pump work.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1996


                             2721 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 12, 1996, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 825 words

HEADLINE: Genes enlisted in war on arthritis

BYLINE: Anita Manning

BODY:

   Doctors in Pittsburgh are analyzing early results from an experimental
arthritis treatment they hope will lead to a way to prevent the
pain and joint degeneration that comes with severe forms of the
disease.

   The experiment was performed two weeks ago at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center on Carlene Lauffer, a 68-year-old woman
with advanced rheumatoid arthritis in her hands. It was the first
attempt at gene therapy for the disease.

   Rheumatoid arthritis is an immune-related inflammation of the
joint lining that affects an estimated 2.1 million in the USA.
It is treated with aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs and, in severe cases, with stronger immunosuppressive medications.
But the drugs, while they may reduce pain and swelling, cannot
eliminate joint erosion.

   The experimental therapy won't help Lauffer, who had been scheduled
for joint replacement surgery because her knuckles had deteriorated
so much. But it could eventually help others with rheumatoid arthritis
by blocking the inflammation process that destroys tendons and
cartilage.

   Researchers also hope the experiment will lead to better treatments
for other autoimmune diseases -- diseases in which a person's
immune system attacks the body's own tissues -- and for other
disorders of bones and joints.

   The procedure was developed by researchers Chris Evans and Paul
Robbins and performed by orthopedic surgeon Dr. James Herndon.
Here's how it was done:

   -- In April, doctors removed cells from Lauffer's thumb joint.
Those cells were allowed to reproduce in a lab. Some then were
modified to carry a gene that blocks inflammation. The others
were grown but not exposed to the inflammation-blocking gene.

   -- On July 17, Herndon injected two of Lauffer's knuckle joints
with gene-bolstered cells and two with cells not genetically modified.
Neither Lauffer nor the surgeon knew which knuckles were being
treated with the gene.

   -- On July 24, Herndon removed Lauffer's knuckles and replaced
them with artificial ones. Tissue and fluid from the removed joints
are being analyzed to determine whether the gene therapy made
a difference.

   The experiment is just "a first step," says Dr. Doyt Conn of
the Arthritis Foundation.

   "It will be important to see if this approach does result in
reduced inflammation in that joint," he says, "and if it does,
the challenge will be to figure out ways of getting this blocking
protein into the body and disseminated throughout all the joints
involved, and see if that reduces inflammation."

   While the Pittsburgh experiment is "important," Conn says, the
treatment itself is impractical because "many people with rheumatoid
arthritis have involvement in 20, 30, 40 joints." Injections
into each of those joints could turn patients into pincushions,
he says.

   At present, "we can do a pretty good job in managing rheumatoid
arthritis if the disease is diagnosed early and managed by people
experienced in managing arthritis," he says. "It's those with
more severe disease and multiple joint involvement who need the
help."

   Still, Conn says, "if this works, with the bright minds in the
field, I'm convinced ways will be devised to figure out how to
get these genes into the appropriate places."

   Evans and his colleagues undertook the experiment, he says, because
arthritis is "a disease just crying out for better treatment.
It's very common, potentially crippling, lasts a lifetime and
often can't be cured."

   The gene therapy has been done experimentally in rabbits, Evans
says. Now, "our goal is to see whether this procedure is safe
and feasible in humans."

   So far, the signs indicate the therapy was at least safe. All
the evidence on whether it was effective won't be in for several
weeks. The researchers plan to perform the procedure on eight
more patients in this part of the trial.

   "After we complete the nine, our next step would be to begin
a larger clinical trial with more people, involving multiple institutions
in the U.S., and to use it in younger people, people who are not
going to require an operation," Herndon says.

   He and his colleagues say they're hopeful, and they think the
seven years of work that led to this point have been well worth
the effort.

   "It's a horrible disease," Herndon says. "All the medicines
we have now give patients some relief but (they don't) affect
the course of the disease. It seems to go on and on. You can see
patients who respond -- their joints won't be so swollen -- but
it doesn't cure the arthritis. People sometimes go into remission.

   "We're hoping this direct attack on the genetic structure can
alter the course of the disease in a particular joint. Hopefully,
eventually, all the joints. But that's down the road. That's pie
in the sky."

   For more information on arthritis, call the Arthritis Foundation,
800-283-7800.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, B/W, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center(4); Joint therapy:
Carlene Lauffer, 68, has her arthritic hands tested before becoming the first
patient to undergo experimental gene therapy. She is in the advanced stages of
rheumatoid arthritis. Using genes: Above, Dr. Mary Chester Wasko checks
Lauffer's hands; near right, Dr. James Herndon readies an anesthetic before
injecting genetically manipulated cells, far right.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1996


                             2722 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1996 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 11, 1996, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 1293 words

HEADLINE: Biotech failures expected to increase;
Venture capital is more selective, backs fewer new companies;
EMERGING BUSINESS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    If success has many fathers and failure is an orphan, the still-young
biotechnology community could start an orphanage.

   From academic-sounding companies such as the Institute of Molecular Biology
Inc. and OsteoArthritis Sciences Inc. to scientific-word-play-monikers such as
Occulon Corp. and Epigen, companies have died in spite of record investments and
high investor expectations.

   They are among the increasing number of biotech firms that have either
failed, packed up and relocated, or have been swallowed by larger, more solid
companies. And the numbers are expected to grow: Over the last two years alone,
more than a dozen biotechnology companies failed.

    The failure came mostly because the companies ran out of money. Or the
science that was promising in small animal testing proved lackluster or failed
to work when tested in people.

   "In the end, it was a vicious circle. To get additional financing, there
tended to be false expectations that were difficult to deliver, which, combined
with some weak science, led to a disillusionment for key investors, which caused
everything to unravel," recalled Thomas R. Sharpe, former president of
OsteoArthritis Sciences Inc.

   Sharpe said the 35-person Cambridge company simply ran out of money and
closed its doors this spring after going through $ 21 million in venture
financing in five years.

    Although relatively few biopharmaceutical companies shut down completely,
more are expected to fail in coming years as venture capital and other forms of
private investment begin to dry up, biotech investors say privately. They point
to the "living dead" companies with second-rate science and management that eke
out an existence until the money runs out or obtain "dumb" money from wealthy
individuals who are unsophisticated about biotech investing.

   Like the fast-growing computer, communications and software industries -
where hefty investments in promising technologies have led to boom and bust
cycles - the nascent biotech industry is riding the same mammoth roller coaster.

    With an estimated 1,500 companies nationwide - 10 percent of which are in
Massachusetts - there is the perennial question of where these companies will
get enough money to fully develop products, obtain US Food and Drug
Administration approval and finally become profitable.

   In recent years the venture capital and private investment money that
launched biotech companies were supported by major US and European
pharmaceutical companies that stepped up to the plate with long-term financing
partnerships, spending upwards of $ 3 billion a year in external research and
development.

    But with the 12-to-18-month boom cycle in high-technology and biotechnology
investment over, there is mounting concern over whether the big companies will
continue their record-setting investment.  Already, fewer venture capital
companies are investing in new biotech companies, despite record levels of
venture capital investment this year.

    "If you follow the 80-20 rule of business, then 20 percent of the 1,500
biotech companies have really good science and 80 percent not much more than a
basic idea," said Richard R. Selden, founder, president and chief scientific
officer of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge.

   "Of the 20 percent with good science, only 20 percent of them have a business
strategy to match their superb science. And that means 4 percent have both
science and business. Now you need a third element - luck - and only half of
them get lucky, so you are left with about 30 major biotech players, like
Genzyme, Amgen, Genentech and Biogen." Selden, of course, hopes his 8-year-old
gene therapy company is among that select group.

   With approximately $ 100 million in venture capital investments, including $
20 million from lead investor Warburg Pincus Ventures, the 80-employee company
still has $ 50 million in the bank.

   PriceWaterhouse LLP, which tracks venture capital investments for The Boston
Globe, maintains that venture capitalists are continuing to fund existing
companies but are putting fewer dollars into new companies. In the first half of
this year, 42 companies received startup or early-stage money compared to 47
companies in the first six months of 1995.

   The decline is expected to continue in the second half, particularly for
biotech companies seeking to develop new pharmaceuticals that are costly to
develop.

   Jean Francois Formela, general partner at Atlas Ventures Inc., a Boston
venture firm, recalls the economic downturn for biotech after the boom of 1991
and 1992. "Now the market is more selective and only the very strong companies
will get funding."

   Occulon Corp. of Cambridge went through $ 33 million in venture capital funds
before closing its doors last year. With the lofty goal of using drugs to delay
or eliminate the need for cataract surgery, Occulon claimed its proposed drug
had the potential to reduce Medicare spending on cataract surgery by up to $ 2
billion a year. But in human testing, the drug failed to live up to the promise.

   "We simply realized that what we had just did not work well," said Lawrence
Kinet, Occulon's former president. "It was not worth continuing."

   Similarly, Telor Ophthalmic Corp. of Woburn, which was also developing vision
medicines, pulled the plug when its drug to treat glaucoma failed.

   Still other companies that ran into problems chose to make a fresh start
outside Massachusetts. Creagen Inc., also of Woburn, had a very narrow
technology in molecular drug discovery. Its chief source of funds, Medical
Science Partners, a Wellesley venture firm, found two other small firms that
could complement Creagen - Boston Biosynthetics and French company Protein
Performance - to start anew in Montreal. The new company is called Cystar Inc.

   The failures have had - and continue to have - drastic effects on the area's
work force.

   At the Institute of Molecular Biology Inc., which was one of Worcester's
bigger employers, 65 people lost their jobs on Thanksgiving eve when president
Daniel M. Bell suddenly announced the company had run out of money.

   For Sharpe of OsteoArthritis Sciences, closing the company this spring
returned him to his home in Wilmington, Del. He had spent 26 months in Cambridge
after 27 years at Dupont Merck, the joint pharmaceutical venture in his
hometown.

    Formed in 1991, OsteoArthritis Sciences focused on finding treatments for
osteoarthritis, a disease of the joints that affects older people. Using a
substance found in marine sponges from the Pacific Ocean, the company sought to
develop a drug that could stop progession and thus avoid surgery.

    But within three to four months of arriving in Cambridge, "I knew we were in
trouble," Sharpe said, adding that key pieces of science were not as strong as
originally envisioned. The company under previous management had embarked on too
many projects, prompting him to refocus the company on a handful of areas.

    Still, Wallace Steinberg believed in OsteoArthritis. He was a general
partner at Healthcare Ventures, an Edison, N.J., venture firm that put up more
than half the $ 21 million in investment funds. But when Steinberg died of a
heart attack last summer, OsteoArthritis lost its chief advocate and money
source.

   In the last three months of 1995, Healthcare Ventures loaned OsteoArthritis
money with the expectation the firm would find a corporate sponsor.

   "We simply ran out of time," said Sharpe, who in January formally closed the
company's doors.

   Looking back, he said he is not bitter by the experience, but he learned to
focus on high quality science and not compromise to please investors.
"Management has to stand tall, be strong in their convictions and get people
properly motivated."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Ex-president Thomas R. Sharpe, at home in Wilmington, Del., said
OsteoArthritis Sciences ran through $ 21 million before closing its doors. / AP
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1996


                             2723 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        AUGUST 11, 1996 Sunday D EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1510 words

HEADLINE: ALLEGHENY GOES SHOOTING FOR THE MEDICAL STARS < IT HAS MONEY. IT'S
GAINING SIZE.< NOW IT'S GOING FOR PRESTIGE BY HIRING BIG NAMES.

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald and Stacey Burling, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Suzanne Ildstad, a cutting-edge transplant researcher at the University of
Pittsburgh, is packing up and establishing a research team of 30 at Allegheny
University of the Health Sciences in Philadelphia.

   Darwin Prockop, an internationally renowned molecular biologist formerly of
Thomas Jefferson University, is also setting up at Allegheny, where he plans to
start a gene-therapy program to rival the best in the country.

   Owen Montgomery, an obstetrician/gynecologist, and four partners, who among
them have decades of practice at Jefferson, also have just come to Allegheny.
Their huge practice delivered 600 babies last year.

   The Pittsburgh-based Allegheny Health, Education and Research Foundation made
big news last week when it became the largest health system in the Philadelphia
region by adding the Graduate Health System's five hospitals to its existing
five.

   But Allegheny seems intent on being more than just the biggest. The relative
newcomer - it entered the Philadelphia market in 1987 - also seems bent on
earning a reputation for being better in a city long dominated by other hospital
stars.

   Allegheny has been pumping big money into its hospitals in recent months,
attracting big-name researchers such as Ildstad and Prockop, spiffing up
operating rooms and upgrading equipment. It has aggressively acquired
primary-care practices even in the farthest-flung suburbs, greatly bolstering
referral bases.

   So far, Allegheny's moves have earned praise from analysts, doctors who work
at the hospitals, and even competitors.

   "Size alone is not enough. You need size, prestige and wealth" in today's
hospital market, said Alan Zuckerman, a Philadelphia health-care consultant with
Chi Systems Inc. "Allegheny has wealth, and they are definitely getting up in
their size. Now, they need the prestige tool, which hopefully will translate
into quality."

   William Kelley, chief executive officer at the University of Pennsylvania
Health System, said, "I think Allegheny is known as a very aggressive, rapidly
developing, successful health system, and I think they have enhanced their
reputation."

   But he pointed out that getting bigger is not in itself an advantage. The
deal with Graduate turns Allegheny into a "very complex" system. He said it
remained to be seen how well the move will work out.

   "There's nothing about a bigger system that necessarily is going to make it
better," he said, "or more competitive."

   Allegheny officials are not saying what their plans are for the five Graduate
hospitals. Some health-care experts said eliminating duplicated services or
closing facilities were distinct possibilities.

   Officials with District Council 1199C, which represents hospital workers,
said they planned to ask the Federal Trade Commission to block the planned
consolidation of Graduate with Allegheny on the ground that Allegheny would
control too large a share of the hospital market, with 13 percent of the beds.

   In addition to the former Medical College of Pennsylvania (MCP) and Hahnemann
hospitals, Allegheny controls St. Christopher's Hospital for Children, the
former Bucks County Hospital and the former Elkins Park Hospital, as well as
Allegheny General Hospital in Pittsburgh.

   Allegheny has pumped $170 million into its four adult hospitals in the
Philadelphia region over the past five years, said Donald Kaye, president and
CEO of Allegheny University Hospitals.

   Allegheny started an obstetrical program and expanded psychiatric services at
Bucks, doubled the rehabilitation department and put in an MRI at Elkins Park,
built state-of the-art cardiac-catheterization and electrophysiology labs at the
former MCP (now called Allegheny University Hospitals, East Falls), and recently
built six operating rooms at Hahnemann (now known as Allegheny, Center City).

   Even with its hefty investment, Allegheny's six acute-care hospitals had an
operating profit of almost $31 million in the 1995 fiscal year, state records
show. "We now have the resources to recruit groups and people we couldn't have
recruited in the past," Kaye said.

   Among the new names on the hospital system's marquee are Joe Torg, a leader
in sports medicine who earned a national reputation at the University of
Pennsylvania; Bernard Segal, head of the Philadelphia Heart Institute at
Presbyterian Medical Center in Philadelphia before coming to Allegheny five
months ago with 20 other heart specialists; and Thomas Gennarelli, who, after 19
years at Penn, came to Allegheny last year as head of the department of
neurosurgery, which has since grown from five to 17 people.

   Ildstad, the Pittsburgh researcher, said she had other offers but chose
Allegheny because of the "vision" of its leaders. She does pioneering work in
bone-marrow transplants and was part of a team of researchers that undertook a
controversial experiment that involved putting a baboon's bone marrow into an
AIDS patient in an attempt to replenish his immune system.

   "They are bringing in some people who will have a halo effect," said Craig
Holm, another health-care analyst with Chi Systems. He said that in today's
competitive health-care market, filled with demanding and increasingly savvy
consumers, people want to think they are going to a hospital that does exciting,
cutting-edge work.

   The system also has tried to bolster its ties to its communities. At Elkins
Park, it has reached out to the growing numbers of Russian immigrants in the
Northeast by hiring Russian doctors and a Russian translator and placing signs
in Russian in the hospital, said Gilbert Grossman, a cardiologist who until
recently was chairman of the department of medicine at Allegheny, Elkins Park.
It has taken similar steps to make the area's Koreans feel comfortable at Elkins
Park.

   Hahnemann and MCP had always existed in the shadow of Penn, with its Ivy
League credentials and impressive research portfolio, and Jefferson, which built
a reputation for clinical excellence. They also had to contend with two other
notable players: Temple University Hospital and Albert Einstein Medical Center.

   Leon Malmud, president of the Temple health system, said Allegheny was having
to play catch-up in areas such as molecular biology.

   Like Malmud, Kelley said that recruiting top-notch people was essential to a
good reputation and that Penn had been doing it for decades. Losing a few people
to Allegheny will have "no impact," Kelley said.

   Doctors who have joined Allegheny said it was invigorating to go to a
hospital that is growing rather than shrinking.

   Torg, 62, the sports-medicine specialist, said all the activity at Allegheny
made him feel "like I'm still in my 30s." Like many of the new big-name
recruits, Torg has a sparkling new facility (it even bears his name) and plenty
of support workers.

   Prockop, the molecular biologist, will have 10,000 square feet of new
laboratory and office space devoted to his gene-therapy work.

   Montgomery, the Jefferson obstetrician/gynecologist, and his colleagues will
practice out of the former Hahnemann hospital, where new delivery rooms and
private patient rooms are being built to accommodate their patients.

   Montgomery said Allegheny doesn't have the reputation of his old employer,
but he hopes that will change.

   "My goal is that five years from now when someone asks a patient, 'Where did
you deliver?' and she says, 'Allegheny Hospital, Center City,' the reply will
be, 'Oh, I hear that's a really nice place.' "

   Early on, Allegheny had incurred the wrath of some longtime faculty members
at Hahnemann's medical school when it set "goals and objectives" for professors.
Allegheny's leader, Sherif Abdelhak, has a reputation for being demanding.

   A group of professors filed a grievance and won. Now, at least one of those
professors has good things to say about the new boss. Not only was the professor
not punished for standing up to Allegheny, he was promoted.

   "In their self-interest, they are helping everyone," said Gerald Soslau,
director of the Interdepartmental Medical Science Program at Allegheny
University.

   High-ranking doctors at Allegheny hospitals said corporate officials had
listened to their ideas.

   "At the hospital, physicians still are in control of patients and patient
care," said Marvin Hunter, a plastic surgeon who is president of the staff at
Allegheny in Bucks County and president of the Bucks County Medical Society. "At
the board levels, there's still physician input. That's not true of all national
companies doing this."

   Hunter said he was impressed that Allegheny had developed a code of ethics
for its board members and employees, spelling out conditions under which they
may make money.

   Mark Tanker, president of the medical staff at Elkins Park, said he believed
Allegheny had done a good job of balancing the dueling goals of making money and
providing quality medical care.

   Doctors there had to fight hard to get some radiology equipment they wanted.
"They listened, and eventually we prevailed," he said. "Does everything come?
No."

CORRECTION-DATE: AUGUST 15, 1996

CORRECTION:
CLEARING THE RECORD, PUBLISHED AUGUST 15, 1996, FOLLOWS:
 A chart in Sunday's Business section incorrectly identified Bryn Mawr, Paoli
Memorial and Lankenau Hospitals as affiliates of the Jefferson Health System.
They are owned by the Jefferson system.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO (2)
1. Darwin Prockop hopes to set up a top-flight gene-therapy program at
Allegheny. He came from Jefferson. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, WILLIAM F.
STEINMETZ)
2. Sherif Abdelhak has the reputation of being demanding.
CHART (1)
1. How Allegheny, Graduate Compares (The Philadelphia Inquirer, ROGER HASLER)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2724 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 11, 1996 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: GOP CONVENTION '96; Pg. SAN DIEGO-12

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Torrey Pines Mesa boasts quality science, an ocean view

BYLINE: David Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Not four decades ago, Torrey Pines Mesa perhaps was most noteworthy as a high
bluff of scattered eucalyptus, pines and scrub commanding a resplendent view of
the Pacific. Now, hardly a generation later, the proliferation of research labs
on the site has, by the measure of most, fulfilled the hope of an influential
scientist at the time: that San Diego would become a "Boston West." If the old
East Coast city can boast of Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology as centers of unsurpassed intellectual endeavors in the sciences, San
Diego can offer the University of California San Diego, also known as UCSD, the
Salk Institute and The Scripps Research Institute as being of the same caliber.
"People are enormously impressed with the quality of science" in San Diego, says
Dr. Gerard N. Burrow, dean of the Yale University medical school and former dean
of the UCSD medical school.

   "People are surprised because UCSD is an upstart.

   Yale will be celebrating its 300th anniversary in 2001." The enclave in San
Diego stands as one of the nation's pillars of scientific productivity and
quality along with Boston and the concentrations of labs that have grown up
around Washington, D.C., San Francisco and New York. Many find it hard to
imagine a more uplifting nexus of beauty and intellectual power than found on
Torrey Pines Mesa. It was just such a possibility that Roger Revelle -- a
Californian, oceanographer, Harvard University professor and a scientific
adviser to the Kennedy administration -- had in mind when he worked to found a
branch of the University of California with a campus in San Diego in 1960.
Revelle, who wanted to build a "Boston West," recruited a strong core of
seasoned faculty, whose reputations helped attract younger, talented scientists.
The late Dr. Jonas Salk, fresh from the development of a polio vaccine,
established the Salk Institute in 1962, across the mesa in a stark concrete and
teak building designed by Louis Kahn that many critics judge to be one of the
most beautiful in the United States. The Scripps Research Institute opened in
1961, and numerous smaller independent labs have come since, benefiting from the
three large cornerstone institutions. The labs generally took what at the time
was a distinctive approach to their work, says David Pendlebury, an analyst with
the Institute for Scientific Information in Philadelphia. They pursued an
aggressively reductionistic approach to biology.

   Where the tradition had been bedside examination of the sick to understand
and treat disease, researchers in San Diego probed cells for the chemical
signals swirling inside and hunted for the genes that underlay disease,
Pendlebury says. In short, they were seeking a fundamental blueprint of the
biology of the human organism in health and disease. They were on a course where
answers lay in seemingly arcane details of proteins and factors, receptors and
neurotransmitters.

   Fruits of this work include discoveries of genes that contribute to disease,
hormones that influence development, approaches to using genes as therapeutic
treatments, and insights into how memory and vision work. Although biology may
predominate, there is vital work also in fundamental physics, materials
research, earthquake engineering and, at UCSD's Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, deciphering the mechanics of global climate. Participants since
the early days include names that are icons in science: Salk and Francis Crick
and others are among the most recognized in their disciplines. Numerous
biotechnology companies have been formed, too, often spinning off personnel and
ideas that initially developed in the university or not-for-profit labs. The
influence of published research and federal research dollars are two other
measures of success. A recent study by the Institute for Scientific Information,
which measured the influence of published scientific research, ranked the Salk
Institute first in the area of neuroscience, the Scripps Research Institute 11th
and UCSD 21st. In the areas of molecular biology and genetics, Salk ranked
first, UCSD 14th and the Scripps Research Institute 21st, based on influential
research published from 1988 thorough 1992. In 1994, in the latest figures
available, UCSD ranked seventh nationally among all universities in the amount
of federal research money received, attracting $218.3 million. And major
research efforts continue to arise. UCSD was selected as an organizational
headquarters for the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor program,
the world's leading effort at designing a fusion energy machine. The
Neurosciences Institute, led by Dr. Gerald Edelman, relocated to San Diego from
Rockefeller University in 1991 and just last year opened a lab on the mesa. Also
citing the rich existing community, biologist Sydney Brenner, who has played a
key role in modern genetics, wants to establish the Molecular Science Institute,
an endeavor supported by a $225 million grant from Philip Morris. The area,
Burrow says, also is poised to benefit from its associations around the Pacific
Rim.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Roger Revelle: Helped bring the University of
California to San Diego. He wanted the region to become "Boston West."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2725 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 7, 1996 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1868 words

HEADLINE: A hard cell;
Maverick gene makes cancer experts sit up and take notice

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Steven Frisch peered into his microscope again and again.

   He saw normal, living human cells. That did not compute.

   He had started with malignant tumor cells.

   He had added a gene known to cause cancer -- an oncogene -- attempting to
test its effects on tumor cells' ability to spread. Instead, the cancer cells
reverted to normal. Six years later, Frisch, now an assistant staff scientist at
the Burnham Institute in La Jolla, makes some mighty big claims about what he
saw in that microscope. Although it causes cancer in rodents, he has discovered
that the "known oncogene" -- which comes from a common cold virus -- converts
human cancer cells into normal, harmless, even helpful cells. He has seen the
gene, called E1A, work in a dozen types of tumor cells and says he hasn't found
any yet that it can't disable.

   He believes the gene hits a previously unknown master switch that overrides
whatever defects made a cell cancerous.

   The discovery of that switch, several scientists said, may open a whole new
field for cancer drug design. "By no means do I have definitive evidence that
E1A is going to cure cancer," Frisch says.

   "What I am confident of is that some principle we learn about how it works is
going to lead to something very powerful." Unfortunately, Frisch has only
preliminary evidence so far about how the gene works.

   The problem is, he can't get money to continue the research. In the cancer
research establishment, Frisch is something of a heretic. Researchers who have
spent years or decades studying E1A as a cancer-causing gene don't warm quickly
to the idea that it actually suppresses tumors. His grant proposals repeatedly
have been denied, his work at first rejected by every major science journal. But
Frisch now has published enough in prestigious journals that influential
researchers are taking notice.

   And he is no longer a lone voice; a research team in Houston has begun
testing E1A in breast-cancer patients. "I believe his data," said Judy Campisi,
head of the cancer biology department at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in
Berkeley.

   "I believe it is an unpopular view.

   I do think his work has been under-appreciated." Dr. Lance Liotta, chief of
the National Cancer Institute's pathology laboratory, is a Frisch fan. "Everyone
who has heard him speak has been very enthusiastic about the whole concept,"
Liotta said.

   "I think the potential is quite significant." Dr. Erkki Ruoslahti, president
of the Burnham Institute, formerly La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, concurs
cautiously. "This isn't any longer a totally oddball idea," Ruoslahti said.

   "It's very unique and very intriguing and it may turn out to be important.

   It looks very promising, but we don't really know yet whether it's going to
work as expected." Carol MacLeod, who heads the cancer genetics program at UCSD
Cancer Center, called Frisch's findings "interesting and seemingly important . .
. observations, which I think should be followed up.

   It surprises me that he hasn't had more good fortune (getting funding)."
Despite the growing support of scientists familiar with his work, Frisch's
research has been stymied by a national funding system acknowledged even by its
administrators to be overly conservative.

   His story provides a telling glimpse into how the system can starve out
innovative ideas. o o o [] [] [] First, the science: E1A is a gene of the
adenovirus, a human cold virus.

   It causes cancer in mice, and no one has proved that it couldn't in humans,
although it has repeatedly failed to do so in laboratory tests. Until Frisch
came along, no one had much reason to put a known cancer-causing gene into tumor
cells. Since his serendipitous experiment six years ago, Frisch has found that
E1A changes tumor cells into a form of epithelial cells, the normal cells lining
most of our organs. Carcinomas -- the majority of human cancers -- arise from
epithelial cells. Frisch has tested E1A in lung, breast and cervical carcinomas,
and also in non-epithelial tumors arising from muscle, skin, bone and connective
tissue; each time, he got normal epithelial cells. Or, at least, normal in the
sense of noncancerous.

   Frisch's theory is that the gene switches cells back to what he believes is
the primordial, embryonic precursor of all cells, what might be called a
proto-epithelial cell. The converted cells take on two important epithelial
characteristics: They interact with neighboring cells and they die whenever they
become detached from the matrix that surrounds cells. The inability to survive
when floating free is a feature of all epithelial cells that Frisch discovered
and named anoikis, the ancient Greek word for homelessness.

   It makes metastasis, or cancer spread, impossible.

   Very unlike tumor cells, these are cells that stay put. "An epithelial cell
is the most wimpy kind of cell you can have," Frisch said.

   "It's basically scared of everything." Unlike other potential gene therapies
for cancer, it may not be necessary to get E1A into every cell, Frisch said.

   Since E1A leaves disarmed tumor cells alive, at least temporarily, they could
influence neighboring unconverted tumor cells in several ways. For one thing,
other researchers have found that E1A-converted cells are prime targets for the
immune system's natural killer cells.

   Frisch believes a few E1A cells in a tumor may bring on the annihilation of
the whole malignant neighborhood. Also, a toxin-producing gene could be added
along with E1A so the converted cells would spew poison. However, gene therapy
may not be the ultimate goal.

   In the long run, several observers said, E1A's most valuable role may be as a
template for designing drugs to mimic what it does.

   With much smaller molecules than genes, drugs can easily get into virtually
all cells in a tumor. Exactly what E1A does inside cells is still a mystery.

   Frisch has some evidence that it achieves the epithelial conversion simply by
attaching to and inactivating a protein called p300. Without accessible p300, a
cell can't be anything but epithelial. The converted cells still have the
genetic defects that made them cancerous, but it no longer seems to matter,
Frisch said. "The idea is that the epithelial cell is the default cell; you can
get virtually anything to collapse into a normal epithelial cell," he said. "You
don't have to know anything about the defects in the cell." If E1A performs that
function, it could be because the adenovirus evolved to replicate best in
epithelial cells and uses the gene to create its preferred environment in
whatever cells it infects, said James Nelson, chair of molecular and cellular
physiology at Stanford University Medical School. Frisch's observations about
E1A are based on some animal studies, as well as tests in cultured cell lines.

   Using cells from a dozen kinds of cancer, Frisch has put E1A into tumor cells
and then injected them into mice.

   The mice either grow no tumors or very small ones apparently caused by an
occasional tumor cell spitting out the gene, Frisch said. He has not had funding
to do the next step, which would be to grow tumors in mice and then inject E1A
into the mice to see if it dissolves the tumors. In July, Frisch received a
National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant to continue defining anoikis, the
death of free-floating epithelial cells, but not enough to allow any work on
E1A, he said. At M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, a team led by tumor
biologist Mien-Chie Hung has just begun testing the safety of E1A as a treatment
for certain advanced breast and ovarian cancers.

   They are giving the gene, combined with a lipid that carries it into cells,
to 24 patients who have failed to improve with chemotherapy.

   Hung said he expects preliminary results within a year. In earlier testing
with mice, the team has reported that E1A cured or greatly reduced human ovarian
tumors in the rodents.

   Based on those results, a French firm, Groupe Fournier, agreed in June to pay
up to $25 million for the right to develop and market E1A in Europe and Africa.
Hung believes E1A works primarily by suppressing an oncogene called HER-2/neu,
which is present in about 30 percent of breast and ovarian cancers.

   But he said he is convinced by Frisch's evidence that E1A suppresses other
tumors as well, by another mechanism. o o o [] [] [] In science, findings must
be duplicated by other researchers before they are considered proof.

   If E1A does prove to work in many cancers, it is the first tumor-suppressor
gene with such broad effect. "The most interesting thing is to learn that many
tumor cells rely on this (p300) pathway," said Ed Harlow, an E1A expert and
genetics professor at Harvard Medical School.

   "That's impressive.

   And that an oncogene will block that pathway is really quite surprising." But
Harlow noted that Frisch is far from developing a usable cancer therapy.
Campisi, at the Lawrence Berkeley lab, also cautioned that while the conversion
to normal cells is promising, it is too early to proclaim it a breakthrough.
Without research funding, Frisch said, he's not likely to get much closer to
figuring out how E1A works and whether it ever will be a useful treatment.

   That's why he feels stuck in a Catch-22. "The NIH has adamantly refused
through the years to fund any aspect of this research," Frisch said.

   "The NIH has pronounced E1A an oncogene." The NIH, the primary source of
funding for work like his, receives more than 25,000 research grant requests a
year and has money to fund fewer than 7,000 of them. Each grant proposal is
reviewed by a committee of 15 or 20 scientists from around the country who
volunteer their time to the duty.

   Each committee has 80 to 100 grants to review at each of its three meetings a
year, so two members are assigned to critique each grant request for the rest of
the group. Since money is so tight, the committees -- called study sections --
usually are quick to turn down a grant proposal if the primary reviewers are
less than ardent about it, Frisch and several other researchers said.

   If proposals like Frisch's are assigned to someone who believes E1A is an
oncogene, they're as good as dead. "There is a group mentality that sets in,"
Campisi said.

   "Steve has been a victim of the fact that there are some established people
in the field who have studied the oncogenic properties of E1A for a long time,
so they're locked into that way of thinking." She noted that researchers on the
frontier of innovative discoveries usually are too busy to serve on study
sections, so the groups tend to be dominated by "middle-of-the-roaders." Donna
Dean, acting chief of the NIH research grant referral and review branch, agreed
with the criticism. "The system is inherently conservative," she said.

   "Everybody's now acknowledging this is a problem and a behavioral change is
needed on the part of our reviewers.

   We're trying to find ways we can improve that." Several scientists said
worthwhile grant requests also may be denied because they are not presented
well, but Frisch is convinced he has been thwarted by resistance to new ideas.
"The sociology of how science is conducted hasn't changed from the time of
Galileo," Frisch said.

   "If you say the earth revolves around the sun and everyone thinks it's the
reverse, they're going to ostracize you."

GRAPHIC: 5 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Novel concept: Flying in the face of established
scientific doctrine, Steven Frisch has discovered that a cold-virus gene thought
to be carcinogenic actually disarms tumor cells. 2,3,4. From tumor to normal
cells 2. Tumor cells | In this laboratory experiment, the E1A gene was added to
a dish of human tumor cells, which changed them to non-cancerous epithelial
cells. The red dye highlights a molecule that is only present in the junctions
formed between epithelial cells, so it doesn't appear in the tumor cells. 3.
Converting | After E1A is added, the conversion to epithelial cells is
demonstrated by the appearance of junctions shown by the red dye. 4. Normal
cells | For comparison, a dish of normal epithelial cells. 5. Sidetracked: At
work in his lab at the Burnham Institute in La Jolla, Steven Frisch continues
other research while awaiting funding for studying the E1A gene. (E-5); PHOTOBY:
1,5. DON KOHLBAUER / Union-Tribune 2,3,4. SOURCE: STEVEN FRISCH

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2726 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                     August 4, 1996, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE, Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 1245 words

HEADLINE: Fighting back against food poisoning; E. coli: Outbreaks of the kind
that have taken place in America and Japan can be prevented.

BYLINE: James B. Kaper and James P. Nataro

BODY:


   SO FAR, the outbreak of food poisoning in Japan has struck more than 10,000
people, killing seven and hospitalizing some 600 others. In 1993, more than 700
Americans became ill after consuming under-cooked meat from a hamburger chain.

   The culprit in both outbreaks was a bacterial species of Escherichia coli, or
E. coli. And similar outbreaks are preventable if consumers are cautious about
food preparation. E. coli strains are almost universally present in human
intestines and most are harmless micro-organisms that serve important functions
in nutrition and normal gastrointestinal health.

   Some E. coli bacteria, however, have acquired genes that allow them to
capitalize on their intestinal niche, wreaking havoc on their hosts.

   One type of E. coli, "enterotoxigenic E. coli" (ETEC), strikes travelers
visiting developing countries, and is known by such colorful names as
Montezuma's Revenge, Delhi Belly and Dhaka Drip.

   Such infections can cause three to five days of watery diarrhea, which may be
quite severe and debilitating. Fortunately, this illness generally clears up on
its own, leaving little more than a vacationer's anecdote.

   But the type of E. coli that has put this species on the front page is termed
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), and the most notorious EHEC strain is E. coli
O157:H7.

   This strain was first isolated in 1982 by U.S. researchers after an outbreak,
and has been labeled an emerging pathogen along with Cryptosporidium,
Hantavirus, and HIV.

   In contrast to the watery traveler's diarrhea, E. coli O157:H7 can cause
bloody diarrhea, intestinal inflammation, intestinal necrosis and a severe
kidney affliction called hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) that can result in
kidney failure and death. It affects mostly children and the elderly.

   These severe complications are caused by a potent toxin called Shiga toxin,
which is released by the E. coli O157:H7 and is absorbed into the bloodstream
and ultimately the kidneys.

   Death sometimes occurs during an acute phase of the illness from central
nervous system or gastrointestinal problems. Ten percent of HUS cases result in
kidney failure that ends in death. Some patients are left with permanent renal
failure, which may require a kidney transplant. But in most cases, kidney damage
takes care of itself spontaneously, requiring only temporary use of a dialysis
system.

   There is no cure for HUS; antibiotics do not stop the organism in humans.
Indeed, recent research suggests that some antibiotics may make the disease
worse because they cause the dying bacteria to release even more toxin.

   An experimental therapy now being evaluated in Canada uses a chemical to soak
up the toxin in the bloodstream, but these trials are preliminary.

   Overall, the death rate from EHEC infection is probably less than 1 percent,
but in outbreaks involving hundreds and thousands of individuals, the number of
deaths and permanently impaired survivors can become horrifying.

   How does one become infected with E. coli O157:H7?

   This deadly bacterium can be found in the intestines of about 1 percent of
healthy cattle. If feces harboring the organism contaminate the meat, the stage
is set for infection.

   Modern food processing technology can encourage the spread of this organism
because meat from hundreds of farms is combined in a single processing plant.
Hamburger from a single plant is then distributed to hundreds of stores and
restaurants.

   Even if the E. coli O157:H7 were present in only one cow on a family farm,
the processing system provides tremendous opportunity for distribution of the
organism to several states.

   Hamburger is not the only source of infection: Other outbreaks have been
traced to roast beef, raw milk, salami, vegetables and apple cider. Infection
has also been transmitted via an unchlorinated municipal water supply, from
swimming in a contaminated lake and directly from person to person.

   E. coli O157:H7 is notable for the very low dose needed; as few as 10 to 100
organisms can cause disease. In contrast, several million enterotoxigenic E.
coli are needed to cause traveler's diarrhea. This low infectious dose makes it
particularly easy for transmission in day-care settings, where even an
apparently healthy child can still excrete E. coli O157:H7.

   The source of the outbreak in Japan is unknown, but officials there have
reason to believe that many smaller outbreaks involving different routes of
transmission contributed to the nationwide outbreak.

   In response to the 1993 outbreak in the United States, the federal government
has recently taken steps to improve meat inspection. Amazingly, in this era of
gene therapy and numerous medical wonders, meat inspection has changed little
since the beginning of the century. Under the fancy name "organoleptic" the
method really consisted of seeing, touching, and smelling the meat.

   The new system is known as Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point
inspection, (HACCP, pronounced "HAS SIP" by aficionados of government acronyms).
It consists of identifying critical points throughout the manufacturing process
where contamination can occur, and monitoring them using laboratory-based,
scientific methods. Because E. coli O157:H7 occurs in such low numbers in meat,
the presence of any generic E. coli would constitute contamination.

   We must remember, though, that the extremely low dose required for infection
means the system will not completely prevent disease. Consumers must protect
themselves by handling food properly.

   To prevent infection at home, meats should be cooked thoroughly, particularly
ground beef, which should be cooked until the center is brown and the juices run
clear.

   Other safe food-handling practices should be rigorously followed:

   * Keep meat refrigerated or frozen;

   * Thaw meat in a refrigerator or microwave;

   * Keep raw meat separate from other foods;

   * Wash cooking surfaces, utensils and hands after touching raw meat;

   * Keep hot foods hot; and

   * Refrigerate leftovers immediately or discard them.

   The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate that E. coli
O157:H7 causes more than 20,000 infections and as many as 250 deaths annually.
The number of outbreaks due to this organism increased sevenfold between 1992
and 1994.

   The incidence of disease due to E. coli O157:H7 and other EHEC in Maryland is
unknown because it has not been a reportable disease in the state. However, as
of Oct. 1, Maryland will join 41 other states in requiring notification of the
state health department whenever this pathogen is isolated from patients.

   This notification requirement will be instituted just in time for the third
International Symposium on Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli Infections, to
be held in Baltimore in June 1997. At this event, researchers from around the
world will gather to discuss the latest findings in this active area of
research. This international meeting will enhance education of researchers,
health-care workers, and the public as to this potentially deadly disease.

   Until an effective treatment or a vaccine for disease due to E. coli O157:H7
is available, the education of the public in safe food-handling practices and in
the potential for person-to-person transmission is crucial in minimizing death
and injury caused by this lowly bacterium.

   James Stein is the author of "A Murder in Wartime: The Untold Spy Story that
Changed the Course of the Vietnam War."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, The enemy: An electron microscope shows the bacteria that killed
seven people and sickened thousands.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1996


                             2727 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     August 2, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy reaches research deal; Calif. company to help make
artificial virus; Biotechnology

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Genetic Therapy Inc., the Gaithersburg biotechnology company attempting to
develop ways to treat diseases with genes, is teaming up with a California
company to develop an artificial virus as a way to carry genes directly to cells
to control or block diseases.

   The collaboration between Genetic Therapy and Advanced Therapies Inc., a
small privately held biotechnology company in Novato, Calif., is worth about $
11 million in research and other payments to Advanced Therapies, the companies
said.

   Genetic Therapy, which was bought by Swiss drug giant Sandoz AG last year,
also would pay the California company royalties if any products are developed
and approved for use from the research, Advanced Therapies said.

   Specifically, Genetic Therapy will pay Advanced Therapies for the rights to
help develop its promising new type of "vector," or delivery device, for gene
therapy.

   The new vector has shown promise in the laboratory for treating cancer and
pulmonary disease, said Hans Schreier, chief scientist at Advanced Therapies who
developed the technology while he was a researcher at the University of Florida.

   Schreier said he and researchers at Advanced Therapies have been working for
about two years on creating the vector, called the Artificial Viral Envelope, or
AVE.

   It's based on a merger of the structure and properties of viruses and those
of liposomes, which are microscopic sacs made of fats that are often used in
cell research.

   The AVE acts like a virus in that it can recognize and enter specific cells
"with high selectivity and efficiency," said Schreier.

   But AVEs lack the actual viral capabilities of a virus and therefore don't
trigger inflammations or other ill side-effects.

   "These are really new entities that combine the useful aspects of viruses,
but don't have the bad side effects other gene vector researchers have been
struggling with," said Schreier.

   "It's a whole new paradigm."

   He said AVEs are easily made in the lab and can be administered to transport
drugs, proteins or enzymes, as well as genes, to specific disease sites.

   Schreier said the companies believe AVEs can be loaded with the right genes,
which contain proteins that tell cells what to do, and inject them in the body
so they head for a disease site, such as a tumor.

   The hope would be that once at a diseased site, AVEs would release the genes,
which in turn would show cells how to fight or block disease.

   Schreier said the companies hope to launch animal trials with AVEs late this
year at Genetic Therapy's Gaithersburg labs. Clinical trials on humans would be
at least several years away, he said.

   No one has shown yet in human trials that gene therapy is an effective way to
treat diseases such as cancer. But numerous biotechnology and pharmaceutical
companies have invested millions of dollars in developing a genetic therapy and
proving it effective.

   Many leading researchers believe gene therapy will one day emerge as an
effective way to treat at least some illnesses.

   The market value for such a way to treat disease is still unclear, say
analysts, but it could be quite large if the therapy is shown to be effective
with minimal side effects.

   Pub Date: 8/02/96

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1996


                             2728 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             August 2, 1996, Friday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: LONGABERGER DONATES 'HEALTHY' SUM

BYLINE: Felix Hoover, For The Dispatch

BODY:


   The Longaberger Co. has donated $ 5 million for three health-care causes
affiliated with Children's Hospital, the McConnell Heart/Health Center and the
Muskingum County Community Foundation.

   The Dresden, Ohio, basket company awarded $ 2 million each to Children's
Hospital and the McConnell Heart/Health Center of Grant/Riverside Methodist
Hospitals and $ 1 million to the Muskingum County Community Foundation in
Zanesville.

   ''We are committed to stimulating a better quality of life in our communities
and for our employees,'' spokeswoman Rachel Longaberger Schmidt said. ''We've
designated the monies for all three gifts to finance improvements and
breakthroughs in health care because we recognize that good health plays a
critical role in everyone's quality of life.''

   The money for Children's Hospital is to be used for research of childhood
diseases and to complete the top two floors of the Wexner Research Center, said
John Fay, executive director of the Children's Hospital Foundation.

   The added areas are expected to house programs in genetic therapy and
molecular biology, he said.

   The gift to the McConnell center brings to $ 16 million the amount raised for
the heart disease prevention facility. The campaign needs $ 2.5 million more to
complete the center north of Riverside, said hospital spokesman Jeff Kaplan.
Construction began in the spring; completion is scheduled for the end of 1997.

   The center and its programs are intended to serve the Midwest,

   Kaplan said. Heart disease is the nation's No. 1 cause of death.

   While construction of the center is under way, several pilot programs for
prevention of heart disease have been initiated, Kaplan said. The emphasis is on
saving lives by preventing heart disease, improving the quality of life for
people who already have heart disease and reducing health-care costs, he said.

   Businesses spend more money on heart disease and related diseases than any
others, Kaplan said.

   The center will include a fitness facility and will offer the Longaberger
Nutrition Program, as well as programs to stop smoking, manage stress and
control cholesterol, he said.

   The Muskingum foundation will use the $ 1 million to establish the
Longaberger Quality of Life Endowment Fund. For the first six years, income from
the fund will go to the health-care effort being conducted jointly by Bethesda
Hospital and Good Samaritan Medical Center.

   After the first six years, the fund's income will go to nonprofit
organizations in Muskingum County to improve the quality of life.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1996


                             2729 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        AUGUST 2, 1996 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2489 words

HEADLINE: HIS LAST CHANCE: 'SUICIDE GENES' GO AFTER BRAIN CANCER

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Wearing a black jacket and a black cap to cover the scar from the brain
surgery, Joseph C. Hilly looked bewildered by the devastating information the
doctors were giving him.

   Tests showed that even after his tumor was removed, there was still cancer in
his brain and it was growing rapidly. Soon the tumor would grow back so large
that it would crush vital brain centers.

   More surgery was needed. He also needed treatment with drugs or with seeds of
radioactive material implanted in his brain. None of this, however, would be
very effective, the doctors told him.

   There was one other possibility for the 59-year-old Lansdowne man. He could
volunteer for a gene therapy experiment with a drug that had never been used on
brain cancer patients.

   A gentle man, with a graying mustache, Hilly was sitting in the corner of a
small, windowless room in the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center with a
neurologist, cancer specialist, gene therapy researcher and bioethicist.

   Hilly had discovered he had a brain tumor when he started talking gibberish
during a Florida vacation. Back at Penn, he was diagnosed as having a glioma, a
type of cancer that strikes 12,000 people each year in the United States. Hilly
underwent surgery a month later.

   Now, four months after his surgery, he was stunned by what the doctors were
telling him. He thought the surgery had eliminated the cancer.

   "I do feel good," said Hilly. "That's what gets me."

   The doctors asked Hilly if he had questions. He didn't have many.

   "Well, I guess that's the story," he said. "I have confidence in you people.
So far it's worked OK, you think?" No one answered.

   The doctors told Hilly he didn't have to make a decision then. But he
shouldn't put it off too long.

   *

   Hilly was being offered a new type of medical treatment, which many
scientists think ultimately will revolutionize the way disease is treated - gene
therapy.

   Since the first human gene therapy treatment in 1990 for a rare, inherited
immune disorder, medical centers throughout the world have started trials
against dozens of diseases.

   This will be the fourth one studied with human trials at Penn, a world leader
in this new field. Penn's first trial, which was started in 1993, involved
cystic fibrosis patients. The trial was stopped midway, to perfect the gene
drug, and is slated to start again this fall. Penn has also tested gene therapy
on patients with a rare cholesterol disease and a chest cancer called
mesothelioma.

   So far none of the trials at Penn or anywhere else has led to effective
treatments, but researchers are experimenting with a growing number of drugs and
diseases, searching for winning combinations.

   The scientists meeting with Hilly last May hoped that brain cancer would be
one of them.

   *

   Hilly left the meeting with a seven-page, informed-consent form, which
described in detail what would be done to him, and went home to talk with
relatives and friends about what to do.

   For 18 years, Hilly, who has never married, had worked as an electrician at
the medical center, and knew that the doctors there were doing many highly
experimental medical procedures. But it wasn't until that meeting that he
appreciated how far out the work was.

   Even by Penn's standards, the gene therapy trial seemed futuristic, almost
more science fiction than science fact.

   What the scientists intended to do was change the genetic machinery of the
cancer cells in Hilly's brain and force them to commit suicide.

   They hoped to do this by first infecting the cancer cells with "suicide
genes," delivered to them by adenoviruses. Normally adenoviruses cause colds,
but these viruses, called "vectors," have been disabled and packed with suicide
genes. The genes force cells to make an enzyme called thymidine kinase.

   A few days after giving Hilly the suicide genes, the researchers would give
Hilly a drug called ganciclovir, which thymidine kinase turns into a poison that
cripples the cell's genetic machinery.

   The trial would not be easy for Hilly. He would have to stay in the hospital
for three weeks, undergo surgery twice and be poked, measured and imaged
innumerable times. Finally, he would have to agree to give his brain to the
scientists after he died - or, as the form tactfully put it, "in the eventual
occurrence of your death" - so the therapy's effect on the tissue could be
evaluated.

   Despite the bizarre nature of what was being proposed, most of Hilly's
friends advised him to volunteer. After working at Penn for all those years,
Hilly thought the medical center was a "nut house," but he did have confidence
in the doctors.

   "I would like to stick around for a while," he said.

   Five days after the meeting in the little, windowless room, Hilly volunteered
for the trial.

   *

   The primary goal of the study, which would take two years and involve 24
patients, was to find out how much genetically altered adenovirus can be given
without harm. The first group of three patients would get 100 million viruses.
The last three patients would get 100 billion, or 1,000 times more.

   Never before had adenoviruses been injected into human brains, though other
Penn scientists have used them on patients with mesothelioma, a rare form of
cancer that strikes the sac that encloses the lungs.

   With 11 mesothelioma patients treated so far, adenoviruses appear safe - even
at doses 1,000 times stronger than the glioma patients will be starting at.

   There's no evidence the therapy has shrunk any tumors, but, with the
exception of one patient, there's also no evidence the mesothelioma is growing.

   The exception is Quinten Garber, a 57-year-old former asbestos worker from
Barnesville in central Pennsylvania. Garber thought gene therapy was a "miracle"
that would save him.

   Afterward, he had increasingly worse chest pain and shortness of breath, and
realized the therapy had failed. Still, he continued to believe in miracles.

   The treatment "may not be a miracle for me," Garber said, "but it may be a
miracle for somebody else." Garber died Wednesday.

   The first patient in the mesothelioma trial, Donald Hardy, a 64-year-old
retired asbestos worker from Toms River, N.J., is doing fine, with no evidence
that his cancer is growing.

   Though this will be the first time brain cancer has been treated with
adenoviruses, it's not the first time gene therapy has been tried.

   Edward Oldfield and Zvi Ram, of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, treated 15 brain cancer patients using a different vector
- a retrovirus. Oldfield said that they saw some tumor shrinkage, but he didn't
know if it was significant. He has not yet reported on the fate of the patients.

   Oldfield said there were problems getting vectors to enough cells in the
tumor, so the researchers have gone back to the laboratory rather than pursue
more trials. He thought adenoviruses might be more effective in distributing
genes through the tumor.

   *

   Shortly before dawn on July 15, Hilly's cousin drove him to the Penn medical
center for the first of the two operations he would undergo as part of the
trial, a joint effort of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, the University
of Pennsylvania Cancer Center and the Albert R. Taxin Brain Tumor Research
Center of the Wistar Institute.

   As it turned out, Hilly was the second patient. The first, a 61-year-old
farmer from central Pennsylvania, underwent surgery two weeks after Hilly's
meeting with the research team. He suffered no side effects and was doing well.

   During surgery, the vector would be injected into five areas of Hilly's
tumor, the size and shape of a man's thumb. It was located just above and behind
Hilly's left ear, in the temporal lobe, which controls speech. Surprisingly,
Hilly's speech had not been hurt.

   Hilly was subdued but in good humor as he was wheeled to the operating room.
Commenting on the passing overhead electrical work he had installed and could
see from the gurney, Hilly talked about how "the doctors in this place are
really good."

   He was still talking about the electrical work - in the operating room - as
the anesthesiologist was preparing to put him to sleep.

   A frame was attached to Hilly's head and then a CAT scan was taken of his
brain. By orienting the tumor to the frame with the CAT scans, the tumor could
be precisely located, enabling neurosurgeon Kevin D. Judy to deliver the
adenovirus to only the cancer without injecting and damaging healthy tissue.

   Hilly's head and much of the apparatus was repeatedly wrapped with a
brownish, plastic sheet to guard against infection once Hilly's skull was
opened. By the time Judy was finished, Hilly looked like an Egyptian mummy with
no recognizable features.

   It wasn't until 9:20 a.m., almost three hours after Hilly's cousin had
dropped him off at the hospital, that Judy said he was ready to do the first
injection.

   Watching from the sidelines, Stephen L. Eck, one of the study's two principle
investigators, telephoned the Human Applications Laboratory of the Institute for
Human Gene Therapy and said they were ready for the vectors. Because vectors are
so fragile, they must be kept frozen until the last moment.

   Fifteen minutes later, lab manager Colleen Baker arrived with a bucket of ice
and two vials, which contained 100 million adenoviruses, each one containing a
suicide gene.

   It was a tedious process getting the vectors into Hilly's tumor. Five times
Judy went to the light board on the wall and studied the CAT scans, determined
new coordinates and reset the cumbersome device used for aiming the hollow
vector needles. Five times he remounted the device on the platform attached to
Hilly's head. Five times Judy went to Baker with tiny syringes and sucked up
vectors from the tube she held out to him. And five times he injected the
vectors into the needles he had pushed into Hilly's brain, through the hole in
his skull created months earlier to remove the cancer the first time.

   It wasn't until noon that Judy was finished and Hilly was taken to the
medical center's clinical research center, where test subjects requiring
hospitalization stay.

   After waiting two days to give the vectors time to make thymidine kinase,
Jane B. Alavi, the study's other principal investigator, started injecting the
ganciclovir into Hilly's brain through a vein in his arm.

   Hopefully the drug would go to genetically altered cancer cells and force
them to make thymidine kinase, which would turn it into a suicide potion.

   *

   Everyone was careful not to suggest the therapy would benefit him, but Hilly
was convinced that there was a good chance it would.

   He was convinced even though the fourth sentence of the informed-consent form
said, "This study may not benefit you in any way." And two pages later, it said,
"Since the purpose of this study is to determine the safety of new techniques,
we do not expect that you will benefit from participating, although knowledge
may be gained that may benefit others."

   Hilly was frank in saying that he wasn't doing this to benefit others, but
because it was his only chance for survival.

   "I'm here for me," he said, "though it would be nice if humanity also
benefitted."

   Hilly's faith in the medical and nursing staff grew during his hospital stay
and with it hopes that the treatment would benefit him.

   "I'm more and more impressed by this whole operation," he said, during his
third day in the clinical research center, where the care is particularly
attentive.

   Bioethicists are concerned that the desperation of people with fatal illness
may drive them to participate in research studies and make it difficult for them
to accurately balance risks and benefits.

   To assess this, Pamela Sankar at the Center for Bioethics at Penn is
observing and interviewing all patients who consider volunteering for the brain
cancer study.

   *

   On July 22, one week after receiving the first treatment, Hilly was back in
the operating room, this time to have the tumor removed and get another dose of
adenovirus.

   It took Judy almost an hour to prepare Hilly, make his way through the skull
and the dura mater, the tough, fibrous membrane that covers the brain, and reach
the tumor, which was a little more than an inch below the surface.

   It took less than a half hour to cut the tumor free from the surrounding
brain tissue. Most of it was taken to the surgical pathology laboratory for
analysis. The rest went to the Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which would
determine whether the vector had deposited the suicide genes.

   Judy knew that he had left cancer cells behind, but to get them he would also
have had to remove healthy brain tissue and run the risk of impairing Hilly's
speech or interferring with vital functions. It's because of these cells that
tumors invariably return, but the researchers were hoping gene therapy would
kill them.

   Once again Baker was summoned to the operating room and she arrived with her
black plastic pail of ice and 100 million adenoviruses.

   This time Judy didn't need the complex device to aim the injections. With
Hilly's brain open, he could do it freehand, injecting five sites into the
tissue that had surrounded the tumor.

   Hilly was then taken back to the clinical research center, where he would
stay for two more weeks, receiving twice-a-day infusions of ganciclovir. The
staff would monitor him for fever, visual changes, weakness or loss of
coordination - signs that either the vector or the surgery had caused an
inflammation of healthy brain tissue, the biggest danger of therapy.

   *

   After leaving the hospital during the first week in August, Hilly will
receive monthly brain scans to see if the therapy has stopped the cancer from
growing.

   Untreated, gliomas kill their victims within three to six months. Radiation
and surgery, Judy says, doubles survival time. Even patients receiving the best
care usually die within a year of being diagnosed.

   The brain cancer grows so fast that by the third month the tumor could be
large enough for the new growth to be detected with MRI scans.

   Eck and Judy said that if they still saw no evidence of the tumor by the
sixth month, they would begin to think that the therapy might be working.

   Examination of the tumor recovered from the first patient showed that part of
it had been killed - possibly by the treatment - and that the man's immune
system was reacting to the vectors. Eck said he didn't know if this meant that
the treatment was working or even if the immune system was attacking the cancer.

   To see what effect, if any, gene therapy has had on the cancer cells, the
patients and the tissue taken from them will be subjected to a battery of
sophisticated tests.

   But the ultimate proof of success will be whether Hilly, the farmer and other
volunteers are alive six months after treatment. If many are, it could be the
start of a new era in the treatment of cancer.

NOTES: THE QUEST: SEEKING AN ULTIMATE CURE
One in a series of occasional articles on gene therapy research.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO (3)
1. A frame is attached to Joseph C. Hilly's head. Neurosurgeon Kevin D. Judy
(second from left) later will inject the suicide genes to fight the cancer. (The
Philadelphia Inquirer, MICHAEL MALLY)
2. At the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Michael Phillips,
assisted by Kathy Leitch, conducts magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on Joseph
Hilly. It would detect any tumor growth. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, AKIRA SUWA)

3. The suicide genes, which are carried inside adenoviruses, are injected into
the tumor in Joseph Hilly's brain. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, MICHAEL MALLY)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2730 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 1, 1996, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: HOUSTON; Ann Hodges; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 792 words

HEADLINE: PBS has new look, old problem

BYLINE: ANN HODGES, Houston Chronicle TV Critic; Staff

BODY:

   PBS has a new logo and a sexy new voiceover to tell you it's
the network to watch. (If the voice is not familiar, think
what leading lady taught Bogart to whistle.)

   But PBS still has the same old problem - think money, but
think positive.

   PBS' programming budget will go up by a record $ 52 million by
the year 2000, almost all of it from new sources of funding
and underwriting, PBS president/CEO Ervin Duggan told TV
critics in Pasadena, Calif. recently.  The current budget is
$ 113 million.

   They'll do it themselves, by going for production partners
like Turner Broadcasting, Disney and Reader's Digest.  And the
message they're already taking to advertising agencies is that
PBS is the place for their clients to be.

   Duggan did reassure, though, that most PBS stations do not
want to go to commercials, that PBS will continue its ""strict
guidelines'' about the length and content of underwriter
messages, and that PBS' goal is now and will be quality
programs, not ratings.

   He also suggested this might be the ""great opportunity'' for
commercial broadcasters to do for PBS what the cable industry
has done in setting up C-SPAN ""as the vessel by which they
express their interest in public service. ''

   PBS had its highest cumulative audience ever in last October's
annual survey and, unlike the commercial networks, there has
been no audience erosion.  PBS, therefore, will not run scared
at the next crisis, but will set ""growth'' as its goal, Duggan
said.

   While beating down the recent threats of budget cuts from
Washington, PBS discovered a very important thing: ""The
American people are not angry with us; they appreciate us,''
Duggan said.

   PBS programming

   Rice University sociology professsor William Martin was a
chief consultant for one of PBS' most intriguing new fall
documentaries. ''With God on Our Side: The Rise of the
Religious Right in America'' is a six-hour series for
October.  He's also the author of the series companion book.

   Martin has been studying and writing about the religious right
for the past 25 years, and he agrees with its producers that
this series is neither ""expose nor investigative journalism
piece. '' It is a history, covering a period of 45 years, and he
thinks it makes a special effort to be fair and balanced.

   He also thinks, though, that the religious right ""has
overplayed the degree of persecution that it has suffered, and
that they have quite often been treated more fairly than they
claim to have been treated. ''

   Marion Ross is one of the actors who read the words of real
women pouring out their anguish over World War I's tragic
human sacrifices.  She is heard but not seen in another mammoth
PBS documentary for fall, The Great War and the Shaping of
the 20th Century.  It goes beyond the battle to show how
that war has affected the world since.

   Ross has been getting good news and great reviews from friends
who've seen a special preview of the movie The Evening
Star, based on Larry McMurtry's sequel to his Terms of
Endearment.  That movie was filmed in Houston last year,
and lately it's been in the Hollywood news.

   The movie's star, Shirley MacLaine, went in to argue
personally against the R rating that the Motion Picture
Association of America was going to give Evening Star,
and she won.  It has a PG-13 rating.

   ""And that's right,'' Ross said.  ""It's not an R movie. ''

   PBS is making a new commitment to TV drama American-style
with three new TV miniseries - one on Mark Twain's personal
life and times; one on Fanny Kemble, the 19th-century
actress/anti-slavery activisit; and, as a co-production with
the BBC, Henry James' novel The American.

   Vaudeville: An American Masters Special will be two
hours of historic performance footage and interviews with
entertainers who started on that stage.  It's for spring
1997.

   Nova's Century is five two-hour programs on the 20th
century as the most remarkable period in the history of
science -from before antibiotics to gene therapy, from
horse-drawn buggies to jumbo jets and rockets to the moon and
beyond.

   Eyewitness, BBC's wonderful, award-laden series on
nature's wonders as seen through the wizardry of computer
graphics, returns for a new season Oct. 14.

   An unprecedented PBS Debate Night: The Future Congress
is set for Sept. 29 on Channel 8 and other PBS stations.

   Jim Lehrer will moderate.  The debaters with him at Colonial
Williamsburg's House of Burgesses will be Speaker of the House
Newt Gingrich, House minority leader Richard Gephardt, Senate
majority leader Trent Lott and Senate minority leader Tom
Daschle.

   PBS' plan is for local congressional debates to follow the
national program on local public TV stations.


GRAPHIC: Mug: William Martin

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1996


                             2731 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Edward H. Birkenmeier

SECTION: Section D;  Page 20;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Edward Birkenmeier, 48, Leader In Using Mice for Medical Studies

BYLINE: By WILLIAM DICKE

BODY:

   Dr. Edward H. Birkenmeier, a geneticist who was a leader in the use of mice
as models for studying human diseases, died on Saturday at his home in Bar
Harbor, Me. He was 48.

   The cause was a brain tumor, said his family.

    Dr. Birkenmeier was a senior staff scientist at the Jackson Laboratory in
Bar Harbor, a center for the study of mammalian genetics and the world's largest
mouse-breeding laboratory.

   "He pioneered the development of experimental systems for studying gene
therapy, a technology that will ultimately prove to be of tremendous importance
in medicine," said Dr. Kenneth Paigen, director of the laboratory.

   Dr. Birkenmeier was also widely known among American geneticists as the
co-director of two courses on mammalian and mouse genetics given at the
laboratory each summer. The courses attract the leaders of the field as well as
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students.

   A central theme of Dr. Birkenmeier's research in mice was the use of
molecular biology to understand the functional changes that accompany a
hereditary disease. Using that information, Dr. Birkenmeier and his colleagues
tried to develop methods of diagnosis and treatment that could be applied to
humans.

   For instance, Dr. Birkenmeier developed a mouse model for a very rare
inherited human disorder, Sly syndrome, that causes cardiac murmurs and mental
retardation and often brings death in childhood. People with the disease have
inherited a faulty gene for an enzyme called beta-glucuronidase, which destroys
certain waste products of cell metabolism. If the waste products are not
destroyed, they accumulate in the body, causing vital organs to become so
distended that they fail to function.

   The mouse model has been used to test experimental therapies for Sly syndrome
and for closely related disorders like Tay-Sachs disease and Gaucher's disease.

   Dr. Birkenmeier and his colleagues reported in 1992 that gene therapy had
corrected the defects caused by Sly syndrome in mice. They inserted normal
copies of the gene in cells that had been removed from a mouse with the disease.
The cells were grown in the laboratory and then returned to the mouse, where the
normal gene could go to work.

   Dr. Birkenmeier was born in St. Louis on Oct. 1, 1947, and earned bachelor's
and medical degrees at Washington University. He worked at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., and the Carnegie Institute in Baltimore
before joining the Jackson Laboratory in 1980.

   He is survived by his wife, Connie, and a son, Tristan, both of Bar Harbor;
and his father, Edward Jr., a brother, Thomas, and a sister, Gail, all of St.
Louis.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Edward H. Birkenmeier (Jackson Laboratory)


LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1996


                             2732 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          July 30, 1996 Tuesday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 1

LENGTH: 602 words

HEADLINE: Triple punch aimed at breast cancer
 Researchers hope combined treatment extends women's lives

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   For the first time, women with advanced breast cancer that has spread to
other parts of the body will be candidates for a new treatment at St. Luke's
Medical Center that combines three therapies at once.

   Researchers hope that the "synergistic" effect of a bone marrow transplant,
chemotherapy and efforts to stimulate the immune system will extend survival for
women with late-stage, metastatic breast cancer. Only about 20% of such women
currently survive three to five years with treatment options available.

   St. Luke's officials say they'll be the first in the country to try the
combined-attack approach to fighting the cancer.

   "We're hoping to get a synergistic, anti-tumor effect" from the combination
of approaches, said Lawrence Lum, scientific director of the medical center's
immunotherapy research program.

   Two parts of the breast cancer experiment high-dose chemotherapy and a
self-supplied bone marrow transplant are often-used therapy now for advanced
cases. The new element is "giving the patient immune system elements that are
primed to fight cancer," Lum said.

   "The immune system agents then can go to work and mop up any residual cancer
cells that have survived" the other treatments, he said.

   The treatment involves these steps:

   Filtering out two types of cells from a patient's blood stem cells, the
progenitor cells in bone marrow that mature into the various types of blood
cells, and T-cells, white blood cells that attack bacteria and other immune
system invaders. The stem cells and T-cells are preserved to be given back to
the patient later.

   Administering ultra-high doses of chemotherapy, including the potent
anti-cancer drug Taxol. Besides killing cancer cells, high-dose chemotherapy has
the side effect of destroying a patient's bone marrow, which is why physicians
remove stem cells ahead of time and then give them back to the patient to grow
new marrow after chemotherapy is completed.

   Enhancing the T-cells removed from the patient into "super killers" by
stimulating them with immune system proteins that make them more keen attackers
of cancer. For 65 days after the stem cells are returned to the patient, these
killer T-cells also are given back along with immune system stimulants,
including interleukin-2, to fight any remaining cancer cells.

   "We're trying to take the best of everything and put it together to optimize
tumor kill," Lum said.

   The treatment isn't easy to tolerate for the patient. All of its elements
have been tried individually, and each has its own risks. The new aspect, the
immunotherapy, has the mildest side effects, Lum said.

   And advanced breast cancer has had such poor outcomes that physicians want to
try every weapon against it to improve survival odds.

   The goal is to recruit 60 patients over three years. Patients who have Stage
4 disease, where the cancer has spread beyond the breast and lymph nodes in the
region, are eligible.

   Patients who already had a bone marrow transplant for breast cancer are not
eligible for this test, though they likely could participate in another clinical
trial at St. Luke's using immunotherapy, Lum said.

   Insurance generally has been covering the cost of transplant and the drugs,
Lum said. The immunotherapy is experimental, so patients are not charged for it.

   In a related development at St. Luke's, the Lombardi Foundation Trust has
donated $1 million to build and equip a gene therapy lab as part of the
hospital's immunotherapy program. Immunotherapy's aim is stimulating the immune
system's natural forces to battle cancer and other diseases.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1996


                             2733 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  July 28, 1996, Sunday, ATLANTA FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Bonus breakthrough from transplant research

BYLINE: Anita Manning

BODY:

   Discoveries in the field of animal-to-human transplantation offer
hope for new treatments for diseases from diabetes to hemophilia,
say scientists.

   "We have tools in place to genetically modify cells and tissues
from an animal so they're more or less invisible to the (human)
immune system," says Stephen P. Squinto, a vice president of
Alexion Pharmaceuticals in New Haven, Conn., co-author of an article
on the research in the current issue of the journal Cell.

   Animal tissue, transplanted to a human, sparks a strong rejection
response. Now, researchers are finding ways to override that rejection.


   They found a type of sugar molecule that sits on the surface of
cells in animals, including pigs, which are the prime non-human
organ donor candidates because of their size and ease in raising.
The molecules, which don't exist in humans or other primates,
are recognized as invaders and destroyed by the human immune system.

   "We looked at that sugar molecule and found it looks a lot like
a sugar molecule you'd find on all Type O human blood cells,"
Squinto says. "Type O cells are called universal donors because
they have a sugar molecule that is not recognized by any human
immune system. We figured that we could use a genetic engineering
strategy to convert all the 'bad' sugar molecules in the pig to
the human universal donor molecule," making them invisible to
the human immune system.

   Further, he says, researchers learned that the same alien molecule
exists in retroviruses, which are used in gene therapy. "The
retrovirus is in many ways no different than the foreign (animal)
organ, so human cells see it and destroy it," he says. By disarming
the retrovirus with the Type O molecule, Squinto says, researchers
"someday will be able to directly inject retroviruses, just like
a shot, to correct a genetic deficiency like hemophilia."

   The research being done by Squinto and others "has incredible
potential in making transplants safer and broadly applicable,"
says Dr. Denise Faustman director of the immunology labs at Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School. "It will require substantial
investigation, but it's very exciting."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1996


                             2734 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     July 27, 1996, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 14B

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: SOVRAN TO SELL $ 150 MILLION IN STOCK, BONDS

BODY:


   Sovran Self Storage Inc. plans to raise as much as $ 150 million by selling
stocks or bonds -- and possibly both, the Williamsville real estate investment
trust said.

   Sovran plans to raise the money by selling additional shares of common stock,
preferred stock or bonds -- or possibly a combination of those securities, the
company said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

   Sovran, which owns 74 self-storage centers that are run under the Uncle Bob's
name, said it will use the proceeds from the sale to acquire other self-storage
facilities, repay existing debt or make improvements at the properties it
already owns.

   The company said it will reveal further details about its plans in a
prospectus that it plans to file later with the SEC. Sovran filed for a shelf
registration, which allows a company to register securities in advance and them
"take them off the shelf" to sell them when financing needs arise later.

   "This filing will permit us to access the capital markets in a timely manner
if and when management and the board of directors deem it appropriate," said
David L. Rogers, Sovran's chief financial officer.

 Kenzie's daughter is named CEO of Genetic Therapy Inc.

   Rachel Kenzie King, daughter of former Goldome Chairman Ross B. Kenzie, has
been named the chief executive officer of Genetic Therapy Inc., a subsidiary of
Sandoz Ltd., effective Aug. 31.

   Ms. King, 36, who currently serves as vice president of product planning, has
worked for GTI since 1989. She is credited with developing a team approach for
moving the company's promising gene-therapy products into clinical trials, and
potentially, the market.

   Ms. King holds an MBA from Harvard University and an undergraduate degree
from Dartmouth College.

   GTI, based in Gaithersburg, Md., is a leader in the development of human gene
therapy products for genetic and acquired diseases.

 Workers join union at Superior Pipecleaning

   Employees of Superior Pipecleaning Inc. in Blasdell have selected the
Laborers' union, Local 210 to represent them.

   By a vote of 9 to 5, the production and maintenance employees decided to join
the union. There also was one challenged ballot but it didn't affect the
outcome.

   Sixteen people were eligible to vote in the union representation election,
which was supervised by the Buffalo regional office of the National Labor
Relations Board.

   Superior, which is located at 3313 Woodlawn Ave., specializes in sewer
cleaning and environmental control. Many of its customers are cities and towns.

 Expo to demonstrate 'green' cleaning methods

   Manufacturers are invited on Sunday to bring their dirtiest equipment or
products to the Solvents Expo, which will feature demonstrations of the latest
environmentally acceptable technologies for industrial cleaning.

   It will be held at Erie Community College's new Vehicle Technology Training
Center, Route 20-A, Orchard Park, from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m.

   The Expo is sponsored by the state Department of Environmental Conservation,
the Erie County Office of Pollution Prevention and the Environmental Business
Association of NYS Inc.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1996


                             2735 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      July 26, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: Human Genome Sciences reports $ 2.6 million profit in 2nd quarter;
Biotechnology

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Buoyed by licensing fees it was paid for rights to discoveries about the
structure of human genes, Human Genome Sciences Inc. of Rockville reported
yesterday it turned a profit in the second quarter of $ 2.6 million on revenues
of $ 13.1 million.

   The company's second quarter, which ended June 30, had a much different
bottom line than its profit picture during the same period last year, when the
company reported a net loss of $ 5 million on revenues of $ 5 million.

   Human Genome said yesterday that the majority of its revenues in the second
quarter came from licensing payments from Schering-Plough Corp., the U.S.-based
pharmaceutical firm, and Synthelabo, a French pharmaceutical company.

   Human Genome recorded $ 12 million in initial annual license and research
fees during the second quarter from deals with those two companies. In June,
Human Genome and SmithKline Beecham struck a research agreement to work on new
disease therapies with Schering and Synthelabo.

   The Rockville-based gene research company also has an agreement with
Schering-Plough Corp. in the field of gene therapy.

   For the six month period ending June 30, Human Genome recorded a profit of $
6.9 million, on revenues of $ 27 million. During the same period last year, it
posted a net loss of $ 11 million on revenues of $ 5 million.

   Melvin D. Booth, president and chief operating officer, said revenue from the
company's collaborations underscored "the power of genomic technology, as
applied to drug discovery, to open broad new frontiers in medicine."

   Pub Date: 7/26/96

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1996


                             2736 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             July 25, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C10

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: INTERNATIONAL EXPERTS WILL MEET ABOUT FRAGILE X IN PORTLAND

BODY:

   Thursday, July 25, 1996 INTERNATIONAL EXPERTS WILL MEET ABOUT FRAGILE X IN
PORTLAND

   More than 60 experts from around the world will participate in the
5thInternational Fragile X Conference Aug. 6-11 at the Red Lion/Jantzen Beach
in Portland.

   Fragile X Syndrome is the leading cause of inherited mental impairment and
retardation, but patients often go many years without a diagnosis. Men
typically display more symptoms than women.

   Characteristics of the condition may include childhood delays in childhood
in sitting up, crawling and walking; hyperactivity; short attention span; and
language and speech difficulties.

   A Fragile X-affected person often has an engaging personality and is likely
to be friendly with a good sense of humor. Many have large ears, a long and
narrow face, prominent forehead, loose joints, flat feet, poor muscle tone  and,
in men, large testicles.

   As many as one in 260 is a carrier of the condition and one in 800 to 1,000
affected by the defective gene that causes the flawed X chromosome, according
to recent studies. Some healthy people may carry the flaw without knowing it
and pass it on to their children or grandchildren.

   The conference is presented by the National Fragile X Foundation in
conjunction with the Fragile X Association of Oregon and is sponsored in part
by the Kaiser Permanente Health Care Plan.

   The conference will feature sessions and workshops for medical
professionals, educators and family members. Topics will include diagnosis,
treatments, daily living, medicines, gene therapy possibilities, social and
psychiatric issues, discussions of related disorders and legal and ethical
issues.

   To register for any part of the conference or for information call Trudi
Sang, conference coordinator 1-503-620-3473, or write the Fragile X  Association
of Oregon, P.O. Box 17727, Salem, Ore. 97305.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2737 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     July 25, 1996, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D14; DIGEST

LENGTH: 1221 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   A small software company in Utah filed an antitrust suit against Microsoft,
reviving issues investigated in a five-year federal probe of the company.
Caldera Inc., owned largely by Ray Noorda, the former chief executive of
Microsoft rival Novell Inc., accuses Microsoft of "predatory acts and practices"
against DR DOS, a software product that competed with Microsoft's MS-DOS.
Caldera acquired DR DOS from Novell yesterday. A Microsoft spokesman said the
company saw no merit in the lawsuit. In 1994, the company settled antitrust
claims made by the Justice Department without admitting culpability.

   A House subcommittee chairman criticized the Treasury Department for a study
that offered no recommendations on whether the government should sever its ties
with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Rep. Richard Baker (R-La.) chairs the House
Banking subcommittee on capital markets, which is holding oversight hearings on
the companies. Fannie Mae and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. are privately
owned, government-chartered companies that buy home mortgages from banks and
repackage them as bonds f*or sale to investors. Their government link allows
them to borrow at below-market rates, and critics say they don't need that
benefit.

   Personal incomes grew faster than inflation in the District and 43 states,
including Maryland and Virginia, from January through March, the Commerce
Department said. For the nation, personal incomes increased 1.2 percent during
the first quarter, the same as during the final three months of 1995. That was
double the 0.6 percent increase in prices paid during the period, as measured by
a price index for personal consumption expenditures. Personal incomes rose 1
percent in the District, 0.8 percent in Maryland and 1 percent in Virginia.

   An SEC advisory panel unveiled a proposal to ease regulatory restrictions on
companies raising capital through the sale of their securities. The proposal, if
adopted as a rule, would reduce costs for companies seeking investments from the
public while improving investor protection and streamlining the SEC's securities
registration process.

   Yields on five-year Treasury notes fell in yesterday's auction to 6.625
percent from 6.674 percent at the last auction on June 26. It was the lowest
rate since five-year notes sold for 6.565 percent on May 30. The notes will
carry a coupon interest rate of 6.625 percent, with each $ 10,000 in face value
selling for $ 10,000.

   DuPont posted a 7 percent increase in earnings in the second-quarter, to $ 1
billion, citing higher prices and increased overseas demand for petroleum.

   Compaq Computer's second-quarter profit rose 9 percent, to $ 267 million. The
Houston-based company said sales grew 14 percent to $ 4 billion.

   Anheuser-Busch's second-quarter earnings rose 17.6 percent, to $ 387.2
million, on record beer sales and increased attendance at its theme parks. The
nation's largest brewer also announced three measures aimed at raising its stock
price: a buyback of 10 percent of its outstanding stock; a 9.1 percent dividend
increase; and a 2-for-1 stock split. Despite that, its stock fell $ 1.75 to $
73.87 1/2 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   United Technologies' earnings rose 19 percent in the second quarter, to $ 259
million. It attributed the gain to improvements in all its businesses but its
automotive division.

   Planet Hollywood International said second-quarter earnings fell 92 percent,
to $ 721,000, because of a $ 10.4 million charge for early repayment of debt.
Profit from operations rose 21 percent, to $ 11.1 million, spurred by the
expansion of the Orlando-based restaurant chain.

   Yosi Amram, founder and chief executive of Individual, a Burlington, Mass.,
electronic information services company, took a leave of absence, coming at a
time of debate with the company's board about the pace of acquisitions. The
company also said two directors resigned due to conflicts of interest and time
constraints. Individual paid $ 38 million in cash and stock three weeks ago to
buy FreeLoader, a Washington-based personalized news service. Individual's stock
closed at $ 6, down $ 3.50, on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   The CFTC's power to police international futures market trading would be
expanded under a bill introduced by Rep. Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) in response
to a copper trading scandal that cost Sumitomo $ 1.8 billion. Regulators are
studying whether former Sumitomo trader Yasuo Hamanaka's trades illegally
inflated world copper prices. An earlier CFTC attempt to probe the trading was
rebuffed by its London counterpart, which regulates the London Metals Exchange,
where Hamanaka did much of his business. Schumer's bill would let the agency
regulate futures contracts executed internationally that call for delivery of a
commodity in the United States.

   A second home test for the AIDS virus went on sale as Home Access Health of
Illinois began taking phone orders (1-800-448-8378). The Home Access Express
kits let people take a blood sample at home, mail it to a laboratory and, three
business days later, learn by telephone if they have HIV. The cost is $ 49.95.
Johnson & Johnson expanded sales of its own $ 49 Confide home test
(1-800-843-8378) to every state except California and New York. Both test kits
will be offered in drugstores later this year.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   The sale of Parks Sausage to a group led by former Pittsburgh Steelers star
Franco Harris was approved by a federal bankruptcy judge in Baltimore. Harris
and his partners will assume about $ 4 million in debt and pay about $ 1.7
million to the owners of Parks, a fixture in the city since 1951.

   M. James Barrett, founder and chief executive officer of Genetic Therapy,
resigned to pursue other interests, but said he would be a consultant to the
Gaithersburg biotechnology company. Rachel K. King, 36, a Dartmouth and Harvard
graduate whose background is not in science, will head the company.

   Media General plans to ask federal regulators to waive a rule that would bar
the company from keeping a Richmond television station that was part of its $
710 million purchase of Park Acquisitions. The Richmond-based media company had
said earlier that it likely would trade WTVR-TV for a station in another
location because FCC regulations prohibit a company from owning a television
station and newspaper in the same city. Media General owns the Richmond
Times-Dispatch.

   American Safety Razor of Verona, Va., said its second-quarter earnings rose
53 percent, to $ 2.9 million. The company said its year-ago results reflected $
947,000 in expenses for settling litigation.

   Apache Medical Systems, a McLean company that provides medical cost
management products and services, reported a $ 717,000 second-quarter loss,
compared with a $ 1.4 million loss in the year-ago quarter. Apache recently
completed an initial public offering that raised $ 25.7 million.

   Baltimore brokerage Legg Mason increased its regular quarterly dividend on
common stock by 1 cent to 12 cents. The dividend is payable Oct. 21 to
shareholders of record on Sept. 20.

   INFLATION HIGHS AND LOWS

   Inflation rate for selected countries, January 1995.

   Highest

   Russia 89.4%

   Venezuela 75.9%

   Lowest

   Japan - 0.4%

   Finland 0.5%

   U.S.  2.7%

   SOURCE: ECA Windham

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1996


                             2738 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    July 24, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 926 words

HEADLINE: Barrett to step down at Genetic Therapy; Rachel King, 36, named next
CEO

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   M. James Barrett, often called "father of biotechnology in Maryland," is
stepping down from the helm as chief executive officer at Genetic Therapy Inc.,
the Gaithersburg company he helped build into such a promising pioneer in gene
therapy that it was bought last summer for $ 295 million by Swiss pharmaceutical
giant Sandoz AG.

   Sandoz, which is merging with Ciba-Geigy to become the world's second largest
drug company, Novartis AG, will announce today that Barrett, 54, will be
succeeded as chief executive officer by Rachel K. King, 36.

   Sandoz officials said Barrett helped select King as the new CEO.

   King, a Dartmouth and Harvard graduate who has no formal science background
or training, is the first woman named to the helm of a major biotechnology
company in Maryland.

   She said she expects to assume the CEO post at Genetic Therapy on Aug. 31.

   "It's interesting where life takes you," said King.

   "This is an interesting, exciting company that one day will market gene
therapies for diseases that have substantial therapeutic needs.

   "I'm grateful to have the opportunity to be part of that. It will be
challenging -- and fun."

   King, who holds an MBA from Harvard, joined Genetic Therapy in 1989 as the
manager of laboratory operations and promptly began working under Barrett's
tutelage.

   She became vice president for product planning in September 1993 and is
credited with developing a team approach for moving promising gene-therapy
products into clinical trials and, potentially, the market.

   As CEO, King should play a leading role in championing the company's leading
candidate for the market, a gene therapy for malignant brain cancer, through
late-stage clinical trials and Food and Drug Administration hearings.

   "Rachel is a really good choice for this company," said Charles Newhall III,
a partner in New Enterprise Associates. The Baltimore-based venture capital
company provided investment capital when Genetic Therapy was growing in the late
1980s and helped the company go public.

   King wants Genetic Therapy and Novartis to be, if not the first, among the
first companies to get a gene therapy on the market.

   She said she expects to keep the company focused on developing gene therapies
for debilitating diseases such as cystic fibrosis, Gauchers disease and some
cancers.

   A Sandoz spokeswoman said yesterday that Barrett leaves behind a lasting
legacy, having built Genetic Therapy into a company with a strong
entrepreneurial spirit, and a track record of raising investor capital in often
difficult market conditions.

   Barrett founded Genetic Therapy in July 1987 with Dr. French Anderson, who
headed a team of National Institutes of Health researchers that developed a
method to genetically alter human cells outside the body so they would provide
therapeutic benefits against disease and disorders once placed back into
patients.

   Barrett said that, while he is stepping down to pursue other interests, he
expects to hold a consulting position with the company.

   Before coming to Genetic Therapy, Barrett was president of Life Technologies,
a Gaithersburg-based company that markets biotechnology research supplies
worldwide.

   He joined that company when it was known as Bethesda Research Laboratories
and was listing under severe financial hardship. Barrett is credited with
salvaging the company and helping it grow into a major supplier of biotechnology
research equipment.

   A soft-spoken, unassuming man who holds an MBA and a doctorate, Barrett is
known in Maryland political and biotechnology circles as not only a wizard at
stirring up investor capital, but also as an outspoken advocate for legal and
other reforms that he believes are needed for biotechnology companies to survive
and thrive in today's harsh business environment.

   In particular, Barrett had campaigned for reforms to make it harder for
investor suits to be filed against companies. He argued that such suits were too
easy to file and were devastating to struggling, cash-strapped biotechnology
companies.

   "Jim is clearly the leading life sciences executive in our area," said
Newhall at New Enterprise. "He could be named to almost any major company's
board of directors and have a lot to contribute."

   The companies Barrett helped create, said Newhall, "will leave two important,
lasting legacies on this biotechnology revolution we're in."

   Under Barrett's leadership, Life Technologies emerged as the leading supplier
of the tools needed for life sciences research, and helped fuel the industry's
growth in the United States, Newhall said.

   As for Genetic Therapy, it will likely be one of the first companies to
successfully show that gene therapy does work and get it approved for marketing,
an event that could change the face of medicine as we know it today, Newhall
said.

   Barrett said yesterday he is confident that the company will successfully
develop gene therapies for diseases, and bring them to the market.

   While he would have liked to have seen a gene therapy approved for marketing
during his tenure, Barrett said, he was extremely pleased with his imprint on
the company and the field of gene therapy.

   "If anything, I think I'll be known as having helped legitimize gene therapy
in the business community," said Barrett.

   "I helped change what had been viewed for a long time as an interesting
scientific hypothesis into a real prospect with vast resources and money behind
it. That is really validation of a dream and I'm glad to have been part of that
effort."

   Pub Date: 7/24/96

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Co-founder departing: M. James Barrett founded Genetic Therapy
nine years ago with Dr. French Anderson.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1996


                             2739 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 24, 1996 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: Research adds purpose to her arthritis pain

BYLINE: Byron Spice, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Carlene Lauffer is no whiner, though few would blame her if she were.

   For 20 years, rheumatoid arthritis has inflamed her joints and made pain her
constant companion. As a cook at a West Virginia high school and then a Nevada
casino, she spent long days on her feet and regularly wrapped her gnarled
fingers around knives and spoons.

   Her doctor urged her to retire early, but she worked until age 65. "It hurts.

   It's bothersome," she said last week.

   "You just live with it." Last Wednesday, Lauffer, 68, of Weirton, W.Va.,
became the first patient to receive gene therapy for arthritis.

   Dr. James Herndon, chairman of orthopedic surgery at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, injected specially treated cells into the knuckles of
her left hand.

   Researchers hope the cells will produce proteins to ease the pain and halt
further deterioration of the joints. There's no guarantee it will work, but, in
any case, it won't benefit Lauffer.

   Because her arthritis is so advanced, she will return to the hospital this
week, when Herndon will replace all four knuckles on her left hand with
artificial joints made of silicone rubber. The gene-therapy treatment is the
first aimed at treating a nonfatal illness, said Christopher Evans, one of the
study's principal investigators. The key to the treatment is a protein that
blocks interleukin-1, the hormone that causes swollen joints and destroys
cartilage, the researchers said. Cells from a patient's joints are removed and
mixed with a cloned gene that produces the protein.

   The cells are then re-introduced to the patient's body, piggy-backed on a
mouse virus. "What we essentially do is to convert the joint into a little
factory that makes its own medicine," Evans said. For Lauffer, the treatment
meant only some additional blood draws and undergoing the cell injections into
each of her knuckle joints.

   But when Herndon had suggested that she would be a good candidate for the
study, she had agreed readily. "This will not help me at all," said Lauffer.

   "But it may help someone in the future." The silicone-rubber joints Lauffer
will receive are basically the same as those used 30 years ago, Herndon said.

   The joint is so small and must undergo such strain that more sophisticated
and complex artificial joints have all failed.

   If gene therapy proves effective, however, joint replacement for arthritis
may eventually become unnecessary. "We hope that, eventually, I'll be out of
business, so to speak," Herndon said. During this early stage of research,
scientists only want to determine that they can place beneficial genes into the
joints and get them to produce the anti-arthritis proteins, and that the
proteins are biologically active. Six years of research showed it can be done in
animals, but researchers will get their first hint of whether it's possible in
humans after they analyze joint fluids and materials removed from Lauffer's hand
this week. Though arthritis affects millions, finding patients for the
gene-therapy trial has been difficult, said Evans, a molecular geneticist.

   Patients must have rheumatoid arthritis that requires replacement of finger
joints.

   And because of concerns that genetic changes not be passed on to other
generations, the subjects must be women past the age of menopause. Lauffer, who
already has had a hip joint replaced and one of her thumb joints fused, expects
to undergo further surgery to replace joints in her right hand and fuse her
right wrist. "I feel wonderful and I'm very happy because I was the first one"
to undergo gene therapy for arthritis, she said.

   But she knows she's not free of arthritis' grip. "No, no, I'm never
pain-free," she said.

   "You just learn to live with it."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2740 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 23, 1996 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 7E

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: TRYING GENE THERAPY ON RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   Researchers in Pittsburgh last week performed the first gene therapy on a
patient with rheumatoid arthritis, a radically new approach to try to block the
progress of the incurable, crippling disease.

   The treatment marks the first time that gene therapy has been tried for a
chronic disease that is not life-threatening.

   The test, which involved injecting genetically modified cells into the
knuckles of an arthritis patient, is the first step in developing a treatment
that can stop the progress of the disease, which destroys the linings of joints,
the researchers said.

   The experimental treatment, performed at the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, is the first time gene therapy has been tried for an autoimmune
disorder, in which a person's immune system attacks his or her tissues.

   During the procedure, cultured joint-lining cells were injected into two
knuckles of a woman's hand. The cells contained genes responsible for a protein
that blocks a natural substance that causes inflammation.

   The researchers said this initial experiment, and eight similar ones planned
during the next year, will not help the patients involved. Doctors plan to
remove the patient's knuckles this week, when she is scheduled to get artificial
joints to replace those crippled by the disease, for detailed analysis.

   These first short-term tests are to help establish the safety of the
procedure before going into longer-term trials to prove its effectiveness.

   "This opens a new chapter in the treatment of arthritis and other disorders
of the bones and joints," said Dr. Christopher H. Evans, co-principal
investigator for the study. He said current treatments for rheumatoid arthritis
were unsatisfactory.

   Dr. Brian T. Butcher, vice president for research with the Arthritis
Foundation, praised the Pittsburgh scientists for doing innovative, but careful,
work. But Butcher warned against expecting too much from the research too soon,
noting that efforts to apply gene therapy to other diseases have had mixed
results, at best.

   "This is an exciting time for arthritis research," Butcher said. "No one has
ever tried gene therapy in any arthritic disease, and this new approach
hopefully will lead to effective, appropriate treatment. This is a good first
step based on a lot of solid work."

   Dr. Raphael Hirsch, an arthritis researcher at Children's Hospital Medical
Center in Cincinnati, said the Pittsburgh work was an exciting initial step in
applying years of animal research to humans.

   Hirsch said researchers were looking at several genes that might counter the
inflammation that destroys tissue in arthritis cases, as well as ways of getting
those genes to places in the body where they may be beneficial. But the ideal
combinations have yet to be found, he said.

   In cancer, for instance, a therapy has to kill every malignant cell to be
effective, he said, but an arthritis treatment that partly reduces inflammation
could result in great relief for patients.

   Rheumatoid arthritis is characterized by the inflammation of tissues that
line certain joints, called synovium, resulting in pain, stiffness, irritation
and swelling. The inflammation occurs when the immune system produces cells and
chemicals that attack the synovium.

   Women are three times more likely than men to have the disease, which
normally develops in middle age and gets progressively worse.

   In Pittsburgh, Evans, working primarily with Dr. Paul D. Robbins, started
developing the potential therapy six years ago. Bolstered by animal studies
conducted by groups worldwide, the researchers decided to use a gene that
produces a chemical that blocks the action of interleukin-1, a substance active
throughout the body that helps start a cascading immune response that attacks
foreign substances and microbes.

   In rheumatoid arthritis, interleukin-1 has been found to be a key substance
in the inflammation and destruction of synovial tissue.

   The gene is mated to a retrovirus developed by Robbins, and the virus,
treated so that it cannot reproduce in the body, inserts the gene into synovial
cells removed from the patients and maintained in culture. These treated cells,
put back into a joint, should bind to the lining and produce a chemical that
blocks receptors that normally would grab interleukin-1 and allow it to do its
damage, the researchers said.

   In the one-hour procedure last week, Dr. James H. Herndon, chief of
orthopedic surgery at the medical center, anesthetized the left hand of Carlene
Lauffer, 68, of Weirton, W.Va.

   After withdrawing fluid from her knuckles for analysis, Herndon injected
synovial cells containing the gene into two knuckles, and control cells that did
not contain the genes into two others. Neither Herndon nor the other researchers
knew which joints got the cells with the new genes.

   Tomorrow, Herndon will remove Lauffer's knuckles, rendered useless by the
disease, and replace them with artificial ones made of silicon rubber, a
procedure she had been previously scheduled for.

   Evans said that even after only a week exposed to the potential treatment,
the knuckles should tell researchers if the gene transfer to the surrounding
synovium worked, if the genes turned on and worked, and if they produced a gene
product that blocked interleukin-1 receptors.

   "If there are no unforeseen complications, we will try intervening earlier in
the disease when there is a chance of stopping the inflammation and saving the
joints," Evans said. Also, if the therapy is successful, it might be tried with
other forms of arthritis and other autoimmune diseases, he said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: NEW YORK TIMES (PAGE 8E); Dr. James H. Herndon of the University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center, prepares a syringe before a gene therapy test
procedure to try to block the progression of rheumatoid arthritis.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1996


                             2741 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 2;   Column 2;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

HEADLINE: July 14-20;
Genes Used in Arthritis

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

BODY:

   Researchers at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center last week became
the first to try gene therapy against rheumatoid arthritis, the crippling,
incurable disease of the joints. It was the first time gene therapy has been
tried for a chronic, disabling disease instead of a life-threatening condition
like cancer.

    The initial experiment tested the therapy's safety. Researchers used cells
genetically modified to produce a chemical that blocks damaging inflammation and
injected them into the knuckles of a woman's arthritic hand.   WARREN E. LEARY

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gene therapy for arthritis. (Associated Press)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1996


                             2742 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                      July 21, 1996, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TABLOID, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1314 words

HEADLINE: Spotlight on ethics; Focus: 'There is a great longing to try to find
or get back to moral foundations.' University of Baltimore educator declares.

BYLINE: David Folkenflik, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   LET US NOW PAY HOMAGE to the fathers of modern American ethics: Socrates, St.
Augustine, Richard Nixon, Ivan Boesky, Dr. Jack Kevorkian. In ways ranging from
philosophy to felony, these men have all raised sticky ethical issues over the
years. And in response the discipline of ethics, long a source of academic
endeavor, has taken on a new, more practical face at the nation's colleges and
universities.

   Specific courses on ethics in the professions have been triggered by separate
crises, including revelations about government actions in the Vietnam war and
Watergate, the Wall Street insider-trading scandals and the medical dilemmas
born of rapid-fire advances in technology.

   Now, as some cultural critics contend that Americans are losing a common core
of values, many colleges have pushed the new discipline of applied ethics even
farther: ethical considerations are being infused into courses throughout their
undergraduate programs.

   "To separate ethics as an area of expertise, there's no excuse for that,"
said Fred Guy, director of the Hoffberger Center for Professional Ethics at the
University of Baltimore. "There is a great longing to try to find or get back to
moral foundations. I think we're getting impatient with the idea that everything
wrong can be explained away."

   Ethics is no longer the exclusive franchise of religious institutions or
service academies, many of which have always had firm ethical underpinnings. The
revival has occurred with a practical emphasis in public universities and
private colleges, secular schools and religious institutions, from ivy-encrusted
halls of the Northeast to party havens of the Southwest. And academics say they
are filling a palpable need.

   "It's absolutely stunning that many of these students have never had any
exposure to the idea of honesty, to the idea of integrity, to the idea that
ethics means anything to your life," said Marianne Jennings, the director of the
Lincoln Center for Applied Ethics at Arizona State University's business school
in Tempe.

   Asked if they would return a wallet they found on a street, students say they
might not, Jennings said. "Honestly, some of the responses I get, are that if
you're dumb enough to lose your wallet, then you don't deserve to get your
wallet back. There's a lot of rationalization that has gone on in their lives."

   In accounting, computing, engineering - you name it, there's probably a
professor on campus weaving morality into an area many think of as
morals-neutral.

   In a classroom discussion during a recent summer's day at the University of
Baltimore, students were weighing Albert Camus' The Stranger, a post-World War
Two novel of a man so alienated from humanity that he shoots another man on an
Algerian beach for little more than drawing breath. Is the narrator evil? Guy
asked his class, which he had split into prosecution, defense and jury.

   "That he was indifferent, that does not make him an evil person," one woman
ventured. "It was happenstance that he was walking on the beach. Nowhere do we
see evidence that he was a heartless person."

   The "jury" agreed, ruling unanimously that he did not set out to kill. And
Guy sounded a little perplexed. "Here's a guy who shot an Arab lying on the
beach," Guy said. "Are we explaining away evil today? We're timid."

   At the least, Guy said later, the class is forced to think critically.
"They're not in the habit of considering carefully a point of view that differs
significantly from your own," he said.

   Professors interviewed said that students often arrive at college with
unquestioned moral assumptions, then abandon the surety of those beliefs after
encountering people with equally strong views that conflict with their own. That
often leads to a relativism that can hold all views as having equal value,
scholars said.

   "It's possible to go beyond that second stage of uncritical relativism," said
William Craft, dean of undergraduate studies at Mount St. Mary's College in
Emmitsburg. "It's possible to figure out that some things are indeed more good
than others." At the Mount, college officials created a new core curriculum with
a mandatory seven-course sequence that covers philosophical and religious ground
from Western and non-Western traditions.

   Even among faculty members, there is a split in the reaction ethics gurus
encounter.

   Some professors, particularly those in the hard sciences, say that ethics has
no place in their courses, and that moral instruction is so intangible, so
squishy, that it serves little purpose.

   Yet some professors hunger for ways to include social dimensions to their
courses. At a recent day-long seminar at UB's Hoffberger Center, community
college instructors clamored for a way to involve case studies to present moral
quandaries, while saying they wanted to avoid preaching to students.

   Sometimes a change in thinking is as simple as a proverbial light turning on
above a head. When Hopkins engineering professor Marc Donohue, an expert in
molecular thermodynamics, was living in upstate New York, an enormously strong
power line was installed within 10 miles of his house, sparking local protests.
"If you walk under a 765,000-volt power line with a light bulb in your hand, it
will light up - the [electromagnetic] fields are that strong," Donohue said.

   He began clipping newspaper articles about the controversy and other issues
in science and engineering and bringing them to class. Now, Donohue teaches a
course on ethics and engineering, and colleagues ask him to guest lecture every
semester.

   "A significant number of [students] say this is the best course they ever
had," Donohue said. "It tells them about things that are real, in the real
world, that they had probably never thought about."

   As often as not, campus officials and professors say, this renewal of
interest in ethics has been driven by outside donors, many of whom reflect the
current concern over a collapse of morality in American culture.

   At the University of Wyoming in Laramie, an alumnus from the class of 1956
promised $ 1 million if it would find another $ 1 million to set up an ethics
center. "His main concern was what he seemed to see as the decline in moral
values across the country," David Resnik, an associate philosophy professor
charged with heading the year-old center, said of donor Carl Williams, a cable
television magnate.

   At Case Western University, law professor Robert P. Lawry authored a report
two years ago saying the university was not challenging undergraduates about the
principles that guided their lives. "We weren't doing a very good job," said
Lawry, who has taught legal ethics courses for two decades at the private
Cleveland campus.

   But now, backed by a $ 2 million grant from a local foundation, a Case
Western initiative is trying to get as many professors as it can to embrace the
idea.

   At Presbyterian College, a religious school in Clinton, S.C., a $ 237,000
grant from the Miami-based Knight Foundation kicked off a complete curriculum
overhaul in 1992, in which all professors were challenged to include ethics to
their classes.

   "If you just have two or three classes on ethics in philosophy, in some ways
that sends the wrong message implicitly to students, that ethics is only a small
part of their lives," said Richard Baker, director of the ethics center at
Presbyterian.

   Now, biology lectures touch on the controversial implications of gene
therapy. Economists discuss the environmental costs of doing business.

   And, in literature, professors explicitly address ethical issues that they
once talked around.

   "There's a concern that we're in an age of moral decline," Baker says.

   "Ethics is more than a reflection on values, the consideration of values. You
don't need to brainwash students, but you do need to make them more reflective."

   Pub Date: 7/21/96

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, GEORGE W. HOLSEY: SUN STAFF, Professor at work: Fred Guy
heads the Hoffberger Center for Professional Ethics at the University of
Baltimore.; PHOTO, GEORGE W. HOLSEY: SUN STAFF, In the classroom: Professor Fred
Guy, head of the Hoffberger Center for Professional Ethics at the University of
Baltimore, is a leader in bringing ethical considerations to the attention of
his students.

TYPE: EDUCATION

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1996


                             2743 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     July 20, 1996, Saturday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF;
Jury told witness will say anything

BODY:


   A federal court jury in the Whitewater trial in Little Rock of two Arkansas
bankers was told Friday that the government's star witness was prepared to tell
prosecutors whatever they wanted to hear. The defense testimony was aimed at
discrediting Neal Ainley, former president of Perry County Bank, who testified
earlier against presidential aide Bruce Lindsey and bank owners Herby Branscum
Jr. and Robert Hill. Lindsey is an unindicted co-conspirator.

   Cooperating with independent counsel Kenneth Starr in a plea agreement,
Ainley contended the defendants and Lindsey schemed to illegally hide cash
withdrawals by President Clinton's 1990 gubernatorial campaign. Lindsey was the
campaign treasurer. Gary Butler, a carpenter from Perryville, Ark., said that
after Ainley pleaded guilty to two misdemeanors, the former bank president told
him: "When the big boys get hold of you, you'll tell them anything they want to
hear."

   Billy Fox Jones, a Bigelow, Ark., carpenter who works with Butler, said he
heard Ainley comment in a different conversation: "When the big man gets you,
you're just about willing to do anything to save yourself."

CRIME Psychic search

   Authorities began draining 3 million gallons of water from an abandoned rock
quarry in Graniteville, Mo., after a woman claimed she had a vision that a girl
missing for seven years had been dumped there. Madison County Sheriff Verlon
Young refused to identify the person who claims the 13-year-old girl's body was
wrapped in a blanket and rested at the bottom of the quarry, which is 30 feet
deep. Gina Dawn Brooks disappeared Aug. 5, 1989, while riding a bike near her
rural home in Fredericktown, 35 miles east of the granite quarry here in
southeast Missouri. Investigators believe she was abducted.

False test reports

   A veteran chemist with the Drug Enforcement Administration has acknowledged
that for the past several months, she has been filing false drug test results.
Hundreds of drug cases in Texas and six other states may be affected, said
Howard Schlesinger, director of the DEA laboratory in Dallas, where chemist Anne
Castillo worked. The agency suspended Castillo last month after she was
confronted and admitted that she reported results on drug evidence without
conducting the required tests.

HEALTH Gene therapy test

   The first human test of gene therapy aimed at easing or curing rheumatoid
arthritis is under way. This week, University of Pittsburgh researchers injected
cloned genes into the pingpong ball-sized knuckles of a 69-year-old woman who
has had arthritis for 20 years. Her knuckles will be removed next week and
replaced with prosthetic joints in a previously scheduled operation. Researchers
then will examine cells in the knuckles to see whether they produce a protein
that blocks interleukin-1, the hormone that causes swollen joints.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former University of South Carolina President James Holderman
 (left) arrives at court Friday in Columbia with his lawyer, Joe
 McCulloch. / ERIC GLENN / Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1996


                             2744 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      July 20, 1996 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 017

LENGTH: 202 words

HEADLINE: Biogen to invest in neighboring firm

BYLINE: By ERIC CONVEY

BODY:

   Biogen Inc. said yesterday it will invest up to $ 87 million over the next
few years to help a neighboring Cambridge biotech company develop and sell
proteins that promote the regeneration of tissue.

   The deal, which covers three so-called "hedgehog" proteins, calls on Biogen
to invest $ 6 million over the next two years to support research at closely
held Ontogeny Inc.

   The research will initially focus on disorders of the central nervous system.

   In addition to the research money, Biogen will provide so-called "milestone"
payments of up to $ 27 million for research success related to each of the three
proteins.

   In return, Biogen will get exclusive worldwide rights to therapies based on
Ontogeny discoveries in the field of hedgehog proteins, Biogen said in a
statement. Ontogeny will keep rights to any gene therapies.

   "The two companies will collaborate closely on research," Biogen's statement
said.

   Biogen derives most of its revenue from sales of Avonex, a drug used to treat
relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis.

   Also yesterday, Ontogeny named Doros Platika its new president and chief
executive, effective immediately.

   Biogen stock closed up 75 cents a share yesterday at $ 58.50.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1996


                             2745 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    July 20, 1996, Saturday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Health Briefs; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: Health Briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   'Being fit is good for you'

    If you think that being a couch potato can't be as bad for
your health as smoking, a new study of fitness and longevity
should be a wake-up call: Being unfit can shorten your life as
much as a cigarette habit - and more than high blood pressure
or elevated cholesterol can.

   ""Being fit is good for you whether you have other risk factors
or not,'' said Steven Blair of the Cooper Institute for Aerobic
Research in Dallas.  The study appears in the Journal of the
American Medical Association.  Being fit demonstrated a
protective effect against other risk factors.  Said Blair,
""It's not all right to smoke, but if you do smoke you are
better off if you exercise. ''

   Hysterectomy alternative

   Many women with abnormally heavy or painful menstrual
periods resort to hysterectomy to alleviate the problem.  But a
new study from England shows that less invasive procedures, in
which only the womb lining is removed, are a safe and
effective substitute.

   The procedure, known as endometrial resection, requires only
an overnight hospital stay and in the future may become an
outpatient procedure, the researchers say in a report in the
New England Journal of Medicine.  A hysterectomy - removal of
the uterus - is more traumatic and costly and necessitates a
much longer recovery time.

   Researchers from Royal Free Hospital in London said that in a
study of 525 women who received endometrial resection, 71
percent to 80 percent obtained relief from the symptoms,
though menstruation was not halted in all patients.  Nine
percent underwent a subsequent hysterectomy within five years
of the procedure.  The bleeding condition is known as
menorrhagia.

   The resection is performed with a laser or an electrical probe
that cauterizes the uterine lining.  More recently, a balloon
device that uses heat to ablate the lining has been
introduced.

   Drs.  Karen Carlson and Isaac Schiff of Massachusetts General
Hospital wrote in an accompanying editorial that the procedure
- which is available in many U.S. medical centers - gives
women a useful and effective alternative to hysterectomy and
to medications, which do not always help.

   Arthritis therapy studied

   A 68-year-old woman has become the first patient to undergo
gene therapy for arthritis, the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center announced.

   It represented the first such study for an autoimmune
disorder, in which a person's immune system attacks the body's
own tissues, said a spokesman for the university.

   The gene therapy, begun Wednesday, is aimed at blocking
cellular events that lead to erosion and inflammation within
human joints affected by rheumatoid arthritis.

   ""We are optimistic that this type of intervention will someday
halt the biological processes underlying these diseases,'' said
Chris Evans, principal investigator for the study.

   Another researcher noted that current therapies, while
reducing pain, do not stop the progress of rheumatoid
arthritis.

   The patient received injections of her own cells into the
knuckles of one hand.  The cells were cultured and modified to
carry a gene that blocks both joint erosion and inflammation.

   Forty million Americans are afflicted with some form of
arthritis.  Rheumatoid arthritis affects 2.1 million Americans,
mostly women.


LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1996


                             2746 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      July 19, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for arthritis faces 1st test; W.Va. woman 1 of 9 to get
experimental treatment

SOURCE: NEWSDAY

BODY:


   The first test of gene therapy against chronic arthritis -- to see if the
procedure is safe -- has begun in a 68-year-old West Virginia woman, doctors
reported yesterday.

   Although the science underlying the treatment is difficult and complex, the
procedure itself was simple, "just a pinprick, and afterwards we took her out to
dinner," molecular biologist Chris Evans, at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, said.

   The one-hour gene therapy involved injecting genetically engineered synovial
cells into two of the woman's arthritic finger joints. Similar cells that had
not been altered genetically were injected into two other joints for purposes of
comparison. Synovial cells form the slippery surface in joints that allows bones
to rub against each other smoothly.

   It will not be known for months whether there was any effect that might be
beneficial, after tissue samples are taken from affected finger joints to see if
the treatment did anything, Evans said. The main goal, he said, is to assess
safety. Evans said all four of the treated finger joints will be removed next
week when the woman undergoes surgery to put in artificial finger joints. The
patient, Carlene Lauffer, from Weirton, W.Va., is the first of nine women who
will receive the experimental treatment.

   Pub Date: 7/19/96

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1996


                             2747 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 19, 1996, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 23; National Desk

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF;
 PENNSYLVANIA;
 NEW GENE THERAPY TARGETS ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:


   A gene therapy treatment for arthritis, developed at the University of
Pittsburgh and being tested on humans for the first time, is the first aimed at
treating a nonfatal illness, said Christopher Evans, one of the study's
principal investigators. Doctors now treat arthritis with drugs, surgery and
artificial joints, but no cure exists. Dr. James Herndon, an orthopedic surgeon,
said the therapy could lead to a cure. Evans said he hopes the therapy will be
generally available within five years.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1996


                             2748 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 19, 1996, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-9

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PIONEER EXPECTS NO RELIEF

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Carlene Lauffer is no whiner, though few would blame her if she were. For 20
years, rheumatoid arthritis has inflamed her joints and made pain her constant
companion.

   As a cook at a West Virginia high school and then a Nevada casino, she spent
long days on her feet and regularly wrapped her gnarled fingers around knives
and spoons. Her doctor urged her to retire early, but she worked until age 65.

   ''It hurts. It's bothersome,'' she said yesterday. ''You just live with it.''

   On Wednesday, Lauffer, 68, of Weirton, W.Va., became the first patient to
receive gene therapy for arthritis. Dr. James Herndon, chairman of orthopaedic
surgery at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, injected specially
treated cells into the knuckles of her left hand. Researchers hope the cells
will produce proteins that would ease the pain and halt further deterioration of
the joints.

   There's no guarantee that it will work but, in any case, it won't benefit
Lauffer. Because her arthritis is so advanced, she will return to Pitt next
Wednesday when Herndon will replace all four knuckles on her left hand with
artificial joints made of silicone rubber.

   Gene therapy, for Lauffer, meant only some additional blood draws and
undergoing the cell injections into each of her knuckle joints. But when Herndon
had suggested that she would be a good candidate for the study, she had agreed
readily.

   ''This will not help me at all,'' said Lauffer, a tall, willowy woman who
answered questions goodnaturedly at a news conference yesterday. ''But it may
help someone in the future.''

   The silicone rubber joints Lauffer receives next week are basically the same
as those used 30 years ago, Herndon said. The joint is so small and must undergo
such strain that more sophisticated and complex artificial joints have all
failed. If gene therapy proves effective, however, joint replacement for
arthritis may eventually become unnecessary.

   ''We hope that, eventually, I'll be out of business, so to speak,'' Herndon
said.

   During this early stage of research, scientists only want to determine that
they can place beneficial genes into the joints, get them to produce the
anti-arthritis proteins and for the proteins to be biologically active. Six
years of research showed it can be done in animals, but researchers will get
their first hint of whether it's possible in humans after they analyze joint
fluids and materials removed from Lauffer's hand next week.

   Though arthritis affects millions, finding patients for the gene therapy
trial has been difficult, said Dr. Christopher Evans, a molecular geneticist who
has led the program in arthritis gene therapy. Patients must have rheumatoid
arthritis that requires replacement of finger joints. And because of concerns
that genetic changes not be passed on to other generations, the subjects must be
women past the age of menopause.

   Thus far, only three patients have been considered as candidates. One said
no, Lauffer said yes and one more is still being evaluated, Evans said. Eight
more patients are needed.

   Lauffer, who already has had a hip joint replaced and one of her thumb joints
fused, expects to undergo further surgery to replace joints in her right hand
and fuse her right wrist.

   ''I feel wonderful and I'm very happy because I was the first one'' to
undergo gene therapy for arthritis, she said. But she knows she's not free of
arthritis' grip.

''No, no, I'm never pain free,'' she said. ''You just learn to live with it.''

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1996


                             2749 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 19, 1996 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 67 words

HEADLINE: ARTHRITIS TREATMENT TESTED

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA

BODY:

   Researchers injected cloned genes and a mouse virus into Carlene Lauffer's
painfully swollen and twisted knuckles in the first human test of gene therapy
aimed at easing or curing arthritis. The gene therapy treatment, developed by
researchers at the University of Pittsburgh, is the first aimed at treating a
non-fatal illness, said Christopher Evans, one of the study's principal
investigators.

COLUMN: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1996


                             2750 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1996 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              July 19, 1996 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: STATE; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: 1st test of gene therapy done on arthritis patient

BODY:

   PITTSBURGH (AP) Researchers injected cloned genes and a mouse virus into
Carlene Lauffer's painfully swollen and twisted knuckles in the first human test
of gene therapy aimed at easing or curing arthritis.

    "I feel wonderful," Lauffer said yesterday, a day after the treatment to the
knuckles of her left hand, which are swollen to the size of Ping-Pong balls.

    The gene therapy treatment, developed by researchers at the University of
Pittsburgh, is the first aimed at treating a nonfatal illness, said Christopher
Evans, one of the study's principal investigators.

    The key to the treatment, developed by Evans and Paul Robbins, is a protein
that blocks interleukin-1, the hormone that causes swollen joints and destroys
cartilage, the researchers said. Cells from a patient's joints are removed and
injected with a cloned gene that produces the protein. The cells are then
re-introduced to the patient's body, piggy-backed on a mouse virus.

    "What we essentially do is to convert the joint into a little factory that
makes its own medicine," Evans said.

    Evans said yesterday that a protein pill is impractical because it would be
destroyed during digestion, while injecting the protein daily would be
inconvenient for most patients.

    Currently, doctors treat arthritis with drugs, surgery and artificial
joints, but no cure exists.

    Dr. James Herndon, an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in hands and helped
with the project, said the gene therapy could lead to a cure.

    "We hope that eventually I will be put out of business, so to speak," he
said.

    Evans said he hopes the therapy will be available within five years.

    Lauffer, however, won't be cured by Wednesday's treatment. Doctors will
remove her knuckles next week and replace them with prosthetic
joints.Researchers will study her real joints to see if the therapy was a
success.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                             2751 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      July 19, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 967 words

HEADLINE: Stepsister begs jurors to spare Klaas' killer

BYLINE: Paul Leavitt

BODY:

   Lawyers trying to save Richard Davis, 42, from the death penalty
in the slaying of 12-year-old Polly Klaas rested their case Thursday
in a San Jose, Calif., courtroom. The case sparked a national
drive for get-tough-on-crime laws, particularly against previous
violent offenders like Davis, who had been sentenced to 16 years
in prison but got out in eight. His stepsister, Brenda Kidd, begged
jurors to spare the habitual criminal's life. "I love him,"
she said. "I'm a Christian and I feel that Rick can change."
Davis was convicted June 18 of the 1993 abduction and murder of
Polly from a slumber party at her Petaluma home. Jurors must decide
whether Davis' penalty should be death or life in prison. Deliberations
could begin next week.


   BAD BERRIES: Raspberries from Guatemala are the probable carrier
of the cyclospora outbreak that has sickened almost 1,000 people
in the USA and Canada, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
said. It's still unclear how the one-celled parasite -- which
can cause diarrhea, vomiting, weight loss, fatigue and muscle
aches -- got on the berries. The news came too late for frustrated
California strawberry growers, whose crop Texas officials had
named as a suspected source of infection, prompting $ 20 million
in losses over the past four weeks.

   ARTHRITIS RESEARCH: Scientists at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center have performed the first human gene therapy to
treat rheumatoid arthritis. Doctors injected a gene that produces
an inflammation-blocking hormone into the knuckles of a patient
with severe arthritis in hopes it would produce the anti-arthritis
chemical. The procedure won't help the patient -- she is scheduled
to have her arthritis-crippled knuckles removed Wednesday and
new, artificial joints implanted -- but doctors will examine tissue
from the hand to see if the gene therapy worked and if the body
is producing the arthritis-blocking hormone.

   DENVER AIRPORT: The control tower at problem-plagued Denver International
Airport was operating on emergency generator power, almost a week
after power surges knocked out electricity. The FAA says a surge
cut power for 66 minutes last Friday, leaving the tower without
communication and delaying 32 flights. Batteries that are supposed
to take over during a power outage also failed. Controllers used
cellular phones and hand-held radios until the generator kicked
in. The $ 5 billion airport opened in February 1995, 16 months
late and $ 2.5 billion over budget.

   Record rains drench the Midwest

   In Orland Park, Ill.: Ruth Gentile is helped aboard an airboat
after being stranded at home by a flood. Up to 17 inches of rain
fell on the Midwest in 36 hours. The Missouri River along the
Iowa-Nebraska border rose 6 feet in 24 hours. Thousands of Chicago-area
homes were flooded. Gov. Jim Edgar declared 13 counties disaster
areas and said damage could reach hundreds of millions of dollars.
More rain is possible today.

   EXECUTIONS: Tommie Smith, 42, was put to death by injection in
Indiana for the 1980 gunshot murder of Indianapolis Police Sgt.
Jack Ohrberg. The execution was delayed because a technician couldn't
insert a needle into a vein in Smith's arm after trying for 15
minutes. A physician then put it in a foot artery and the execution
proceeded. In South Carolina, Fred Kornahrens, 47, was to be executed
today by injection for the 1985 gunshot and stabbing murders of
his ex-wife, her father and her 10-year-old stepson.

   ANTI-GANG MOM CONVICTED: Mary Thompson, 41, an anti-gang activist
in Eugene, Ore., was convicted Wednesday of aggravated murder
for arranging a gang-related killing in 1994. She also was found
guilty of hindering prosecution for lying to police and helping
dispose of the gun that killed Aaron Iturra, 18. Once Thompson's
friend, Iturra had told police her son pulled a knife on a boy.
Two teens have pleaded guilty to Iturra's murder.

   ALSO THURSDAY . . .

   -- BIBLE CONTEST SLAYING: A Dadeville, Ala., man who was angry
that he lost a Bible-quoting contest killed the man who bested
him, police said. Gabel Taylor, 38, was shot once in the face.
The name of the suspect was withheld.

   -- EXTRADITION CLEARED: A U.S. Supreme Court justice rejected
an appeal by Irish prison escapee James Smyth, clearing his extradition
from San Francisco to Northern Ireland. Smyth, a Catholic and
Irish nationalist, was serving time for attempted murder when
he and 38 others escaped from the Maze prison near Belfast in
1983.

   -- TOBACCO LAWSUIT: Connecticut filed a $ 1 billion lawsuit against
the tobacco industry, joining at least nine other states seeking
to recover taxes spent treating tobacco-related illnesses. Attorney
General Richard Blumenthal said Connecticut taxpayers spend $ 100
million on Medicaid alone to treat the diseases caused by tobacco.

   Little Maranda 'in good hands'

   A Macomb County, Mich., judge hearing the second trial of a custody
fight over Maranda Ireland Smith, 5, met with the child and said
"she seems to be in pretty good hands." The hearing is continuing.

   The case -- pitting Maranda's father, Steven Smith, against her
mother, Jennifer Ireland -- drew national attention when a judge
in 1994 awarded custody to Smith because his mother would care
for Maranda, whereas Ireland put the girl in day care. The judge
said Maranda was better off with "blood relatives" rather than
"strangers."

   The Michigan Supreme Court ordered a new trial, saying Ireland's
use of day care while attending the University of Michigan was
not pertinent to deciding the girl's custody. The court also ordered
that a different judge hear the case.

   Contributing: Adam Weintraub, Angela Townsend and Shannon Tangonan.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, AP; PHOTO, B/W, Scott Strazzante, Daily Southtown via AP;
PHOTO, B/W, Detroit News; Polly: Abducted, killed in 1993 In Orland Park, Ill.:
Ruth Gentile is helped aboard an airboat after being stranded at home by a
flood. Up to 17 inches of rain fell on the Midwest in 36 hours. The Missouri
River along the Iowa-Nebraska border rose 6 feet in 24 hours. Thousands of
Chicago-area homes were flooded. Gov. Jim Edgar declared 13 counties disaster
areas and said damage could reach hundreds of millions of dollars. More rain is
possible today. Ireland: Put daughter in day care

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1996


                             2752 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   July 18, 1996, Thursday, Southland Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

HEADLINE: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS / THE PACIFIC;
 EU CLEARS THE WAY FOR DRUG COMPANY;
 HEALTH: A $36-MILLION UNION BETWEEN SANDOZ AND CIBA-GEIGY WOULD LEAD TO
CREATION OF NOVARTIS.

BYLINE: From Bloomberg Business News

DATELINE: STRASBOURG, France

BODY:


   The European Commission approved a $36-billion union between Swiss drug
makers Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy with only minor amendments.

   The commission, the executive agency of the European Union, gave the green
light for the creation of Novartis after the two companies agreed to license out
the production of methoprene, an ingredient used to make animal flea-control
products.

   Novartis will be the world's second-largest drug company after Glaxo
Wellcome, with annual sales of $ 22 billion and market capitalization of about $
80 billion. U.S. regulatory officials must also approve Novartis. A decision is
expected by November.

   The companies also said they are ready "to use their influence" to guarantee
competition in gene therapy. That means non-exclusive licenses could be granted
for some future patents for products used to treat brain and other tumors, the
commission said in a statement.

   The approval was widely expected after the EU's advisory committee, made up
of antitrust officials from each of the 15 EU nations, voted to clear Novartis
at a closed meeting July 2.

   The creation of Novartis involves a stock swap that will leave Sandoz
shareholders with 55% of the new company's equity, while Ciba investors will get
45%.

   "Novartis will continue to face competition in all areas from a number of
major competitors," the commission said, citing rivals Glaxo Wellcome and Bayer.

   Granting companies production licenses for methoprene is a minor
modification, said Birgit Kulhoff, an analyst at Union Bank of Switzerland,
before the ruling. Because it is not Program, Ciba's fastest-growing
flea-control product, the loss shouldn't be big.

   "They can expect some small losses," Kulhoff said. "What's important is that
Program stays and that everything goes smoothly with pharmaceuticals."

   In animal health, Novartis will control about 40% of the EU market. It will
also be strong in the markets for blood pressure and bone disease treatments,
the commission said.

   The EU's investigation also looked at crop protection, where Novartis is set
to be twice as large as its next competitor. It will control more than half of
some markets in seed-treatment and fungicides, especially in France.

   Though Switzerland isn't an EU member, the commission reserves the right to
investigate any merger where combined EU sales exceed $ 324 million $ 314
million and worldwide sales exceed $ 5 billion.

   EU Competition Commissioner Karel Van Miert said in an interview July 4 that
Ciba and Sandoz had been "particularly cooperative" during the commission's
inquiry. That kind of cooperation, he said, was not always evident in EU
antitrust investigations.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1996


                             2753 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

HEADLINE: Arthritis Researchers Try Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

BODY:

   Researchers in Pittsburgh yesterday performed the first gene therapy on a
patient with rheumatoid arthritis, an effort to use a radically new approach to
block the progress of the incurable, crippling disease. The treatment marks the
first time gene therapy has been tried for a chronic disease that is not
life-threatening.

   The test, which entailed injecting genetically modified cells into the
knuckles of an arthritis patient, is the first step, the researchers said, in
developing a treatment that can stop the progress of the disease, which destroys
the linings of joints.

    The experimental treatment, performed at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, is also the first gene therapy that has been tried for an
autoimmune disorder, in which a person's immune system attacks the body's
tissues.

   During the procedure, details of which are to be announced today at a
briefing at the hospital, cultured joint-lining cells were injected into two
knuckles of a woman's hand. The cells contained genes responsible for a protein
that blocks a natural substance that causes inflammation.

   The researchers said this initial experiment, and eight similar ones planned
during the next year, would not help the patients involved. Doctors plan to
remove the current patient's knuckles for detailed analysis next week, when she
is to get artificial joints to replace those crippled by the disease.

   These first short-term tests are to help establish the safety of the
procedure before going into longer-term trials to prove its effectiveness, the
researchers said.

   "This opens a new chapter in the treatment of arthritis and other disorders
of the bones and joints," said Dr. Christopher H. Evans, co-principal
investigator for the study. Dr. Evans said that current treatments for
rheumatoid arthritis were unsatisfactory. "Our idea is to try a different
approach," he said.

   Dr. Brian T. Butcher, vice president for research with the Arthritis
Foundation, praised the Pittsburgh scientists for doing innovative yet careful
work. But Dr. Butcher warned against expecting too much from the research too
soon, noting that efforts to apply gene therapy to other diseases had achieved
mixed results, at best.

   "This is an exciting time for arthritis research," Dr. Butcher said. "No one
has ever tried gene therapy in any arthritic disease, and this new approach
hopefully will lead to effective, appropriate treatment. This is a good first
step based on a lot of solid work."

   Dr. Raphael Hirsch, an arthritis researcher at Children's Hospital Medical
Center in Cincinnati, said the Pittsburgh work was an exciting initial step in
applying years of animal research to humans. Dr. Hirsch said researchers were
looking at several genes that might counter the inflammation that destroys
tissue in arthritis cases, and at different ways of getting those genes to
places in the body where they might be beneficial. But the ideal combinations
have yet to be found, he added.

   "Gene therapy has a lot of potential in arthritis and other diseases," Dr.
Hirsch said, "but it's a bit premature to talk about it as a therapy that will
become common in clinics in the near future. There are reasons to believe gene
therapy might become more effective in arthritis than with other diseases, but
that has to be proven."

   In cancer, for instance, a therapy has to kill every malignant cell to be
effective, he said, but an arthritis treatment that partly reduced inflammation
could result in great relief for patients.

   Rheumatoid arthritis is characterized by the inflammation of tissues that
line certain joints, called synovium, resulting in pain, stiffness, irritation
and swelling. The inflammation occurs when the immune system produces cells and
chemicals that attack the synovium, gradually digesting bone and cartilage and
leading to crippling disability.

   The Arthritis Foundation says 2.1 million Americans have rheumatoid
arthritis. Women are three times more likely than men to have the disease, which
normally develops in middle age and becomes progressively worse.

   In Pittsburgh, Dr. Evans, working primarily with Dr. Paul D. Robbins, started
developing the potential therapy six years ago. Bolstered by animal studies
conducted by groups worldwide, the researchers decided to use a gene that
produces a chemical that blocks the action of interleukin-1, a substance active
throughout the body that helps start a cascading immune response attacking
foreign substances and microbes. In rheumatoid arthritis, interleukin-1 has been
found to be a key substance in the inflammation and destruction of synovial
tissue.

   The gene is mated to a retrovirus developed by Dr. Robbins, and the virus,
treated so that it cannot reproduce in the body, inserts the gene into synovial
cells removed from the patients and maintained in culture. These treated cells,
put back into a joint, should bind to the lining and produce a chemical that
blocks receptors that normally would grab interleukin-1 and allow it to do its
damage, the researchers said.

   In today's one-hour procedure, Dr. James H. Herndon, chief of orthopedic
surgery at the medical center, anesthetized the left hand of the first patient
volunteer, Carlene Lauffer, a 68-year-old food services manager from Weirton,
W.Va. After withdrawing fluid from her knuckles for analysis, Dr. Herndon
injected cultured synovial cells containing the gene into two knuckles, and
control cells that did not contain the genes into two others. To control the
experiment, neither Dr. Herndon nor the other researchers know which joints got
the cells with the new genes.

   Next Wednesday, Dr. Herndon will remove Ms. Lauffer's knuckles, rendered
useless by the disease, and replace them with artificial ones made of silicon
rubber, a procedure she had been previously scheduled for.

   Dr. Evans said that even after only a week exposed to the potential
treatment, the knuckles should tell researchers if the gene transfer to the
surrounding synovium worked, if the genes turned on and worked, and if they
produced a gene product that blocked interleukin-1 receptors.

   "If there are no unforeseen complications, we will try intervening earlier in
the disease, when there is a chance of stopping the inflammation and saving the
joints," Dr. Evans said. And, if the therapy is successful, it may be tried with
other forms of arthritis and other autoimmune diseases, he said.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. James H. Herndon of the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center prepared syringes yesterday before the gene therapy procedure. (Keith
Srakocic for The New York Times)


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1996


                             2754 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A3-15

SWEATSHOP DEBATE IN HONDURAS

   While some critics denounce what they see as exploitation in the low-wage
"monstrous sweatshops" of Honduras, some workers see the apparel assembly plants
as a relatively sure road to a better life.  A1

TIGHTER SECURITY IN SAUDI ARABIA

   Defense Secretary William J. Perry announced a plan to improve security
precautions for American troops in Saudi Arabia.  A1

YELTSIN'S INTRIGUING CHOICES

   News analysis: Russia's President is building a new Government that seems to
be designed to insure that none of his deputies can possibly trust each other.
A3

MISSION TO SERBIA FALLS SHORT

   An American mission to persuade Serbia's President to remove the Bosnian Serb
leader, Radovan Karadzic, from power ended without progress.  A10

DEFENSE CUTS BY FRANCE

   France said it would disband a third of its army regiments and shut military
bases and hospitals.  A10

EUROPE COOL TO U.S. MOVE ON CUBA

   President Clinton's decision to suspend for six months part of a law that
would penalize foreign companies using American plants seized by Cuba got only a
lukewarm welcome by Europeans.  A15

Thousands of Israelis went on strike to protest planned budget cuts.  A7

Anillaco Journal: Patronage helps an Argentine town.  A4

National A16-21, D22-23

TIME WARNER DEAL CLEARED

   Regulators have effectively approved the merger of Time Warner and Turner
Broadcasting System, but will require the new company's cable-television systems
to carry a second news channel as a rival to its own Cable News Network.  A1

PESTICIDE BILL ADVANCES

   The House Commerce Committee approved legislation that would fundamentally
reshape the regulation of pesticides in food.  A20

NEW ROLE FOR GENE THERAPY

   Scientists performed gene therapy on a patient with rheumatoid arthritis, the
first time gene therapy has been tried for a chronic disease that is not life
threatening.  A16

HOPE IN UMBILICAL BLOOD

   Scientists reported that blood from an infant's umbilical cord could provide
treatment for patients with leukemia and other diseases.  A19

EARTH'S CORE MOVES SEPARATELY

   Scientists reported finding evidence that Earth's inner core is spinning
freely and slightly faster than the rest of the planet.  A20

TESTIMONY ON VALUJET

   The former Inspector General for the Transportation Department told a Senate
panel about her suspicions of safety problems at Valujet and the department's
reaction.  A18

MAN BEHIND 'PRIMARY COLORS'

   The Newsweek columnist Joe Klein said he was "Anonymous," the author of
"Primary Colors." D23

LATE MAIL FOR PEROT PARTY

   Many supporters of Ross Perot's Reform Party in New York State have yet to
receive a candidate preference survey that they are to return by Saturday.  D22

CELL PHONES FOR CRIME WATCH

   The cellular phone industry will contribute 50,000 cellular telephones to
citizen patrols.  D23

DOLE CRITICIZES SCHOOLS

   Bob Dole said public schools were overrun by crime and mediocre and unions
were partly at fault.  D22

N.R.A. UPSET WITH DOLE

   The National Rifle Association, upset that Bob Dole has backed off his
opposition of an assault-gun ban, threatened to withhold its endorsement of his
candidacy.  D22

CLINTON OPPOSES WELFARE BILL

   The President objected to a Republican welfare bill and urged Congress to
send a substitute.A21

ON DRUG USE IN THE WHITE HOUSE

   Secret Service agents said 40 Administration officials who were screened had
a history of drug use beyond experimentation.  D23

Metro Report B1-8

PLANE EXLPODES OFF LONG ISLAND

   A T.W.A. 747 airplane bound for Paris with more than 200 people aboard
exploded over the waters off eastern Long Island after leaving Kennedy Airport.
The Coast Guard said there were no survivors.  A1

A FIREBALL APPEARS IN THE SKY

   Witnesses to the crash, near Westhampton, L.I., reported seeing a bright ball
of fire fall into ocean waters.  A1

TAX EVASION CASE WIDENS

   At least 600 New York City employees are suspected of failing to pay Federal
and state income taxes in what officials said may have been an organized scheme
at several city agencies. Some of the suspected evaders claimed that the United
States Government had no authority to tax them.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

Alison Chase, director of Pilobolus Dance Theater.  C16

Theater: Critic's Notebook.  C13

Music: New York Philharmonic in Central Park.  C13

Sports B9-15

Baseball: Red Sox rally to beat the Yankees. B9

Column: Vecsey on Janet Evans B9

N.B.A.: O'Neal's offer grows. B9

The Home Section C1-11

Keeping your cool C1

Garden Notebook C1

At home with Sarabeth Levine C1

Obituaries A24

Paul Touvier, Frenchman convicted of war crimes against humanity

Dr. Kenneth T. Bainbridge, directed first test of an atom bomb

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Pataki's legislative scorecard.

The better welfare bill.

Steven R. Weisman: Markets.

Letters

Maureen Dowd: Liddy, Hillary, Nancy.

Derrick Bell: Et tu, A.C.L.U.?

Samantha Power: Croatia's threat to peace.

Gideon Rose: Bully-boy foreign policy.

Chronicle D24

Bridge C17

Crossword C16



LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1996


                             2755 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

HEADLINE: INTERNATIONAL BRIEFS;
European Union Clears Sandoz-Ciba Merger

BODY:

   The European Commission said yesterday that it had approved a $36 billion
union between the Swiss drug makers Sandoz A.G. and Ciba-Geigy A.G. with only
minor amendments. The commission, the executive agency of the European Union,
authorized the creation of the new company, Novartis A.G., after Ciba and Sandoz
agreed to license the production of methoprene, an ingredient used to make
animal flea-control products, and to "use their influence" to guarantee
competition in gene therapy.

    Novartis is to be the world's second-largest drug company after Glaxo
Wellcome P.L.C., with annual sales of $22 billion and market capitalization of
about $80 billion. United States regulators must also approve Novartis. Ciba and
Sandoz said they expect a decision "in the next few months," and hope to merge
by early autumn.   (Bloomberg Business News)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1996


                             2756 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 18, 1996, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 946 words

HEADLINE: PITT RESEARCHERS TRY GENE THERAPY TO TREAT ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: CARMEN J. LEE, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   University of Pittsburgh researchers treated a rheumatoid arthritis patient
yesterday using gene therapy that one Pitt official said was on the ''frontier
of scientific and clinical investigation.''

   Although gene therapy has been used to treat diseases such as cancer and
AIDS, yesterday's test marked the first time gene therapy had been used for a
chronic disease that is not life-threatening.

   The experimental treatment, which involved injecting genetically modified
cells into the knuckles of an arthritis patient, also was the first time gene
therapy had been tried for an autoimmune disorder, in which a person's immune
system attacks his or her tissues.

   ''It's certainly on the frontier in scientific and clinical investigation. No
question about it,'' said Dr. Savio L-Y. Woo, vice chairman of research for
Pitt's department of orthopedic surgery and director of the department's
Musculoskeletal Research Center.

   ''We're very proud that (our researchers) are taking laboratory results and
applying them to clinical studies to help people with arthritis.''

   Dr. Joseph C. Glorioso, chairman of molecular genetics and biochemistry at
Pitt and director of its Gene Therapy Center, said researchers hoped gene
therapy eventually would evolve into a treatment for a variety of disease,
similar to the way in which transplant surgery has developed over the years.

   ''One of the neat things about gene therapy is that it's a technology that
can be used to replenish the body with genes to correct genetic defects,'' he
said.

   Dr. Christopher H. Evans, co-principal investigator for the study, told The
New York Times that current treatments for rheumatoid arthritis were
unsatisfactory.

   ''This opens a new chapter in the treatment of arthritis and other disorders
of the bones and joints,'' he said ''Our idea is to try a different approach.''

   During a one-hour procedure, the details of which are to be announced at a
briefing today at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Dr. James H.
Herndon, chief of orthopedic surgery at the center, anesthetized the left hand
of a patient volunteer, Carlene Lauffer, 68, of Weirton, W.Va., and withdrew
fluid from her knuckles.

   He then injected into two knuckles cultured joint-lining cells that contained
genes responsible for a protein that blocks a natural substance that causes
inflammation.

   Rheumatoid arthritis is characterized by the inflammation of tissues that
line certain joints, called synovium, resulting in pain, stiffness, irritation
and swelling. The inflammation occurs when the immune system produces cells and
chemicals that attack the synovium, gradually digesting bone and cartilage and
leading to crippling disability.

   Yesterday's test is the first step in developing a treatment that can stop
the progress of the disease, researchers said.

   The initial experiment, and eight others planned during the next year, will
not help the patients involved, researchers said.

   But the tests should help establish the safety of the procedure before
long-term trials begin to prove the procedure's effectiveness.

   Doctors plan to remove Lauffer's knuckles next week, when she is scheduled to
get artificial joints to replace those crippled by the disease, for detailed
analysis.

   Glorioso said researchers wanted to determine whether there were any negative
effects of putting therapeutic genes in cells and then placing them in a
person's joints.

   Scientists also want to find out whether other joints will be affected in
addition to the joints in which the joints were injected, he said.

   If there are no side effects, researchers will be able to look into ways of
injecting the genes directly into a joint rather than placing them in cells
first, Glorioso said.

   He added that even if successful, gene therapy would be more of a treatment
than a cure because the cause of arthritis still has to be determined.

   ''The symptoms will disappear, even though the person would still have the
disease, in effect,'' he said.

   Dr. Brian T. Butcher, vice president for research with the Arthritis
Foundation, praised the Pittsburgh scientists for doing innovative but careful
work. But Butcher also warned against expecting too much from the research too
soon, noting that efforts to apply gene therapy to other diseases have had mixed
results, at best.

   ''This is an exciting time for arthritis research,'' Butcher told The New
York Times. ''No one has ever tried gene therapy in any arthritic disease, and
this new approach hopefully will lead to effective, appropriate treatment. This
is a good first step, based on a lot of solid work.''

   Dr. Raphael Hirsch, an arthritis researcher at Children's Hospital Medical
Center in Cincinnati, told The New York Times that the Pittsburgh work was an
exciting initial step in applying years of animal research to humans.

   The Pitt researchers, for example, had worked for several years on animals,
particularly rabbits. Glorioso said rabbits had joints big enough to study the
effects of the therapy.

   Hirsch said researchers were looking at several genes that might counter the
inflammation that destroys tissue in arthritis cases as well as different ways
of getting those genes to places in the body where they may be beneficial. But
the ideal combinations have yet to be found, he added.

''Gene therapy has a lot of potential in arthritis and other diseases,'' Hirsch
said, ''but it's a bit premature to talk about it as a therapy that will become
common in clinics in the near future. There are reasons to believe gene therapy
might become more effective in arthritis than with other diseases, but that has
to be proven.''

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1996


                             2757 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 18, 1996, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 931 words

HEADLINE: PITT RESEARCHERS TRY GENE THERAPY TO TREAT ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: WARREN E. LEARY, THE NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:


   Researchers in Pittsburgh yesterday performed the first gene therapy on a
patient with rheumatoid arthritis, an effort to use a radically new approach to
block the progress of the incurable, crippling disease.

   The treatment marks the first time gene therapy has been tried for a chronic
disease that is not life-threatening.

   The test, which involved injecting genetically modified cells into the
knuckles of an arthritis patient, is the first step in developing a treatment
that can stop the progress of the disease that destroys the linings of joints,
the researchers said.

   The experimental treatment performed at the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center also is the first time gene therapy has been tried for an autoimmune
disorder, in which a person's immune system attacks his or her tissues.

   During yesterday's one-hour procedure, details of which are to be announced
today at a briefing at the hospital, cultured joint-lining cells injected into
two knuckles of a woman's hand contained genes responsible for a protein that
blocks a natural substance that causes inflammation.

   Dr. James H. Herndon, chief of orthopedic surgery at the medical center,
anesthetized the left hand of the first patient volunteer, Carlene Lauffer, 68,
a food services manager from Weirton, W.Va. The researchers said this initial
experiment, and eight similar ones planned during the next year, would not help
the patients involved. Doctors plan to remove Lauffer's knuckles next week, when
she is scheduled to get artificial joints to replace those crippled by the
disease, for detailed analysis.

   These first short-term tests are to help establish the safety of the
procedure before going into longer-term trials to prove its effectiveness, they
said.

   ''This opens a new chapter in the treatment of arthritis and other disorders
of the bones and joints,'' said Dr. Christopher H. Evans, coprincipal
investigator for the study. Evans said current treatments for rheumatoid
arthritis were unsatisfactory. ''Our idea is to try a different approach,'' he
said.

   Dr. Brian T. Butcher, vice president for research with the Arthritis
Foundation, praised the Pittsburgh scientists for doing innovative but careful
work. But Butcher warned against expecting too much from the research too soon,
noting that efforts to apply gene therapy to other diseases have had mixed
results, at best.

   ''This is an exciting time for arthritis research,'' Butcher said. ''No one
has ever tried gene therapy in any arthritic disease, and this new approach
hopefully will lead to effective, appropriate treatment. This is a good first
step, based on a lot of solid work.''

   Dr. Raphael Hirsch, an arthritis researcher at Children's Hospital Medical
Center in Cincinnati, said the Pittsburgh work was an exciting initial step in
applying years of animal research to humans.

   Hirsch said researchers were looking at several genes that might counter the
inflammation that destroys tissue in arthritis cases as well as different ways
of getting those genes to places in the body where they may be beneficial. But
the ideal combinations have yet to be found, he added.

   ''Gene therapy has a lot of potential in arthritis and other diseases,''
Hirsch said, ''but it's a bit premature to talk about it as a therapy that will
become common in clinics in the near future. There are reasons to believe gene
therapy might become more effective in arthritis than with other diseases, but
that has to be proven.''

   In cancer, for instance, a therapy has to kill every malignant cell to be
effective, he said, but an arthritis treatment that partially reduced
inflammation could result in great relief for patients.

   Rheumatoid arthritis is characterized by the inflammation of tissues that
line certain joints, called synovium, resulting in pain, stiffness, irritation
and swelling. The inflammation occurs when the immune system produces cells and
chemicals that attack the synovium, gradually digesting bone and cartilage and
leading to crippling disability.

   The Arthritis Foundation says 2.1 million Americans have rheumatoid
arthritis. Women are three times more likely than men to have the disease, which
normally develops in middle age and gets progressively worse.

   In Pittsburgh, Evans, working primarily with Dr. Paul D. Robbins, started
developing the potential therapy six years ago. Bolstered by animal studies
conducted by groups worldwide, the researchers decided to use a gene that
produces a chemical which blocks the action of interleukin-1, a substance active
throughout the body that helps start a cascading immune response that attacks
foreign substances and microbes.

   In rheumatoid arthritis, interleukin-1 has been found to be a key substance
in the inflammation and destruction of synovial tissue.

   The gene is mated to a retrovirus developed by Robbins, and the virus,
treated so that it cannot reproduce in the body, inserts the gene into synovial
cells removed from the patients and maintained in culture. These treated cells,
put back into a joint, should bind to the lining and produce a chemical that
blocks receptors that normally would grab interleukin-1 and allow it to do its
damage, the researchers said.

In Lauffer's procedure yesterday, after withdrawing fluid from her knuckles for
analysis, Herndon injected cultured synovial cells containing the gene into two
knuckles, and control cells that did not contain the genes into two others. To
control the experiment, neither Herndon nor the other researchers know which
joints got the cells with the new genes.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1996


                             2758 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1996 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      July 17, 1996 Wednesday 1ST EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: NEW HOPE IN AIDS RESEARCH CSU prof touts gene transfer

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:
 Breakthrough research announced yesterday by a Colorado State University
scientist could lead to lifelong resistance to HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

   Pathology Professor Ramesh Akkina has developed what he says is a nearly 100
percent effective way of getting "good" genetic information into blood-forming
cells.

   The delivery method, which allows researchers to get genes where they want
them to help the body fight disease, also holds treatment promise for such
illnesses as diabetes, cystic fibrosis and cancer.

   "This method gives us an efficient way to carry disease resistance into many
different types of cells through gene transfer," Akkina said in announcing his
research yesterday. "If someone would have talked to me three or four years ago
and asked if this were possible, I would have said no."

   It still could be several years before the delivery system is tested in
humans. Thus far, it's been used only in mice.

   Nonetheless, Akkina and colleagues at UCLA may have found the vehicle to
break through one of several huge hurdles facing gene therapy or fighting
disease on a genetic level. Previous attempts have been only 30 percent to 40
percent effective.

   Gene therapy essentially involves replacing the "bad" or harmful portion of a
virus' genetic makeup with "good" material. A few years ago, gene therapy was
hailed as a great hope against a host of genetic or inherited diseases. But
while many researchers have continued the pursuit, development of gene therapy
has proven elusive.

   Dr. Chip Schooley, head of infectious disease at the University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, said Akkina's work is "one of a number of different
approaches people are taking" to develop gene therapy. Akkina's work is
supported by a National Institutes of Health grant.

   "Any advance in this helps us all," said Schooley, who is the leader of the
AIDS Clinical Trials Group that performs AIDS studies at 30 U.S. centers. His
lab is focusing on gene therapy in treating AIDS. "This is the kind of
incremental research" that is needed to push the research forward, he said.

   Cancer also has been targeted for possible gene therapy. CU oncology
Professor Michael Glode said, "If it's a very effective (delivery system),
that's good. We need a lot more very effective" gene therapy delivery systems.

   However, Glode was concerned that the research development may create false
hope in patients and families for an impending cure. Disease research, Glode
said, "does move along slowly from the perspective of any one patient. That's
the sad thing."

   Glode said gene therapy "is very much in its infancy. We would love to have
an F-15 on the shelf, but we're still in the glider pilot days."

   What he called a "huge challenge" to gene therapy has been developing an
effective delivery system. Akkina's research "certainly is a step forward in
that direction." The other challenge is in finding ways to ensure that once the
good genetic information is inserted, the viruses continue to produce the
genetically altered material, Glode said.

   More than a year ago, Akkina and his team began manipulating a retrovirus,
which is what causes AIDS. Retroviruses infect cells by integrating their genes
into the host cells.

   "We took the retrovirus and basically took all the bad things out," Akkina
said. Anti-HIV genetic information is inserted into the disabled retrovirus, and
its surface is stripped. A coating borrowed from the virus vesicular stomatitis
is wrapped around the retrovirus and it is injected. Vesicular stomatitis causes
disease in animals such as cattle and horses but is harmless to humans.

   "In essence, we are using viral infection, which people think of as a bad
thing, to carry beneficial genes into cells," Akkina said.

   The bullet carrying the "good" genetic information finds its target: stem
cells, which are the "seeds" for blood cells including T-cells that are infected
by HIV.

   The stem cells, which divide in bone marrow, last a lifetime, Akkina said, so
one treatment theoretically could alter them enough to continue producing
generation after generation of HIV-resistant T-cells.

   Akkina said use of the vesicular stomatitis virus' coating opens the door to
using it to attack many diseases since it readily infects a wide variety of
cells.

   "Any inherited genetic disease, particularly where there is a gene that is
mutated and not working properly, or if a specific gene has been identified as
the cause of disease," could be a candidate for the delivery system, Akkina
said.

   So far, the researchers have achieved their results in genetically altered
mice. Since they lack immune systems, these mice allow human tissue to grow
inside them. Other researchers have only achieved results in test tubes, Akkina
said.

   The problem now is how to get the altered T-cells to produce the "good" gene
at a very high level.

   The next step is to determine which of several anti-HIV genes is the most
effective. Researchers may be able to get around HIV's ability to mutate easily
by focusing on the part of the virus' genetic makeup that doesn't change much.

   For example, Akkina said, there are parts of HIV's genome that are needed for
the virus to replicate. They could be targeted for manipulation: "The idea is
simple: If you can stop the virus from replicating, you can stop the virus."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Denver Post/Susan Biddle Pathology Professor Ramesh Akkina
works with living cells that he grows in his CSU lab for use in gene transfer
experiments.  The Denver Post/Jonathan Moreno New therapy through gene transfer

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1996


                             2759 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                July 17, 1996, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: GENE FLOW; ALTON MAN IS FIRST IN WORLD TO GET A NEW TREATMENT FOR
BRAIN TUMORS

BYLINE: John Schieszer Special To The Post-Dispatch

BODY:


   A florist from Alton has become the first patient in the world to undergo a
new gene-therapy technique that doctors hope can greatly improve treatment of
brain tumors.

   On July 5, Dick Strack, 54, was told he had glioblastoma, one of the
deadliest tumors and one of the most difficult to treat. Most patients die
within a year of diagnosis.

   "I cried for a week, and everybody thought I was never going to stop crying,"
said Dorothy Strack, 54, Dick's wife. They have four grown children. Dick Strack
owns Dick's Flowers in Alton and Wood River.

   On Monday, brain surgeons at St. Louis University School of Medicine
performed a unique procedure. They used a computer guidance system to remove as
much of the tumor as possible. Then they implanted gene-therapy cells directly
into Strack's brain.

   "We will only know if it is a success by looking at the long-term effects,"
said Dr. Richard Bucholz, who performed the three-hour surgery with Dr. Kenneth
Smith.

   "This is a fast-growing tumor, so it would be our hope that if we are going
to see an effect we will know within a year or year and a half."

   Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common brain tumor in middle-aged adults.
It accounts for about 30 percent of all primary brain tumors. Bucholz says
50,000 new cases are diagnosed every year in the United States.

   Worldwide, about 35 brain tumor patients have undergone gene therapy. But
this is the first time a specific gene called the Herpes Thymidine Kinase gene
(TK gene) has been inserted into brain tumor cells using a computer guidance
system pioneered at St. Louis University School of Medicine.

   Bucholz hopes to treat 15 to 20 brain tumor patients over the next year as
part of a multicenter trial under way in the United States and Europe. A total
of 400 patients are expected to undergo the treatment at 12 medical centers.

   "This study is the first use of an exciting new technique in the treatment of
disease," Bucholz said. "The combination of computer guidance and genetic
manipulation may prove useful in a wide range of neurological diseases."

   With this procedure, the TK gene is carried into the brain tumor cells by a
mouse virus. The virus is known as the vector, and it acts as a vehicle carrying
the TK gene into the tumor cells.

   Placement of the vector is critical. The vector travels only a few
centimeters from where it is injected. St. Louis University is part of this
study because its neurosurgeons have developed a computer guidance system to
place the vector precisely in the brain.

   Although this treatment uses the herpes TK gene, patients are not at risk of
getting herpes simplex infection, which causes mouth sores and other types of
infections.

   "The important consideration here is that we are not giving the herpes
virus," Bucholz said. "We are giving a gene from the herpes virus."

   Dorothy Strack said she and her husband never hesitated about undergoing the
new treatment.

   "We feel very strongly that the progression of the events was through divine
intervention. We have many churches in our metropolitan area praying for him,
and we feel God has intervened and brought us to these doctors," Dorothy Strack
said.

   So far, Strack is recovering well, and he could go home as soon as this
weekend. Bucholz says everything has gone well and now it is just a matter of
time to see whether this gene therapy experiment has worked.

   Dorothy Strack, a registered nurse, says they were prepared to go anywhere
for treatment. Instead they found it less than 40 miles from home.

   She says that although many people may laugh at her, she believes this has
happened through the direct power of prayer.

   "We called all the churches and told them to pray, and then we called back a
week later and said thanks, your prayers worked," she said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Color photo by Karen Elshout/Post-Dispatch - Dorothy Strack
talks with Dr. Richard Bucholz (left) and Dr. Kenneth Smith on Tuesday, as they
check her husband, Dick Strack, recovering from brain surgery.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1996


                             2760 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JULY 15, 1996, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 2619 words

HEADLINE: IPO Fever May Be Cooling Off
 Even some hot issues could face postponements

BYLINE: Peter Sinton, Chronicle Senior Writer

BODY:

    The first half of 1996 was the best of times for new stock issues. But with
last week's market sell- off fresh in the minds of entrepreneurs, venture
capital firms, underwriters and others who have supped at the public trough,
even some hot issues look likely to be postponed. On Friday it was revealed that
Wired Ventures, the darling of the digerati, would postpone its initial public
offering until October.

   Few investors are predicting the worst of times, but many pros believe the
number of IPOs will slow in the months ahead. In addition, huge price increases,
which often come on the first day of trading, will be more subdued.

   ''The pace of new deals was unsustainable. You couldn't rationalize the
valuations,'' said Gretchen Knoell, a managing director of Punk, Ziegel & Knoell
in San Francisco. ''Everyone wanted a piece of an IPO and felt that they could
make 30 percent on the first day.''

   Knoell and some other investment bankers are relieved that IPO fever seems to
be cooling, along with saner valuations.

   To put a price on new issues, underwriters look at the value of
''comparable'' companies and often set the price at 70 or 80 times next year's
projected earnings. A few years ago a P/E ratio of 40 to one was considered sky
high. When there were no earnings on the horizon, no problem.

   REPLACING THE LBO

   ''The IPO has replaced the LBO (leveraged buyout) as the American financial
obsession,'' observed William Marbach, managing editor of Venture Finance in New
York.

   That was clear in the first six months. Nationwide, 462 companies went to the
stock market looking for capital. They raised $ 33.5 billion, nearly 2 1/2 times
as much as during the same period last year, according to Bloomberg Business
News. In the past three months alone, 250 companies landed more than $ 18
billion, shattering the $ 12.2 billion record set in the final quarter of last
year.

   As a sign of the times, Hambrecht & Quist, the San Francisco investment bank
that has made a lucrative specialty out of taking other companies public, is
planning an IPO of its own.

   Companies have lined up to issue more than $ 15 billion in initial and
follow-on offerings in the months ahead. And the backlog is growing as dozens of
firms delay their IPOs until stock market jitters about high-tech stocks
subside.

   ''There will be a slowdown in the second half,'' said Misha Petkevich,
managing director of investment banking for Robertson Stephens. But he feels
good companies ''with records and revenues'' will likely get financed.

   OFFERINGS TURN GOLD

   Investors struck gold on many new offerings in the first half, but it helped
to be fleet of foot since some of the biggest gains were made in just the first
hours of trading. But some who gambled on high-tech and other startups that had
more promise than profits, got trounced.

   The biggest stock market gainers among IPOs nationwide in the past six months
were two local companies. Shares of Digital Video Systems, a Santa Clara maker
of video CD players and video compression components shot up 270 percent, from 5
to 18 1/2, from its May 9 IPO to the end of June. Titan Pharmaceuticals, a Menlo
Park company developing anti-cancer therapies, also more than tripled in price
from 5 to 16 1/2.

   Excluding first-day gains -- Digital Video soared from 5 to 14 1/4 on opening
day -- Supergen of Emeryville was the top IPO in the country in the first half.
It climbed from 6 to 6 1/4 after trading began March 12 and subsequently tacked
on more than 9 points for a 148 percent gain.

   As usual among Bay Area IPOs, technology dominated. About 20 software and
computer systems companies went public, including several that help companies
and large organizations access and manage data from desktop computers.

   Surprisingly, there were even more health science and service IPOs. These
included new pharmaceutical companies and developers of new minimally invasive
surgical techniques to diagnose and treat coronary and other diseases.

   DIVERSE BAY ECONOMY

   There was also an assortment of one-of-a-kind IPOs, reflecting the diverse
makeup of the Bay Area economy.

   Cost-Plus, the specialty retailer based in Oakland, may be low-tech but its
shares nearly doubled in value in the past three months. The stock of Western
Staff Services, an employment agency specializing in high-tech workers, has
barely moved since April. And shares of Dignity Partners, which buys life
insurance policies of terminally ill people at a discount and sells the death
benefits, dropped by about 40 percent.

   Despite the record numbers of IPOs and billions raised, the performance of
local issues was far below year earlier levels. Bay Area IPOs gained an average
of 27 percent from their offering price through the end of June.  That out-
distanced the Dow Jones Industrial Average increase of about 10 percent, but was
far short of the average IPO gain of 60 percent in the first half of last year.

   Moreover, 20 of the 57 local IPO stocks declined in value from their opening
price in the first half. Another 10 have slipped below their offering price in
the past two weeks.

   Still, some investors did very well, especially venture capital firms that
got into investments early. Norwest Venture Capital, which is based in
Minneapolis and has an office in Palo Alto, backed 12 companies that completed
IPOs in the first half. These included Forte Software of Oakland, which is worth
$ 687 million and Documentum of Pleasanton, which is worth $ 323 million.
Norwest General Partner Kevin Hall figures that his company and its
institutional partners invested a total of about $ 40 million for an average 10
percent stake in the dozen companies suddenly worth about $ 600 million on
paper.

   ''Returns are about 15 times our investment,'' said Hall. ''Five or six would
be normal.''

   Investment bankers, who typically take 7 percent of IPO proceeds, got real
cash. So did attorneys, accountants and printers who split another 1 percent or
2 percent of the funds.

   All equity offerings, including secondary issues, totaled $ 63.6 billion in
the first half -- nearly double the year-earlier mark, according to Securities
Data Co. in Newark, N.J.

   Morgan Stanley was the leading U.S. underwriter with $ 9.1 billion in
proceeds, including AT&T's $ 2.6 billion spin-off of Lucent Technologies -- the
biggest IPO ever. San Francisco's Montgomery Securities ranked No. 9 with 44
issues worth $ 2.7 billion and Robertson Stephens ranked No. 10 with 26 deals
worth $ 1.4 billion.

   HIGH TECH STILL TOPS

   High technology continued to dominate, accounting for more than 36 percent of
the 820 total equity deals. Securities Data reports Baltimore-based Alex. Brown
& Sons was lead manager on 26 high- tech deals, followed by Hambrecht & Quist in
San Francisco with 23 issues.

   In ''aftermarket'' trading, H&Q's 14 IPO deals had the best performance among
the major investment banks with nearly a 40 percent average gain from offering
date through June 28. But as they say in the prospectuses, past results are no
guarantee of future performance. For proof, one only has to look at the IPO
winners of a year ago.

   Premisys Communications of Fremont was the premier performer, more than
quadrupling in price from its IPO in April, 1995 to the end of June. In the past
12 months, Premisys stock has doubled again, but the No. 2 and No. 3 winners a
year ago have gone into a tailspin.

   Integrated Silicon Solutions, a Sunnyvale semiconductor maker, soared from 13
to 52 1/4 in the first six months of 1995 only to skid all the way back to 10
7/8. Oak Technology, a multimedia chip and software company also based in
Sunnyvale, is selling for 9, half of what it was a year ago.

   A number of other IPOs this year went off like rockets only to fall to earth.
Makers of software to navigate the Internet caused investors the most serious
motion sickness,

   The biggest loser among local new issues was Excite Inc. Shares of the
Cupertino ''search engine'' company rose from 17 to 20 on the first day of
trading April 4, only to lose half their value by the end of June. Yahoo, a
Sunnyvale rival, should perhaps be renamed yo-yo. After zooming from 13 to 33 on
April 12, its shares have slipped to 17 1/2. Infoseek of Santa Clara jumped from
12 to 14 on its first trading day and since then has slumped to 6 1/4.

   CHART (1):

   IPO SCORECARD

   Initial public offering records for the first six months od 1996(x):

   * Biggest U.S. IPO EVER: $ 2.6 billion Lucent Technologies spinoff from AT&T

   * Biggest gain from offer price: Digital Video Systems of Santa Clara-up 270%

   * Biggest gain from first day close: Supergen of Emeryville-up 180%

   * Biggest local IPOs: Arterial Vascular Engineering and Heartport, which
raised $ 105 million eac

   * Local IPO worth the most: Total shares of Forte Software valued at $ 950
million

   * Biggest local Gains: same as above Digital Video and Supergen

   * Biggest local decline: Excite of Mountain View-down 51%

    (x) Based on performance through June 28, 1996

   Sources: Securities Data Co., Bloomsberg Business News and Chronicle research

   CHART (2):

   NORTHERN CALIFORNIA IPOS IN THE FIRST HALF -- HOW THEY FARED

   Between January 1 and June 28, 1996, 57 local companies went public.

   Their offerings are listed in order of stock market performance

   through July 12.

 Company / Ticker Symbol
 Type of business
 Headquarters / Phone number
             Amount       Offer price                    Market value
    Offer    raised (n)   (adjusted    Price     Percent  7/12/96
    date  (in millions)   for splits)  7/12/96   change   (in

   Digital Video Systems DVIDU

   Digital video equipment

   Santa Clara (408) 748-2100

   5/9 21 5 18 260.0% $ 151.10

   Titan Pharmaceuticals TTNPU

   Pharmaceuticals

   Menlo Park (415) 617-2090

   1/18 16.0 5 15 1/4 205.0 107.50

   SuperGen SUPGU

   Pharmaceuticals

   Emeryville (510) 655-1075

   3/12 21.0 6 13 7/8 131.3 159.64

   Forte Software FRTE

   Computer software

   Oakland (510) 869-3400

   3/11 45.2 21 37 1/2 78.6 687.67

   Cost Plus CPWM

   Specialty retail stores

   Oakland (510) 893-7300

   4/4 42.0 15 26 1/2 76.7 213.14

   Iridex IRIX

   Electromedical devices

   Mountain View (415) 962-8100

   2/16 23.0 9 14 1/2 61.1 21.82

   Siebel Systems SEBL

   Sales automation software

   Menlo Park (415) 329-6500

   6/28 33.4 17 26 52.9 403.80

   Cotelligent Group COTL

   Computer related services

   San Francisco (415) 439-6400

   2/14 21.3 9 13 3/4 52.8 85.72

   HMT Technology HMTT

   Magnetic, optical media

   Fremont (510) 490-3100

   3/13 84.0 10 15 50.0 659.69

   Worldtalk Communications WTLK

   Computer software services

   Santa Clara (408) 567-1500

   4/12 16.8 8 12 50.0 19.39

   Verilink VRLK

   Telephone equipment

   San Jose (408) 945-1199

   6/10 59.2 16 23 1/4 45.3 292.16

   Edify EDFY

   Computer software

   Santa Clara (408) 982-2000

   5/2 37.5 15 20 3/4 38.3 322.75

   Red Brick Systems REDB

   Computer software services

   Los Gatos (408) 399-3200

   1/22 32.4 18 24 1/2 36.1 272.19

   Landec LNDC

   Polymer products

   Menlo Park (415) 306-1650

   2/14 33.6 12 16 1/4 35.4 166.34

   Indus Group IGRP

   Industrial software

   San Francisco (415) 904-5000

   2/29 52.5 15 20 1/4 35.0 359.37

   Yahoo!  YHOO

   Internet search engine

   Sunnyvale (408) 328-3300

   4/12 33.8 13 17 1/2 34.6 459.20

   Arterial Vascular Engineering AVEI

   Medical equipment

   Santa Rosa (707) 525-0111

   4/2 105.0 21 26 5/8 26.8 821.70

   Heartport HPRT

   Heart surgery equipment

   Redwood City (415) 306-7900

   4/25 105.0 21 26 5/8 26.8 624.21

   FemRx FMRX

   Surgical equipment

   Sunnyvale (408) 752-8580

   3/27 24.3 9 10 11.1 87.86

   USCS International USCS

   Customer management software

   Rancho Cordova (916) 636-4500

   6/20 81.6 17 18 5/8 9.6 414.01

   Integrated Packaging Assembly IPAC

   Semiconductors

   San Jose (408) 321-3600

   2/28 22.5 7 1/2 8 6.7 110.74

   Aspect Development ASDV

   Software

   Mountain View (415) 428-2700

   5/24 43.0 20 20 3/4 3.8 233.62

   InVision Technologies INVN

   Aviation security products

   Foster City (415) 578-1930

   4/23 9.9 11 11 1/8 1.1 44.67

   ArthroCare ARTC

   Surgical, medical products

   Sunnyvale (408) 736-0224

   2/5 30.8 14 14 0.0 121.39

   Documentum DCTM

   Software

   Pleasanton (510) 463-6800

   2/5 43.2 24 24 0.0 323.02

   Oacis Healthcare Holdings OCIS

   Clinical information systems

   Greenbrae (415) 925-0121

   5/16 28.0 10 10 0.0 NA

   Thermatrix TMXI

   Pollution control equipment

   San Jose (408) 453-0490

   6/19 25.0 12 1/2 12 1/2 0.0 NA

   ThermoQuest TMQ

   Process control equipment

   San Jose (408) 577-1053

   3/19 45.0 15 14 3/4 -1.7 714.64

   BroadVision BVSN

   Interactive marketing software

   Los Altos (415) 943-3600

   6/21 21.0 7 6 3/4 -3.6 139.05

   Endovascular Technologies EVTI

   Surgical instruments

   Menlo Park (415) 325-1600

   2/7 24.0 12 11 1/8 -7.3 92.26

   Western Staff Services WSTF

   Employment agency

   Walnut Creek (510) 930-5300

   4/30 28.0 14 12 1/2 -10.7 129.65

   General Surgical Innovations GSII

   Surgical instruments

   Palo Alto (415) 812-9730

   5/10 45.0 15 13 1/4 -11.7 161.03

   Aradigm ARDM

   Drug delivery stystems

   Hayward (510) 783-0100

   6/19 27.5 11 9 5/8 -12.5 96.90

   Affymetrix AFFX

   Genetic information systems

   Santa Clara (408) 522-6000

   6/6 90.0 15 13 -13.3 276.11

   Cylink CYLK

   Security systems

   Sunnyvale (408) 735-5800

   2/16 75.0 15 12 3/4 -15.0 317.28

   Cardiac Pathways CPWY

   Medical diagnosis and treatment

   Sunnyvale (408) 737-0505

   6/12 47.5 19 15 5/8 -17.8 141.98

   Digital Generation Systems DGIT

   Electronic delivery services to radio

   San Francisco (415) 276-6600

   2/6 33.0 11 9 -18.2 102.51

   Farallon Communications FRLN

   Telephone equipment

   Alameda (510) 814-5100

   6/12 36.0 16 13 -18.8 140.49

   Polycom PLCM

   Telecommunications equipment

   San Jose (408) 526-9000

   4/29 23.9 9 7 1/4 -19.4 139.72

   Avigen AVGN

   Gene therapy products

   Alameda (510) 748-7150

   5/22 20.0 8 6 7/16 -19.5 43.96

   Microcide Pharmaceutycals MCDE

   Antibiotics

   Mountain View (415) 428-1550

   5/14 35.0 14 11 1/8 -20.5 114.14

   Prism Solutions PRZM

   Data Management software

   Sunnyvale (408) 752-1888

   3/14 36.9 17 13 1/2 -20.6 178.46

   Connective Therapeutics CNCT

   Therapeutic biotechnology

   Palo Alto (415) 843-2800

   1/31 27.5 11 8 5/8 -21.6 63.64

   Health Systems Design HSDC

   Healthcare consulting

   Oakland (510) 763-2629

   3/5 22.1 13 10 -23.1 64.10

   Unify UNFY

   Software

   San Jose (408) 467-4500

   6/14 25.7 12 8 7/8 -26.0 66.48

   Ultradata ULTD

   Data processing services

   Pleasanton (510) 463-8356

   2/15 25.0 10 7 3/8 -26.3 54.52

   Conceptus CPTS

   Medical devices

   San Carlos (415) 802-7240

   2/1 42.0 14 10 -28.6 91.02

   OpenVision Technologies OPVN

   System management software

   Pleasanton (510) 426-6400

   5/7 38.3 14 9 7/8 -29.5 177.82

   Eclipse Surgical Technologies ESTI

   Surgical supplies

   Sunnyvale (408) 747-0120

   5/31 64.0 16 10 3/4 -32.8 125.58

   Electronic Hair Styling EHST

   Personal hair care products

   Mill Valley (415) 380-8200

   5/22 20.8 8 5 1/4 -34.4 NA

   Onyx Pharmaceuticals ONXX

   Pharmaceuticals

   Richmond (510) 222-9700

   5/9 30.0 12 7 7/8 -34.4 NA CardioThoracic Systems CTSI

   Minimally invasive surgery

   Portola Valley (415) 529-0250

   4/18 80.1 18 11 3/8 -36.8 147.30

   CardioGenesis CGCP

   Coronary artery surgical systems

   Sunnyvale (408) 328-8500

   5/21 60.0 20 12 1/2 -37.5 145.34

   Fusion Medical Technologies FSON

   Wound closure products

   Mountain View (415) 903-4000

   6/7 27.3 13 7 3/4 -40.4 52.86

   Dignity Partners DPNR

   Life insurance

   San Francisco (415) 394-9469

   2/14 28.2 12 7 1/32 -41.4 NA

   Infoseek SEEK

   Internet service provider

   Santa Clara (408) 567-2700

   6/11 41.5 12 6 1/4 -47.9 155.91

   Excite XCIT

   Internet search engines

   Mountain View (415) 943-1200

   4/3 34.0 17 6 7/8 -59.6 74.03

   (n) Before over allotments.

   Source: Securities Data Company, Bloomberg Business News, Chronicle Research

   EC:

GRAPHIC: CHART (2): SEE

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1996


                             2761 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      July 14, 1996, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 11F

LENGTH: 994 words

HEADLINE: AIDS PROGRESS IS RAISING POIGNANT QUESTIONS

BYLINE: JOAN BECK; Chicago Tribune

BODY:


   For a change, there is much encouraging medical news to cheer about at the
current 11th International Conference on AIDS in Vancouver.

   But the price of what may be life-saving progress is sobering. And it
foreshadows some painful decisions about how much taxpayers and insurers may be
willing to spend on people with HIV infection to keep them alive indefinitely.

   It also raises broader questions about how to allocate expensive medical
resources in a future where health care is increasingly entangled with politics
and cost-cutters seem more important than physicians: Who will live? Who will
die? Who will pay? Who will get priority? Who will decide?

   What is so medically promising is the discovery and development of a new
class of drugs called protease inhibitors that act to stop the AIDS virus from
multiplying in the body. Taken with older AIDS drugs, the new medications seem
to halt the progression of HIV infection to full-blown AIDS in many patients and
can even reduce the amount of virus in the blood to an undetectable level in
some cases.

   How long the new drugs can keep people with HIV from developing AIDS isn't
yet known. It seems possible the medications could keep people with HIV
infection in remission and good health indefinitely.

   Three of the new protease inhibitors--Invirase made by Hoffman-LaRoche,
Crixivan by Merck and Norvir by Abbott Laboratories--are already on the market.
Several more are in pharmaceutical company pipelines. In part because of intense
pressure from AIDS activists, the FDA is acting much faster to get new drugs to
patients than it did earlier.

   But the new AIDS drugs point up in poignant and powerful terms the flip side
of medical progress. The new protease inhibitors cost about $ 5,000 to $ 8,000 a
year; taken with two other medications, the cost can come to about $ 12,000 to $
16,000 a year. The regimen may need to continue for years, even a lifetime.

   If only half of the estimated 800,000 infected Americans take the new drugs,
the bill could be $ 6 billion a year, the Wall Street Journal estimates. Like
the kidney dialysis program, the more lives that are extended by expensive,
on-going treatment, the higher the annual cost will grow.

   Pharmaceutical companies are already marketing the new drugs directly to gays
with HIV infection by advertising in gay publications and in exhibits at gay
expositions. But only about half of Americans with HIV are gay and bisexual men.
At least one fourth are intravenous drug users and many are inner-city blacks
and Hispanics.

   That means the overstrained Medicaid program--read taxpayers--will have to
pick up much of the bill for the new medications. That tab may be higher than
just the cost of the drugs. Treatment requires following a strict schedule of
pill taking and usually some dietary controls. Doctors fear that a break in
treatment of even a few days may allow dangerous new mutations of the AIDS virus
to develop, endangering not only the patient but others.

   Drug users, in particular, may lead such disordered lives that other health
and lifestyle problems should be solved before they start taking the new drugs,
some physicians insist. These social welfare efforts, then, must be added to the
costs of the new treatment.

   Even if these difficulties can be overcome in the United States, they seem
insurmountable in other parts of the world, especially Africa and Asia where
health care of all kinds is minimal. Not counting the United States, an
estimated 15 million to 20 million people are currently believed to be infected
with HIV.

   So devastating is AIDS in Africa, for example, that the pandemic will
significantly alter population patterns in several African nations. AIDS will
have reduced the population of sub-Saharan Africa by 100 million people by 2025,
for example, according to a report by the World Population Data Sheet.

   It seems impossible to provide such a costly and rigorous treatment regimen
for people in countries that lack even basic sanitation and where the death rate
is excruciatingly high from diseases which can be prevented or cured much more
easily and inexpensively.

   Many medical questions remain to be answered about AIDS. It will take more
years of research and experience with patients to know whether the new drugs can
actually control this vicious and wily disease and if a vaccine can ever be
developed to protect against it completely.

   But we should rejoice that such major progress has been made against a virus
that has already taken the lives of more than 325,000 Americans since it was
first identified in the early 1980s.

   We can only hope that resources can be marshaled as successfully against
other devastating diseases, such as cancer which kills many more Americans in a
single year than AIDS has done in its whole history, causes far more pain and
illness and often can not be prevented.

   AIDS has preempted an inordinate share of medical research resources in
recent years, in part because of the skilled politicking of activist groups. We
should all rejoice that the effort is now beginning to pay off, even though
problems remain and the public's tab is still running.

   But this exciting progress should be a reminder that medical victories
usually don't come cheap. The organ transplants, heart surgeries, cancer
chemotherapies and emergency room miracles have to be paid for. So will the new
antibiotics, the revolutionary gene therapies, the stroke prevention, the cures
for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, dementia, retardation, cancer and
schizophrenia we need so urgently. Just as we should not have to ration care for
individuals, we should not have to ration research among competing ills.

The time will come--soon, I think--that we will have to accept higher
health-care bills as inevitable because the alternatives of rationing or living
with the status quo are unthinkable.

   JOAN BECK is a columnist for the Chicago Tribune.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1996


                             2762 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      July 12, 1996, Friday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 02T

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
Eating-related protein identified, scientists say

BYLINE: Bill Hendrick and Amanda Husted; STAFF WRITERS

BODY:


   Scientists have identified a long-sought protein that plays a key role in the
brain's control of eating, a study suggests.

   The study, in Thursday's issue of the journal Nature, says the protein allows
a natural substance called neuropeptide Y, or NPY, tell the brain that it's time
to eat.

   Scientists have known for 10 years that NPY powerfully stimulates feeding.
When NPY is injected into the brains of rats, it makes them overeat, and
injections over a long period make rats obese.

   Researchers believe they've found the protein that helps NPY deliver its
"let's eat" message, and they are developing methods to block access to the
protein. So far, substances have been tested in rats.

   It will be at least several years before any testing is done in humans. The
work is being done by scientists at Synaptic Pharmaceutical Corp. of Paramus,
N.J., and Ciba-Geigy Ltd. in Basel, Switzerland.

   ZINC AND COLDS: Using zinc lozenges apparently helps people recover from
symptoms of a cold sooner, a study found. But don't rush to the health food
store looking for some - other studies of zinc and colds have found no benefits.
The latest study, in Monday's issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine, looked
at the effect of lemon-flavored zinc gluconate lozenges, marketed by Quigley
Corp. of Doylestown, Pa., under the brand name COLD-EEZE. One hundred employees
of the Cleveland Clinic were randomly assigned to use the zinc lozenges or
look-alike lozenges that didn't contain zinc. Those using the zinc lozenges
recovered from cold symptoms an average of three days sooner, 4.4 days vs. 7.6
days. But those who used the zinc lozenges complained of nausea, mouth
irritation and a bad taste. The manufacturer markets COLD-EEZE over the QVC
shopping network, but the product soon may be in health food stores.

   NEWS ON STUTTERING: What causes stuttering? A small study using brain scans,
on 10 men who stutter and 10 who don't as they read aloud, suggests some
possibilities. In a study in Thursday's issue of the journal Nature, the
stutterers had abnormally high activation of brain circuits involved in planning
the complex movements needed to speak, as well as in some circuits that order
the muscles to move. That fits theories that blame stuttering on overactivity in
planning speech movements, the researchers said. Other findings fit the theory
that traces stuttering to an abnormal division of labor between the right and
left halves of the brain; the left side of the brain normally is dominant for
speech, but in the stutterers both sides were equal or the right side slightly
dominant.

   BRAIN TUMOR STUDY: Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania Medical
Center have begun an experimental gene therapy they hope one day can be used to
eradicate malignant brain tumors that have proven unresponsive to conventional
treatments. In the first step of the three- week treatment, An engineered virus
was injected at several sites inside the tumor of a 61-year-old man, hoping to
deliver a "suicide gene" to the tumor cells. Over the next three years, 24
patients will participate in the study, but results won't be known for several
years. Cancer specialist Stephen Eck said the need is compelling for such novel
therapies, because such malignant brain tumors often are fatal within two years
of diagnosis.

From staff, news services and published reports

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1996


                             2763 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      July 12, 1996, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A21; THE FEDERAL PAGE

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: NIH to Kill DNA Advisory Committee; Director Says Replacement Panel
Would Defer to FDA on Gene Proposals

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Despite vocal opposition from scientists, ethicists and at least four members
of Congress, National Institutes of Health Director Harold Varmus announced in
Monday's Federal Register that he intends to abolish the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, the NIH panel that oversees human gene therapy experiments.

   The plan was detailed publicly for the first time yesterday by NIH and Food
and Drug Administration officials at a gene therapy conference in Bethesda.
Under the plan, said Lana R. Skirboll, NIH associate director for science
policy, "RAC is eliminated."

   That does not mean the government will have one less abbreviation to kick
around. Countering criticism that the change would stymie public oversight of
human genetic experiments, Varmus is proposing a new panel, the Office of
Recombinant DNA Activities Advisory Committee, or OAC.

   Like the RAC, OAC would consist of scientists, ethicists and lay
representatives (although the size would be reduced from 25 members to about
six). Like RAC members, OAC members would consider social and ethical aspects of
the rapidly growing field of gene therapy. And like the RAC, the OAC would meet
quarterly.

   "We named it OAC for a reason," Skirboll said. "It is very similar to the
RAC."

   Where OAC will differ from RAC is in the power to approve or toss out
individual gene therapy proposals. That would go to the FDA, which already has
sole authority to approve routine gene therapy experiments but defers to the RAC
for novel protocols that break new scientific or ethical ground.

   Some say that's a major problem, because the FDA does not consider ethical
issues in its approval process as the RAC does. Research centers where the
experiments would be done all have institutional review boards that would now be
charged with weighing ethical considerations, but some suspect these boards are
not up to the task.

   A June 26 letter from Sens. David Pryor (D-Ark.), Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) and Mark
O. Hatfield (R-Ore.) and Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Calif.) to Varmus cites a March
General Account Office report that found IRBs overworked and ill equipped. "It
is our concern that abolishing the RAC could abruptly add new and unfamiliar
responsibilities to the workloads of IRBs across the country," the congressmen
wrote.

   Varmus received another opposition letter from Charles R. McCarthy, who for
14 years was director of NIH's Office of Protection of Research Subjects. "I am
convinced that discontinuing protocol review by the RAC could endanger research
subjects," McCarthy wrote last month. "Furthermore, FDA is highly unlikely to
give increased attention to the rights of human subjects at a time when it is
facing harsh political pressure to accelerate its decision making."

   Skirboll countered that OAC could look at protocols submitted to FDA and
consider issues arising from those requests. Moreover, OAC would sponsor
quarterly gene therapy policy conferences to discuss controversial issues, such
as the propriety of performing gene therapy on fetuses or for cosmetic purposes.

   But W. French Anderson, the University of Southern California scientist who
performed the nation's first gene therapy test in 1990, doubted the OAC's
viability. "Nobody who's any good would spend time on a committee that has no
power," he said. "Why should these people bother to show up just for some window
dressing?"

   The proposal has some support. The Biotechnology Industry Organization, which
represents more than 650 biotech companies and other institutions, "believes
that the RAC has outlived its usefulness," said Dominique Cahn, BIO's director
of federal government activities. And Inder Verma, the Salk Institute professor
who led a recent committee assessing the federal gene therapy program, called
the plan "bold and imaginative."

   Still unknown is how the majority of scientists and citizens feels. Skirboll
implored people to write with comments during the 30-day public comment period,
which ends Aug. 7.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1996


                             2764 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 10, 1996 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1405 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   IN THE REGION
 ATLANTIC HEALTH ACQUIRES 3 PHYSICAL THERAPY PROVIDERS * Atlantic Health Group,
Wayne, said it acquired three physical therapy providers: Penn Sports Rehab,
King of Prussia; Penn Therapy Associates, Broomall; and Physiotherapy Associates
Inc., Lester. Financial terms were not disclosed. Atlantic Health Group, part of
the Liberty Mutual Group, Boston, has four other occupational and sports
medicine facilities in the Philadelphia area.

    NATIONAL MEDIA ACTS TO ACQUIRE HAWTHORNE * National Media Corp., a
Philadelphia infomercial company, signed a letter of intent to acquire Hawthorne
Communications, Fairfield, Iowa, an infomercial advertising agency. Financial
terms were not disclosed.

   SEPTA BUYS PRIMA FACIE ROADRECORDERS * Prima Facie Inc., Conshohocken, said
SEPTA will spend $400,000 to outfit 35 buses with the company's patented
RoadRecorder. The devices are digital video and sensor recorders designed to
reduce fraudulent accident claims and prevent vandalism and other crimes on
transit vehicles. SEPTA will use the devices on Route 23, which has a relatively
high accident-claim rate, Prima Facie president Shawn Marcell said.
RoadRecorders have been sold to transit systems in Delaware, and in Baltimore,
Houston, Milwaukee, Oakland and Palm Springs, Calif., and Mississauga, Ontario.

   HUNT WILL TAKE A SHARE CHARGE TO COVER CEO'S HIRING Hunt Manufacturing Co.,
Philadelphia, said it would take a charge of 11 to 14 cents per share in the
second half of fiscal 1996 to pay for its recent hiring of Donald L. Thompson as
chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer. Thompson had been
employed by Avery Dennison for 23 years, most recently as group vice president
of the $800 million Office Products Business.

   2 FOUNDING PARTNERS LEAVING TIMBY BROWN & TIMBY * The 26-lawyer firm of Timby
Brown & Timby is losing two of its founding partners to a cross-town competitor
but will remain in operation with no immediate name change planned, according to
its most senior partner, Walter J. Timby Jr. Timby's son, Walter J. Timby 3d,
said his reasons for leaving the firm he founded six years ago with his father
were personal. "We look at it as an opportunity to expand our business," he said
of his move to Margolis Edelstein with James H. Brown Jr., the other name
partner in his former firm. Timby Brown & Timby specializes in insurance defense
work.

   BROKER WHO SAYS SHE WAS RAPED DRAWS PROBATION FOR HARASSMENT * A Philadelphia
stockbroker who alleges she was raped by Boston financier Thomas Lee was
sentenced in New York to probation for harassing Lee and his attorneys with
hundreds of late-night phone calls. Laura Goldman, 38, who pleaded guilty to the
harassment misdemeanor in January, has publicly alleged she was raped by Lee but
has never filed formal charges against him. Lee denies that he raped Goldman but
has said that they had consensual sex during a 1993 date. Goldman was fined
$7,500 and sentenced to five years of probation.

   ELSEWHERE
 IMMUNE RESPONSE, BAYER AG STRIKE GENE-THERAPY DEAL * The Immune Response Corp.
and Bayer AG of Germany agreed to collaborate on a gene-therapy product to treat
hemophilia A. Under the agreement, Bayer will pay a $6 million license fee and
invest $4 million in Immune Response. In addition, Immune Response will receive
research funding, milestone payments, and royalties on future sales. Bayer will
handle regulatory approvals, development costs and manufacturing. The companies
hope to begin human testing of the gene-therapy product in 1997 or 1998. Immune
Response, of Carlsbad, Calif., also has a Montgomery County manufacturing
facility for a potential AIDS therapeutic vaccine.

   DELTA OPPOSES AMERICAN-BRITISH AIRWAYS ALLIANCE * Delta Air Lines weighed in
against the proposed alliance of American Airlines and British Airways. Delta
told U.S. transportation regulators that by cooperating on setting fares and
service, American and British Air would eliminate meaningful competition at
London's major gateway, Heathrow Airport, and would raise fares for U.S.-U.K.
travelers by reducing air-carrier choices for 72 percent of all passengers.

   GM RECALLS 292,860 CARS WITH ENGINE PROBLEMS General Motors Corp. is
recalling 292,860 cars because their engines may backfire and catch fire or fail
to start. The recall covers 1996 Buicks, Oldsmobiles and Pontiacs and 1997 Buick
LeSabres built before May 1. Some of the vehicles have faulty power-train
software, GM said. The company said there haven't been any accidents or injuries
associated with the problem and that it has corrected the software in cars built
after May 1. General Motors is notifying owners of the affected cars to take
them to dealers for a free, 30-minute repair. GM wouldn't disclose the cost of
the recall, but said it sets aside reserves to cover the cost of unexpected
repairs.

   NASD HIRES 2D SEC OFFICIAL IN TWO WEEKS * The parent company of the Nasdaq
Stock Market hired a prominent Securities and Exchange Commission official to
start up a new investor-services office. Michael D. Jones, the SEC's deputy
director for public affairs, was the second senior SEC official hired by the
National Association of Securities Dealers Inc. in the last two weeks. The moves
come as the SEC is wrapping up a major investigation of the NASD, which has
faced allegations it failed to adequately police trading abuses and other
wrongdoing by large brokerage firms.

   BEN & JERRY'S IS RAISING ICE CREAM PRICES * Ben & Jerry's premium ice cream
will soon come at more of a premium. The Montpelier, Vt., ice cream maker, known
for offbeat blends like Cherry Garcia and Chunky Monkey, will raise prices 10
cents a pint. This follows a similar move four weeks ago by competitor
Haagen-Dazs, which, like Ben & Jerry's, blamed rising milk costs.

   HERTZ WILL INSTALL AUTO NAVIGATION GUIDES * Hertz Corp., Park Ridge, N.J.,
said it would install at least 7,500 navigation units made by Rockwell
International Corp. in its rental cars, at a cost of $23 million. The devices,
which have a four-inch color monitor, use computer-generated voice prompts to
provide directions within a defined area. Customers who want the system must pay
an additional $6 a day.

   FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN U.S. IS UP FOR A THIRD YEAR * Foreign investment in the
United States rose for the third consecutive year in 1995, the Commerce
Department said, but at a much slower rate than the boom levels of 1994 and
1993. The department said outlays for new investment increased $8.7 billion - or
19 percent - to $54.4 billion last year. Outlays had jumped 74 percent and 71
percent, respectively, in the two prior years. Foreign investment remained well
below its 1988 peak of $72.7 billion largely because of a sharp reduction in the
level of investments from Japan.

   SCHOOLS TO BE OFFERED FREE INTERNET CONNECTIONS * The cable television
industry announced a plan to provide schools with free high-speed connections to
the Internet. Sixteen cable companies say they will provide 3,000 schools in
roughly 64 communities with Internet connections as part of an industry-wide
program that aims to eventually hook up all elementary and secondary schools in
the United States.

   GANNETT SELLING OUTDOOR-ADVERTISING UNIT * Gannett Co. said it was selling
its outdoor-advertising division, North America's largest, to Outdoor Systems
Inc., Phoenix, for $690 million. Gannett, Arlington, Va., said it would use the
money to repay debt incurred in its $1.7 billion merger last year with
Multimedia Inc., a publishing and broadcasting company.

   18 BUSINESSPEOPLE WILL ACCOMPANY KANTOR TO BOSNIA * Commerce Secretary Mickey
Kantor said 18 business executives would accompany him to Bosnia and Croatia to
continue a trade mission cut short by a plane crash that killed former Commerce
Secretary Ronald H. Brown.

   SOCIAL SECURITY OVERHAUL WOULD ALLOW PRIVATE ACCOUNTS * Workers could invest
part of their Social Security taxes in private accounts under a bill proposed to
overhaul the huge but troubled retirement system. The bill, offered by Rep. Nick
Smith (R., Mich.) with the endorsement of some seniors groups, also would delay
the retirement age, gradually reduce pensions for future retirees, cut the
additional benefit for married couples, and require all newly hired state and
local government workers to join Social Security.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2765 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 10, 1996, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. B-9, NEWS BRIEFS

LENGTH: 88 words

HEADLINE: BAYER IN GENE FUNDING

BODY:


   Bayer Corp. said it agreed to provide $ 10 million to Immune Response Corp.
to help fund development of a gene therapy product for the treatment of
hemophilia A. Pittsburgh-based Bayer will pay the biopharmaceutical company a $
6 million license fee and make an equity investment of $ 4 million in the
company. Bayer also will provide research funding for the hemophilia A program
and royalties on sales, if the product is commercialized. Hemophilia A is a
hereditary genetic disorder linked to a gene called Factor VIII.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1996


                             2766 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1996 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 10, 1996 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Immune Response, Bayer unit link The Carlsbad-based Immune Response Corp. and
the U.S. affiliate of Germany's Bayer Corp. announced a collaboration to develop
a gene therapy product for the treatment of hemophilia A. Bayer will provide a
$6 million license fee payment and an equity investment of $4 million, as well
as research funding, milestone payments and royalties on future sales.
Acquisition making progress Irvine-based I-Flow Corp. said yesterday its
acquisition of Block Medical, a San Diego subsidiary of Hillenbrand Industries
Inc., should close later this month.

   The cash-and-stock deal worth more than $17 million was disclosed in April.

   Both companies manufacture medical infusion devices. Mitek plans offering
Mitek Systems Inc. of San Diego disclosed plans to sell more than 4 million
shares of common stock in an offering expected to raise almost $11.6 million for
general corporate purposes.

   The offering includes 1.57 million shares to be sold by insiders and will
increase the outstanding shares by 32.3 percent to 10.26 million.

   Mitek sells automated data recognition software and related products. Hirl
new CFO for Titan The Titan Corp. of San Diego yesterday named Bernard M. Hirl
senior vice president and chief financial officer.

   Hirl was vice president of finance for Unisys Corp.'s Health Information
Management group.

   Hirl replaces Roger Hay, who left Titan for Pinnacle Micro Inc. of Irvine.

   Titan makes high technology information systems for commercial and government
clients. Acquisition by Xytronyx OK'd San Diego-based Xytronyx Inc. said a
majority of shareholders in Binary Therapeutics Inc. have approved a plan that
gives Xytronyx the option to acquire Binary by April 30, 1997, for stock valued
at $6 million.

   Xytronyx develops medical products, chiefly for cancer treatment. BPP to sell
properties Burnham Pacific Properties Inc. said it expects to close tomorrow the
$23.7 million sale of two multitenant office buildings to a major pension fund.
The San Diego-based real estate investment trust will sell the
101,458-square-foot, two-building Highlands Plaza in Del Mar and the five-story,
117,128-square-foot Fireman's Fund building on Balboa Avenue. Price REIT buys
Dallas property The Price REIT Inc. said it bought, for $12.7 million, the
210,000-square-foot Towneast Centre and Plaza on a 15-acre site in Dallas. The
announcement said the center is 100 percent leased and is expected to return 11
percent on invested capital.

   The San Diego-based real estate investment trust now owns 20 retail
properties in seven states. Coastcast rated by Oppenheimer Coastcast Corp. stock
was rated "market perform" by Oppenheimer & Co. as it initiated coverage of the
Rancho Domiquez golf club-head maker yesterday. Coastcast stock closed up $2.25
at $22.50 per share on 129,400 shares traded. Pac Bell, SBC pick Sprint Pacific
Bell and SBC Communications Inc., which hope to merge later this year, said that
each will name Sprint Corp. to handle their long-distance calls.

   The action could throw millions of dollars of business Sprint's way.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2767 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              July 9, 1996 Tuesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B07

LENGTH: 836 words

HEADLINE: GOOD NEWS ON AIDS RAISES NEW FEARS

BYLINE: Joan Beck

BODY:

   Tuesday, July 9, 1996 GOOD NEWS ON AIDS RAISES NEW FEARS

   Who will live? Who will die? Who will pay?

   Who will get priority? Who will decide?

   For a change, there is much encouraging medical news to cheer about at the
current 11th International Conference on AIDS in Vancouver, British Columbia.

   But the price of what may be life-saving progress is sobering. And it
foreshadows some painful decisions about how much taxpayers and insurers may  be
willing to spend on people with HIV infection to keep them alive  indefinitely.
It also raises broader questions about how to allocate expensive medical
resources in a future where health care is increasingly entangled with politics
and cost-cutters seem more important than physicians.

   What is so medically promising is the discovery and development of a new
class of drugs called protease inhibitors that act to stop the AIDS virus from
multiplying in the body. Taken with older AIDS drugs, the new medications seem
to halt the progression of HIV infection to full-blown AIDS in many patients
and can even reduce the amount of virus in the blood to an undetectable level
in some cases.

   How long the new drugs can keep people with HIV from developing AIDS isn't
yet known. It seems possible the medications could keep people with HIV
infection in remission and good health indefinitely.

   Three of the new protease inhibitors -- Invirase made by Hoffman-LaRoche,
Crixivan by Merck and Norvir by Abbott Laboratories -- are already on the
market. Several more are in pharmaceutical company pipelines.

   But the new AIDS drugs point up in poignant and powerful terms the flip  side
of medical progress. The new protease inhibitors cost about $5,000 to  $8,000 a
year; taken with two other medications, the cost can come to about  $12,000 to
$16,000 a year. The regimen may need to continue for years, even a  lifetime.

   If only half the estimated 800,000 infected Americans take the new drugs,
the bill could be $6 billion a year, the Wall Street Journal estimates.

   Pharmaceutical companies are already marketing the new drugs directly to
gays with HIV infection by advertising in gay publications and in exhibits at
gay expositions. But only about half of Americans with HIV are gay and  bisexual
men. At least one fourth are intravenous drug users and many are  inner-city
blacks and Hispanics.

   That means the overstrained Medicaid program -- read taxpayers -- will have
to pick up much of the bill for the new medications.

   Even if these difficulties can be overcome in the United States, they seem
insurmountable in other parts of the world, especially Africa and Asia where
health care of all kinds is minimal. Not counting the United States, an
estimated 15 million to 20 million people are currently believed to be  infected
with HIV.

   So devastating is AIDS in Africa, for example, that the pandemic will
significantly alter population patterns in several African nations. AIDS will
have reduced the population of sub-Saharan Africa by 100 million people by
2025, for example, according to a report by the World Population Data Sheet.

   It seems impossible to provide such a costly and rigorous treatment regimen
for people in countries that lack even basic sanitation and where the death
rate is excruciatingly high from diseases that can be prevented or cured much
more easily and inexpensively.

   Many medical questions remain to be answered about AIDS. It will take more
years of research and experience with patients to know whether the new drugs
can actually control this vicious and wily disease and if a vaccine can ever  be
developed to protect against it completely.

   But we should rejoice that such major progress has been made against a  virus
that has already taken the lives of more than 325,000 Americans since it was
first identified in the early 1980s.

   AIDS has preempted an inordinate share of medical research resources in
recent years, in part because of the skilled politicking of activist groups.  We
should all rejoice that the effort is now beginning to pay off, even though
problems remain and the public's tab is still running.

   But this exciting progress should be a reminder that medical victories
usually don't come cheaply. The organ transplants, heart surgeries, cancer
chemotherapies and emergency room miracles have to be paid for. So will the  new
antibiotics, the revolutionary gene therapies, the stroke prevention, the  cures
for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, dementia, retardation, cancer  and
schizophrenia we need so urgently.

   Just as we should not have to ration care for individuals, we should not
have to ration research among competing ills.

   The time will come -- soon, I think -- that we will have to accept higher
health-care bills as inevitable because the alternatives of rationing or  living
with the status quo are unthinkable.

   Copyright1996, Chicago Tribune

   Joan Beck is a columnist for the Chicago Tribune. Readers may write to her
care of the Op-Ed Desk, Chicago Tribune, 435 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, Ill.,
60611.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2768 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     July 06, 1996, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Watchdogs

BODY:


   THE PROPOSAL by National Institutes of Health Director Harold Varmus to
dismantle the institutes' 20-year-old Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee has
brought a measure of consternation among observers both lay and professional.
Those in favor of the change call it a natural streamlining of a process that,
after exciting years when genetic engineering was new, lately has come to focus
exclusively on run-of-the-mill pre-approvals of gene therapy protocols before
they are sent to the Food and Drug Administration. Critics concede this is
faster, but persist in arguing, reasonably enough, that experiments with genetic
science need all the advisory oversight they can get.

   Under the proposed new system, the FDA would take the applications directly;
at NIH, ad hoc panels would be convened to amplify a skeleton committee of six
or eight advisers to the NIH director. Wider issues might end up under the
purview of a new National Bioethics Advisory Commission the president has
promised to create, though its membership is as yet unknown and could be hotly
contested.

   The current committee, charged with approving experimental protocols before
they go to the FDA for further testing, was created more generally to help
navigate the complex ethical and scientific issues raised by the new sciences
and therapies of genetic engineering. Along the way, it has promulgated
guidelines on matters that range from the splicing of new genetic material into
bacteria and plants to the more daring possibilities of human gene therapy.

   Gene therapy may be in something of a lull at the moment, partly for reasons
that go beyond scientific ebb and flow to the larger forces shaping health care.
The large pharmaceutical companies that can afford to fund genetic research
have, for instance, focused mainly on possible cancer therapies, where the
scientific odds are thought slim but the potential market is huge, rather than
on the less widespread genetically transmitted conditions that offer better
reasons to expect results. And the committee itself, asked to relinquish the
more routine work of pre-approving FDA-bound protocols, soundly refused to do so
in a unanimous vote in December.

   Still, basing a significant structural change on such doldrums is faintly
reminiscent of the familiar if possibly apocryphal quotation from the
turn-of-the-century patents commissioner who suggested shutting down the patent
office because everything that could be invented had been invented. The truly
scary quandaries offered by genetic manipulation -- enhancement of selected
qualities, for instance -- still lie ahead. Though a national bioethics panel
might conceivably end up filling this role, it seems premature for the time
being to disband a well-established body with an institutional memory and a
familiar point of entry for the airing of public concerns.

LOAD-DATE: July 06, 1996


                             2769 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JULY 5, 1996, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1553 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Going Global
 U.S. companies seek cash from 'big pharmas'

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Whether they are hunting for a cancer cure or a high-tech alternative to
eyeglasses, U.S. medical entrepreneurs increasingly must search the world for
money and markets.

   Biotech companies need capital to get them through the long, expensive
process of bringing a new drug to market. The huge European drug companies have
proven to be the most enthusiastic believers in the long-term prospects of
biotech, and thus the most willing to lay out large sums to get their hands on
product rights.

   Medical-device companies are also going global, but for different reasons. By
taking advantage of looser regulation overseas, medical-device makers find they
can start selling products much more quickly if they conduct clinical trials and
set up manufacturing in European markets.

   Northern California, the birthplace of biotech, now has close links with most
of the cash-rich giants of the drug industry -- the so-called ''big pharmas''
like Roche, Ciba-Geigy and Glaxo Wellcome.

   The big European drug companies ''have had a problem getting a productive
new-product pipeline,'' said Dennis Purcell, managing director at Hambrecht &
Quist. ''One way to solve the problem. . .is to go out and create alliances with
emerging biotech companies.''

   OVERSEAS ALLIANCES

   Between 1975 and 1994, foreign investors provided 10 percent of the Bay Area
biotech industry's equity financing, accounted for nearly half the dollar value
of joint ventures and alliances, and figured in nearly all the major takeovers.
The foreign investment ran to some $ 12.5 billion during the past five years,
according to recent figures from the industry-supported Bay Area Bioscience
Center in Oakland.

   ''It's a global industry now,'' said Fred Dorey, president of the Bioscience
Center. ''As the pharmaceutical industry continues to consolidate, you're
getting a smaller number of global players.''

   High-profile deals involved such biotech flagships as Chiron Corp. in
Emeryville, which sold a 49.9 percent stake to the Swiss drug firm Ciba-Geigy
for $ 2.1 billion. Ciba-Geigy itself plans to merge with Sandoz, another Swiss
drugmaker, to form a new company, to be called Novartis.

   Roche Holding Ltd., another Swiss company, picked up controlling interest in
Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco for $ 2 billion in 1990. Roche also spent
$ 5.3 billion acquiring the former Syntex Corp. in Palo Alto, now called Roche
Biosciences.

   Although the goal is up-to-the-minute technology, the investment pattern can
be traced back to the 19th century, when Swiss drug companies first began
establishing complex, long-term relationships with British and German chemists.

   A SWISS TRADITION

   ''It's a 100-year-old strategy,'' said David Gollaher, president of the
California Health Care Institute in San Diego. ''You look at Switzerland and you
have to wonder why this tiny country excels in chocolate, watches and
pharmaceuticals. There's really no easy answer but it's basically all about
leveraging capital into science.''

   Some of the biggest medical-device makers also are now set up as seamless,
worldwide operations in which national boundaries count for little.

   Siemens AG, one of Germany's biggest conglomerates, employs in Concord about
450 people who make big-ticket radiation- therapy machinery for sales worldwide.

   Such operations take elaborate research and manufacturing facilities as well
as highly specialized technical staff. So even if land and labor costs might be
cheaper somewhere else, ''the kind of engineering talent you can attract keep it
here,'' said Patrick Boyle, Siemens Oncology Care Systems group vice president.

   It's relatively easy to start a company in the United States, but notoriously
hard to get a medical device approved for sale on the U.S.  market.

   EUROPEAN TRIALS CONDUCTED

   As a result, American-born device makers now routinely conduct clinical
trials and introduce new products first in Europe. The foreign medical data and
marketing savvy can then be brought back to the United States and recycled.

   ''You can start selling products in the European countries with less data
than is required by the FDA,'' said Tracy Lefteroff, managing partner at the
financial consulting firm Coopers & Lybrand. But he noted that most companies
still try to set up European trials along FDA guidelines.

   By contrast, there's not much difference in the time or effort it takes to
get a drug approved in the United States vs. European countries.

   But biotech companies need the long- term source of stable financing that
foreign drug companies provide.

   ''The stand-alone biotech company is turning out to be the exception rather
than the rule,'' Gollaher said.

    DRUGMAKERS COME A-COURTIN'

   Alliances between old-line drugmakers, mainly based in Europe and the
Northeast, and predominantly West Coast biotech startups last year were worth
about $ 3.4 billion, more than double the 1994 total.

   Mark Edwards, managing director of the San Francisco consulting firm
Recombinant Capital, noted that a new crop of drugmakers in Sweden, Germany and
France are actively courting potential biotech partners. ''The waiting room has
more people in it,'' he said.

   One example is Foster City-based Cell Genesys Inc., which got $ 50 million
from German drugmaker Hoechst Marion Roussel in October 1995 and can get another
$ 100 million if certain targets are met. The company is developing an
experimental gene therapy for AIDS.

   And this week, Human Genome Sciences, a Rockville, Md., drug-discovery
company that specializes in the emerging field of genomics, and its British
partner, SmithKline Beecham, announced $ 140 million in technology-sharing deals
including Philadelphia-based Schering-Plough, Synthelabo in France and Merck in
Germany.

   The cross-border dealmaking seems largely immune to the ups and downs of the
U.S. financial markets. If anything, a strong U.S. stock market should make
domestic financing more attractive, reducing the need to find a foreign
bankroll.

   CAPITALIZING ON CURRENCIES

   But the transcontinental alliances have continued all through the 1995 bull
market. In part, that's because foreign-based drug companies came here armed
with strong local currencies.

   ''They're just like the European tourists -- even if prices go up, things
still look like a bargain when they come over here,'' said Thomas Loarie,
chairman and chief executive of KeraVision, an East Bay maker of ''corneal
rings'' for correcting nearsightedness.

   Loarie argues that medical-device makers who launch their products overseas
are exporting technology and jobs, hurting both the U.S. economy and patients
denied access to new treatments.

   ''If I want to compete in the global landscape, I have to move quickly.  But
those of us in the United States are at a disadvantage,'' he said.

   The American medical-device industry remains far and away the world leader,
claiming close to half the global market. Still, that's down from 60 percent in
the early '80s, Loarie noted.

   By contrast, biotech boosters portray global investment as an unalloyed
benefit. It provided fully 70 percent of the biotech industry's outside
financing, according to the Bay Area Bioscience Center, and except for a round
of job cuts at Syntex following the Roche buyout, there appear to have been few
major disruptions tied to foreign takeovers.

   ''By and large, jobs have gone up, not down,'' Dorey said.

   CHART: (1)

   DRUG-BIOTECH ALLIANCES

   CHRONICLE GRAPHIC

   CHART: (2)

     NEW WORLD ORDER OF MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY
 Biggest drug-industry mergers and acquisitions:
    ACQUIRING COMPANY/                 VALUE
    ACQUIRED COMPANY           (IN MILLIONS)
    Sandoz/iba-Geigy                  27,000
    Glaxo/Burroughs Wellcome          14,900
    American Home
    Products Corp./Americar            9,700
    Hoechst Marion Roussel/MMD         7,200
    Merck/Medoc Containment Services   6,000
    Hoffmann-LaRoche/Syntex            5,300
    Lilly/PCS Health Systems           4,000
    Baxter/Grace W.R.                  3,800
    Sandoz/Gerber Products             3,700
    SmithKline/Sterling Drug           2,925
    Rhone-Poulenc Rorer/Fisons         2,600
    SmithKline/DPS                     2,300
    Ciba-Geigy/Chiron                  2,100
    Industrier                         2,100
    Hoffmann-LaRoche/Genentech         2,014
    Johnson & Johnson/Cordis           1,800
    Sanofi/Sterling Drug               1,680
    Pfizer/SmithKline                  1,450
    Tyco Intl./Kendall Co.             1,400
    BASF/Boots                         1,300
    Rhone-Poulenc Rorer/
    Institute Merieux                  1,300
    Colgate-Palmolive/
    American Home Products             1,040
    Johnson & Johnson/Kodak            1,006
    Warner-Lambert/Wellcome            1,005
    Bayer/SmithKline                   1,000
    Source:Recombinant Capital
 CHRONICLE GRAPHIC
 EC:


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CHART (,Gerhard Konard (center), showed members of a group of 20
German inventors and executives around Siemens Medical Systems in Concord.
Hermann Zierhut (left), and Wolfgang von Gentzkow, listened to Konard explain
Siemens' technology , BY FREDERIC LARSON, THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1996


                             2770 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     July 3, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 791 words

HEADLINE: Genetic research alliance expands; Human Genome, SmithKline to include
3 more firms in work; Biotechnology

BYLINE: Abbe Gluck, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Human Genome Sciences Inc. and SmithKline Beecham PLC said yesterday that
their combined efforts to use genetic coding to develop new drugs had generated
so many opportunities that they have invited three more companies to share the
work.

   In addition to renegotiating their own 1993 agreement, Human Genome, the
Rockville-based biotechnology company, and SmithKline of London said they will
receive at least $ 140 million for opening their alliance to other
pharmaceutical companies eager for access to their human gene research.

   New Jersey-based Schering-Plough Corp. said it will pay Human Genome and
SmithKline $ 55 million over five years for access to the companies' combined
gene database, and France's third largest pharmaceutical group, Synthelabo, said
it will pay $ 35 million for that access over the same period. The money will be
split equally between Human Genome and SmithKline.

   Schering-Plough and Synthelabo also will pay additional research fees and
royalties to Human Genome. SmithKline will retain the marketing rights to some
products that stem from the agreements.

   Human Genome and SmithKline, the world's ninth largest drug maker, also said
yesterday they had signed a letter of intent with Germany's Merck KGaA, for a
similar deal worth about $ 50 million. Last year, the companies also signed a
deal with Japan's Takeda Chemical Industries.

   Human Genome and SmithKline's collaboration over the past three years
generated "more opportunities to develop pioneer pharmaceutical products" than
the companies can handle alone, William Haseltine, Human Genome chairman and
chief executive, said at a news conference.

   Yesterday's deals allow more companies to benefit from collaboration. "It
would be wrong to leave opportunities unexploited," said Brad Lorimier, Human
Genome's senior vice president of development.

   Richard Koenig, spokesman for SmithKline, agreed. "The objective is to share
this pow-erful discovery tool with other companies in an effort to create more
innovative products for all of us to market," he said.

   With more scientists working, more new products will likely be developed,
Koenig said. And that means more royalties and marketing rights for Human Genome
and SmithKline.

   "This is a big deal, and I think it will take a while for people to digest it
and understand it," said David Molowa, a biotechnologies analyst at Bear Stearns
& Co. in New York.

   "First of all, they brought in two additional partners, so you have that many
more scientists working on new products, and if you include Merck, you're
talking about guaranteed cash payments to Human Genome alone of $ 90 million,"
Molowa said.

   The agreement also moves Human Genome, initially a gene-sequencing company,
closer to its goal of entering the pharmaceutical market, Lorimier said.

   By renegotiating the 1993 agreement with SmithKline, Human Genome can now
independently develop therapeutic proteins. Under the 1993 agreement, SmithKline
had the right of first refusal to develop those proteins, Lorimier said.

   Shares of Human Genome fell 12.5 cents to $ 35.125 yesterday, while
SmithKline shares rose by 50 cents to $ 55.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   Pharmaceutical stocks are generally unaffected by deals like this, said
Reijer Lenstra, who tracks biotechnology stocks at Smith Barney in New York.
"The stocks will move when the products reach the clinical stage, when they
appear successful on humans," he said.

   And although 4-year-old Human Genome has yet to turn a profit, profits may
not be the most important thing, said Molowa of Bear Stearns. "You can build
value in your company without making money, and that's what they're doing."

   From Schering-Plough's perspective, the agreement provides it with "access to
HGS's primary human genomic database, which is the largest and most complete
available anywhere," said Steve Galpin Jr., vice president of corporate
communications.

   That access "will provide Schering-Plough with an important competitive
advantage," he said.

   Schering-Plough's business, which is 80 percent pharmaceutical, includes
brands like Coppertone sun products and Dr. Scholl's foot-care products.

   In addition to its pharmaceutical agreement with Human Genome and SmithKline,
Schering-Plough also signed a separate agreement with Human Genome to
collaborate in the field of gene therapy, through which defective genes are
replaced with healthy ones.

   In February, Schering-Plough strengthened its presence in that field when it
acquired the private San Diego gene therapy company, Canji.

   Human Genome, which currently employs 250 people in Rockville, plans to
increase its staff by about 50 workers by the end of the year, Lorimier said.

   Pub Date: 7/03/96

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, SUN FILE : 1996, Human GenomeChairman William Haseltine said
deals with three firms will allow more pioneering work in pharmaceutical
research.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1996


                             2771 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;   Page 3;   Column 6;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 463 words

HEADLINE: Drug Makers Set to License Data on Genes

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Acknowledging that there may be many more possible gene-therapy drugs than
the partners can research and develop on their own, the SmithKline Beecham
Corporation and Human Genome Sciences Inc. said yesterday that they would
license their human-gene data base to two other companies in deals worth more
than $90 million.

   The Schering-Plough Corporation, based in Madison, N.J., will pay at least
$55 million, plus royalties, for access to the data developed by the two
companies and for commercialization of several products discovered by Human
Genome, which is based in Rockville, Md.

    Meanwhile, France's third-largest pharmaceutical group, Synthelabo, will pay
at least $35 million for access to and details about the biological roles of
genes in the data base. Synthelabo will develop new drugs with SmithKline, a
subsidiary of SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. of Britain.

   And a deal with Merck K.-G.a.A. of Germany, which is not affiliated with the
American drug maker Merck & Company, is expected to be announced soon, which
would be worth about $50 million over five years, the companies said.

   The deals announced yesterday are part of an effort to get actual drugs onto
the market faster than SmithKline has been able to do alone.

   William A. Haseltine, Human Genome's chairman and chief executive, said the
collaborative deals "amount to a testimony to the power and success of genomics
technology as we have implemented it."

   Shares in Human Genome, which had risen as much as $3 each shortly after the
announcement, fell 12.5 cents, to $35.125, in Nasdaq trading.

   The American depository receipts of SmithKline rose 50 cents, to $55.50, on
the New York Stock Exchange, while the share of Schering-Plough dropped 25
cents, to $62.375.

   Mr. Haseltine said that Human Genome and SmithKline had anticipated sharing
their data with other companies as far back as May 1993, when SmithKline made
its investment.

   But Human Genome's critics, primarily among other genome companies, say that
in its rush to identify sequences for 90 percent of the body's genes, the
company has simply overwhelmed SmithKline's ability to interpret the data. Other
companies, like Sequana Therapeutics Inc. and Millenium Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
have pursued a strategy of sequencing a more limited set of genes in search of
those directly implicated in disease.

   J. P. Garnier, SmithKline's chief operating officer for pharmaceuticals and
consumer health care, said that while there was some truth to the critics'
charge, it did not invalidate the data generated by Human Genome.

   SmithKline and Human Genome said they might enter additional agreements with
other companies.  SmithKline previously granted a sublicense to Takeda Chemical
Industries of Japan in June 1995.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1996


                             2772 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Lockheed Martin Is Picked For Spacecraft Project
NASA selected Lockheed Martin to build a rocket that could lead to drastic cuts
in the cost of putting payloads into space. The X-33, a wedge-shaped reusable
spacecraft, is a step toward replacing the space shuttle. The $1 billion project
features the first new rocket design in 25 years, and will be built under a
program intended to move much of the initiative for developing high-risk
technologies out of NASA's hands and into those of private industry.

   Lockheed Martin's proposal was picked after a competition with two other
California aerospace companies, Rockwell International and McDonnell Douglas.
[Page A1.]

Sybase Expects Loss and Plans Cuts
Continuing to stumble while its rivals prosper, Sybase, the data base software
company, said that it expected to post a $20 million loss for the quarter,
instead of the small profit analysts had expected, and that it would cut about
10 percent of its 6,200 jobs. [D4.]

Borland International shares fell nearly 15 percent after its chief executive
resigned and the company forecast a larger-than-expected loss in its first
quarter. [D4.]

Earnings Up 81% at Morgan Stanley
Morgan Stanley Group reported an 81 percent increase in earnings for the second
quarter. The firm earned $301 million, or $1.83 a share, in the quarter ended
May 31, exceeding most forecasts. [D2.]

Major Revamping for CS Holding
CS Holding named a new chief executive and other top officials and said it would
cut 5,000 jobs and create four new divisions. The move by CS Holding, the parent
of CS First Boston, is an abrupt shift from its chairman's defense of the bank's
structure and comes two months after a failed attempt to merge with Union Bank
of Switzerland. [D2.]

Sales Drop a Bit for G.M.
General Motors said its sales slipped 1.2 percent in June from their levels a
year earlier as consumer confidence weakened and auto dealers ran short of some
models. [D2.]

New Platform for the Gulf of Mexico
Shell Oil said it and three partners plan to build a $1.45 billion platform in
the Gulf of Mexico that will be the deepest offshore platform yet in the gulf.
[D3.]

Compaq Reorganizes Into 3 Units
Compaq Computer said it had reorganized its management into three business
units, putting a new executive in charge of its flagship corporate server
business. [D4.]

License Deals For Gene Data
Acknowledging that there may be many more possible gene-therapy drugs than they
can research and develop on their own, SmithKline Beecham and Human Genome
Sciences said they would license their human-gene data base to Schering-Plough
and Synthelabo of France in deals worth more than $90 million. [D3.]

Stocks Slip in Cautious Trading
Stocks retreated, but the pullback was tempered by caution as Federal Reserve
policy makers began a two-day meeting on interest-rate policy. The Dow Jones
industrial average slipped 9.60 points, to 5,720.38, while the Standard & Poor's
index of 500 stocks fell 2.27 points, to 673.61. The Nasdaq composite index fell
6.30 points, to 1,191.15. [D6.]

Prices of Treasury securities dropped, as traders were surprised by data
indicating strong home sales. The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond rose to
6.93 percent, up from 6.91 percent on Monday. [D16.]

GRAPHIC: Graph: "TODAY"

Factory Orders

    May figures due at 10 A.M. Eastern.

    Expected: +1.8%

Chart: "YESTERDAY"

   Dow Industrials -- 5,720.38, down 9.60

   30-yr. Treasury yield -- 6.93%, up 0.02

   The Dollar -- 110.35 yen, up 0.80

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1996


                             2773 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    July 03, 1996, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Human Genome Gains Major Research Funds; 2 Drug Firms to Provide at
Least $90 Million

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Human Genome Sciences Inc. of Rockville and its major corporate collaborator
in its genetic research, drug giant SmithKline Beecham PLC, yesterday announced
they had won at least $ 90 million in new research funding over five years from
two major pharmaceutical companies.

   Analysts applauded the move, saying there was simply too much information
coming out of Human Genome's work on mapping the human genetic code for even a
major drug company such as SmithKline to digest and make use of.

   The deal should give Human Genome sufficient funding to support its research
into the year 2002, when it hopes to begin receiving royalties from licensing
agreements with other companies, company executives said.

   "Financially we've crossed into the zone of a self-sustaining company," said
William Haseltine, chairman and chief executive of Human Genome, a biotechnology
company that is attempting to catalogue the collection of genetic codes that
define the human body. That knowledge could be used to develop new drugs and
products.

   The deals underscore the growing importance of the human genome in the
development of new drugs. It's the latest of several genome deals signed in
recent years by established drug companies such as Merck & Co., Bristol-Myers
Squibb Co. and Boehringer Mannheim GmbH with smaller gene research companies.

   It also brings new strength to the Washington region's biotech industry that
is spread out along Interstate 270 north of the National Institutes of Health.
Many of the companies are struggling financially as their products take longer
to get to market than anticipated.

   SmithKline has given Human Genome $ 125 million since 1993 in exchange for
access and rights to use the genetic information the Rockville company is
generating.

   The two partners yesterday brought in Schering-Plough Corp., which pledged $
55 million, and Syn thelabo, France's third-largest drug company, which said it
will give $ 35 million. Under the pacts, Schering and Synthelab will have access
to human genetic information that is being generated by Human Genome and, until
now, was provided exclusively to SmithKline. All four companies will have the
right to try to develop the information into new drug applications.

   Separately, Human Genome announced it has signed a five-year agreement for an
undisclosed sum to provide Schering-Plough with genetic information that the
company will use to try to develop gene therapies, where corrective genes are
inserted into human cells to correct faulty hereditary material. And Human
Genome executives said they hope to sign a five-year, $ 50 million research and
licensing agreement this month with Merck KGaA of Germany.

   Human Genome Sciences' stock dropped 12 1/2 cents yesterday to close at $
35.12 1/2.

LOAD-DATE: July 03, 1996


                             2774 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 30, 1996, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, Pg. 8F

LENGTH: 1060 words

HEADLINE: A BIOCHEMICAL SOLUTION IS SOUGHT TO THE PROBLEM OF;
VIOLENCE;
BUT CRITICS CHARGE THAT IDEA OF 'NEUROGENETIC DETERMINISM' OPENS UP;
'A WHOLE SET OF PROBLEMS'

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:


   The scientist grabs Mutant 9 by the tail, lifts the mouse out of its
shoebox-size cage, and lowers it gently into another, identical container, the
reeking, sawdust-floored home of Mutant 4.

   Blind and jittery, the mice are freaks of nature, products of a genetic
engineering experiment that did not go exactly as planned. But, oddly, their
encounter in this fifth-floor laboratory at the University of Southern
California School of Pharmacy may reveal something vital about human nature.

   They square off, sniffing furiously, then inch closer. Within seconds, 9
corners 4. And then they dive at each another -- a rolling, squeaking, clawing
gray blur. Sawdust and fur fly.

   Jean Chen Shih, a USC biochemist and promoter of this unlikely murine bout,
jumps back, startled by the attack even though she was expecting it. "Normal
mice fight also, but not so rapidly as these," Shih says.

   By any measure, the mice, called Tg8, are among the most aggressive in
captivity.

   This odd little spectacle is part of the quest for answers to the violence
clawing at American's soul. A Tg8 is born with its brain awash in an excess of
serotonin, a neurotransmitter chemical that helps regulate mood and mental
health. Shih and co-workers believe that excess greatly contributes to the
mouse's fierce temper.

   To be sure, a brawl between blind mice in an ivory tower is a far cry from
the mayhem and brutality perfected by such brainy animals as ourselves. But the
work does appear to touch on human experience: The Tg8's cardinal biochemical
defect was originally discovered in numerous related Dutchmen who committed
arson, attempted rape and assault.

   The Tg8 mice are the first laboratory animals to share both the biochemical
defect and the behavior observed in a pedigree of violent criminals. In that
sense, the mice are an important new tool for probing the physiology of running
amok. By studying the mice's trigger-happy biology, researchers hope to
understand aggression better and perhaps develop new drugs that control it.

   But for every potential new use of such information, critics envision a new
abuse. Steven Rose, at the Open University in England, is an outspoken critic of
the idea that one's genetic makeup determines behavior -- a scientific premise
he calls "neurogenetic determinism."

   Sociologist Dorothy Nelkin of New York University says that conservatives
might seize on biological explanations of violence to "dismantle the welfare
state," because controlling aggression with drugs could well be much cheaper
than rehabilitation programs.

   She also fears that if certain biochemical signatures became associated with
violence or criminal behavior, people with such a makeup could be wrongly
implicated and stigmatized as potential threats to society -- the physiological
equivalent of a bad credit rating. The Tg8 research and similar studies, she
says, "open up a whole set of problems that are worthy of careful
consideration."

   Scientists at the Pasteur Institute near Paris accidentally created the Tg8
mouse strain two years ago. Olivier Cases and colleagues were trying to develop
a novel gene therapy by injecting a one-celled embryo of a special lab strain of
blind mice with a shred of foreign DNA. But instead of resulting in a "new"
mouse pup with a bolstered immune system, the experiment led to a strain of male
mice with a really bad temper.

   The first indicator of that ill nature was painfully obvious: The mice nipped
the researchers' fingers. When caged together, male Tg8s -- the Tg is for
"transgenic" -- tore each other apart. And the researchers also found that when
male and female mice mated, the males were especially quick, grabby and
forceful, eliciting more female squeaks, on average, than other males did.

   Those traits may be reminiscent of any number of men, but the French
researchers were put in mind of certain Dutch males in one extended family
described in medical literature. Over four generations, a remarkable number of
those males were accused or convicted of rape, assault and arson, leading local
psychologists as well as police to watch them very closely.

   After much study, Dutch scientists reported a finding in 1993 that, they
believed, helped explain the aggressive males' behavior: They were missing an
enzyme called monoamine oxidase A, or MAO-A, which breaks down a variety of
neurotransmitters, including serotonin. Lacking the MAO-A enzyme, the affected
males, who also had borderline mental retardation, had extra-high levels of
several neurotransmitters, including serotonin.

   The genetic defect found in the violent Dutchmen is probably very rare,
researchers say, and certainly doesn't account for what makes most aggressive
people act that way. Still, the finding offers a unique window into how
disruptions in brain chemistry can be correlated with a pattern of antisocial
behavior.

   Given the Dutch findings, then, it was logical for the sore-fingered French
researchers to want to know if their mutant mice also lacked the MAO enzyme.
That's where Shih, a world expert on that family of enzymes, came in. Not long
after she agreed to test the Tg8 mice for the enzyme, a shipment of the
creatures arrived from France (after weeks of quarantine at the airport).

   It took Shih and her co-workers several months of painstaking work to
establish that the male mice were indeed lacking the gene for the MAO-A enzyme
-- just like the Dutchmen. "When this gene is missing, the animals are very
aggressive and hyperactive," Shih says.

   Her Tg8 study, says Randy Nelson, a behavioral psychologist at Johns Hopkins
University, was "one of the first to show a biological mechanism for aggressive
behavior in an animal." Follow-up studies published this spring in the journal
Neuron suggest that the neurotransmitter defect actually affects the structure
of the Tg8's brain, most likely by skewing growth and development in fetal and
newborn mice.

   Nelson says it's no surprise that genes affect temperament. "Anybody who
knows the difference between a pit bull and a Labrador retriever knows that
aggressive behavior has a genetic basis," he says.

   Dr. Frederick Moeller, a psychiatrist at the University of Texas, hopes that
the missing-enzyme research leads to new drugs for treating criminals and other
violent people who simply can't control their aggression.

GRAPHIC: Los Angeles Times; Jean Chen Shih displays some of mutant mice (in
closeup at right) used in her enzyne research.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1996


                             2775 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      June 28, 1996, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: Gene-Splice Oversight

BYLINE: Erik Parens

BODY:


   Harold Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), has
proposed eliminating the forum where scientists and representatives of the
public come together to evaluate scientific and ethical questions posed by
advances in human gene therapy. That forum, charged with advising the NIH
director on new research protocols involving human gene therapy, is called the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, or RAC.

   One doesn't have to be a "bioethicist" to believe that Varmus's proposal is a
bad one. The author of the first successful human gene therapy protocol, W.
French Anderson, has called the proposal "shortsighted, inappropriate and
wrong." Indeed, the committee that Varmus himself appointed to determine the
fate of the RAC, the Ad Hoc Review Committee, recommended that he not eliminate
it.

   That committee did concur with the critics who argue that because of progress
in the scientific and ethical understanding of human gene therapy, it is no
longer necessary to examine every single human gene therapy protocol. But it
went on to state in the clearest of terms: "Review of protocols by the RAC in an
open public forum should continue in several ar eas of concern in which a
particular protocol or new technology represents a significant departure from
familiar practices."

   Not long ago, many members of the public worried about "genetic engineering"
in any form. Thanks in part to the RAC, important distinctions have now been
made among types of "engineering." Representatives of the public have come to
understand those distinctions, and scientists have been held accountable to
respect them. For example, until now there has been agreement that scientists
should not attempt to manipulate human ova and sperm, called "germ" cells.
Scientists bringing their protocol before the RAC have had to show that their
experiments would not affect the research subject's germ cells and thus her
offspring. Until now it has also largely been agreed that the manipulation of
non-germ, or "somatic," cells to cure disease is ethically acceptable.

   It was fairly easy to make and enforce the germ cell/somatic cell distinction
when manipulation of germ cells was technically difficult. But as recent
meetings of the RAC suggest, our lives are about to become more complicated. It
now appears that enormously controversial extensions of biomedical research are
on our horizon. Not only does it look as if manipulating human germ cells to
cure disease soon will be technically feasible; it also appears that
manipulating somatic and germ cells for cosmetic (or non-disease-related)
purposes will be feasible. As the Ad Hoc Committee's report to Varmus suggested,
"modification of the germ line [and] the use of gene transfer for enhancement
purposes" would represent "a significant degree of departure from familiar
practices." Such departures would rightly raise questions from the public. Now
is the wrong time to lose our public place to debate those questions.

   According to the article in Science magazine that broke the story, Var mus
thinks that in place of the RAC he can "appoint a small group of experts to meet
several times a year to advise the NIH on gene therapy" and that "NIH should
sponsor regular public workshops" to examine the more controversial applications
of new genetic technologies. Such thinking suggests that Varmus does not
appreciate at least three features of the RAC that make it an indispensable
public institution.

   First, the RAC has a 20-year history. Because the group has worked through
many complex ethical questions over time, it does not have to reinvent the
ethical wheel each time it faces another protocol. Public workshops of the sort
Varmus mentioned would not have the benefit of such continuing reflection.

   Second, the RAC is diverse. Its members are from both scientific and lay
communities. Small groups of experts of the sort Varmus favors risk losing touch
with the ethical concerns of the people who pay for their research.

   Third, the RAC has built a reputation for thoughtfulness and independence,
which did not come easily. It was built in the face of skepticism about the
ability of an NIH-appointed committee to independently evaluate proposals
submitted by members from the NIH community.

   Conclusions drawn at public workshops and by small groups of experts will not
be respected in the way that those now drawn by the RAC are. Given the
controversial extensions of gene-therapy research on the horizon, it is in the
interest of the public -- and ultimately the director of the NIH -- that there
is a group that enjoys such history, diversity and respect.

   Any day now, Varmus's proposal will be announced in the Federal Register.
From the day that announcement is made, the public will have 30 days to speak
up.

   The writer is associate for philosophical studies at the Hastings Center.
This article is adapted from a piece that appeared in Science magazine.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1996


                             2776 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             June 27, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 1170 words

HEADLINE: OF MICE AND MAYHEM

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, LA Times - Washington Post Servi

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   Thursday, June 27, 1996 OF MICE AND MAYHEM

   Summary:  Tg8 mice share biochemical defect, behavior of line of  violent
criminals

   The scientist grabs Mutant 9 by the tail, lifts the mouse out of its
shoebox-size cage, and lowers it gently into another, identical container, the
reeking, sawdust-floored home of Mutant 4.

   Blind and jittery, the mice are freaks of nature, products of a genetic
engineering experiment that did not go exactly as planned.

   But, oddly, their encounter in this fifth-floor laboratory at the  University
of Southern California School of Pharmacy may reveal something  vital about
human nature.

   They square off, sniffing furiously, then inch closer. Within seconds, 9
corners 4. And then they dive at each another -- a rolling, squeaking, clawing
gray blur. Sawdust and fur fly.

   Jean Chen Shih, a USC biochemist and promoter of this unlikely murine bout,
jumps back, startled by the attack even though she was expecting it. ``Normal
mice fight also, but not so rapidly as these,'' Shih said.

   By any measure, the mice, called Tg8, are among the most aggressive in
captivity. This odd little spectacle is part of the quest for answers to the
violence clawing at American's soul.

   A Tg8 is born with its brain awash in an excess of serotonin, a
neurotransmitter chemical that helps regulate mood and mental health. Shih and
her co-workers believe that that excess greatly contributes to the mouse's
fierce temper.

   To be sure, a brawl between blind mice in an ivory tower is a far cry from
the mayhem and brutality perfected by such brainy animals as ourselves. But  the
work does appear to touch on human experience: The Tg8's cardinal  biochemical
defect was originally discovered in numerous related Dutchmen who  committed
arson, attempted rape and assault.

   The Tg8 mice are the first laboratory animals to share both the biochemical
defect and the behavior observed in a pedigree of violent criminals.

   In that sense, the mice are an important new tool for probing the  physiology
of running amok. By studying the mice's trigger-happy biology,  researchers hope
to understand aggression better and perhaps develop new drugs that control it.

   But for every potential new use of such information, critics envision a new
abuse.

   Steven Rose, a biologist at the Open University in England, is an outspoken
critic of the idea that one's genetic makeup determines behavior -- a
scientific premise he calls ``neurogenetic determinism.''

   Sociologist Dorothy Nelkin of New York University said conservatives might
seize on biological explanations of violence to ``dismantle the welfare
state,'' because controlling aggression with drugs could well be less  expensive
than rehabilitation programs.

   She also fears that if certain biochemical signatures became associated  with
violence or criminal behavior, people with such a makeup could be wrongly
implicated and stigmatized as potential threats to society -- the  physiological
equivalent of a bad credit rating.

   - Studies open up problems

   The Tg8 research and similar studies, she said, ``open up a whole set of
problems that are worthy of careful consideration.''

   Scientists at the Pasteur Institute near Paris accidentally created the Tg8
mouse strain two years ago.

   Olivier Cases and colleagues were trying to develop a novel gene therapy by
injecting a one-celled embryo of a special lab strain of blind mice with a
shred of foreign DNA. But instead of resulting in a ``new'' mouse pup with a
bolstered immune system, the experiment led to a strain of male mice with a
really bad temper.

   The first indicator of that ill nature was painfully obvious: The mice
nipped the researchers' fingers.

   When caged together, male Tg8s -- the Tg is for ``transgenic'' -- tore each
other apart. And the researchers also found that when male and female mice
mated, the males were especially quick, grabby and forceful, eliciting more
female squeaks, on average, than other males did.

   Those traits may be reminiscent of any number of men, but the French
researchers were put in mind of certain Dutch males in one extended family
described in the medical literature.

   Through four generations, a remarkable number of those males were accused  or
convicted of rape, assault and arson, leading local psychologists as well  as
law enforcement authorities to watch them closely.

   - Enzyme missing

   After much study, Dutch scientists reported a finding in 1993 that, they
believed, helped explain the aggressive males' behavior: They were missing an
enzyme called monoamine oxidase A, or MAO-A, which breaks down a variety of
neurotransmitters, including serotonin.

   Lacking the MAO-A enzyme, the affected males, who also had borderline  mental
retardation, had extra-high levels of several neurotransmitters,  including
serotonin.

   The genetic defect found in the violent Dutchmen is probably rare,
researchers say, and certainly doesn't account for what makes most aggressive
people act that way. Still, the finding offers a unique window into how
disruptions in brain chemistry can be correlated with a pattern of antisocial
behavior.

   Given the Dutch findings, then, it was logical for the sore-fingered French
researchers to want to know if their mutant mice also lacked the MAO enzyme.

   That's where Shih, a world expert on that family of enzymes, came in. Not
long after she agreed to test the Tg8 mice for the enzyme, a shipment of the
creatures arrived from France (having spent weeks in quarantine at Los Angeles
International Airport).

   - Animals become aggressive

   It took Shih and her co-workers several months of painstaking lab work to
establish that the male mice were indeed lacking the gene for the MAO-A enzyme
-- just like the affected Dutchmen. ``When this gene is missing, the animals
are very aggressive and hyperactive,'' Shih said.

   Her Tg8 study, said Randy Nelson, a behavioral psychologist at Johns  Hopkins
University, was ``one of the first to show a biological mechanism for
aggressive behavior in an animal.''

   Follow-up studies published this spring in the journal Neuron suggest that
the neurotransmitter defect actually affects the structure of the Tg8's brain,
most likely by skewing growth and development in fetal and newborn mice.

   Nelson said it's no surprise that genes affect temperament. ``Anybody who
knows the difference between a pit bull and a Labrador retriever knows that
aggressive behavior has a genetic basis,'' he said.

   Some researchers expect that the biochemical analysis of behavior will pay
off.

   Dr. Frederick Moeller, a psychiatrist at the University of Texas in  Houston,
hopes that the missing-enzyme research leads to new drugs for  treating
criminals and other violent people who simply can't control their  aggression.

   ``The goal isn't to control everybody and make them less aggressive,'' he
said. ``The goal is to work with real people who have a real problem with
aggression.''

   ILLUSTRATION: 2 Color photos by CAROLYN COLE/Los Angeles Times

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = LA Times - Washington Post
Service <

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2777 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       June 25, 1996 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 910 words

HEADLINE: THESE BLIND MICE MAY LEAD TO UNDERSTANDING VIOLENCE

BYLINE: By TERENCE MONMANEY; LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   The scientist grabs Mutant 9 by the tail, lifts the mouse out of its
shoebox-size cage and lowers it gently into another identical container, the
reeking, sawdust-floored home of Mutant 4.

   Blind and jittery, the mice are freaks of nature, products of a genetic
engineering experiment that did not go exactly as planned. But, oddly, their
encounter in this fifth-floor laboratory at the University of Southern
California School of Pharmacy may reveal something vital about human nature.

   They square off, sniffing furiously, then inch closer. Within seconds, 9
corners 4. And then they dive at each other - a rolling, squeaking, clawing gray
blur. Sawdust and fur fly.

   Jean Chen Shih, a USC biochemist and promoter of this unlikely murine bout,
jumps back, startled by the attack even though she was expecting it. "Normal
mice also fight, but not so rapidly as these," Shih says.

   By any measure, the mice, called Tg8, are among the most aggressive in
captivity.

   This odd little spectacle is part of the quest for answers to the violence
clawing at America's soul. A Tg8 is born with its brain awash in an excess of
serotonin, a neurotransmitter chemical that helps regulate mood and mental
health, and Shih and her co-workers believe that that excess greatly contributes
to the mouse's fierce temper.

   To be sure, a brawl between blind mice in an ivory tower is a far cry from
the mayhem and brutality perfected by such brainy animals as ourselves. But the
work does appear to touch on human experience: The Tg8's cardinal biochemical
defect was originally discovered in numerous related Dutchmen who committed
arson, attempted rape and assault.

   The Tg8 mice are the first laboratory animals to share both the biochemical
defect and the behavior observed in a pedigree of violent criminals. In that
sense, the mice are an important new tool for probing the physiology of running
amok. By studying the mice's trigger-happy biology, researchers hope to
understand aggression better and perhaps develop new drugs that control it.

   Scientists at the Pasteur Institute near Paris accidentally created the Tg8
mouse strain two years ago. Olivier Cases and colleagues were trying to develop
a novel gene therapy by injecting a one-celled embryo of a special lab strain of
blind mice with a shred of foreign DNA. But instead of resulting in a "new"
mouse pup with a bolstered immune system, the experiment led to a strain of male
mice with a really bad temper.

   The first indicator of that ill nature was painfully obvious: The mice nipped
the researchers' fingers. When caged together, male Tg8s - the Tg is for
"transgenic" - tore each other apart. And the researchers also found that when
male and female mice mated, the males were especially quick, grabby and
forceful, eliciting more female squeaks on average than other males did.

   Those traits may be reminiscent of any number of men, but the French
researchers were put in mind of certain Dutch males in one extended family
described in the medical literature. Over four generations, a remarkable number
of those males were accused or convicted of rape, assault and arson, leading
local psychologists as well as law enforcement authorities to watch them very
closely. After much study, Dutch scientists reported a finding in 1993 that they
believed helped explain the aggressive males' behavior: They were missing an
enzyme called monoamine oxidase A, or MAO-A, which breaks down a variety of
neurotransmitters, including serotonin. Lacking the MAO-A enzyme, the affected
males, who also had borderline mental retardation, had extra-high levels of
several neurotransmitters, including serotonin.

   The genetic defect found in the violent Dutchmen is probably very rare,
researchers say, and certainly doesn't account for what makes most aggressive
people act that way. Still, the finding offers a unique window into how
disruptions in brain chemistry can be correlated with a pattern of antisocial
behavior.

   Given the Dutch findings, then, it was logical for the sore-fingered French
researchers to want to know if their mutant mice also lacked the MAO-A enzyme.
That's where Shih, a world expert on that family of enzymes, came in. Not long
after she agreed to test the Tg8 mice for the enzyme, a shipment of the
creatures arrived from France.

   It took Shih and her co-workers several months of painstaking lab work to
establish that the male mice were indeed lacking the gene for the MAO-A enzyme -
just like the affected Dutchmen. "When this gene is missing, the animals are
very aggressive and hyperactive," Shih says.

   Her Tg8 study, says Randy Nelson, a behavioral psychologist at Johns Hopkins
University, was "one of the first to show a biological mechanism for aggressive
behavior in an animal." Follow-up studies published this spring in the journal
Neuron suggest that the neurotransmitter defect actually affects the structure
of the Tg8's brain, most likely by skewing growth and development in fetal and
newborn mice.

   Some researchers expect that the biochemical analysis of behavior will pay
off. Dr. Frederick Moeller, a psychiatrist at the University of Texas in
Houston, hopes that the missing-enzyme research leads to new drugs for treating
criminals and other violent people who simply can't control their aggression.

   "The goal isn't to control everybody and make them less aggressive," he says.
"The goal is to work with real people who have a real problem with aggression."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: LOS ANGELES TIMES; PHOTO 1: Biochemist Jean Chen Shih with
some of the mice she uses in her research to determine if the lack of an enzyme
in their brains triggers hyperaggressive behavior and violence.; PHOTO 2: Mutant
mice being used in enzyme research at the University of Southern California
School of Pharmacy.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1996


                             2778 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 24, 1996, Monday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE DOCTORS;
Procedure kills cancer in prostate;
'Suicide gene' aimed at recurring tumors

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Houston researchers anticipate beginning a new ""suicide gene''
therapy for prostate cancer within the next few weeks, a
leading scientist said.

   The treatment holds real promise for men whose prostate cancer
have recurred after radiation treatment, said Dr. Peter
Scardino, chief of urology at Methodist Hospital and Baylor
College of Medicine.

   Scardino and his colleagues will use an adenovirus, a close
cousin to the kinds of viruses that cause colds, to take the
thymidine kinase gene into prostate cancer cells.

   The thymidine kinase, or TK, gene typically is found on the
herpes simplex virus and acts as a beacon to attract a drug
called ganciclovir.  Ganciclovir, an anti-herpes drug, is
changed into a form that prevents synthesis of cellular DNA,
which contains the blueprint for all the cell's activities.  As
a result, the cancer cells die.

   In other words, the gene causes the cell to attract the drug
that kills it - hence the name, suicide gene.

   Scardino said the procedure is fairly simple.  He will inject
one to two cubic centimeters of the virus containing the
TK-gene into the prostate, watching the procedure all the time
on a picture provided by ultrasound.

   For the next two weeks, the patient will receive ganciclovir
twice a day in the hospital.

   After the patient goes home, doctors will closely monitor the
status to determine if the cancer is coming back.  The patient
will undergo two ultrasounds and two repeat biopsies at 14
days and three months after the gene therapy treatment.

   Scardino said there is no one standard treatment with a good
rate of success in treating men whose prostate cancer has come
back after radiotherapy.  In most cases, he said, the success
rates are disappointingly low.

   ""When we first applied to the FDA (the U.S.Food and Drug
Administration) for approval, we thought this might be a way
to get rid of local tumors (that remain in the prostate)
without the side effects of current treatments,'' Scardino
said.

   But as they continued to try the treatment in animals, they
have found that the treatment is effective on metastatic or
spreading cancer as well.

   ""It has a remarkable effect,'' said Scardino.  ""It prevents
metastasis (cancer spread) in animals and actually kills the
metastatic cells that are already there. ''

   He said the result is not widely known yet, but he expects the
scientific community to respond with excitement after he
presents the results at an upcoming conference.

   He believes the effect could be the result of one or two
mechanisms.

   The immune system could be hyperactivated by the treatment,
killing not only the tumor in the prostate itself but also the
tumor spread that has grown elsewhere in the patient's body.

   Or, he said, the treatment is allowing release of a protein
that stops development of the blood cells necessary to nourish
growing tumors.

   He said scientists already know that the original prostate
tumor will make the protein called angiostatin and that this
inhibits the growth of metastases.

   ""There may be other as yet poorly understood mechanisms
working here,'' he said.

   His study is similar to one for brain cancer being pioneered
in the laboratory of Dr. Savio Woo and Dr. Robert Grossman,
also at Baylor.


TYPE: Series

NOTES: One in an occasional series.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1996


                             2779 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1775 words

HEADLINE: INVESTING IT;
A Smart Gambler's Travels in the Land of Biotech

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   THE image of the venture capitalist as swashbuckler, ready to invest vast
sums in raw start-ups and brilliant ideas, has always been more well-cultivated
myth than reality. But Kevin J. Kinsella, known as the P. T. Barnum of biotech,
has come very close to living the myth.

   Mr. Kinsella is the founder of Avalon Ventures, based in La Jolla, Calif.
Avalon is a "seed" fund, raising money to invest in enterprises at the riskiest
first stage of development, when they are no more than a gleam in the eye. And
unlike a traditional venture-capital firm, Avalon usually creates companies from
scratch, rather than financing would-be entrepreneurs.

    For the 50-year-old Mr. Kinsella, famed for presentations that owe more to
Hollywood than to the Proceedings of the National Academies of Science, the
rewards have equaled the risks. Avalon is tiny, never having managed more than
$15 million in the five funds it has run over 15 years. But the 26 mostly
biotechnology companies it has created are valued today at $3.7 billion. The 12
public companies alone -- including Athena Neurosciences, which develops
treatments for epilepsy and other neurological diseases, and Vertex
Pharmaceuticals, which focuses on cancer and hemoglobin disorders -- have a
market capitalization of $3.1 billion.

   Mr. Kinsella will soon leave the venture-capital business, though, to serve
as chief executive of Sequana Therapeutics, a company he founded three years ago
to pursue genomics. He believes that this discipline, the use of human genes to
diagnose and treat illnesses, will produce the next generation of biotechnology
products.

   Q. The public markets have long had a kind of binge-and-purge mentality
regarding biotech. We appear to be in another binge. Do you think the pattern
will continue?

   A. There will always be cyclicality, but I think that there are enough
products in advanced phases in the clinic across the biotech industry that a
short spate of failures won't derail the market. For example, one severe
downturn was caused by three companies' failed clinical trials of antibodies
against septic shock. Now that you have many, many more trials under way in a
great number of different areas, and you're starting to see some successes, the
market is becoming a little more mature. And with the huge sums that need to be
invested, there's a good base of people who have to hold, come what may.

   Q. Do you think that biotech has validated the notion of a concept stock,
that a company can go public well before there are products or profits? We're
now seeing many Internet companies, with no profits, going public.

   A. Any rational person looking at the value in the aggregate of Internet
companies has got to say there's something terribly wrong. I remember having the
exact same conversation with someone, probably six or seven years ago. He said
the land on which the Imperial Palace in Tokyo sits is not intrinsically worth
more than the whole state of California, which is what it was valued at based on
Tokyo real estate. And ultimately making a great short on Tokyo real estate
would have been a very prudent thing to do. So, is it possible that these
Internet companies, which have gross revenues probably in the
hundred-million-dollar range for all of them put together in 1996, really
justify a market capitalization in the multiple billions? The answer is clearly
no. There's a shakeout coming. But for the moment it's sort of like Road Runner,
who runs off a cliff. No one wants to look down, and therefore they just keep
running.

   Q. Not to play devil's advocate, but the public Avalon companies have $3
billion in market caps, and not a lot of revenues.

   A. But I think if you look at the ones that have the highest market caps, say
Vertex, you see a company that seems about to get a second-generation protease
inhibitor for H.I.V. That would be a huge, blockbuster product, as well as five
or six others projects Vertex is involved in. I don't think there's a company in
the portfolio that is totally out of kilter with what these medium-term revenue
prospects are.

   Q. Beyond the venture level, how should people go about investing in biotech?

   A. You need to do a reasonable amount of investigation about people and their
track records. Everyone of any reasonable age out there has a long track record
that is ascertainable by people who are willing to do some research. You can
find out an awful lot. But a lot of people are lazy and they can get conned.

   Q. You are staking your own future on a genomics company, Sequana. With at
least a half-dozen genomics companies public now, would it make sense for people
to create a little genomics portfolio for themselves?

   A. That is an articulated strategy that no one could argue with. If you
believe that genomics is going to be the basis of all future drug discovery, as
I do, then having a diversified stake in a bunch of the leading companies would
be smart.

   Q. Ever since the last purge cycle in biotech, there's been limited analysis
on Wall Street, except by the underwriters. Where does an investor go for
independent analysis?

   A. It's tough because, obviously, part and parcel of the investment-banking
decision, whom you give your business to, is that their analysts will cover you
and give you a positive recommendation. So investors need to carefully read the
prospectus, see if the strategy makes sense, see if the people involved have
records of success and scientific excellence, and make the decision to back,
perhaps, several companies in the same field to spread the risk.

   Q. You think that genomics is the wave of the future. But the venture-capital
industry has had love affairs with many such ideas: monoclonal antibodies,
combinatorial chemistry, gene therapy, etc. Why should this be any different?

   A. Because you can't get any more basic than the code of life itself, which
is what genomics is. And once you've determined the gene or genes involved in
every illness, there is no better place to start. Everything else is a
theoretical construct.

   Q. How do you identify the technologies or issues you form companies around?
You don't have a degree in molecular biology.

   A. Reading the literature is very important, so every weekend I take home
Science, Nature, P.N.A.S., Biochem, those sorts of things, and figure out what's
going on. Then over time you build up a network of contacts of people whom you
view as particularly insightful. One of the pleasures of the venture business is
access to Nobel laureate-caliber scientists; you find that the brighter and more
accomplished an individual is, the more simply he can explain something to you,
even if it's very profound. I've been tutored, one on one, over cocktail
napkins, by some of the world's great thinkers.

   Q. What was the biggest deal you missed?

   A. Back in the late 70's, Bob Metcalfe, who was my fraternity brother at
M.I.T., came to me and said that he had invented this wonderful-sounding thing
called Ethernet. And I said, "Well, what is that?" And he said, "It lets
computers talk to each other, and I'm going to start a company." He had already
thought of the name, 3Com, computers and communication and I forget the third
com. And I scratched my head, trying to think about the market for such a
network given that we were in the age of mini-computers and mainframes, with
maybe a couple of Apples out there. It was unfathomable to me what one computer
would have to say to another. It was certainly much more my failure to
understand than his failure to communicate, but that was an opportunity that I
passed on. I obviously regret it today.

   Q. O.K., that's the biggest success that you didn't get in on. What's the
biggest failure you participated in?

   A. Probably Dolphin Imaging Systems, which was involved with a device that
would design orthodonture -- braces -- without using an X-ray. The first step in
designing braces now is to take an X-ray of your head. This is not a good thing.
Also, setting braces is like tacking in a sailboat race, you correct and you
overcorrect and you're kind of going back and forth. So, ideally, every time you
make an adjustment you would have an image, but they don't do that simply
because you can't take an X-ray every time to see how it's lining up. This
technology would have avoided all of that. Terrific.

   But we did not anticipate how conservative and cheap orthodontists were. They
were far more concerned with the next upgrade to their Mercedes than with
acquiring equipment that -- as a marketing tool alone -- would have paid for
itself.

   Q. Most people never get to invest in your kind of deals. How can they
participate?

   A. Numerous people have said they really want to get involved. And they give
the best of personal references, and they come by, and we talk. I take them to
lunch and, of course, we always pick up the tab. Then they'd say, well this is
great. Count us in. Just send us some paperwork and we'll send you a check for
$100,000 or $500,000 or whatever on your next deal.

   But the fact is that none of them ever participate, and I don't know why. I
suppose one reason is that individuals have a great deal more to do with their
money than institutional investors. I mean, institutional investors have one
purpose, which is to invest money. They can't decide that they'd rather take a
vacation or buy a Lamborghini or a yacht. A lot of people are very risk-averse
as well. They just can't conceive of investing money in a company that, in
effect, has only had a phone number for a week and a half.

   Q. Why, after 15 years, are you leaving the venture-capital business?

   A. A couple of reasons. I didn't intend to do this forever. And seed capital
is a really tough business. You have to come in after your last deal is done and
sit at a blank desk, think up a new company, validate the idea and get a science
advisory board together. You have to license technology, in many cases. You've
got to get people to leave their jobs. You have to make it happen, and meanwhile
you're taking horrendous risks with your capital. It's enormously gratifying,
but it's also exhausting.

   And when I started Sequana, I had fallen in love with the technology. It was
an idea for a company that I didn't think I could equal, at least for a long
time.

   Q. You've always brought great showmanship to your presentations, and not
without controversy. Why do you do it?

   A. You have to consult with your internal guide as to how you should do
anything in life, and not necessarily listen to the critics. I think that doing
something that is both entertaining and educational is what people like. It's
certainly what I like!

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1996


                             2780 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                         JUNE 23, 1996 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 740 words

HEADLINE: AX LOOMING FOR COMMITTEE ON GENE-THERAPY ETHICS< INDUSTRY SAYS A
"VERY, VERY CUMBERSOME PROCESS" WILL BE IMPROVED.< CRITICS FEAR SAFEGUARDS WILL
BE LOST.

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The federal government plans to do away with a respected committee that
studies the ethics of human gene therapy, saying the panel has "outlived its
usefulness."

   Although the announcement was praised by the biotechnology industry, it was
denounced by members of the committee, which for 20 years has overseen the
pioneering field. Gene therapy offers the possibility of curing illness by
turning genes on and off, and of "enhancing" healthy people - making cosmetic
improvements and increasing physical and mental capacities.

   Critics fear the move will remove important safeguards on gene-therapy
research and allow researchers to experiment without fully informing patients of
the risks.

   In place of the ethics committee, the director of the National Institutes of
Health, Harold Varmus, wants a group that will oversee ethical issues in genetic
research more generally. The timetable for establishing the group is uncertain.

   The new panel will not examine individual proposals for gene-therapy
experiments and will not have the power to stop experiments.

   The existence of the current committee has always been somewhat contradictory
to the notion of free and open research that rules most basic medical
experimentation. The idea has been that gene therapy moves scientists into such
new territory that representatives of the public - in the form of the committee
- should be involved in decision-making.

   Scientists who wanted to conduct a gene-therapy experiment had to submit
their proposals to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, known as RAC, which
examined them for ethical and scientific propriety, and to the Food and Drug
Administration, which examined them for safety and for their potential for
success.

   All proposals will now go directly to the FDA.

   "We don't need the public to discuss good science and bad science," said Lana
Skirboll, the NIH's associate director for science policy. "We need the public
to discuss social and ethical issues."

   Phil Noguchi, director of the FDA's division of Cellular and Gene Therapies,
also supported the NIH move. "Most of the case reviews were the kind of things
FDA does 24 hours a day, seven days a week," he said.

   But Leroy Walters, an ethicist who was the acting chairman of the ethics
committee and a professor of philosophy at Georgetown University, is skeptical.
He warned that the move could be a step toward unbridled science, which had led
to patient injury in other areas of scientific research.

   "In the case of heart transplants, there was an enthusiastic use by some
cardiac surgeons," he said. "Then patients started dying right and left because
of organ rejection. Careful studies were then done, and those careful studies
should have been done first rather than this swashbuckling approach."

   To biotechnology companies, the change in committee structure is overdue.

   "We were finding the NIH process has become very, very cumbersome in looking
at everything on a protocol-by-protocol basis," said Alan Goldhammer, director
of technical affairs at the Biotech Industry Organization, which represents the
bulk of the companies.

   The RAC consists of 25 scientists, ethicists, lawyers, theologians and
patient-rights' advocates. It has studied genetic engineering since 1974.

   Because the possibilities of gene therapy are enormous - vast portions of our
physical, intellectual and emotional lives are dictated by genes - concerns that
gene therapy could be put to bad ends also have been great.

   Among the greatest fears are that gene therapy could lead to efforts to
control heredity, and that biotech companies, in their zeal to find ways to make
the fat slender and the bald hairy, would ignore the plight of patients with
serious genetic diseases. Also, since the technique is in its infancy, there is
the possibility that patients might unwittingly be hurt as scientists perfect
their tools.

   Abbey Meyers, a committee member and president of the National Organization
for Rare Disorders in New Fairfield, Conn., a patient advocacy group, said:
"When you look at the biotech industry and the types of experiments they want to
do, they want to study the problems that are going to bring in the most money."

   The new committee will have six to 10 members, Skirboll said, and also
consist of scientists, ethicists, lawyers and patient advocates. It will review
issues in gene therapy and recommend which ones deserve a public discussion.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             2781 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1996 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 21, 1996, Friday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 251 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FOR CANCER TO BE TRIED ON HUMANS

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:


   A medical researcher said Thursday that human trials of a new gene therapy
that could revolutionize the treatment of prostate cancer would begin shortly at
a hospital here.

   Peter Scardino, chief of urology at Methodist Hospital, said a herpes virus
gene would be injected into the cancerous prostate tumors of 15 men, then
activated by anti-viral drugs in research expected to take about a year.

   The combination of the herpes gene and the anti-viral drug causes the cancer
cells to stop replicating and die, Scardino said.

   The genes of the herpes virus, which is the same virus that causes genital
sores in humans, also die and do not infect the patients. As a safeguard against
transmission to sexual partners, the first research subjects must have
vasectomies, Scardino said.

   The "suicide gene" therapy has thus far been tested only on mice, but with
positive results. Scardino that said 10 to 15 percent of the mice were cured but
that rate would almost certainly improve as the therapy is refined.

   There also are indications that the gene-drug combination kills prostate
cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, he said.

   Gene therapy is particularly promising because it is far less invasive and
debilitating than existing cancer treatments such as surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy.

   Prostate cancer surgery frequently leaves the patient impotent, incontinent
or both, Scardino said. Mice receiving the gene therapy developed only a local,
short-term inflammation.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1996


                             2782 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                 June 20, 1996, Thursday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 12; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES ARE BRUSHING UP ON HAIR-RESTORERS;
 MEDICINE: SEVERAL ANTI-BALDNESS TREATMENTS ARE BEING READIED BY FIRMS EAGER TO
CHALLENGE ROGAINE, THE FIRST REMEDY TO REACH THE MARKET.

BYLINE: From Reuters

BODY:


   Ever since the biblical Samson had his locks shorn by the scheming Delilah,
most men have preferred a full head of hair to the alternative.

   Now a number of pharmaceutical companies see a chance to grow profits along
with hair and are racing to develop a new wave of anti-baldness drugs to compete
with the industry's first offering, Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc.'s Rogaine.

   Some of the new remedies are traditional scalp-applied solutions, another is
a once-a-day pill, and a small California company is even experimenting with
gene therapy to grow hair.

   "The industry is growing like you can't believe," said Anthony Santangelo,
president of the American Hair Loss Council, an industry consultant group.

   About 35 million men and 20 million women in the United States are losing
their hair, about 95% of this attributable to the hereditary condition known as
male pattern baldness.

   Treatments for baldness, ranging from hair transplants to Rogaine to more
dubious drugstore and mail-order treatments, represent an $ 800-million-a-year
industry in the United States, the American Hair Loss Council estimates.

   Rogaine, launched in 1988, was the first drug approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration for hair loss treatment.

   London-based Pharmacia and Upjohn started in April to sell the product--a 2%
solution of the blood-pressure drug minoxidil--without a prescription. Since
then, four other companies have said they are putting generic versions of
Rogaine on supermarket and drugstore shelves.

   While it had worldwide sales of $ 124 million in 1995, Rogaine has not been
the panacea dreamed about by the hair-impaired for centuries.

   Only about 25% of men using Rogaine report moderate to dense hair growth
after four months, and just 20% of women see moderate growth after eight months.
It must be used for the rest of the person's life to maintain results.

   Whitehouse Station, N.J.-based Merck & Co. Inc., the largest U.S. drug
company, is the biggest contender to step into the hair-growth ring so far.

   Merck scientists recently told industry analysts that the company planned to
file by the end of the year for FDA approval to market Propecia, a drug they say
increases hair growth and prevents further hair loss in balding men. Merck says
it plans to test Propecia in women later.

   Propecia is a lower-dose form of Proscar, a Merck drug for treating enlarged
prostates. Unlike Rogaine, which is applied to the scalp twice a day, Propecia
is once-a-day pill, which analysts said could be a major selling point.

   Princeton, N.J.-based Life Medical Sciences is developing a product to be
applied to the scalp that it hopes to have on the market in Europe in early 1998
and in the United States in 2000.

   Researchers began developing the treatment, called Piliel, after they noticed
that a wound-healing product the company is developing spurred hair growth when
applied to scalp wounds.

   Another company, Kirkland, Wash.-based ProCyte Corp., is in the early stages
of testing a solution it developed specifically for hair loss. Called Tricomin,
it delivers the mineral copper to the scalp, stimulating the formulation of new
tissue and blood vessels.

   But scalp tonics and pills are only stop-gap solutions that do not address
people's genetic predisposition to balding.

   A small, privately held company in San Diego says it has discovered a method
for delivering genes into hair follicles. The company, AntiCancer Inc., said it
expects outside scientists to discover within two years the gene or genes
responsible for growing hair.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1996


                             2783 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     June 16, 1996, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 4; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS SHOW MESSAGE FROM GENE TO CELL CAN BE CHANGED

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   In a step that suggests a new approach to gene therapy, scientists have been
able to edit the message that a gene sends to a cell.

   The strategy might allow treatment of genetic diseases that appear when
faulty genes send improper messages to cells, causing them to produce harmful or
malfunctioning proteins, researchers said.

   The traditional gene therapy approach to such diseases is to try to implant a
working version of the gene instead.

   Genes tell cells to produce certain proteins by sending a message in a
substance called RNA. This RNA message is usually modified by other substances
before it reaches the cell's protein-making machinery.

   In the June issue of the journal Nature Medicine, scientists from the Duke
University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., report that they were able to
intervene in this modification process to edit an RNA message.

   The work was done with cells in laboratory dishes. The message came from a
gene that researchers had inserted into the cells, and the editing was done by
inserting an enzyme designed to target the RNA from the gene.

   Results showed that the enzyme altered not only the RNA it was aimed at, but
also RNA from other genes in the cell. So it will take more work to make the
enzyme work only on its target, researchers said.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1996


                             2784 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                            June 15, 1996, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 7, Part c

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: Comment

BYLINE: James A. Delaney


BODY: Semantics won't change the facts of life

   Recently, there have been several letters to the editor regarding Planned
Parenthood's announcement of the availability of so-called "emergency
contraception."

   Dr. Herbert Brown wrote a commentary addressing what he termed the
"outpouring of invective, misinformation, and statement of religious opinion as
medical fact."

   I believe his attempt at clarification has muddied the issue even further.

   For example, he states, "The notion stated as fact by many that life begins
at the moment of fertilization is a religious belief held only by the Catholic
Church and a few others. Most mainline Protestant and Jewish denominations
believe it is with the first breath after birth."

   Oh, really!

   Brown continues, "An even more important issue, however, is: When does
pregnancy begin? Medical scientists and biologists believe it begins with
implantation of the blastocyst into the endometrium."

   I called the UT Medical School and visited the UT Health Science Center
library to examine textbooks used in medical schools. They contradict Brown.

   Johnson's Human Developmental Anatomy says that the union of sperm and egg
"marks the beginning of the development of a new potential human being" (page
46).

   Danforth's Obstetrics and Gynecology states: "The length of gestation in
humans is thought to average 266 days from conception" (page 105). On page 220,
the author discusses genetic therapy and pre-implantation diagnosis as
alternatives to selective pregnancy termination.

   If pregnancy does not occur until after implantation, how can you terminate
that which has not yet begun?

   I understand Brown is an obstetrician. Does he tell his pregnant patient that
the moving, kicking baby in her uterus is not yet alive? What accounts for its
movements? Batteries, perhaps? Magnetic pull? His logic is preposterous!

   The most significant aspect of all this redefining terms of life is the
reason for it all. It is obvious that semantics has come into play to
accommodate the abortion mentality.

   For centuries, the beginning of pregnancy has been synonymous with
conception. The resultant "potential human being" grows and develops
continuously, and has thus always been assumed to be alive - long before it took
its first breath after birth.

   The fact is, the abortion industry would like as much distance as possible
between the words "abortion" and "baby." It wasn't that long ago that we were
told abortion was merely the removal of clumps of tissue or products of
conception.

   With the advent of sophisticated diagnostic measures such as the sonogram,
these terms have lost their salability and credibility.

   In order to market pills and procedures while minimizing moral ramifications,
terms must be "user-friendly." Hence the scramble to find new definitions of
pregnancy and life.

   Brown also asserts that people have used twisted logic to attack Planned
Parenthood's provision of Norplant to teens, stating that the safety of Norplant
in adolescents has been confirmed.

   Tens of thousands of lawsuits would seem to indicate otherwise.

   As regards oral contraceptives, I am told by pharmacists and doctors that no
studies are available on the long-term effects of hormone use by teens. Lack of
data does not mean "safe."

   Besides, there are medical problems other than direct effects. One letter
writer made the point that Planned Parenthood prescribed oral contraceptives
without parental knowledge.

   Do these clinics not care about the medical contraindications that might only
be revealed by family history and medical history? Do they not care about
patient safety? Or do they care only for financial gain?

   Planned Parenthood, says Brown, is Bexar County's largest family-planning
provider. As such, they have a vested interest in keeping our teens sexually
active.

   One letter summed it up perfectly when the writer said that Planned
Parenthood needs our adolescents as customers for contraceptives and abortions.

   The bottom line is: They don't make any money from abstinence.

   James A. Delaney is president of San Antonio Right to Life.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2785 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     June 13, 1996, Thursday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 12E

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
Researchers eye genetic therapy for lung cancer

BYLINE: Amanda Husted; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Working with a smoker who'd rather fight than quit, physicians one day may be
able to make a more convincing argument: You will get lung cancer.

   Discoveries of how cells fight off cancer have led to development of a
possible test to tell how aggressive a patient's lung cancer is - and perhaps
predict who is most susceptible to tumors.

   The test, created by Dr. Antonio Giordano of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, detects levels of a protein that's important for stopping cancer's
uncontrolled cell growth.

   The test for the Rb protein is not yet available. The Rockland Co. of
Gilbertsville, Pa., said it plans to seek Food and Drug Administration approval
to sell the test within 16 months.

   But Giordano says the test, while still preliminary, is a first step.
Ultimately, he hopes new findings on the different molecules involved in a
cell's life cycle, including this Rb protein, will lead to a genetic therapy for
lung cancer.

   If additional studies prove the test works, he said doctors may use it to
help decide how aggressively patients should be treated or to identify patients
who are likely to develop lung cancer.

   -CPR HOCUS-POCUS: In real life, it would be a medical miracle - 75 percent of
television actors returned from the brink of death to perfect health by the
magic of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR. It's no wonder that patients
have misconceptions about the success rate of CPR, say researchers who watched
all episodes of TV's "ER" and "Chicago Hope" during the 1994-'95 season and 50
consecutive episodes of "Rescue 911." In a report in today's New England Journal
of Medicine, researchers found that in TV land, 65 percent of cardiac arrests
occur in children, teens or young adults. In reality, most are in elderly
patients. And sometimes revival of those patients is ill-advised, for instance,
in cases involving terminal illness or when lack of oxygen to the brain would
leave the patient with severe neurological damage. The television shows, while
good drama, may "undermine trust in data and foster trust in miracle s," the
study says.

   -LIVER CANCER STUDY: A synthetic form of vitamin A, given after surgery for
liver cancer, lowers risk of developing new tumors by two- thirds, a study
suggests. The new drug, polyprenoic acid, was developed and tested by Dr.
Yasutoshi Muto and colleagues from Gifu University in Gifu, Japan. Their
findings were published in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   -FISH OIL REMEDY: Newly developed fish oil capsules that slowly release the
oil in the intestines offer hope for patients with Crohn's disease, a chronic
inflammation of the bowel. The capsules, developed in Europe and not yet
available in the United States, appear to reduce the number of flareups, a
report in today's New England Journal of Medicine says. The study, by
researchers at the University of Bologna in Italy, was paid for by Tillotts
Pharma of Ziefen, Switzerland, which makes the capsules.

From staff, news services and published reports

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1996


                             2786 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1996 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             June 13, 1996 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 168 words

HEADLINE: STUDY INDICATES INTRONS MAY HOLD KEY TO ADD INFORMATION TO GENE

BODY:

   Thursday, June 13, 1996 STUDY INDICATES INTRONS MAY HOLD KEY TO ADD
INFORMATION TO GENE

   Researchers have discovered that introns --     parts of genes long  thought
to play no role in conveying genetic information -- may well be the  key to
determining where new information is transferred into a gene.

   If true, the finding has important implications for future use in guiding
genetic therapy. Current techniques can insert new information into genes, but
exactly where that information is transferred is often left to chance.

   The new intron approach would allow researchers to insert new information  at
specific sites along a gene, allowing more control than is now possible.  Ohio
State University researchers reported their findings recently in the  journal
Nature.

   The team found that certain introns could move from place to place along a
gene, inserting themselves at specific points along the genes, basically long
strands of DNA that carry the essential genetic information needed to produce  a
protein.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2787 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    June 13, 1996, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-9

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: LUNG CANCER TEST COULD BE IN OFFING

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   Discoveries of how cells fight off cancer have led to the development of a
possible test to tell how aggressive a patient's lung cancer is - and perhaps
even predict who is most susceptible to tumors.

   The test, created by Dr. Antonio Giordano of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, is supposed to detect levels of a protein important for stopping
cancer's uncontrolled cell growth.

   The test is not yet available - a Pennsylvania company is preparing to do
additional studies required for Food and Drug Administration approval.

   But Giordano says the test is a first step. Ultimately, he hopes new findings
on the different molecules involved in a cell's life cycle, including this Rb
protein, will lead to a genetic therapy for lung cancer.

   ''That is many years away,'' acknowledged Giordano, who plans next month to
report findings on 200 patients given his Rb test. He gave a preview yesterday
at a meeting of biotechnologists.

   More immediately, if additional studies prove the test works, he said doctors
may use it to help decide how aggressively patients should be treated.

   ''I understand . . . this is still evolving,'' said study participant Norman
Gross of Wynnewood, Pa., who says his moderate levels of the Rb protein may be
one reason his lung cancer has been in remission for a year. ''But I just wanted
to know'' the results.

   Lung cancer kills 160,000 Americans a year, and cigarette smoking is the
chief cause. Research indicates numerous carcinogens in tobacco smoke can injure
genes that, when activated by a mutation, can stimulate the growth of cells that
are precursors to cancer.

   But cells have built-in safety mechanisms that are supposed to detect such
mutations and stop them. These tumor suppressor genes control cell division
unless they are mutated so they don't work either.

   ''Can the lack of a single suppressor gene cause cancer? Yes,'' said Dr.
Carlos Cardon-Cardo of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute in New York.

   The most well-known suppressor gene is p53, but the retinoblastoma gene may
be equally important, he said. Originally identified as the cause of a rare eye
cancer, mutated Rb genes now have been discovered in breast, prostate, cervical
and lung cancers.

   Simple cells divide until eventually they are dedicated to a particular
function in an organ. Defective Rb appears to allow those ''differentiated
cells'' to start reproducing again, opening a path to the uncontrolled cell
growth of tumors, said Dr. James DeCaprio of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in
Boston, who is experimenting with Rb in mice.

   Adding the Rb gene to human lung cancer cells in test tubes can ''arrest
their growth in a dramatic way,'' Giordano said.

So he used an antibody to the protein the Rb gene produces to measure how active
the gene was in lung cancer patients.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1996


                             2788 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                            June 13, 1996, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 8, Part A

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: PHILADELPHIA - Discoveries of how cells fight off cancer have

SOURCE: Associated Press


BODY: PHILADELPHIA - Discoveries of how cells fight off cancer have led to the
development of a possible test to tell how aggressive a patient's lung cancer is
- and perhaps even predict who's most susceptible to tumors.

   The test, created by Dr. Antonio Giordano of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, is supposed to detect levels of a protein important for stopping
cancer's uncontrolled cell growth.

   The test isn't yet available - a Pennsylvania company is preparing to do
additional studies required for Food and Drug Administration approval.

   But Giordano says the test is a first step. Ultimately, he hopes new findings
on the different molecules involved in a cell's life cycle, including this Rb
protein, will lead to a genetic therapy for lung cancer.

   "That is many years away," acknowledged Giordano, who plans next month to
report findings on 200 patients given his Rb test. He gave a preview Wednesday
at a meeting of biotechnologists.

   More immediately, if additional studies prove the test works, he said,
doctors may use it to help decide how aggressively patients should be treated.

   "I understand . . . this is still evolving," said study participant Norman
Gross of Wynnewood, Pa., who says his moderate levels of the Rb protein may be
one reason his lung cancer has been in remission for a year. "But I just wanted
to know" the results.

   Lung cancer kills 160,000 Americans a year, and cigarette smoking is the
chief cause. Research indicates numerous carcinogens in tobacco smoke can injure
genes that, when activated by a mutation, can stimulate the growth of cells that
are precursors to cancer.

   But cells have built-in safety mechanisms that are supposed to detect such
mutations and stop them. These tumor suppressor genes control cell division -
unless they are mutated so they don't work either.

   "Can the lack of a single suppressor gene cause cancer? Yes," said Dr. Carlos
Cardon-Cardo of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute in New York.

   The most well-known suppressor gene is p53, but the retinoblastoma gene may
be equally important, he said. Originally identified as the cause of a rare eye
cancer, mutated Rb genes now have been discovered in breast, prostate, cervical
and lung cancers.

   medical cure discovery

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998


                             2789 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 13, 1996, Thursday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: STUDY OF CANCER-FIGHTING PROTEIN MAY YIELD TREATMENT FOR TUMORS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   Discoveries of how cells fight off cancer have led to the development of a
possible test to tell how aggressive a patient's lung cancer is - and perhaps
even predict who is most susceptible to tumors.

   The test, created by Antonio Giordano of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, is supposed to detect levels of a protein important for stopping
cancer's uncontrolled cell growth.

   The test is not yet available. A Pennsylvania company is preparing to do
additional studies required for Food and Drug Administration approval.

   But Giordano says the test is a first step. Ultimately, he hopes new findings
on the different molecules involved in a cell's life cycle, including this Rb
protein, will lead to a genetic therapy for lung cancer.

   "That is many years away," acknowledged Giordano, who plans next month to
report findings on 200 patients given his Rb test. He gave a preview Wednesday
at a meeting of biotechnologists.

   More immediately, if additional studies prove that the test works, he said
doctors may use it to help decide how aggressively patients should be treated.

   "I understand . . . this is still evolving," said study participant Norman
Gross of Wynnewood, Pa., who says his moderate levels of the Rb protein may be
one reason that his lung cancer has been in remission for a year. "But I just
wanted to know" the results.

   Lung cancer kills 160,000 Americans a year, and cigarette smoking is the
chief cause. Research indicates that numerous carcinogens in tobacco smoke can
injure genes that, when activated by a mutation, can stimulate the growth of
cells that are precursors to cancer.

   But cells have built-in safety mechanisms that are supposed to detect such
mutations and stop them. These tumor suppressor genes control cell division -
unless they are mutated so they don't work.

   "Can the lack of a single suppressor gene cause cancer? Yes," said Dr. Carlos
Cardon-Cardo of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute in New York.

   Simple cells divide until eventually they are dedicated to a particular
function in an organ. Defective Rb appears to allow those "differentiated cells"
to start reproducing again, opening a path to the uncontrolled cell growth of
tumors, said Dr. James DeCaprio of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston,
who is experimenting with Rb in mice.

   Adding the Rb gene to human lung cancer cells in test tubes can "arrest their
growth in a dramatic way," Giordano said.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1996


                             2790 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1996 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         June 13, 1996 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: TEST SHOWS TUMOR GROWTH;
GENETIC THERAPY FOR CANCER IS GOAL

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press writer

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   Discoveries of how cells fight off cancer have led to the development of a
test that might tell how aggressive a patient's lung cancer is and perhaps even
predict who is most susceptible to tumors.

   The test, created by Dr. Antonio Giordano of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, is supposed to detect levels of a protein important for stopping
cancer's uncontrolled cell growth.

   The test is not yet available; a Pennsylvania company will do additional
studies required for Food and Drug Administration approval.

   But Giordano said the test is a first step. Ultimately, he hopes new findings
on the different molecules involved in a cell's life cycle, including this Rb
protein, will lead to a genetic therapy for lung cancer.

   "That is many years away," said Giordano, who plans next month to report
findings on 200 patients given his Rb test. He gave a preview Wednesday at a
meeting of biotechnologists.

   More immediately, if additional studies prove the test works, he said,
doctors may use it to help decide how aggressively patients should be treated.

   "I understand . . . this is still evolving," said study participant Norman
Gross of Wynnewood, Pa., who said his moderate levels of the Rb protein may be
one reason his lung cancer has been in remission for a year. "But I just wanted
to know" the results.

   Lung cancer kills 160,000 Americans a year, and cigarette smoking is the
chief cause. Research indicates numerous carcinogens in tobacco smoke can injure
genes that, when activated by a mutation, can stimulate the growth of cells that
are precursors to cancer.

   But cells have built-in safety mechanisms that are supposed to detect such
mutations and stop them. These tumor suppressor genes control cell division
unless they are mutated so they don't work either.

   "Can the lack of a single suppressor gene cause cancer? Yes," said Dr.
Carlos Cardon-Cardo of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute in New York.

   The most well-known suppressor gene is p53, but the retinoblastoma gene may
be equally important, he said. Originally identified as the cause of a rare eye
cancer, mutated Rb genes now have been discovered in breast, prostate, cervical
and lung cancers.

   Simple cells divide until eventually they are dedicated to a particular
function in an organ. Defective Rb appears to allow those "differentiated cells"
to start reproducing again, opening a path to the uncontrolled cell growth of
tumors, said Dr. James DeCaprio of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston,
who is experimenting with Rb in mice.

   Adding the Rb gene to human lung cancer cells in test tubes can "arrest their
growth in a dramatic way," Giordano said.

   So he used an antibody to the protein the Rb gene produces to measure how
active the gene was in lung cancer patients.

   "There was a strong correlation between aggressive disease and low
expression" of the gene, he said. So people with low levels might benefit more
from stronger - and riskier - therapy, he said.

   Additionally, he said, smokers who have low Rb levels probably would be the
most at risk for getting lung cancer.

   The Rockland Co. of Gilbertsville, Pa., said it plans to seek FDA approval to
sell the test within 16 months.

   It was unclear how much additional research Rockland will need. Just last
December, FDA's scientific advisers rejected a test kit to detect breast cancer
patients' levels of a gene believed to spur tumor cell growth. Although several
hospitals already offer such a breast test privately, the panel said a study of
244 patients was too small to approve wide sales.

   Giordano's eventual goal is to increase patients' Rb levels, to fight growth
of existing cancer cells and perhaps even lower susceptible people's risk of
getting sick.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1996


                             2791 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     June 11, 1996, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. B-16

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH MEETING GRAPPLES WITH ETHICS

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   Should gene therapy be used to create healthier fetuses? Should companies
develop tests to predict mental illness? What about engineering hormones to turn
average-sized children into basketball stars?

   The biotechnology industry is grappling with the development of a host of
medical products and techniques that could earn millions but also raise
troubling ethical and moral questions.

   ''The public is wary,'' said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology
Industry Organization, which is devoting a big portion of its annual meeting in
Philadelphia this week to ethical issues.

   ''We are asking what things people think are unacceptable, and we are
listening.''

   Yesterday, University of Pennsylvania bioethicist Arthur Caplan told about
3,000 executives and scientists that he keeps getting phone calls from fertility
clinics wondering if they should test embryos for the newly discovered breast
cancer gene - and essentially, allow parents to pick a child without that risk.

   ''That question's going to explode as more genes for traits and disorders are
identified,'' Caplan said.

   Biotechnology is a young but rapidly growing industry, with 40 medical
technologies and 21 agricultural products on the market.

   Already, ethical quagmires have developed. Religious leaders denounced
scientists for patenting genes they discover, saying no one can ''own'' genes.
Critics protested a biologically engineered hormone to boost cows' milk
production, in light of a national milk surplus and fears it might promote
infections.

   And Congress only now is grappling with how to keep genetic test results
private so patients don't face discrimination because they inherited certain
disease risks.

   Biotechnology's societal implications are becoming more complex as scientific
discoveries increase.

   Caplan recalls patients being tested to see if they inherited the
Huntington's disease gene - only to discover the men they thought were their
fathers weren't. Others sought simple cholesterol tests only to discover they
might be at risk for the brain-destroying Alzheimer's disease.

   His university decided to tell patients that genetic testing might uncover
unexpected unpleasantness, but that they'll get all the news if they ask.

   Harder is grappling with whether fertility clinics one day could let
prospective parents pick their children's genetic traits, he said.

   Already, clinics in the United States and England have tested embryos, at
least experimentally, for the BRCA-1 gene that puts about 5 percent of women at
risk for inherited breast cancer - even though the test is still experimental in
adults, he said.

   ''Why would you test an embryo for a disease that won't develop for 30 years
or more?'' Caplan asked. ''They said, 'If you can test for it, why not?''

   To answer that pivotal question, companies often now hire outside ethicists
before developing a new product. The Biotechnology Industry Organization is
seeking guidance from the public in special meetings held in eight states so
far.

   Therapy brings its own dilemmas. For example, is it OK to create a drug to
fight dwarfism and not let healthy children take it to add a few more inches?

   ''We are running into a fuzzy line,'' said Mark Hanson of the Hastings
Center, an ethics think tank that just began raising $ 750,000 to study values
in biotechnology. ''It's not just whether they want to become a pro basketball
player . . .  It's the implications for a society of 7-foot people.''

   The industry, which finances a small part of the Hasting Center's work, hopes
defining the public's tolerance will help biotechnology avoid much of the fear
that plagues the nuclear industry - and let it develop a code of conduct rather
than accept a government version.

   But, notes W. Steven Burke, vice president of the North Carolina
Biotechnology Center: The nation has ''never found an easy balance between
profit-making and ethics-making. Whether that is doable with biologically based
products I think remains to be seen.''

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1996


                             2792 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     June 11, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z11

LENGTH: 4347 words

HEADLINE: REBECCA LILLY FACES MORE TREATMENT

BYLINE: Don Colburn

BODY:


   When centerfielder Rebecca Lilly came up to bat on a softball-perfect evening
last month, her team needed a rally-starter. Third inning, no score, no one on.
Becca swung at the first pitch and thunked a slow roller to third, then flew
down the first base line in time to beat the throw.

   "Hey, girls!" coach Tom Mayers shouted to his team. "That's how you run."

   Moments later Becca scored the go-ahead run. In all, she made three hits,
scored two runs and pitched in relief as the Spandits evened their Montgomery
County league record with a 10-5 victory.

   "Becca's got a heart as big as this ballfield," coach Mayers said after the
game. "She's gutsy, she never complains, she never gives up. She keeps us all in
the game."

   What Mayers didn't know is that almost exactly 24 hours earlier, his
centerfielder had learned some frightening news about the five-year-old tumor in
her brain.

   Fifteen-year-old Becca Lilly of Takoma Park, a 10th grader at Good Counsel
High School, has lived with brain cancer since she was 10. Last November, she
became the first child ever treated with gene therapy for a brain tumor. In a
nine-hour operation at Children's National Medical Center, surgeons removed her
tumor and then injected into her brain a harmless virus carrying a gene designed
to trick any remaining tumor cells into cooperating in their own demise. The
experimental therapy was tried on her because standard anti-cancer treatments
had not been able to keep the deadly tumor from growing back.

   Becca recovered quickly from that pioneering gene therapy. After a few dizzy
spells last winter, she was back in school, active and free of symptoms beyond
nagging fatigue, headaches and slips of memory. Doctors kept her on anti-seizure
medicine and monitored her with periodic brain scans.

   Three weeks ago today, Becca had another checkup. Roger J. Packer, chairman
of neurology and director of the brain tumor program at Children's, first put
her through a routine of tests to check her balance, reactions and hand-to-eye
coordination. She aced them all.

   "You look as good as I've seen you," Packer said.

   She had put on five pounds and was looking forward to summer: a family
wedding in Maine, camp in the Shenandoahs and -- there were family jokes about
this -- getting behind the wheel to start going for her driver's license.

   After the umpteenth blood draw, it was time for a magnetic resonance imaging
scan, or MRI. She lay strapped-in on a bed table that slid headfirst inside the
huge doughnut-shaped magnet. For nearly an hour, the rackety machine used radio
signals and a computer to make detailed cross-sectional pictures of her brain.

   When it was over, Becca changed back into her T-shirt and shorts and waited
in an examining room. In a nearby office, Packer and radiologist Gilbert Vezina
were going over the glossy scans.

   Already, another patient was in the MRI room, a 12-year-old girl having her
first scan after an epileptic seizure. A little boy sat outside, staring
wide-eyed through glass at the huge machine into which his sister had just
disappeared.

   Becca walked over to talk with the boy and reassure him it wouldn't hurt. "I
remember the first time I had an MRI," she said. "I was so scared. It was so
weird!" That was dozens of MRIs ago.

   A technician handed Becca a grape popsicle.

   Then neurologist Packer walked in with her dad. She knew right away.

   "The area doesn't look quite as good as last time," Packer said, referring to
the part of her brain where they had injected the gene therapy cells. "There's
more dye being taken up."

   "What does that mean?" Becca asked.

   Packer explained that a dye injected into her bloodstream "enhances" or
lights up an MRI scan wherever there's extra blood flow.  Enhancement on the
scan is a sign of inflammation -- and possible tumor growth.

   "I don't know for sure if it means there's inflammation from the gene therapy
injections, or tumor growth. It could mean that the tumor is coming back,"
Packer said.

   It's doubtful she heard much of what he said after that.

   The tumor coming back. Six months after gene therapy, she was hearing the
news any family facing cancer dreads.

   Becca sat on the examining table, her legs dangling off the edge. Packer was
seated in a rocking chair in front of her, leaning forward and looking up
directly at her as he spoke. He said he would talk with her parents and the
other doctors in the coming days and they would decide what to do next. The only
way to know for sure if the bright spot on the MRI was tumor would be to take a
biopsy, a tissue sample that could be tested in a lab. But that would require
another operation on her brain.

   Packer was on a verbal tightrope. Becca's tumor was very likely growing back.
At 15, she was old enough to know what that meant. Whatever effect the gene
therapy experiment had had -- and it was impossible to measure at this point --
it had not worked a miracle for Becca.

   Yet he also tried to comfort her. She wasn't in any immediate danger "of
anything really bad happening," Packer said. He left room for hope. "We can't
tell for sure what it means. We just know that it's not good news because we
wanted it to go away and it didn't."

   He asked if she had questions, and she shook her head no and didn't say a
word. She was still sucking on the grape popsicle and swinging her legs off the
examining table.

   "I'm sorry," Packer said. He patted her on the left knee and stood up out of
his chair. "You take care." She smiled at him, then hopped down and walked out
with her dad.

   It was Becca's idea to stop in the cafeteria before heading home. "I don't
have much homework tonight," she said.

   She got a chocolate pudding, and Joe Lilly got a fruit shake. They split a
slice of pepperoni pizza. They picked out a table by the window and watched the
evening sky turn dark and thunderous. She told her dad about the art project she
had worked on that morning at school. It was a drawing of a shelf with flowers
on it. "I don't know what kind they are, but they're purple, dark purple," Becca
said. She scooped the whipped cream off her chocolate pudding and set it aside.

   "Dr. Packer's a cool doctor," she said out of the blue. She talked about
running into him the week before at a Capitol Hill reception to honor medical
researchers. It was the first time she had ever seen him in a suit coat that
wasn't white and the first time he had ever seen her in heels.

   Becca was still smiling, but subdued. There was no other mention of cancer,
or surgery, or what she had just been told.

   They left the hospital just as the downpour began, the sky jagged with
lightning. As they rode home through the flooded streets and slashing rain,
Becca and her father reminisced about other big storms they had been through, in
New Orleans, in Kansas, in Takoma Park.

   As soon as they got home, Becca went off to her room and Joe Lilly went into
the kitchen to tell her mom, Maureen, the disappointing news.

   Then the family sat down to supper.

   "Aren't you going to tell Mom what Dr. Packer said?" Becca asked her dad.

   "Why don't you tell her," he suggested. Both parents were curious how she
would interpret what Packer had said.

   "He said the cancer probably came back and I may have to have surgery again,"
was how Becca put it.

   All evening, they kept checking on her, wondering how she was handling it.
Was she okay? Was she alone? Had she gone to bed? Was she having trouble falling
asleep? Nothing looked out of place or different with Becca that night.

   "I don't think we've ever been able to tell how well she's doing by how she
looks," Maureen Lilly said. "It's one of the signs, but it's never the only
one."

   Having a child with cancer means periodically getting your wind knocked out.
The previous times when Becca's tumor recurred, her parents got the news first
and then, after discussing what might come next, broke it to her.

   This time, Becca heard it directly from Packer, a couple of minutes after he
and the radiologist had gone over her MRI scans. This time, she learned before
anyone knew what might come next -- a biopsy, another full-scale operation, or
wait-and-worry. Or what?

   "This is an uncharted one," Maureen Lilly said.

   Packer himself was shaken. He had delivered that kind of message to hundreds
of children and their families. But Becca was nearly 16. He had been treating
her for more than four years. In Packer's line of work, a doctor rarely gets to
know patients for that long.

   "You try to be compassionate and understand the horrible information you're
conveying," he said. "And yet at the same time you have to be honest."

   Now the options were even narrower. He would talk to the neurosurgeon, and
they would weigh the risks and benefits of yet another operation and then talk
it over with the family.

   "I don't want to put her through any more than necessary," he said. "She's
been through so much already."

   Over the next few days, Packer and neurosurgeon Steven J. Schiff decided to
recommend surgery, but they were still not sure how much tumor could be safely
removed -- or what would come next. In medical terms, they had to decide how
aggressive to be. To make a follow-up treatment possible, they would have to
remove at least 75 percent of the tumor. Taking much more would risk serious
brain damage.

   Two weeks ago, Becca went back to Children's for yet another brain operation
-- her fourth. It was the day after Memorial Day and exactly five years since
she had first blacked out from a seizure -- the first hint of trouble.

   The aim this time was not a cure. It was damage control; it was buying time.
If they could remove enough tumor to delay symptoms, that might give Becca a
chance at one more experimental therapy.

   "Last time, I tried to get every bit of tumor that I could," said
neurosurgeon Schiff, standing next to Becca's brain scans lit up on the
operating room wall. "Looking at these films, I think I may be able to get 80
percent, maybe 90 percent." Even that would likely damage her vision slightly.
The tumor itself had begun to affect her peripheral vision. This surgery
probably would make that worse.

   Becca and her parents, in a meeting with Schiff, had been warned about these
and other dangers. Doctors have an ethical obligation to be frank about a
treatment's risks, which in brain surgery are many. But Becca tended to take
even potential risks quite literally. Her usual stoicism broke down when she
heard the possibility of going blind or losing strength on her right side.

   She cried all through the meeting.

   The operation took five hours. Schiff followed the same incisions he had made
in November, starting with the question-mark-shaped line above her left ear.
Still it took two hours to get at the tumor.

   A tiny sample of tissue was sent to the pathology lab, where it was
quick-frozen, thin-sliced and examined under a microscope. The pathologist
quickly confirmed that it was cancerous: a malignant high-grade astrocytoma.

   Guided by the ultrasound monitor beside him, Schiff went about removing as
much tumor as possible. That took nearly two more hours of delicate work, trying
to distinguish between infiltrating tumor and normal brain, making sure not to
damage any key blood vessels or nerves.

   "We've taken as much out as we think we ought to," Schiff said finally.
"There's still tumor in there. I'd like to say I got 90 percent of it, but it's
probably more like 80-some." He could have taken out more, he said, but only by
causing her the same effect a stroke might have in an older person.

   Recovery came slower this time. Even when awake, Becca was anxious and
confused at first. In the intensive care unit, she insisted that her dad spend
the first night at her side; he catnapped on a stool with his arm hooked around
her bedrail and his chin on the top bar.

   It was two days before she ate anything but ice chips. By then she could
walk, with assistance, to the bathroom. But she was still groggy and had trouble
concentrating or having a conversation.

   In the early going, something seemed disconnected. When they went over the
menu, she didn't remember what macaroni and cheese was. She had difficulty
following all but the simplest sentences. She fished for common words and
couldn't always come up with her sister's name.

   "You'd give her a cup in one hand and a pill in the other, and she'd try to
drink the pill," Maureen Lilly said.

   If anyone knew what Becca was going through, it was Colleen McGowan. She and
Becca became friends four years ago through Camp Fantastic, a summer camp in
Front Royal, Va., for kids with cancer. Colleen, 16, of Falls Church, was
diagnosed with a brain tumor 10 years ago. She has been through two surgeries,
radiation, chemotherapy -- and two relapses.

   Colleen was the first person outside Becca's family to visit her in the ICU.
"I was talking to her, but she wasn't really talking to me," Colleen said. "She
was real groggy and pale. Her freckles really stood out."

   Becca and Colleen talk to each other about things they don't tell other
people, their parents say.

   "Becca's my buddy," Colleen said. "She helped me so much. She was always the
strong one of us. She helped me up the hill and down the hill when I had trouble
walking." Colleen had lost some peripheral vision and strength on her left side
and had to walk with a cane when Becca first knew her.

   The weekend before Becca's recent surgery, Colleen and Becca had hung out
together at Pentagon City Mall. They talked about Becca's surgery and what it
might do to her.

   "I told her, 'Whatever it takes, I'll be there for you,' " Colleen said.
"That's what Becca was for me. She's always just right there."

   Becca's safety net is sturdy and vast. It begins with her parents and her
three siblings: Anne Marie, 19; Joe Jr., 13; and Sarah, 4. But how many kids
have 54 cousins? Not to mention a bazillion stuffed bears -- plus schoolmates,
teammates, neighbors, her parish. The morning of her surgery, friends organized
a special 8 a.m. Mass at St. Bernadette's; nearly 200 people came.

   The walls in Becca's hospital room turned into bulletin boards of
well-wishing. She was adopted by, among others, the fourth grade at St.
Bernadette's, where Joe goes to school. Kids find words for what adults have
trouble saying:

   "Dear Rebeka," wrote fourth-grader Michael Spiegelberg on his handmade card.
"I am very worried about you, Rebeka. Please get well. . . . I would hate to
loose you. I pray very hard for you every night, it is hard but I still do it,
even if it is very late. I went to church on Monday only for you not for
everybody else because I'm very worried. I really hope you feel beter. Keep
cool, get well, and be very careful!!!"

   "Becca, are you okay?" whispered her older sister, Anne Marie, bent down over
her, their faces inches apart. It was the second day after her surgery. "Is
something bothering you? Becca, what's bothering you?"

   Becca looked puzzled, scared. Her eyelids were fluttering, and her lips
quavered as if she knew what to say but couldn't shape the words.

   "You thirsty?" Anne Marie asked.

   Becca nodded under her helmet of gauze, eyes closed.

   "Ice chips or water?"

   Becca's mouth soundlessly shaped the word "chips."

   Anne Marie fed her a chip of ice from the plastic cup.

   "Good job."

   Anne Marie, who's studying to be a nurse, often stayed in the hospital with
Becca during the day, spelling her parents, who took turns staying overnight.
She was there during some of the roughest times. Once, she had to hold down the
screaming Becca while they added four stitches to repair a leak in her incision.
Hospital staffers quipped that they might as well just give her an honorary
nursing degree.

   The scariest crisis came later that afternoon. Becca seemed more cut off than
ever. She started drooling, her eyes and mouth twitching, tongue askew. Anne
Marie summoned help, and Becca's room became a flurry of urgency. Maureen Lilly
rushed to the hospital from work, and Joe Lilly gathered the other children. She
seemed to be losing ground.

   It turned out that Becca was having seizures, electrical storms in her brain,
probably triggered by inflammation from the surgery. She couldn't speak up to
tell anyone. Neurologist Joan Conry boosted her dose of intravenous Dilantin,
and by late afternoon, Becca looked more like Becca, her face less puffy and
more expressive. Even to see her wince and complain when they took the brain
wave electrodes off her surgical scar was a relief to her family: the real Becca
responding.

   They worked out a signal for her to use if she felt a seizure coming on but
couldn't get the words out. She would brush her fingers back and forth across
her attendant's hand.

   In the next few days, with the seizures under control, Becca began to express
herself more. "She has answers now," Maureen Lilly said. "They're just not
always the right answers."

   Packer would show her a quarter, and she'd say "penny." She forgot the word
"thumb." He asked her to say, "no ifs ands or buts." It came out garbled.

   She still had no stamina. "As soon as she does anything at all," her mom
said, "she's pooped. And there were times when her usual "truck on through"
spirit flagged. "I don't feel good," she said one afternoon. She was sitting up
in bed, clutching a green stuffed frog.

   "What doesn't feel good, Becca?" Maureen Lilly asked.

   "My self," she said.

   By last Monday, Becca was well enough for Packer and her parents to raise an
enormous question. In a deserted playroom down the hall, the three of them sat
in shin-high chairs around a knee-high table between the Barney Baby Bop poster
and the fish tank.

   Packer began by saying he expected Becca to go home soon. "A bigger issue,"
he said, "is what are we gonna do from here on in."

   There were options but not many, he said. The main one was chemotherapy.
Becca had never had conventional chemo, because its results in tumors like hers
were not good -- either because brain tumors aren't sensitive to such drugs or
because the drugs could not get across the blood-brain barrier, the remarkable
ability of blood vessels to keep toxic chemicals from leaking out of the
bloodstream into the brain.

   But some still-experimental drugs that had shown promise in adults were about
to be tried on children like Becca who had run out of proven choices. These were
long shots. But if chemo helped shrink her tumor, that might buy more time and
allow for the possibility of higher-dose chemo later.

   Or they could forgo aggressive treatment for the time being -- something that
Packer said he didn't believe "either you or I would recommend now."

   The new chemo combination that looked most promising to him combined a proven
anti-cancer drug, carboplatin, with a newer agent, called RMP-7, that boosts its
ability to get across the blood-brain barrier into the tumor.

   "It's still very preliminary," he told them. But in more than 400 adults, it
had shown some ability to shrink tumors, with relatively few serious side
effects. In his view it was "a very reasonable thing to try for Rebecca" and
"our best option."

   If the Lillys agreed, Becca could start in two or three weeks. She would get
an intravenous dose of RMP-7 first, followed minutes later by the carboplatin.
After four weeks, another series. Then they'd see if it was having any good
effect.

   If it worked superbly -- Packer cautioned that this was a huge "if" -- they
might consider the possibility of an eventual bone marrow transplant. Such a
transplant might enable doctors to give Becca an extraordinarily high dose of
chemotherapy, a dose that otherwise would devastate her immune system. That
would make sense only if they could shrink her tumor down to microscopic size --
and prove that her tumor would respond to high-dose chemo. "So I've got two
hurdles," he said.

   It was time for the Lillys to ask questions. They had done their homework.
Maureen Lilly had spent hours logged on to a World Wide Web site on brain
tumors, in touch with hundreds of researchers, patients and parents around the
world. Joe Lilly seemingly had seen every media report of experimental brain
cancer treatments, even those in animals -- though as he once noted wrily, "Rats
don't have to sign consent forms."

   Did the gene therapy do any good? the Lillys wanted to know.

   "Except that she got six good months out of it, I don't know," Packer said.
Would she have gotten those six good months from surgery alone, without gene
therapy? He doesn't think so. "I think there was something there. But we can't
say for sure."

   What they all do know is that it didn't work well enough to keep Becca's
tumor from coming back.

   Becca's latest surgery, Packer said, had bought some time. But they couldn't
wait long to start the next step. When brain tumors grow back, they tend to get
more and more malignant and sometimes grow terrifyingly fast. "What I'm worried
about," he said, "is that we could be getting to a point where it takes off and
we have less time to [plan] than before."

   In her five years of treatment, Becca has bounced back fairly quickly from
every treatment: surgery, radiation, gene therapy. "We're getting to a different
level now," Packer said, "where no matter what I do, I'm going to kill some
normal cells along the way."

   Joe Lilly, ever his daughter's advocate, asked the final question: "This is a
lose-your-hair one?"

   Yes, Packer said. But a decision about chemo could come later. They stood up
and walked back to Becca's room, where she was sound asleep.

   Becca came home last Thursday.

   The night before, the whole family gathered at the hospital. The mood in Room
4116 Green had lifted again. The seizures and short-circuits in her brain had
abated. Almost overnight, she seemed connected again -- eating better, talking
better, feeling better. They could look ahead once more. Becca was cutting up.
She was going home.

   Becca strolled down the corridor with her sister Anne Marie, weaving a bit,
as her parents watched from behind. They saw her lean to the left and brush the
wall, then veer back to her right and bump Anne Marie. How much was loss of
peripheral vision and how much was just getting her sea legs back they couldn't
tell. After a harrowing eight days, it was a relief to see her walking at all.

   "You gotta remember," Joe Lilly said to Maureen, "that it's sort of like
she's learning everything all over again."

   Gene Therapy: What the Doctors Learned

   The unsung heroes of medical research are people like Rebecca Lilly and her
family.

   Last November, when she became the first child ever to receive gene therapy
for a recurrent brain tumor, everyone involved knew the odds were long. Indeed,
the therapy didn't work a miracle -- her tumor grew back six months later.

   But did it work at all?

   "She's had six good months," said Roger J. Packer, who directs the brain
tumor program at Children's National Medical Center. If he had known last fall
that he could get Becca Lilly six good months with any other treatment besides
gene therapy, he would have gone for it "in a minute."

   The gene therapy approach was twofold. First, doctors injected into Becca's
brain a harmless virus designed to smuggle a gene into her tumor cells. If the
gene invaded enough tumor cells, it would make them lethally sensitive to a
follow-up drug that she received two weeks later.

   Whether Becca's tumor responded at all to the gene therapy treatment is "a
matter of some debate," said Stephen G. Marcus, vice president of Genetic
Therapy Inc., the Gaithersburg biotech company that developed the technology for
the treatment tried on her.

   Samples of Becca's tumor are being studied by her doctors and at GTI. But
measuring the gene therapy's effect or noneffect on her brain tumor is
problematic. To cite just one vexing problem, any tumor cells that did take up
the gene-carrying virus and were killed by the follow-up drug are gone. They
can't be studied because they're not there anymore.

   Besides, one case cannot show definitively whether or not a complex
experimental treatment works. "A single patient leaves you with a lot of open
questions," said neurosurgeon Steven J. Schiff, who operated on Becca. Answers
will come only when more patients are treated, and the results can be analyzed
and compared statistically, he said.

   Medical science advances less often by breakthrough than by a series of small
steps. One hunch, one clue, one table of data leads to another, and another. The
science of gene therapy is still so new that even dramatic moves like Becca's
treatment are "10 or 11 steps" away from finding a cure for brain tumors, said
Philip H. Cogen, chairman of pediatric neurosurgery at Children's.

   Even so, Cogen said, doctors learned from Becca's experience a crucial piece
of information: that the gene therapy combination is safe and nontoxic in
children. That allows doctors to move ahead, fine-tuning the dose and delivery
of the gene therapy combination in other patients. A second patient underwent
the treatment at Children's last month.

   Preliminary studies look for "a glimmer of efficacy," GTI's Marcus said. That
her tumor held off for six months is a good sign, but "far short of proof."
Under the terms of the experiment, the gene therapy is tried only once per
child.

   If a roomful of people were to look at a single case such as Becca's and be
asked whether the experimental treatment worked, Marcus said, they would tend to
split into three groups. Some will say they don't know. Some will say it gave
her six good months, so it must have worked. Some will say it probably didn't
work, because the tumor came back. No one can say for sure until a group of
patients who get the treatment is compared with a group who don't, he said.

   What is clear, Marcus said, is that without the contribution of individual
patients, there would be no hope of finding a better way to treat a terrible
disease.

   "Everything starts and ends with individuals like Becca," he said.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, Becca's gene therapy was profiled in the
Health section on April 2.  Anne Marie comforts her younger sister before
Becca's fourth operation for brain cancer.  Several days after her surgery,
neurologist Roger J. Packer, in top photo, tests Becca's reactions, as her
parents watch. Her recovery was slower this time, but doctors later realized she
was having a series of seizures and gave her medication to help. Then she began
feeling better. Above, Maureen and Joe Lilly visit Becca in the intensive care
unit immediately after her five-hour surgery. Right, neurosurgeon Steven J.
Schiff goes over a brain scan with Becca's parents, while she listens from her
wheelchair, next to Anne Marie.  Becca gets a hug from Colleen McGowan, a friend
and fellow brain cancer patient, who visited often in the hospital. "Becca's my
buddy," Colleen said. "She helped me so much." Becca's family never left her
alone at the hospital. Her parents took turns spending the night and her sister
Anne Marie often stayed during the days. Sometimes, the whole family was there
together.  Neurologist Packer discusses the next round of treatment with Joe and
Maureen Lilly.  Becca and her sister Anne Marie stroll the hospital hallway the
night before Becca went home.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1996June 11, 1996


                             2793 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            June 10, 1996 Monday All

SECTION: Health Pg. 4

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: POST-MENOPAUSE CONCERN
 Avoiding breast-cancer risk
 Raloxifene may offer hope to women on hormone therapy

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

DATELINE: Chicago, Ill.

BODY:

   Many women fear taking estrogen or hormone replacement therapy after
menopause because some studies have shown it slightly increases the risk of
breast cancer. A new drug being tested could offer them a much better
alternative.

   The drug, raloxifene, is known to increase bone density, thereby preventing
osteoporosis, and to lower cholesterol, preventing cardiovascular disease, said
V. Craig Jordan, the former head of the University of Wisconsin Medical School's
breast cancer center who now leads a similar department at Northwestern
University.

   The best part is that it "appears to have the side effect of preventing
breast cancer what hormone replacement therapy now doesn't do," Jordan said.

   He spoke at a breast cancer symposium at Northwestern last week featuring a
speech by Diana, the Princess of Wales, to raise money for three cancer research
and support organizations.

   Jordan is nationally known for his pioneering work on tamoxifen, an
anti-estrogen drug that's been shown to prevent breast cancer in rats, is now
being tested nationwide in women, and is the primary hormonal therapy today for
breast cancer.

   Raloxifene has been tested in rats and is being tested now on 10,000 American
women. Results are expected in about a year, Jordan said.

   Breast cancer is the most commonly occurring cancer among women in the United
States and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women, after lung
cancer. About 184,300 cases will be diagnosed and 44,300 women will die of it
this year, the American Cancer Society estimates.

   The symposium featured prominent researchers from across the nation
discussing the newest areas of breast cancer research. Other aspects of the
disease they covered include:

   Genetic predisposition and testing: Most women with breast cancer don't have
a known genetic defect or family history of the disease, and women in general
have an 11% risk of developing cancer sometime in their lives. The discovery of
two genes BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 is helping researchers study women whose lifetime
risk of getting it approaches 90%, said Barbara Weber, a physician from the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.

   But genetic testing is controversial for many reasons: It poses technical
challenges and there's no oversight or standards yet for labs doing such
testing; medical professionals disagree over how to follow up and treat women at
risk; there are insurance implications in discovering a predisposition to a
disease; and there's no gene therapy treatment yet to intervene to replace
defective genes or the proteins they produce.

   Dietary factors: Diet is estimated to contribute to 35% of total cancer risk,
and "diet is very likely linked favorably and unfavorably to breast cancer
risk," Linda Van Horn, a dietitian and professor at Northwestern. Diets low in
fat are known to reduce cancer risk, and foods rich in carotenoids and
anti-oxidants carrots, broccoli, spinach and others can prevent DNA damage and
enhance the immune system, she said.

   "Soy has generated a great amount of interest" because the American breast
cancer incidence is 20 times greater than in Asian cultures with high soy
intakes, she said.

   Mammography and early detection: Fewer than 6.5% of breast cancers occur in
women under age 40, so the public health rationale for not recommending
mammograms at that age is somewhat understandable, said Monica Morrow, director
of the breast cancer program at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.

   The frequency of mammography for women ages 40 to 50 remains controversial.
But among women 50 and older, mammography has been shown to cut breast cancer
mortality 30%, an anti-cancer result that "could only be equaled if everyone in
the United States stopped smoking," she said.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1996


                             2794 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             June 10, 1996, Monday

SECTION: SEMINOLE TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: SEMINOLE TIMES; LARGO TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS
TIMES; CITY & STATE

LENGTH: 1480 words

HEADLINE: Family waits and hopes for cure

BYLINE: JULIA CAMPBELL

DATELINE: SAFETY HARBOR

BODY:


   It was graduation day at the Little Peoples Learning Center and Danny Gorman

 was hamming it up. As 11 members of his family looked on, Danny belted out God

 Bless America - several decibels higher than all the other 5-year-olds.

   His father, Donald, doubled over with laughter, tried to steady the video
camera. It was a moment the family wanted to savor, because moments like that
seem so much more precious now.

   Six weeks ago, the Gormans learned Danny has Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  It
is the most common form of childhood muscular dystrophy, and it is fatal.

   If the disease follows its usual course, Danny's muscles will be so  weakened
by age 12 that he will need a wheelchair. He will gradually lose the  use of his
arms and eventually every other muscle in his body. By age 20, he  could be
dead.

   As grim as his prognosis sounds, there is some hope.

   Today  two separate teams of scientists are scheduled to announce new
research that inches them closer to the use of gene therapy, a treatment many
believe may stop the ravages of the disease on human muscles.

   When Donald and Debbie Gorman were told April 25 that their son has  Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, the couple had hardly heard of the disease. They  certainly
didn't know it was lethal, they said.

   The diagnosis has changed their world. Since then, they have moved through
all the emotions. Anger. Sadness. Helplessness.

   "How do you watch your kid slip away like that?" Donald Gorman said at  their
modest two-bedroom home in Safety Harbor. "It's such a cruel way to go.  It's
just so cruel."

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a disease that strikes one in 3,500 male
babies, was named after a French neurologist who described the symptoms of the
disease in medical papers in the 1860s. For years, scientists focused on the
muscles in their search for a cause.

   But in 1986, geneticists at Harvard University, doing research funded by  the
Muscular Dystrophy Association, made a discovery: They identified a gene  that,
when defective, fails to produce dystrophin, a protein that reinforces  the cell
walls of muscles. In Duchenne patients, the missing protein causes  the muscles
to break down.

   Since that discovery, scientists have looked at ways to replace the
defective gene through what is known as gene therapy. They say it could be
years before that treatment is possible. In the meantime, progress also has
been made in slowing the effects of the disease - for instance, through the  use
of steroids. Yet, there is still no cure.

   The Gormans wanted to tell their story because they hope that if more  people
know about the disease, they will want to help find a cure. The Gormans  are
setting up the Danny Foundation, which will accept tax-deductible  donations to
pay for research at the Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Research  Center at the
University of Pittsburgh.

Doctor delivers devastating news

   The Gormans were looking for an affordable place to live and raise a family
when they moved to Safety Harbor a decade ago from Queens, N.Y.

   Danny, their first child, was born April 14, 1991, and appeared healthy.  The
Gormans said they were relieved. "You counted the toes and the fingers  and you
made sure he was a healthy child," said Donald Gorman, 34, a property  claim
trainer at State Farm Insurance Co. The couple also has a second child,
Jessica, who was born in February.

   "We had accomplished everything we wanted to do," the father said. "We  had a
house on a dead-end street, with a swing set in the back yard. It's  nothing
fancy, but we were at peace."

   During the interview, Danny periodically skipped by a window on his way to
the backyard swing set. Once, he stopped briefly to come inside and show his
father a mosquito bite the size of a dime on his kneecap. Then, he was off
again.

   Danny shows some of the early signs of the disease: He has a slight waddle
to his gait, his calf muscles are enlarged and he can't do some simple
activities like squatting. But his bright, round eyes and infectious giggle
mask the truth that he is a child with a terminal disease.

   One of the mysteries of the disease, said Eric Hoffman, a geneticist who
identified the protein dystrophin in 1986, is that while the protein is  missing
at birth, the effects of the disease don't appear until a boy is  between 3 and
5. Then, said Hoffman, a researcher at the Pittsburgh center,  the disease
progresses rapidly.

   "You have a normal kid at 5 and you just watch him die for the next 15
years," Hoffman said.

   The Gormans said they first noticed something might be wrong with Danny  when
he was 3. He walked differently, slightly waddling from side to side. He  played
cautiously, carefully climbing the steps on a jungle gym while other  children
raced by him.

   But the Gormans and their doctor thought Danny might just be developing at  a
slower pace, as some children do. Then his preschool teachers began to  notice
that Danny could not keep up. He tired easily on field trips. And his  parents
saw that he had a tough time pedaling his bicycle uphill.

   Danny also needed to use his hands to push himself up off the ground. Known
as the Gower's sign, it is an early signal of muscular dystrophy.

   As his fifth birthday approached in April, Debbie Gorman took her son to  his
pediatrician for a checkup required before he starts kindergarten this  fall.

   The pediatrician, John C. Viverito of the Diagnostic Clinic in Clearwater,
decided to run some blood tests. When he got the results, he called the  Gormans
and asked them to come to his office at 7:30 a.m.

   The news was devastating. "My heart just dropped," Debbie Gorman said.

   Debbie Gorman learned last week that she is a carrier and passed the
defective gene on to her son. The family had no previous history of the
disease.

Danny is told his muscles "have a cold'

    After the diagnosis in April, the couple said, their lives revolved around
tears and an obsessive search for answers.

   Last month, Donald Gorman took time off from work and traveled to  Pittsburgh
for a conference on the disease. He learned about the Parent  Project for
Muscular Dystrophy Research, a national organization formed by  parents of
Duchenne patients. The Gormans have joined the parents' group,  which helps
raise funds for research.

   Debbie Gorman, 33, a secretary at State Farm, said she doesn't want to  think
about her son's eventual death. "I picture him going to college, having
girlfriends," she said. "I don't picture him lying down in a bed, sick."

   Gorman said she refuses to give up hope for a cure.

   "They can tell us what has happened in the past," she said. "They can't  say
what's going to happen in the future. Why not think that he is going to be
cured?"

   In the meantime, Viverito and Danny's physical therapist, Cathy Dellinger of

 the Children's Therapy Center in Largo, say the best thing for Danny is to
keep him active and limber.

   Danny goes to therapy once a week. His parents do stretches with him twice  a
day, beginning at 6:30 a.m. They play games with him to try to make it fun,
like sticking coins between his toes so he can reach for them. The Gormans say
they encourage Danny to play outside. He has recently enrolled in a class of
uechi-ryu, an Okinawan form of karate.

   Danny was told that his muscles "have a cold," his mother said, and  doesn't
seem to be bothered by the disease.

   And his parents say he has shown some signs of improving strength. "He can
walk on his heels," Debbie Gorman said. "He can jump. He can skip. He can  ride
his bike better than he ever has." The muscle strengthening will also  keep him
healthier for a longer time.

   But experts say those improvements will be short-lived. Danny's disease  will
continue to progress unless a cure is found.

   In Pittsburgh, Paula Clemens, an assistant professor of neurology at the
research center, has been studying a method of using the adenovirus or common
cold virus to carry the dystrophin gene back into the body. But there are some
serious obstacles to overcome, she said, such as preventing the body from
rejecting the cloned gene.

   "It's impossible to put time frames on any of these particular hurdles,"
Clemens said. "Something could develop in science that could change things
virtually overnight. But on the other hand, we don't know that."

   For the Gormans, life, as they know it now, goes on.

   Danny still begs his father at bedtime to tell the story about how his life
began - when his mother went into labor at Home Depot. The Gormans said they
don't want to have to tell the ending of that story in their lifetimes.

   "Miracles happen in this world all the time," Debbie Gorman said. "They  are
out there. You've just got to look for them."

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, AL HOGUE, (2); BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, AL HOGUE; BLACK AND
WHITE PHOTO; Danny Gorman gets help with stretching exercises from karate
instructor Steve Gorman (ran SE, LA, NT, CT); Debbie, Danny, Jessica and Donald
Gorman (ran SE, LA, NT, CT); Danny Gorman practices during his karate lesson
(ran SE); Debbie, Danny, Jessica and Donald Gorman (ran CITY & STATE)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1996


                             2795 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1996 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             June 8, 1996, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: BIOMEDICAL STARTUP COMPANY PLANS STOCK OFFERING

BYLINE: Ron Carter, Dispatch Business Reporter

BODY:


   Progenitor Inc., a Columbus biomedical company, has filed a registration
statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public
stock offering that could raise as much as $ 37.4 million.

   The company, 1507 Chambers Rd., was formed in 1992 to make commercial
cellular and genetic therapies developed by researchers at Ohio University's
Edison Biotechnology Institute.

   Progenitor is owned by Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Lexington, Mass.,
which will retain a 51 percent stake in the company.

   The offering of 2.5 million shares is expected to be priced at $ 11 to $ 13
each, the company said. Progenitor also has granted underwriters an option to
purchase 375,000 additional shares.

   Douglass Given, president and chief executive, said money raised by the
offering will be used to advance the company's research and efforts to bring new
drug therapies to market.

   Commercial applications for the company's research includes treatments for
cancer, degenerative diseases associated with aging and blood and immunity
disorders.

   The offering is expected to be made by the end of July, Given said.

   ''We have developed a proprietary system for discovering new drug leads which
are attractive to the pharmaceutical industry,'' said Given.

   Progenitor's employment of 25 is expected to double within a year after the
offering is completed, Given said.

   Vector Securities International Inc., Tucker Anthony Inc. and Genesis
Merchant Group Securities will serve as underwriters for the offering, the
company said.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1996


                             2796 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1996 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      June 6, 1996, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1240 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
 OF MICE AND MAYHEM;
 THE FIERCE TEMPERS OF MUTANT RODENTS BORN WITH THEIR BRAINS AWASH IN THE
CHEMICAL SEROTONIN MAY PROVIDE A CLUE TO VIOLENT BEHAVIOR AMONG HUMANS

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   The scientist grabs Mutant #9 by the tail, lifts the mouse out of its
shoebox-size cage, and lowers it gently into another, identical container, the
reeking, sawdust-floored home of Mutant #4.

   Blind and jittery, the mice are freaks of nature, products of a genetic
engineering experiment that did not go exactly as planned. But, oddly, their
encounter in this fifth-floor laboratory at the USC School of Pharmacy may
reveal something vital about human nature.

   They square off, sniffing furiously, then inch closer. Within seconds, #9
corners #4. And then they dive at each another--a rolling, squeaking, clawing
gray blur. Sawdust and fur fly.

   Jean Chen Shih, a USC biochemist and promoter of this unlikely murine bout,
jumps back, startled by the attack even though she was expecting it. "Normal
mice fight also, but not so rapidly as these," Shih says.

   By any measure, the mice, called Tg8, are among the most aggressive in
captivity.

   This odd little spectacle is part of the quest for answers to the violence
clawing at American's soul. A Tg8 is born with its brain awash in an excess of
serotonin, a neurotransmitter chemical that helps regulate mood and mental
health, and Shih and her co-workers believe that that excess greatly contributes
to the mouse's fierce temper.

   To be sure, a brawl between blind mice in an ivory tower is a far cry from
the mayhem and brutality perfected by such brainy animals as ourselves. But the
work does appear to touch on human experience: The Tg8's cardinal biochemical
defect was originally discovered in numerous related Dutchmen who committed
arson, attempted rape and assault.

   The Tg8 mice are the first laboratory animals to share both the biochemical
defect and the behavior observed in a pedigree of violent criminals. In that
sense, the mice are an important new tool for probing the physiology of running
amok. By studying the mice's trigger-happy biology, researchers hope to
understand aggression better and perhaps develop new drugs that control it.

   But for every potential new use of such information, critics envision a new
abuse. Steven Rose, a biologist at the Open University in England, is an
outspoken critic of the idea that one's genetic makeup determines behavior--a
scientific premise he calls "neurogenetic determinism."

   Sociologist Dorothy Nelkin of New York University says that conservatives
might seize on biological explanations of violence to "dismantle the welfare
state," because controlling aggression with drugs could well be much cheaper
than rehabilitation programs.

   She also fears that if certain biochemical signatures became associated with
violence or criminal behavior, people with such a makeup could be wrongly
implicated and stigmatized as potential threats to society--the physiological
equivalent of a bad credit rating. The Tg8 research and similar studies, she
says, "open up a whole set of problems that are worthy of careful
consideration."

   No such heady dilemmas weighed upon scientists at the Pasteur Institute near
Paris when they accidentally created the Tg8 mouse strain two years ago. Olivier
Cases and colleagues were trying to develop a novel gene therapy by injecting a
one-celled embryo of a special lab strain of blind mice with a shred of foreign
DNA. But instead of resulting in a "new" mouse pup with a bolstered immune
system, the experiment led to a strain of male mice with a really bad temper.

   The first indicator of that ill nature was painfully obvious: The mice nipped
the researchers' fingers. When caged together, male Tg8s--the Tg is for
"transgenic"--tore each other apart. And the researchers also found that when
male and female mice mated, the males were especially quick, grabby and
forceful, eliciting more female squeaks, on average, than other males did.

   Those traits may be reminiscent of any number of men, but the French
researchers were put in mind of certain Dutch males in one extended family
described in the medical literature. Over four generations, a remarkable number
of those males were accused or convicted of rape, assault and arson, leading
local psychologists as well as law enforcement authorities to watch them very
closely.

   After much study, Dutch scientists reported a finding in 1993 that, they
believed, helped explain the aggressive males' behavior: They were missing an
enzyme called monoamine oxidase A, or MAO-A, which breaks down a variety of
neurotransmitters, including serotonin. Lacking the MAO-A enzyme, the affected
males, who also had borderline mental retardation, had extra-high levels of
several neurotransmitters, including serotonin.

   The genetic defect found in the violent Dutchmen is probably very rare,
researchers say, and certainly doesn't account for what makes most aggressive
people act that way. Still, the finding offers a unique window into how
disruptions in brain chemistry can be correlated with a pattern of antisocial
behavior.

   Given the Dutch findings, then, it was logical for the sore-fingered French
researchers to want to know if their mutant mice also lacked the MAO enzyme.
That's where Shih, a world expert on that family of enzymes, came in. Not long
after she agreed to test the Tg8 mice for the enzyme, a shipment of the
creatures arrived from France (having spent weeks in quarantine at Los Angeles
International Airport).

   It took Shih and her co-workers several months of painstaking lab work to
establish that the male mice were indeed lacking the gene for the MAO-A
enzyme--just like the affected Dutchmen. "When this gene is missing, the animals
are very aggressive and hyperactive," Shih says.

   Her Tg8 study, says Randy Nelson, a behavioral psychologist at Johns Hopkins
University, was "one of the first to show a biological mechanism for aggressive
behavior in an animal." Follow-up studies published this spring in the journal
Neuron suggest that the neurotransmitter defect actually affects the structure
of the Tg8's brain, most likely by skewing growth and development in fetal and
newborn mice.

   Nelson says it's no surprise that genes affect temperament. "Anybody who
knows the difference between a pit bull and a Labrador retriever knows that
aggressive behavior has a genetic basis," he says.

   Some researchers expect that the biochemical analysis of behavior will pay
off. Dr. Frederick Moeller, a psychiatrist at the University of Texas in
Houston, hopes that the missing-enzyme research leads to new drugs for treating
criminals and other violent people who simply can't control their aggression. "I
treat individuals who . . . can't keep from assaulting hospital staff even long
enough to get out of the hospital," he says.

   "The goal isn't to control everybody and make them less aggressive," he says.
"The goal is to work with real people who have a real problem with aggression."

   For her part, Shih is a little dismayed to find herself in the middle of such
a hot controversy. "I like to avoid the political issues," the biochemist says.

   Even though she is no sociologist, Shih believes that she can make a
contribution to understanding human behavior by studying the Tg8's biology.

   That possibility is apparent to her whenever she returns the mice to their
cages in the locked, windowless animal room across the hall from her office.
Normal mice fare perfectly well living four to a cage. But the Tg8 males are
held in solitary confinement, too hostile for mouse society.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Biochemist Jean Chen Shih of the USC School of Pharmacy displays
some of the mutant mice that she uses in her research on whether the lack of the
enzyme monoamine oxidase A in their brains triggers hyperaggressive behavior and
violence. The vicious rodents attack each other when housed together and bite
researchers.  PHOTOGRAPHER: CAROLYN COLE / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1996


                             2797 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     June 5, 1996, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: Genvec, Scios pool efforts on new drug; Artery-growth factor may
lessen bypass surgery

BYLINE: Timothy J. Mullaney, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   A Rockville biotechnology company yesterday announced a deal that it hopes
will lead to drugs that will complement, or in some cases replace, the role of
bypass surgery in heart patients.

   Genvec Inc. said it had acquired worldwide rights from California-based Scios
Inc. to develop genetic therapies based on Scios' vascular endothelial growth
factor. Genvec said VEGF 121 is produced by a gene that signals the body to
create new blood vessels. The new vessels may restore the flow of blood and
oxygen to parts of the heart that are being starved because vessels that
normally feed the muscle are clogged with fat.

   Researchers at Genvec said the goal is to learn how to use Genvec's drug
delivery systems to target Scios' growth factor at the proper parts of the body,
making the combination a potentially effective therapy for heart patients.

   "This creates more pipes; that's the idea," said Ronald Crystal, Genvec's
chief outside scientific consultant and a founder of the privately held firm.

   "The biology is complex, but the concept is quite simple. The body makes new
blood vessels because it is signaled to do so by molecules signaled by certain
genes."

   In bypass surgery, surgeons graft vessels from other parts of the body to
areas around the heart, using the transplanted vessels to carry blood around
arterial blockages caused by poor diet or other factors, Crystal said. Surgeons
may use artificial vessels in place of the grafts.

   Crystal said the gene therapy will complement surgery in most cases. He said
surgery is effective at bypassing large arteries but can fail to address
blockages in smaller blood vessels. The genetic therapy will replace vessels too
small for effective surgery and reduce the strain on larger, bypassed arteries,
he said.

   Terms of the licensing agreement were not disclosed. Scios is the company
that bought Baltimore-based Nova Pharmaceutical Corp. in 1992.

   The gene therapy will not be on the market for at least several years,
however, even assuming the product Genvec dubbed BioBypass works in clinical
trials.

   Company officials said the firm will be doing preclinical research on
BioBypass until early next year. The next step will be to apply to the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration for permission to launch the first of three phases of
clinical studies in selected patients. "It's conceivable that we could be in
pivotal trials by 1999, but a lot of things have to happen," said Paul Fischer,
Genvec research and development vice president.

   Technical obstacles are not the only barriers between yesterday's
announcement and commercial success. Genvec Chief Executive Thomas D'Alonzo said
the company is also seeking marketing partnerships with larger drug companies.

   Those deals would let a bigger company sell the product and split the profits
with Genvec. Such arrangements are common in biotechnology because young
research-oriented companies with no products on the market lack the money to
build sales forces.

   The marketing partnership also may help Genvec raise capital to pay for its
research, D'Alonzo said.

   Genvec has two other therapies that are in the first stage of clinical
trials, D'Alonzo said. One is designed to treat cystic fibrosis, and the other
is aimed at colon cancer that has spread to the liver.

   Pub Date: 6/05/96

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1996


                             2798 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1996 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     June 04, 1996, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. D07; ON THE DIAL

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: Only the Radio Was On; On a Dare, Listeners Go Streaking at WXTR

BYLINE: Jeffrey Yorke, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:


   Office workers in Marlow Heights experienced a raw flashback to the 1970s on
Friday morning when 15 naked people boarded the elevators in the building at
5210 Auth Rd., home of WXTR-FM (104.1).

   No, it wasn't part of a station campaign to clothe the needy, just the result
of an on-air conversation at the '70s music station that had legs. And then
some.

   On Wednesday, after spinning "The Streak" by Ray Stevens -- a song recorded
at the height of the early-'70s fad of running nude in public to shock onlookers
-- morning host Wes Johnson said to partner Marilyn Thompson, "Wouldn't it be
funny if we got streakers to . . ." Their conversation evolved into an
invitation to listeners to streak at the station on Friday.

   "One or two" listeners called to say they'd participate, said Johnson, then
14 people arrived before 8 a.m. and disrobed in the station's lobby. One station
intern joined the group. Johnson, fully clothed and with wireless microphone in
hand, led the streakers out to the parking lot, where they ran around grassy
median strips for about five minutes while he gave listeners a play-by-play
account of the event. The exuberant participants were rewarded with "Xtra 104"
T-shirts and pepperoni sticks.

   For those who couldn't actually see the event, Johnson offered these
observations: "People seem to run much more slowly when they're naked" and
"where there is a lot of nudity around, eye contact increases."

   An Xtra Push

   Donations for Camp Fantastic continued to pour into WXTR-FM last week
following the station's Memorial Day weekend fund-raiser from the Fashion Center
at Pentagon City. The on-air drive has brought in almost $ 40,000 for the summer
camp for children battling cancer. One of the kids who provided personal
testimony was Rebecca "Becca" Lilly, a 15-year-old from Takoma Park who, earlier
this year, was the first patient to undergo gene therapy treatment for a brain
tumor.

   Tuesday, after the fund-raising event, Becca underwent five hours of surgery
to remove a brain tumor and is recovering at Children's Hospital.

   Levey to Leave WMAL

   The local talk show wars have produced another casualty. Mid-morning host Bob
Levey was told last week that his WMAL-AM (630) contract will not be renewed
when his three-year deal expires on June 13. He expects to remain on the air
until then.

   "The audience didn't develop as we expected it to," WMAL operations director
Jim Gallant said yesterday. "Bob and we are disappointed; after three years, we
really expected more."

   Levey, 51, who also is a Washington Post columnist, was named talk show host
of the year in the 1994 local Achievement in Radio (AIR) competition and was
recognized as one of the nation's most important talk hosts by Talkers magazine
three months ago.

   He has performed in what he calls "a bitterly competitive" atmosphere with
Diane Rehm at WAMU-FM (88.5) and fellow Post columnist Tony Kornheiser at
sports-talk WTEM-AM (570). For one hour each morning he is also up against
top-rated schlock jock Howard Stern at WJFK-FM (106.7).

   Levey's show has been the liberal lead-in to conservative Rush Limbaugh at
WMAL.

   "I'm really surprised. I was the balance against Limbaugh, who casts a cloud
over the station every day," Levey said. "They must be looking for some ratings
super miracle at a tough time of day. I wish them luck. There are people in this
city and in this business who know what kind of a contribution I made. We will
find each other."

   As far as a replacement for Levey, Gallant said he is "working on a couple of
things, but nothing is firm at this point."

   Local comedy club owner Chip Franklin, who writes jokes for NBC-TV's
"Saturday Night Live" and "The Tonight Show," and cable's "Politically
Incorrect," will fill in on the 10 to 11:45 a.m. show for the week beginning
June 17.

   Levey will continue writing his "Bob Levey's Washington" column for The Post
and will look for other opportunities in radio.

   Starling Lands at Metro

   Airborne traffic reporter Walt Starling, who has been grounded since Dec. 21,
has signed on with Metro Traffic and likely will be heard on talk station
WWRC-AM (980) and its adult contemporary sister station, WEBR-FM (99.5).

   Starling, who began his traffic career in 1974 and is the only area traffic
reporter to pilot his own aircraft, has been off the air since CBS-owned classic
rocker WARW-FM (94.7) opted not to renew his exclusive contract with the
station.

   Metro Traffic provides reports to 33 area radio stations and five television
outlets. Starling, 44, also expects to be a contributor to a TV traffic cast.

LOAD-DATE: June 04, 1996June 04, 1996


                             2799 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

HEADLINE: In the Region/Long Island;
Expansions Help Ease Downsizing Vacancies

BYLINE: By DIANA SHAMAN

BODY:

   WHEN Ingenious Designs moves into its expanded quarters next weekend it will
quadruple the amount of space it now occupies.

   Now in 20,000 square feet in Deer Park, it will add 60,000 additional square
feet that it has leased in a 200,000-square-foot building under construction in
the Heartland Business Center in Edgewood.

    Founded four years ago by Joy Mangano, who started the business in her
Smithtown home, its annual sales have grown from an initial $10,000 to $17
million. Its products, all of which were invented by Mrs. Mangano, are the
self-wringing Miracle Mop, a specialty storage box and a jewelry box.

   Ingenious Designs exemplifies the small and medium-size company that is
thriving on Long Island whose space needs help shrink industrial vacancies
created by the downsizing of corporate giants like Northrop Grumman.

   Air Techniques, another example, turned down lures of lower power costs and
cheaper rents offered by other states and decided to stay on Long Island.

   The company, which owns an 85,000-square-foot building in Hicksville,
manufactures dental equipment, including a video camera that magnifies images of
teeth. Last summer, it added 24,000 square feet in a nearby building owned by
Spiegel Associates of Jericho.

   "We didn't want to lose our people, and we need good vendors and suppliers,
which Long Island has," said Mark S. Brooks, the company's vice president.

   "I think demand is going to get even better so I want to have the space when
the big tenant who wants 100,000 square feet comes along," said Jerry Wolkoff,
the developer of the 200,000-square-foot Edgewood project into which Ingenious
Designs is moving. He is also the owner of the 300-acre Heartland Business
Center.

   His $7 million self-financed new project, though close to completion, still
has 140,000 square feet for rent. But of the 2.5 million square feet of existing
space that he owns in Heartland, only about 35,000 square feet are currently
available, Mr. Wolkoff said.

   Nevertheless, economists, planners and others say demand for industrial space
is still modest and more needs to be done, especially in reducing utility costs
and taxes, to replace the 66,800 manufacturing jobs lost since 1986.

   The region, though gaining service jobs, is still losing industrial jobs,
pointed out Pearl M. Kamer, chief economist for the Long Island Association, a
business group. From March 1995 through last March 31, 3,200 manufacturing jobs
were lost and 7,900 service jobs were gained.

   The overall vacancy rate in industrial space at the end of March was 15.02
percent in Suffolk and 17.97 percent in Nassau, according to Greiner-Maltz, a
brokerage in Woodbury that collects such data. The two counties have a total of
more than 115 million square feet of industrial space.

   "But absorption is going to be a slow process and you are not going to see a
whole bunch of help-wanted signs like you saw in 1985," said Bill Greiner,
president of Greiner-Maltz.

   But some landlords are more optimistic. They say they are already
experiencing shortages of good space for tenants who want to expand.

   Jan Burman, president of Lazarus-Burman Associates in Syosset, owners of 5
million square feet of industrial space on Long Island, said his overall vacancy
rate was just 2 percent, adding that he was buying new buildings to meet the
growing needs of tenants.

   "I am looking every day for opportunities because the economy is getting
better, a lot of companies are expanding and a lot of the industrial space has
been absorbed," he said.

   RECENTLY he purchased a 100,000-square-foot warehouse in Farmingdale, which
has been leased by J.C. Penney. Next month, he said, he will be closing a deal
on a 300,000-square-foot office/industrial building in Garden City.

   "Although our economy has trailed the national economy, a lot of companies
here manufacture goods for national and global distribution," said Arthur D.
Sanders, president of Spiegel Associates, a commercial developer. "As the
economy improves they are expanding."

   He said his vacancies had dropped to 5 percent from 15 percent a year ago.

   The 560,000-square-foot Equi-Park, an industrial park in Ronkonkoma, is
nearly 100 percent occupied, compared to a 50 percent vacancy in 1993, said
Michael DiDonato, senior vice president at the Island Realty Group in Melville,
the leasing broker. "It's a reflection of what's happening in the market," he
said.

   One positive sign, observers say, is new construction -- most of it
build-to-suit buildings that are preleased or presold. Buildings erected without
a specific tenant in mind, such as the Edgewood project, are still rare.

   "The fact that the build-to-suit market is alive again is significant," said
Jack O'Connor, president of the Island Realty Group, who recently brokered a
deal for the Audiovox Corporation of Hauppauge, which plans to build a
60,000-square-foot headquarters for its cellular communications division in the
Hauppauge Industrial Park. "It shows that what's on the market is sparse," Mr.
O'Connor said.

   Nicholas H. Racanelli, a vice president, of the Racanelli Construction
Company of Hauppauge, which will construct the Audiovox building, said business
was on the upswing. Since Jan. 1, 1995, he said, 355,000 square feet of space
has been completed or is now under construction by his company on Long Island,
compared with 50,000 square feet in 1994.

   Another Racanelli client is the Festo Corporation of Hauppauge, a maker of
air valves and air cylinders used on assembly lines and in manufacturing, which
recently added 20,000 square feet to its existing 80,000-square-foot building
and will be erecting a 50,000-square-foot warehouse to support the extra
production capability.

   "For us, what speaks for New York is that we are a multinational company and
airports are very important," said Horst K. Saalbach, the president of Festo,
whose parent of the same name is based in Esslingen, Germany.

   "Labor rates in other states are now the same and Long Island is more
attractive because of its labor pool and the first-class academic institutions
that support industry," Mr. Saalbach added.

   SEVERAL initiatives to expand Long Island's manufacturing base are under way,
among them a recently appointed advisory group headed by Morton L. Certilman,
chairman of the Long Island Regional Planning Board.

   The group is formulating proposals for a 100-acre Navy-owned property at the
Northrop Grumman site in Bethpage. The Navy will be turning over the site, which
contains 1.35 million square feet of industrial and warehouse space, to the
county in about two years. A cogeneration plant on the property, which can
supply low-cost power, could become the major factor in attracting new industry
from outside the region, Mr. Certilman said.

   The Long Island Association, which has identified high-technology industries
that are likely to thrive locally, is developing a plan to foster their growth.
Among its proposals is to provide venture capital and to create closer dialogue
between the educational and business communities.

   A task force headed by James A. Hayward, president of Collaborative
Laboratories of East Setauket, is evaluating proposals to create incubator space
that would give fledgling companies access to laboratories and other research
opportunities.

   Long Island's only existing incubator was created in 1986 by the State
University of New York at Stony Brook. It recently expanded from 40,000 to
72,000 square feet.

   Dr. Hayward's five-year-old company, among the first to develop a product at
the incubator, now has 150 employees and is the world's largest manufacturer of
a form of artificial cell called liposome, used in skin care, gene therapy and
in manufacturing synthetic blood.

   "Without the incubator, our company would not be where it is now," he said.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joy Mangano with her Miracle Mop in the new space she has leased
for Ingenious Designs in Edgewood. (Steve Berman for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1996


                             2800 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                         MAY 31, 1996 Friday PM EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 432 words

HEADLINE: 'A WAY FOR HIM TO LIVE'< NEWBORN GOES HOME AFTER FETAL SURGERY

BYLINE: Mary Flannery, Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:

   The news that her unborn child could have surgery and be returned to her womb
had only one meaning for Felicia Rodriguez.

   "It was hope. Without the surgery, there was no hope," she said. "This was a
way for him to live."

   Her son, Roberto III, was diagnosed by ultrasound with a large, non-cancerous
mass on his chest that was pushing his heart and squashing his developing lungs.
Without treatment, she was told, he would most certainly die and endanger his
mother's life.

   Her doctors in West Palm Beach, Fla., referred her to the only
fetal-treatment center on the East Coast, at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia. On Feb. 16, only 22 weeks after conception, Roberto was operated
on in utero at the hospital and the mass was removed, the first time that fetal
surgery was performed here.

   After 13 more weeks confined to bed rest at the nearby Ronald McDonald House,
Rodriguez went into early but normal labor. Following a Ceasarean section
delivery, her six-pound son greeted the world for the second time on May 13.

   Yesterday, the baby, wearing a yellow-print outfit and a sleepy expression,
was discharged from Children's Hospital. After a few days for out-patient
observation, Rodriguez and her baby will go home, where her husband, Roberto,
Jr., and their 5-year-old daughter, Macy, are waiting patiently for the family
reunion.

   "Prayer and God got me through this," said Rodriguez, 25. "The baby has a
scar but it will fade. I am going to try and raise him like a normal kid, not
like someone who had a tumor on his chest and fetal surgery. But I'll never
forget."

   The delicate surgery was performed by Dr. N. Scott Adzick, recruited from the
University of California San Francisco last year to develop the fetal treatment
center, and by Dr. Timothy Crombleholme, who came from Tufts University to join
the fetal treatment team.

   Adzick is now following more than 30 pregnant women with fetuses with genetic
or anatomic birth defects. Most are monitored closely until birth, when surgery
is performed. But for babies like Roberto, surgery can't wait.

   he reason why I went into this," said Adzick, "is because I was operating on
newborns with birth defects. Most had been diagnosed by ultrasound before birth.
I was frustrated because the damage had been done. I was too late."

   For more than 10 years, Adzick has been pushing the surgical envelope,
removing fetal tumors and repairing urinary tract malformations.

   Now he is experimenting on animal models with stem cell transplants to
correct enzyme deficiencies and gene therapy to cure inherited diseases.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO (1)
1. Roberto Rodriguez III gets kiss from mom on leaving hospital (JIM MacMILLAN,
DAILY NEWS)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002
