
                             401 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JULY 16, 2004 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: Phila. losing a key cancer researcher;
Joined by a staff of over 30, he will leave Jefferson for an Ohio St. program.

BYLINE: Faye Flam INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Carlo Croce, widely considered the brightest scientific star at Thomas
Jefferson University, is leaving and taking more than 30 people with him, a
major loss for one of Philadelphia's premier medical research centers.

   In October, Croce, 59, will become director of the human cancer genetics
program at Ohio State University in Columbus.

   Croce said he was going partly because Ohio State offered him more money and
laboratory space. He also said he was disappointed with Jefferson's handling of
its relationship with benefactor Sidney Kimmel. A disagreement with the
philanthropist might have cost Jefferson tens of millions of potential
cancer-research dollars.

   Croce, who pioneered much of today's understanding of the genetic basis of
cancer, said he would take his 30-person laboratory and the smaller lab run by
his life companion, fellow cancer researcher Kay Huebner. "They hired me and I
hired her," Croce said.

   In a press release, Ohio State researchers praised Croce as "legendary" and
"one of the top cancer scientists in the world today."

   Wally Curran, clinical director of the Kimmel Cancer Center, said that going
on without Croce would be a challenge to the leadership of the center.

   "He was the founding and sole director for 14 years and he's an
internationally recognized researcher," Curran said.

   Craig Thompson, scientific director of the Abramson Family Cancer Research
Institute at the University of Pennsylvania, said he considered Croce one of the
five most important cancer researchers in the country.

   "There is no question Carlo has been one of the leading lights of cancer
research and medical research in Philadelphia for the last 20 years," he said.

   Croce, a member of the National Academy of Sciences, has won numerous
high-prestige awards.

   He said he became disillusioned with Jefferson four years ago when the
hospital failed to build a dedicated Kimmel Cancer Center building on what is
now a parking lot between Walnut and Locust. That damaged the university's
relationship with Sidney Kimmel.

   Kimmel, Croce said, was immensely important to Jefferson's cancer effort. The
Philadelphia philanthropist gave Jefferson $10 million in 1996 and had agreed to
donate $25 million more specifically for the building.

   Jefferson probably could have gotten as much money as it wanted from Kimmel,
Croce said. But the building wasn't getting built. Jefferson cited problems with
parking and zoning. In 2000, Kimmel withdrew the $25 million and publicly
accused Jefferson of reneging on an agreement.

   "Six months later he gave $150 million to Johns Hopkins University," Croce
said. "That broke my heart." It was money that might have gone to Jefferson. "It
was a huge blow to all of us, to the entire faculty."

   Jefferson's failure to construct the building, he said, "was probably the
major reason why I decided to go."

   Croce made a name for himself while working at Philadelphia's Wistar
Institute in the late 1970s and early 1980s. There, he identified some of the
first genetic abnormalities associated with cancer cells. He moved to Temple
University in 1988 and to Jefferson in 1991, where he directed the Kimmel Cancer
Center.

   Born in Milan, Italy, Croce studied medicine in Rome before coming to Wistar
in the 1970s. Back then, he said, scientists did not have a clue what caused
cancer. A few, including Croce, suspected genes might be involved. He decided to
look into this question by studying a childhood cancer called Burkitt's
lymphoma, in which immune cells called B-cells become malignant.

   He found that in B-cells taken from patients with this disease, the genetic
code had become scrambled in key places.

   The thousands of human genes in every cell are divided into 46 separate
structures - the chromosomes - and sometimes whole pieces of these chromosomes
break off like pages of text ripped from a book. Once loose, these pieces of
genetic code attach somewhere else, often to another chromosome.

   Such damaged cells normally die, but Croce found that in Burkitt's lymphoma,
the malignant cells always had certain genes juxtaposed. A gene that controls
cell division called the myc oncogene was pasted in next to genes that promote
the production of antibodies. The two genes get plugged into the same circuit so
when the cell tries to make antibodies, it also grows out of control.

   Croce found a handful of other such "translocations," where oncogenes were
stuck in the wrong place. It just has to happen once, in one cell, and it can
lead to cancer.

   A body of work built up in the 1980s firmly established that all cancers stem
from damage to genetic material, which can come about by sunlight, smoking,
radiation, chemicals, time and bad luck. Sometimes people inherit genes that
render them more vulnerable than others to certain cancers.

   Ultimately, the point of all this work is to design new treatments and
diagnostic tests. Croce is working on several tests and interventions, including
one that involves gene therapy. He said it had worked in laboratory animals and
he will start testing it on people with advanced lung cancer after he arrives in
Ohio.

   Croce said Ohio State does a better job than Jefferson in encouraging
researchers to translate their scientific findings into clinical treatments.

   For the urbane Croce, who lives in Center City, the hardest part of the move
will be having to leave the cultural landscape. But he will take some of the
arts with him, he said, by transporting his collection of 300 Renaissance and
Baroque paintings and drawings. Art, he said, is a passion second only to
science.

   Leaving "was a very difficult decision because I love Philadelphia," he said
in his Italian accent. "I hate having to go to Columbus."

   But Ohio State recruited Croce vigorously, said Michael Caligiuri, who
directs the university's comprehensive cancer center. Researchers there plan to
emphasize Croce's specialty, the human genetics of cancer, he said. "There are
only two or three names in the world that come to mind as truly outstanding
scientists in this area," he said. "Dr. Croce kept coming up number one."

   While some see Croce's departure as a loss for Philadelphia, Caligiuri gave
it a positive spin, saying we are all in the fight against cancer together and
if Croce's talents are better used in Ohio, everyone will benefit.

   Still, no one will know what inroads might have been made had Croce been able
to stay in Philadelphia and combine his scientific leadership with Kimmel's
money.

   Croce's work "changed the way we all think," Penn's Thompson said. "Carlo is
and will continue to be one of my closest friends and closet colleagues and one
of my biggest rivals," he said. "He pushed us all to be better."

   Contact staff writer Faye Flam

   at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
Carlo Croce said missteps by Jefferson hurt funding.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2005


                             402 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2004 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    July 14, 2004 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: OHSU GETS GRANT FOR IMMUNITY STUDY

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Scientists check the body's defenses for safer vaccines for the
young, the old and those with weak systems

   Oregon scientists hope that aging monkeys and a modified smallpox vaccine can
help explain a medical mystery: Why senior citizens and infants get sick so
easily.

   Weakened immune systems are a hallmark of both ends of life, contributing to
disease and death in babies younger than a year and adults 60 and older. For
example, most of the 36,000 U.S. residents killed by flu each year are 60 and
older.

   A new federal grant will give Oregon Health & Science University researchers
$10 million during five years to study why those immune changes happen.
Scientists have "very fragmented" and "certainly incomplete" understanding of
those reasons today, said lead researcher Dr. Janko Nikolich-Zugich, with OHSU's
Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute.

   One goal is to make vaccines safer and better for the young, the old and
others with weakened immune systems, such as people with HIV. Once scientists
understand the defects that weaken aging immune systems, they can look for ways
to overcome those defects, said Dr. Rebecca Fuldner, an administrator with the
National Institute on Aging, which awarded OHSU the grant.

   "It's very difficult to immunize people of that age (older than 60) against a
new pathogen the body has never seen before," she said. "This is really a big
project for us."

   Fuldner said federal interest in protecting people with weakened immune
systems is growing for several reasons: The U.S. population is aging. New
diseases are emerging, such as West Nile virus. And the country is planning for
possible disease attacks by terrorists. The National Institute on Aging has
funded much research on immunity and aging, she said, mostly studies of mice.

   The OHSU project is exciting partly because it will use rhesus monkeys, which
scientists assume have immune systems more like their fellow primates: humans.
OHSU's Oregon National Primate Research Center, in Hillsboro, has a colony of
senior monkeys to study, Nikolich-Zugich said.

   The researchers will test the monkeys' immune systems by giving them an
experimental kind of smallpox vaccine, made by modifying vaccinia Ankara, a
weakened strain of the cowpox virus. The vaccine also will be engineered to make
some proteins made by SIV, the monkey version of the AIDS virus, because doctors
have studied SIV extensively.

   Labs will screen for genetic and other changes in the vaccinated monkeys.
Different teams will focus on each of three cell types key to immune response:
T-cells, B-cells and dendritic cells. The OHSU group also will study a few
infant monkeys to see whether their immune systems act like those of the aging
monkeys, Nikolich-Zugich said.

   One focus of the study is whether chronic diseases help to weaken adult
immune systems. Most people get quiet viruses they carry their whole lives, such
as many herpes viruses. The question is whether having to constantly fight those
viruses can exhaust one's overall immune reserves after decades, Nikolich-Zugich
said. Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

GRAPHIC: Graphic - by Steve Cowden - The Oregonian Weak Immune Systems List Age
vs. Death

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2004


                             403 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             July 8, 2004 Thursday

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. 22W

LENGTH: 1014 words

HEADLINE: The science of summer

SERIES: get away; PREVIEW

BYLINE: MARTY CLEAR

BODY:

   Ah, summer in Florida. That magical time when the kids drive you crazy when
it's pouring rain or insanely hot - which is to say, all the time.

   Next time the blaring sounds of SpongeBob SquarePants and Xbox are fraying
your last nerve, try saying this with as much enthusiasm as you can muster:
"Hey, kids, let's go to a museum!"

   Resist the protest that Yu-Gi-Oh! comes on in only three hours, and your
persistence will be rewarded. Museums on both sides of Tampa Bay have new
science-oriented exhibits and activities designed to appeal to inquisitive - and
even TV-loving - kids. Instead of the look-but-don't-touch things so many
parents endured during museums trips as kids, many of the current offerings
feature hands-on elements that invite kids to interact with the exhibits.

   In St. Petersburg, an exhibit at the Florida International Museum takes
visitors to the limits of the known cosmos, to explorations of things
unimaginably large and almost infinitely far away.

   In Tampa, the Museum of Science and Industry takes children into the
microscopic essence of all living things, to the invisible molecules that
largely determine who and what we are. Another MOSI exhibit is designed to
appeal to fans of TV fare such as CSI, the hit CBS show about forensic science.

   New views of the universe

   Built around the spectacular photographs from and stunning discoveries of the
Hubble Space Telescope, the Florida International Museum show is aimed at
visitors of all ages.

   The touring exhibit, designed by the Smithsonian Institution with officials
from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center and other space agencies, includes short
videos in which top astronomers and physicists explain, in layman's language,
what has made the Hubble such a powerful tool. Exhibits and video games give
visitors a look at the way scientists saw the universe before Hubble and the way
they're able to see it now.

   One section of the exhibit shows a series of Hubble images of a comet's
impact on Jupiter. A brief game in that section allows kids to show a comet
headed toward a planet orbiting the sun. On a recent Saturday afternoon, the
game proved as popular with adults as with kids, though the adults looked a
little embarrassed about having such a good time with it.

   Other sections detail the formation of stars, in striking and now-familiar
photographs from the Hubble telescope, and begin to explain the vastness of
known space and the origins of the universe.

   One of the exhibit's short films said the Hubble's goal is to explore four
basic questions: How did the universe begin? How did we get here? Where are we
going? Are we alone? The exhibit presents bite-sized answers.

   In case children find all this a little dry, the museum also has an
associated activity called "Space Hunt" that lets them run through a maze
looking for aliens.

   The Florida International Museum also has three other exhibitions: a
permanent display on the Cuban Missile Crisis; an exhibit of art and artifacts
from the State Russian Museum, which closes Sunday; and fans from Sarasota's
Ringling Museum of Art.

   "We're fortunate in that we can offer a variety of exhibits at the same
time," museum curator Cynthia Duval said. "Most museums have to focus on one
kind of exhibit. Everything has to be related. We can offer anything, as long as
it's edifying and educational."

   "Genome: The Secret of How Life Works"

   At MOSI, a Smithsonian-designed exhibit called "Genome: The Secret of How
Life Works" takes visitors inside the building blocks of life.

   The flashy, brightly colored exhibit is more overtly aimed at kids than the
Hubble exhibit. But it offers just as much new information to adults.

   The exhibit emphasizes the power and importance of DNA. It includes a
25-foot-long sculpture of a double-helix DNA molecule, displays that explore
gene therapy and a film that considers the science fact and fiction behind such
movies as The Fly and Jurassic Park. It explains the mapping of the human genome
and what it could mean for research into such diseases as Alzheimer's and
cancer, and  how it can guide us toward living longer, healthier lives.

   One of the basic displays shows the surprising amount of DNA we share with
other living things. Half our DNA is the same as that of a banana; 98.4 percent
is the same as that of an ape. We share 99.9 percent of our DNA with all other
humans.

   "That means that all our differences - skin color, hair color, height - all
of that is a difference of just one-tenth of 1 percent of our DNA," museum
spokeswoman Beverly Littlejohn said.

   "Whodunit? The Science of Solving Crime"

   Interesting as the DNA show is, an adjoining hands-on exhibit is what's
really drawing  kids, Littlejohn said.

   "Whodunit?" allows visitors to help solve a crime, in the process explaining
how forensic experts do their work. There's even a very graphic film of an
autopsy, for all you CSI watchers who've gotten used to the gore, and a film
that shows how forensic sculptors recreate a crime victim's face starting with
the skull.

   Here's how the exhibit works: Visitors get to play detective, investigating a
"crime scene" at a diner that has been set up. They collect and analyze evidence
at hands-on crime lab stations to figure outwho did it.

   Some activities are just for kids, but there's plenty for all ages. It's your
chance to find out about those terms you hear thrown around on TV, such as DNA
profiling, fingerprinting, forensic anthropology and forensic pathology.

   On Saturday nights this month, MOSI also is offering a "Summer Mystery Dinner
Theatre," in which diners get to figure out who stole Al Capone's antique
revolver. Call the museum for ticket information.

   The local museum scene in general is picking up on the increased national
interest in forensic science. The Science Center of Pinellas County recently
completed two weeklong workshops for kids on crime scene investigation; both
were filled to capacity. Great Explorations: The Children's Museum in St.
Petersburg has an exhibit that lets young sleuths learn how lie detectors work.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JOSEPH GARNETT JR., (2); PHOTO, Associated Press; PHOTO,
Smithsonian Institution; DRAWING, STEVE CAVENDISH; A young visitor to the Museum
of Science and Industry stands at the entrance to the exhibit "Genome: The
Secret of How Life Works."; With the help of a much-larger-than-life display at
the "Genome" exhibit, Diane Myers of Largo explains to; her daughter Anastasia,
6, how DNA molecules are arranged.;  (1999) A camera mounted in Discovery's
cargo bay captures the release of the Hubble Space Telescope with the Earth in
the background.;  The Hubble telescope team made this image of the; Ring Nebula
in 1998.;  a strand of DNA (ran page 1W)

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2004


                             404 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                        July 6, 2004 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: SORTING OUT DEPRESSION, MOOD DISORDERS

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Depression and mood disorders can come in many different flavors, but imaging
technology can help differentiate between the varieties, researchers at the Yale
School of Medicine reported Monday.

   They found low levels of the neurotransmitter GABA and high levels of the
excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate were strongly associated with severe
melancholia, a form of depression marked by loss of appetite and pleasure.

   The researchers used imaging technology called proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy to detect neurotransmitters in 38 healthy individuals and 33
subjects with major depressive disorders.

   The results were published in the Archives of General Psychiatry.

   Depression has been linked to variations in activity of several
neurotransmitter systems such as serotonin or norepinepherine.

   "At the moment, we have limited ability to predict how a patient will respond
to one treatment for depression compared to another," said Gerard Sanacora,
assistant professor of psychiatry at Yale and author of the study. "We are very
interested in exploring the usefulness of these and other biological markers in
identifying various subtypes of depression and predicting specific treatment
responses."

   Huntington's Hope

   Scientists have silenced a gene in mice that cause an illness similar to
Huntington's disease, an incurable and fatal neurological disorder.

   University of Iowa researchers used a gene therapy that included a technique
called RNA interference, which effectively blocked the function of a mutated
gene in the cerebellum of mice with spinocerebellar ataxia type I -- one of a
family of progressive neurological diseases that include Huntington's.

   According to study results published Sunday in the online edition of Nature
Medicine, mice treated with gene therapy showed improved muscle control and
their brain cells seemed to be protected from destruction by the disease.

   Huntington's disease is caused by a single genetic flaw, so successful
therapy must remove or suppress the disease-causing gene. The Iowa scientists
used a modified virus to deliver gene-blocking RNA into the cells of the mice.

   "This is among the most important work I have done, and I am excited about
the prospect of helping to move this approach to clinical trials,"' said Beverly
Davidson, senior author of the study and professor of internal medicine,
physiology, biophysics and neurology at the University of Iowa.

   Immunity From Stress

   Stress does jumpstart our immune system in the short term, but over the long
haul it can lead to a breakdown of our internal defenses, according to a review
of nearly 300 studies that appears in the current issue of the Psychological
Bulletin.

   Also, stress seems to have the most impact on the immune systems of the
elderly.

   Psychologists at the University of Kentucky and the University of British
Columbia also assessed the impact of different types of stresses on the immune
system. They found, for instance, that acute, but time-limited, stresses such as
giving a public speech seemed to ready the immune system to fight infections --
perhaps an adaptive reaction to the "fight or flight" response. But chronic
stresses -- such as dealing with a permanent injury or caring for a spouse with
dementia -- were associated with an almost global suppression of the immune
system, the authors said.

   Learning, Despite Dementia

   A new study adds to mounting evidence that people with early stage
Alzheimer's disease can improve performance on a variety of mental tasks.

   A study published in the current issue of the American Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry showed that after three to four months of training, patients with
early-stage Alzheimer's showed an average improvement of 170 percent in their
ability to recall faces and names. Researchers at the University of Miami School
of Medicine also reported that subjects showed a 71 percent improvement in their
ability to provide proper change for a purchase.

    Last month, researchers at the University of Washington in St. Louis showed
that people with Alzheimer's disease can improve scores on rote memory tasks.

    "Taken together, these studies introduce the exciting notion that older
people who are in the early stages of [Alzheimer's disease] can be taught
techniques to help stay engaged in everyday life," said Neil Buckholtz, head of
the dementias of aging branch of the National Institute of Aging, part of the
National Institutes of Health, which funded by studies.

COLUMN: MEDICAL FRONTIERS

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2004


                             405 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       July 5, 2004 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-8

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: BETTER LOOK AT TINY MICE BRAINS POINTS TO BIGGER THINGS

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   A new technology is letting researchers see big differences between the tiny
brains of male and female mice.

    Researchers from Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Pittsburgh
and Nashville's Vanderbilt University used three-dimensional magnetic resonance
microscopy, or MRM, to see how the puberty hormones influenced mouse brain
development.

    "No one has ever done a detailed study of the difference between the male
and the female [mouse] brain," said investigator Eric Ahrens, of Carnegie Mellon
and the Pittsburgh NMR Center for Biomedical Research.

    Nationwide, he added, "there's only a handful of instruments capable of
doing this measurement." The findings were recently published in the early
online edition of the journal NeuroImage.

    Ahrens' team found the brains of the mice were very similar during
childhood.

    But the high hormone levels of puberty led to dramatic differences between
adult males and females in the size of specific brain structures, including
those involved with emotion, learning and memory.


    For example, the male amygdala, an area known to be associated with
aggression, was more than 13 percent bigger than that of the female, the
researchers found. Overall brain size was the same between the sexes.

    Spotting meaningful size differences in the substructures of a brain that is
less than a half-inch big requires an incredible eye for detail.

    Conventional measurement techniques, which involve extracting, preserving,
slicing and reconstructing the tissue, are laborious and can take months to
complete, so mouse brain studies like Ahrens' are rarely done.

    But powerful new technology made it possible to get results within weeks.

    Like conventional MRI machines, MRM also uses magnetic fields to take vivid
pictures of anatomy, but its magnets are about 10 times stronger, Ahrens said.

    "That allows us to image subjects like the mouse brain at really high
resolution, at nearly cellular [level]," Ahrens said. "[We] get a quick,
accurate representation of the 3D structures in the brain."

    Ahrens said MRM machines for humans are being developed.

    Human brains are much larger, so researchers have already compared
differences between the sexes. But those studies can't account for the myriad
factors that influence neurologic development.

    "Genetics is known to have an effect on the sizes of certain brain
structures in people," Ahrens said. "The other factor you can't control for in
humans is rearing."

    Lab mice, though, have been inbred to be nearly genetically identical and
their living conditions are controlled, adding more weight to the findings, he
said.

    Scientists typically use mice to learn about neurologic development,
diseases, and drug effects that could be applied to humans. Knowing that there
are sex-based differences in the mouse brain could help a researcher use the
mouse model better.

    And some mouse patterns did not parallel human brain development, which
could teach researchers more about the limitations of using the animal model,
Ahrens noted.

    In the future, the researchers might inject mice with opposite-sex hormones
to see what happens to brain development.

    Ahrens is trying to create agents that tag certain molecules, cells or
tissues in the body so that they can be monitored with MRM techniques. Then,
doctors might be able to watch stem cells or gene therapy in action, he said.



NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The lab mouse: Teacher of scientists.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2004


                             406 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 13; Column 1; Television; COVER STORY; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1134 words

HEADLINE: Between the Wraith and the Deep Blue Sea

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

BODY:

   FINALLY, an age-old mystery is solved: what happened to the lost continent of
Atlantis.

    The island's people, threatened by an awesome enemy, deliberately submerged
it beneath the sea. That's sort of what the Greeks believed -- except that it
happened in another galaxy. In 2004, when a group of well-meaning Earth
explorers visit the galaxy of Pegasus, they cause the force field surrounding
Atlantis to collapse and the city to rise, after many millennia, to the surface.
The found city becomes a haven for Athosians, one of several cultures that have
managed to survive under the constant threat of the Wraith, vampire-mouthed
zombie types in leather coats with waist-length straight white or punk-red hair
and an appetite for the human life force.

     Thus ''Stargate SG-1,'' the sleeper Sci Fi Channel hit, introduces
''Stargate Atlantis.'' The new series, which begins on July 16, is partly set up
in ''SG-1's'' two-hour season premiere starting at 9 p.m. this Friday, but it is
not a spinoff in the old-fashioned ''Rhoda''-''Frasier''-''Joey'' sense. It's a
brand extension: same formula, new cast, new location. Similar franchises --
like the ''Law and Order'' and ''C.S.I.'' series -- have worked, so the
''Stargate Atlantis'' cast should be feeling awfully sure of themselves. They
say no.

    ''Actors are never confident about anything,'' said Torri Higginson, who
plays Dr. Elizabeth Weir, the serious-minded new head of the Stargate program.

    Joe Flanigan, who plays Maj. John Sheppard, the irreverent ranking military
officer, is equally uncertain: ''Television is going through these tectonic
changes,'' he said. ''I don't know what exactly is successful and why.''

    Unlike his stars, Brad Wright, co-creator of both ''Stargate'' series, can
relax a little, now that ''SG-1'' is entering its eighth season and has been
declared a worldwide phenomenon. (It is broadcast in 64 countries with more than
17 million viewers a week, is a leader in syndication in the United States and
is reportedly the No. 1 show in Britain, France and Germany with the 18-to-44
set.)

    ''People are finding 'Stargate' now in a new way,'' said Mr. Wright. ''They
think: 'They haven't gone away. O.K., for God's sake, I'll watch it.'''

    ''It'' began with the 1994 feature film ''Stargate,'' which starred James
Spader as an Egyptologist, Kurt Russell as the military leader and Jaye
Davidson, of ''The Crying Game,'' as the sun god Ra, who was not a nice guy. Mr.
Wright and Jonathan Glassner borrowed the premise -- a series of
wormhole-dependent ''stargates'' built by an ancient race as portals from Earth
to distant galaxies -- and turned it into an hourlong series on Showtime with
Richard Dean Anderson in the Kurt Russell role. It moved to Sci Fi five seasons
later.

    One reason for the success of ''SG-1'' may be its lack of solemnity, which
''Atlantis'' plans to carry on. ''Part of it's the humor,'' said Mr. Wright, who
got his sci-fi start as a writer and producer on the 1990's version of ''The
Outer Limits.'' In an old ''SG-1'' episode, when someone uses the phrase ''beam
it up,'' the alien -- the alien -- replies: ''What am I? Scotty?'' As Mr. Wright
points out, both ''Stargate'' series take place today, not in the future.
Sheppard, we learn, got into trouble for disobeying a direct order while serving
in Afghanistan.

    Sheppard and Weir are primed to be the Kirk and Spock (emotional versus
logical) as well as the Mulder and Scully (skeptic versus believer) of the new
series. Mr. Flanigan even looks a little like David Duchovny from some angles.
And Ms. Higginson, like Mr. Duchovny's ''X-Files'' co-star, Gillian Anderson, is
attractive in an understated way and wears a lot of business suits. So do they,
uh, like each other?

    ''We find that the audience perceives sexual tension when we didn't see
it,'' Mr. Wright said. ''You don't even have to plant it.'' (Well, surely, there
were some meaningful looks exchanged by Sheppard and Teyla, the Athosians'
beautiful leader, played by Rachel Luttrell.)

    Ms. Higginson, who was born in Ontario, believes that Weir and Sheppard
''have great respect for each other, because their hearts are in the same
place.'' It's just that because he has a military background, his tendency would
be to ''just blow stuff up,'' she says.

    Mr. Flanigan agrees. ''I tend to jump into action,'' he said, speaking as
his character. ''I don't have my head screwed on right.''

    Neither actor was a huge science fiction fan before, but Mr. Flanigan
considers ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' and ''Blade Runner'' pivotal films in his
life. Ms. Higginson was a fan of ''Star Trek: The Next Generation,'' and kept a
baseball trading card of Patrick Stewart, the star of the series, on her
refrigerator. (This did not go unnoticed by William Shatner, the
first-generation ''Star Trek'' captain who worked with her in a couple of
''StarTek'' television movies -- but he handled it well, she recalled.)

    Like their ''Star Trek'' predecessors, Weir and Sheppard's team will
encounter plenty of danger. Sheppard's commanding officer (Robert Patrick, who
was Agent John Doggett in the waning days of ''The X-Files'') has an unfortunate
encounter with a female Wraith. In the next few episodes, Sheppard is paralyzed
by an alien symbiote; the self-important Dr. McKay (David Hewlett) goes through
gene therapy that leaves him unable to eat; and Lieutenant Ford (Rainbow Sun
Francks) and Dr. McKay get their plane stuck halfway through the event-horizon
(not a good thing).

    This isn't the way some imagined life among the enlightened people of
Atlantis, but then the ''Stargate'' universe has always played with the past. In
the season premiere of ''SG-1,'' a delegation of ''system lords'' come to Earth
for a crucial meeting; among them are what appear to be a geisha, a gladiator,
Fu Manchu and Attila the Hun. (''Stargate'' fans know that that's because the
galaxy is populated by the descendants of kidnapped Earthlings from various past
civilizations, but that's another story.)

    The lost-continent myth just happens to fit into the ''Stargate'' scheme of
things. Since the beginning, ''SG-1'' characters have referred to ''the
ancients,'' the gatebuilders who established the network of stargates throughout
the universe. Those ancients, the producers decided, would turn out to be the
people of Atlantis.

    Ms. Higginson, who likes the fact that science fiction allows open treatment
of sensitive political issues, sees a widespread appeal in the Atlantis myth,
especially considering the ''very selfish culture'' we live in.

    ''There's a romantic idea that there was a past, there was a wisdom that was
lost,'' she said. ''I think we hold onto the idea that there's a wisdom within
us and we've just lost it.'' And for some fans, science fiction is the place to
imagine finding it again.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: On the cover, clockwise from left: Robert Patrick in ''Stargate
Atlantis''
Michael Shanks , Torri Higginson , Kira Clavell, Steve Bacic and (bottom right)
Patrick Curry in the season premiere of ''Stargate SG-1.'' (Photographs by Bob
Akester/Sci Fi Channel [top left] and Shane Harvey/Sci Fi Channel)(pg. 1)
Above, from left: Kira Clavell, Steve Bacic and Vincent Crestjo in the season
premiere of ''Stargate SG-1,'' which introduces ''Stargate Atlantis,'' starring
Joe Flanigan (above left) and Torri Higginson and Michael Shanks (top). (Photos
by Left, photograph by Bob Akester/Sci Fi Channel
above, photographs by Shane Harvey/Sci Fi Channel)(pg. 4)
 In the series premiere of ''Stargate Atlantis,'' Rachel Luttrell (top right)
plays Teyla, ruler of Athos (top), whose inhabitants (above) are led to safety
by Col. Marshall Sumner (Robert Patrick, with gun), the leader of a team sent to
Atlantis by Brig. Gen. Jack O'Neill (Richard Dean Anderson, below right).
(Photographs on this page by Bob Akester/Sci Fi Channel)(pg. 5)

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2004


                             407 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        June 28, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 860 words

HEADLINE: New approach transports DNA to cells;
UW-Madison team testing method that may solve virus problem, too

BYLINE: CZERNE M. REID creid@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Two major problems that plague clinical gene therapy work may have finally
been solved by a new gene delivery approach that effectively and safely sends
genetic material to target cells while eliminating potentially fatal immune
responses to viruses typically used to carry DNA into cells. Once in the cells,
the genes generate proteins that deficient cells need but cannot produce on
their own.

   The technique enables DNA transport to muscle cells through veins in limbs.
It uses "naked" DNA -- not encased in a virus or combined with another carrier
-- and works just as well for primates as it does for small laboratory rats,
according to a recent study by University of Wisconsin-Madison researchers and
Mirus Corp., a Madison-based biotechnology company.

   "I've been working for 15 years to get this, and I think we've finally done
it," said Jon Wolff, a genetics professor at UW-Madison and senior author of a
paper describing the new work, which is published in the journal Molecular
Therapy.

   Wolff also is co-founder of Mirus, the company that financed his research.

   "The group out there is doing leading-edge research," said Ronald Scheule,
scientific director of gene transfer research at Genzyme Corp., based in
Framingham, Mass. "These studies will most likely prompt additional studies
using the same approach specifically in genetic diseases. It's going to have
significant potential applications."

   In the near term, the technique holds promise for treatment of diseases such
as muscular dystrophy. The group is gearing up for a clinical trial in early
2006 involving boys with muscular dystrophy.

   In the long term, the therapeutic benefits of the method could extend to
systemic diseases such as anemia and peripheral vascular ischemia -- a condition
characterized by poor blood flow to the limbs and often observed in former
smokers or older people with diabetes. The team also hopes to use the method to
deliver genes for stimulating growth of new blood vessels.

   James Hagstrom, co-founder and vice president of scientific operations at
Mirus Corp., hopes the vein delivery method will ultimately be able to send
genes to all muscles of the body, including the heart. To accomplish this, a
gene can be engineered to make a protein that helps it navigate through the
bloodstream.

   Testing technique on animals

   The group has tried the new method on rats, dogs and monkeys. The researchers
fastened a tourniquet or blood pressure cuff just above the limb joint of a test
animal to restrict blood flow out of the lower part of the limb. They then
administered rapid high-volume injections of a solution of naked DNA to the
lower limb.

   This injection pressure forced the DNA out of the bloodstream and into the
underlying muscles through a process called extravasation. Injected genes went
only into muscles downstream of the cuff. The researchers extracted the muscles
from the animals and measured the amount of protein the genes expressed in the
muscle cells.

   "I didn't think it would work this well and be this easy," Wolff said. "I
should have tried this 15 years ago."

   When genes were delivered using the vein method in rats, 30 times more
protein was expressed in muscle cells compared with when genes were injected
directly into muscle tissue. Because genes do not spread around enough with
direct muscle injections, a patient would need multiple needle pricks to feed
cells with the genes they need.

   In the late 1990s, the Wisconsin group of researchers pioneered a technique
for injecting genes into arteries. But from a clinical standpoint -- arteries
are harder to get to and any damage can bring about severe consequences -- the
new vein approach is safer and much more viable.

   Immune system response

   Common gene therapy techniques use a virus or other combining agent to
transport DNA into the cells. But the human immune system can strongly reject
these carriers, even causing death.

   In September 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died from inmmunologic
reactions while participating in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
clinical trial for treatment of an inherited liver disease.

   That same year, 10 boys with X-SCID -- a severe form of a rare immune
disorder called "boy in the bubble" syndrome -- received gene therapy during a
French clinical trial. By 2002, two of the boys had developed T-cell leukemia.
Scientists think this was caused by the virus used to transport the genes.

   These cases essentially shut down gene therapy research for a time and
underscored the need for effective gene delivery methods that lower the risk of
lethal immunologic and other negative responses.

   In less severe cases, the immune response lessens the effectiveness of
subsequent gene therapy treatments that a subject receives. By contrast, vein
delivery of naked DNA can be repeated many times without losing effectiveness.

   Even with advances in gene delivery technology, questions remain about
whether the immune system of people who never had "good" genes to begin with may
have immunologic reactions to genes inserted into their cells during therapy.

   "No one really knows," Hagstrom said.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2004


                             408 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                       June 27, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; LETTERS; Pg. 3E

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: Embryonic research leading nowhere fast

BODY:

   The June 21 editorial, "Stem cells offer glimmer of hope," proves that if a
lie is repeated enough times, it begins to sound right. There are several
problems with research on embryonic stem cells besides the moral issue, but The
Star has chosen to support it anyway.

   The editorial correctly notes, "Research using private funds is not
prohibited" on embryonic stem cells. It's not a coincidence that the push for
federal funding has mushroomed recently; private funding apparently has dried up
because investors have lost confidence in the process. Where better to look for
more money than the federal government?

   Wesley Smith is correct regarding tissue rejection. Adult stem cells, because
they can come from the patient's own body, will not cause tissue rejection.
Additionally, brain, bone marrow and blood stem cells have been significantly
helpful in treating Parkinson's disease and growing new heart tissue. Spleen
cells have reversed type 1 diabetes in mice, and pancreatic tissue has helped
human type 1 diabetics. Umbilical cord blood stem cells have led to the growth
of new blood vessels. Gene therapy has regenerated severed spinal cords in rats.
New uses for adult stem cells are constantly being discovered.

   The comment "Government can better dictate the ethical parameters by becoming
more involved" is a paradox: that the government should dictate the ethics of an
unethical practice. Any controls instituted by Congress would be subject to new
legislation at any time.

   If 400,000 embryos are being discarded each year, it's not reasonable to
study them. It is reasonable to make them available to the thousands of couples
longing to provide a home and a life for unwanted babies.

   Ronald Reagan has become the poster child for embryonic stem-cell research.
But based on his strong respect for life, I don't believe he would support it,
even to save himself. Until adult stem cells have been developed to their full
potential, we don't need to squander federal money on research that has produced
only negative results.

   Shelley Van Antwerp

   Indianapolis

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2004


                             409 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 8; Column 1; Sports Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: Doping Is Mental Illness

BODY:


   To the Sports Editor:

    I applaud Dick Pound, the World Anti-Doping Agency and the United States
Anti-Doping Agency for their recent campaign to clean up sports. Let me remind
William C. Rhoden (''Suspicion Is the Standard in Judging Elite Athletes,'' June
20) that a negative drug test does not indicate a clean athlete. What better
testing system do you propose?

    For the athlete who wakes up at 4 a.m. to catheterize himself and performs a
suprapubic injection of another person's urine, what test do you suggest? For
the athletes who have multiple urine and blood checks during training to see if
they would test positive in a race, what test do you suggest? For the athletes
and coaches who have been attending recent gene therapy conferences, what test
do you suggest?

    Doping in sports is criminal and, at extremes, is a psychiatric illness,
similar to eating disorders and addiction. These athletes are ill, and they will
do whatever it takes. They will always be one step ahead of the game, but the
gap is closing thanks to the efforts of W.A.D.A. and U.S.A.D.A.

    An Australian cyclist has recently been barred from the Olympics for life,
after vials and syringes found in his dorm room at the Australian Institute of
Sport facility were found to contain equine growth hormone and other banned
substances. He did not test positive. Do you think he represents the Olympic
credo?

Marc R. Silberman, M.D.
Springfield, Pa.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2004


                             410 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      June 26, 2004 Saturday Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: Gene scene;
Fernbank display decodes the wonders of DNA

BYLINE: TOM SABULIS

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   EXHIBIT

   "The Genomic Revolution"

   10 a.m.-5 p.m. Mondays-Saturdays; noon-5 p.m. Sundays. $10-$12; free for
members. Through Jan. 2. Fernbank Museum of Natural History, 767 Clifton Road
N.E. 404-929-6400. www.fernbank.edu.

   Welcome to science class.

   Today's lesson is the human genome, sometimes referred to as the blueprint of
life, a smart-sounding way of describing a mystery many of us have no hope of
understanding.

   According to "The Genomic Revolution," a new exhibit at Fernbank Museum of
Natural History, the human genome (pronounced GEE-nome) holds about 3.2 billion
bits of information (DNA) encoded in some 30,000 genes.

   Lost already? Stay with us. You could learn something.

   For example, a wall of streaming electronic headlines inside the exhibit
suggests that in the next century it is "highly possible" that . . .

* The average human life span will increase by 50 percent.

* Parents will choose traits for their children, including eye and hair color.

* Gene therapy will make most common surgery obsolete.

* Everyone will carry his or her individual genome on a wallet-size computer
card.

   If those are shocking ideas --- particularly for those of us who keep
misplacing our wallets --- they are intended to tease.

   "These [headlines] were made to be provocative," says Rob DeSalle, curator of
"The Genomic Revolution," which was conceived at the American Museum of Natural
History in New York.

   "They're on the edge of science fact and science fiction," DeSalle says. "In
essence, they are designed to make you think, wow, this technology is going to
change a lot of things. So maybe I should pay attention to what I'm seeing
here."

   What you'll see is an intriguing introduction into the exploding world of
genetic technology and the myriad scientific and social issues it raises.

   Through videos, talking heads and interactive exhibits, visitors can get a
handle on the history of genomics and the ethical debate over gene therapy and
such hot-button topics as cloning.

   To put a human face on the subject, the exhibit includes stories of people
whose lives have been helped by testing for genetic disorders. One woman, who
learned through testing that she has a 90 percent chance of developing
Alzheimer's disease, was inspired to start a company to teach memory-building
skills to Alzheimer's patients.

   Visitors to "The Genomic Revolution" can also weigh in on some controversial
issues. Two polling stations allow exhibit-goers to answer hypothetical
questions electronically and have their votes tabulated to see where they stand
among other visitors. (Atlanta votes are automatically figured in with the
opinions gathered in New York during the show's engagement there in 2001, when
more than 450,000 people attended the exhibit.)

   Some sample questions: Would you approve cloning to reproduce a favorite pet?
(Twenty-eight percent voted yes; 66 percent no.)

   If records of genetic information were maintained by physicians, should
medical researchers have access to them? (Forty-three percent voted yes; 47
percent no.)

   Despite some entertaining bells and whistles, there's no getting around the
fact that "The Genomic Revolution" is a concept-heavy journey.

   The exhibit does boast a few kid-friendly corners: At the Mutation Station,
you can twist a rung of a giant double helix to find out how certain species can
have genetic abnormalities. Inside the Learning Lab, college interns will help
visitors conduct DNA-extracting experiments --- on stuff like wheat germ, not
you.

   And the first thing you encounter upon walking into the exhibit is a vial of
human DNA, taken by cheek swabs from anonymous donors.

   "It looks a lot like snot," DeSalle says, accurately.

   Ultimately, though, the exhibit requires a good deal of text-reading, while
lacking the ooh-and-ahh specimens and artifacts of an exhibit like last year's
fascinating "Pearls: A Natural History."

   Nevertheless, a little focus can go a long way. The exhibit has its share of
inspiring moments, as well as a sense-zapping design featuring various
electronica that seem to symbolize the seductive enigmas of the subject matter.

   Unlike museum shows where quiet rules, "The Genomic Revolution" offers a
pulsating environment in keeping with its futuristic theme. An eerie ambient
soundtrack and the spillover sounds of talking heads create an aural collage
that pulls you through the exhibit without pushing you away.

   At its best, you'll find yourself in sync with the progressive spirit of
barrier-breaking science. At its least, you'll feel like you've wandered into
the Tomorrow Land section of a world's fair.

   And on that cautionary note, class is adjourned.

GRAPHIC: Photo: "The Genomic Revolution" at Fernbank uses videos and interactive
stations to teach about the genetic blueprint of life. / LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff;
Photo: Evan Sawyer of Jacksonville looks at a test tube full of a DNA sample he
made in the interactive lab. / LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff; Photo: Bernadette Brogan
of Atlanta helps her son Sean, 5, mix a tube of a DNA sample in the interactive
lab. DNA stores the information encoded in human genes. / LOUIE FAVORITE /
Staff; Photo: Caitlin Hopkins, 7, and Madison Hopkins, 4, of Ball Ground, try
out one of the interactive displays, which allows visitors to compare their DNA
with that of animal species. / LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2004


                             411 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 24, 2004, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: Methodist Hospital pairing with Cornell;
New partners say distance not a problem

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN

BODY:

   Two months after splitting with longtime partner Baylor College of Medicine,
The Methodist Hospital has hooked up with a new medical school - one 1,400 miles
away.

   In an announcement that raised eyebrows in and outside the Texas Medical
Center, Methodist said Wednesday its new primary affiliation will be with
Cornell University's medical school in New York City.

   "Today marks an important, historic milestone for Methodist, with the
announcement of this new primary affiliation," said John Bookout, chairman of
Methodist's board of directors. "This relationship is the first of its kind and
furthers our shared missions of excellence in patient care, research and
teaching."

   Observers said they couldn't think of another partnership in which such
distance separated a teaching hospital from its medical school. Before
affiliating with Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine a few blocks
away, The Cleveland Clinic's primary affiliation was with Ohio State
University's medical school in Columbus, 120 miles away.

   Methodist has been looking for a new medical school since it couldn't agree
with Baylor on a contract renewal in April. The split ended a 50-year
partnership in which Methodist was the real-life clinical classroom for Baylor,
located just around the corner.

   Because Weill Cornell Medical College is so bound to New York-Presbyterian
Hospital - the two institutions affiliated in 1928 - Methodist's affiliation is
also with Presbyterian, one of the biggest hospitals in the country. The
contract for the three-way partnership is for 30 years.

   Wednesday's announcement was vague, emphasizing collaboration but giving few
details about the workings of a relationship that seems to dramatically limit
the kind of faculty and student/resident relations Methodist enjoyed with
Baylor.

   One expert said that planning will be crucial.

   "The issue and challenge for all three institutions will be to structure the
arrangement in a way that's real and meaningful for all," said Robert Dickler,
senior vice president for health care affairs for the Association of American
Medical Colleges in Washington. "If it's not, they're not going to realize the
outcome they want, they're not going to attract top-notch people."

   Methodist President Dr. Ron Girotto downplayed the mileage separating the
hospital from Cornell, saying "distance is not an obstacle. Technology today
makes anything possible - the sharing of information, quality data and
collaboration on research and patient care."

   Still, there are no plans to base Cornell faculty in Houston, and any
residents sent from New York will constitute just a small portion of the total
number.

   Methodist officials said they are committed to Baylor residents the next four
years, then plan to develop their own program, whereby medical students would
apply to it rather than an affiliating medical college. Baylor, with whom
Methodist will maintain some programs, the University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston and Cornell are all expected to supply future residents.

   Methodist officials emphasized that despite the loss of Baylor they wanted to
remain an academic hospital and affiliate with a top medical school. Cornell was
ranked twelfth on U.S. News & World Report's latest survey of best medical
schools, one ahead of Baylor.

   Under the agreement, Methodist physicians can choose to have faculty
appointments at Cornell. Methodist officials said such appointments will be a
tremendous lure in recruiting, particularly citing the current vacancy for chief
of surgery. (The job was recently vacated when Dr. Charles Brunicardi resigned
to stay with Baylor.)

   Methodist officials also said the affiliation should accelerate the launch of
the hospital's research institute, a recently announced plan to create a
collection of researchers and doctors devoted to rapidly translating research
into patient treatments.

   The affiliation reunites Methodist with Dr. Antonio M. Gotto Jr., who was the
hospital's chief of internal medicine services and Baylor's chair of the
department of medicine from 1977 to 1996 and is currently dean of the Weill
Cornell Medical College.

   Cornell recently started a hospital in Qatar in the Middle East, and has
programs in Brazil, Haiti and Tanzania.

   Teaching hospitals typically pay residents' salaries even if they come from
an affiliated medical school, but observers wondered if Methodist dangled
inducements to attract Cornell. Girotto said he is not "at liberty to discuss
the financial arrangements, but the relationship should be considered a valuable
investment in medicine, research and education."

   The affiliation with Cornell and New York-Presbyterian doesn't end
Methodist's search for medical school partners. Hospital officials said they
will have multiple affiliations, including Baylor, and are open to other ones in
Texas. Talks are still ongoing with UT-Houston. But Methodist officials were
focused on Cornell and New York-Presbyterian on Wednesday.

   "It marks a new approach in health care delivery and medical research
collaboration," said Girotto. "With Cornell and New York-Presbyterian, we have
an opportunity to be completely aligned with other top-tier institutions toward
our shared goals - to be among the top-ranked medical centers dedicated to
excellence in patient care, research and education."




   MED SCHOOLS COMPARED


   In annoucing its affiliation with Weill Cornell Medical College, The
Methodist Hospital hopes to fill a void left by the departure of Baylor College
of Medicine.


    BAYLOR   CORNELL


   1900   Founded   1898

   13   2005 ranking by U.S. News in research category   12

   669   Medical school students   412

   1,891   Full-time faculty   1,762

   1,491   Clinical faculty   650

   $ 327.3 million   Research support, fiscal 2003   $ 275 million





   CORNELL'S MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGHS


   Development of the Pap test

   First kidney transplant and dialysis treatment in New York City

   First human gene therapy trial for cystic fibrosis

   First successful embryo biopsy pregnancy and birth in the United States

   First clinical trial for gene therapy for Parkinson's disease



GRAPHIC: Graphs: 1. MED SCHOOLS COMPARED (color, TEXT); 2. CORNELL'S MEDICAL
BREAKTHROUGHS (p. 4, TEXT); 1. Houston Chronicle, Sources: Baylor College of
Medicine; The Methodist Hospital; U.S. News & World Report, 2. Houston
Chronicle, Source: The Methodist Hospital

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                             412 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JUNE 21, 2004 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS PHILADELPHIA & ITS SUBURBS; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1176 words

HEADLINE: Next stop for Rodin could be classroom or campaign;
Penn's departing president may teach, and politics has
been mentioned. She hasn't "ruled anything in - or out."

BYLINE: James M. O'Neill INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Judith Rodin won't be president again - at least not of a university.

   That's the only thing she has ruled out about her future as she packs up
boxes and memories and concludes a transforming decade as president of the
University of Pennsylvania.

   Preparing for her June 30 departure, Rodin talked about her future and
assessed a period in which she helped propel Penn to national prominence,
restored the university's tattered relations with its neighbors, and used Penn's
financial clout to revitalize West Philadelphia.

   When Rodin wakes up on July 1, it will be the first weekday in a decade that
she will not have been handed an index card listing her entire day's schedule in
15-minute increments.

   "That will be an enormous relief," Rodin said in her College Hall office.

   "Mentally, the job has been incredibly stimulating, but physically
exhausting," she said. She sometimes found her mind still whirring late at night
over a problem or opportunity, making sleep difficult.

   "It will be nice for a while to have a more normal life pattern," she said.

   After she leaves the Penn presidential mansion, she will move to Manhattan,
into the apartment she owns with her husband, Paul Verkuil, dean of the Yeshiva
University law school.

   She won't be idle. For starters, she will contemplate her next career move.
That could be almost anything, from teaching to politics. "I haven't ruled
anything in - or out," she said. But she amended that, saying she would not take
on another university presidency. "This job is the best in higher ed," she said.
"I could never do another one."

   For years Rodin, 59, a registered Democrat, has been whispered about as a
perfect political candidate. "Her name always comes up," Democratic consultant
Larry Ceisler said. "She's got an incredible record. She's telegenic. She's
charismatic. And she's a great fund-raiser."

   But there are potential drawbacks. Ceisler said he did not know how well her
success as an academic administrator would translate to the rest of the state,
and he was not sure she would enjoy a position in a deliberative body such as
the U.S. Senate because she has been a chief executive who ran the show. (U.S.
Sen. Rick Santorum, a Republican, is up for reelection in 2006, opening one
possible opportunity for Rodin if she were interested.)

   Ceisler said he could see Rodin taking a cabinet-level position in a John
Kerry administration; she could even be a cabinet choice for President Bush if
he wanted to signal more bipartisanship in a second term.

   T.J. Rooney, the Democratic state chairman, said Rodin "meets the criteria
for an incredible candidate for any office. Politics today screams for people
like her. If she did have such ambitions, she'd be met with open arms. Be
assured her phone will ring."

   Rodin would not comment further on the possibility of a political career,
other than to say she would be "taking counsel" with friends and associates
about what she might do next.

   Rodin will spend the next year writing a book about Penn's efforts to restore
its relationship with the community and revitalize the area.

   She will coordinate two conferences next year at Penn. One is designed to see
whether the Penn-West Philadelphia rehabilitation can be replicated by other
universities; the other will take a global look at women's health issues.

   While at Penn, Rodin took on broader leadership roles; she will relinquish
some and retain others. She has stepped down as chair of the Knowledge Industry
Partnership, a coalition of civic, business and government leaders trying to
leverage the region's colleges into economic vitality.

   But she will stay on the board of the Schuylkill River Development Corp., a
nonprofit that has been working to revitalize the Philadelphia riverfront.

   Rodin said she was most proud of her work improving Penn's undergraduate
experience, her work restoring West Philadelphia, and her fund-raising
successes.

   Not that Rodin's tenure lacked controversy or tumult. In 1998, the federal
government cited Penn for reporting violent crime statistics inaccurately. In
1999, after a gene-therapy experiment led to the death of a teenager, Rodin
broke up the $25 million Gene Therapy Institute. Penn's health system,
meanwhile, shed jobs in a bid to reverse four years of operating losses that
totaled $400 million. The system became profitable again in 2001.

   The health system's losses and Rodin's many construction projects on campus
and in the neighborhood combined to burden Penn with $1.4 billion in outstanding
debt, and Penn now has the worst asset-to-debt ratio among Ivy League schools.
Analysts have said that gives Penn less financial flexibility and puts more
constraints on future projects.

   But it is clear that Rodin's positive impact will keep Penn a national
academic power.

   In her inaugural address, Rodin talked about the need to improve Penn's
undergraduate programs. She cited the changes since that speech: improving links
among disciplines so students could see connections between fields of study;
establishing college houses, where dorms serve as learning communities; and
establishing academic hubs on campus, such as Kelly Writers House, where
students can explore similar interests beyond the classroom.

   When she arrived, Rodin was surprised at the level of community animosity.
"There was this great suspicion people felt about Penn and its aspirations," she
said.

   That was because of decades of city urban-renewal policies that tore down
entire blocks of working-class housing and transferred the land to Penn, which
Rodin described as "slashing and burning."

   So, early in her tenure, she said several times that Penn would not push
farther west, that any expansion would be done east toward the Schuylkill. "We
stuck to that," Rodin said.

   Still, she is sensitive to new criticism that Penn's successful
revitalization sent property values so high that working-class people can no
longer afford to move to West Philadelphia: "You have to restore confidence in
the area without driving out and displacing people. That's the old way of doing
renewal."

   Rodin said she never planned to be an urban-renewal expert. But "it quickly
became a passion, and I feel very good about the outcome," she said.

   She has had many conversations with Temple University president David Adamany
about how Temple can replicate in North Philadelphia what Penn did in West
Philadelphia.

   Some don't see parallels - North Philadelphia neighborhoods were even more
deteriorated than those in West Philadelphia, and Temple has fewer financial
resources than Penn.

   "Whether it's $100 million or $20 million isn't as important as spending what
you have early and showing confidence in the area to attract developers," she
said.

   Asked whether she would have done anything differently, or whether she had
any regrets, Rodin thought a long moment, then said, "No, I'm very satisfied. I
really am satisfied."

   Contact staff writer James M. O'Neill at 610-313-8012 or
joneill@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
RON TARVER, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Judith Rodin, whose days as University of Pennsylvania president are almost
over: "This job is the best in higher ed. I could never do another one."
Political insiders think her skills could be ideal for elected office or a
cabinet position. She plans to write a book about Penn and the West Phila.
community.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2005


                             413 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2004 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              June 21, 2004 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 801 words

HEADLINE: The Stuff of Life

BYLINE: KURT LOFT, kloft@tampatrib.com

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

   Human genes get up close and personal in a new exhibit at the Museum of
Science & Industry

   By KURT LOFT

   kloft@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA -- The Human Genome Project may go down as public health's silver
bullet.

   It took more than a decade and $300 million for scientists to create a
person's chemical code, the sequence of DNA that forms a complete genetic
blueprint.

   Today, a half-century after James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the
twisted-ladder structure of DNA, science is on the verge of dramatic advances in
medicine. Armed with a growing knowledge of human genes, researchers hope to one
day alter and even conquer some hereditary diseases.

   For most people, the concept of the human genome is foreign, as tough to
crack as nuclear physics. Making the subject accessible is the aim of "Genome:
The Secret of How Life Works," a new exhibit opening this weekend at the Museum
of Science & Industry.

   "Discoveries related to the genome have the potential to revolutionize health
care," says Tom Turi, a molecular geneticist with Pfizer Inc., sponsor of the
exhibit. "But the public doesn't understand the topic, so there's a need to
educate them about the genome. We wanted to examine some of the complex
information -- and make it fun and interactive."

   Its organizers expect more than 5 million people will attend "Genome" as it
tours 15 cities during five years. "Science education is paramount," Turi says.
"And this is about bringing science to people."

   The Human Genome Project was launched in 1990 as an international research
effort to sequence and map the more than 35,000 genes in human deoxyribonucleic
acid. It also would determine the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base pairs
that make up human DNA.

   A genome is all the DNA in an organism, including the genes that carry
information for making proteins. These proteins determine how a person looks,
metabolizes food, fights infection and behaves. Scientists also have mapped
other creatures, such as mice, worms and flies, as "model organisms" to serve as
references for the map of a person.

   As a tool, the Human Genome Project could transform medicine as it evolves
from treating symptoms of disease to changing the fundamental causes of illness.
Scientists also hope to use this knowledge to develop a class of drugs and
immunotherapy techniques, and replace defective genes through gene therapy.

   Even at its early stages, the project made scientists acutely aware of how
little they know about what the majority of genes do, Watson writes in his 2003
book "DNA: The Secret of Life." He calls the project a boon to understanding
"how organisms are put together and how they operate, and of what it is that
sets us apart from other species."

   MOSI's 5,000-square-foot exhibit explores a person's entire set of genes and
explains the secret codes that make us who we are. The exhibit looks at the
nature, history of discovery, effect of gene research and why the genome was
mapped.

   (CHART) GENOME: THE SECRET OF HOW LIFE WORKS

   WHAT: Interactive exhibit on human genes

   WHEN: Saturday through Sept. 12

   WHERE: Museum of Science & Industry, 4801 E. Fowler Ave., Tampa

   HOURS: 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday; 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. Saturday and
Sunday

   ADMISSION: (includes Imax theater) $15.95; ages 60 and older, $13.95; ages 2
to 12, $11.95; (813) 987-6300

   (CHART) GENES TO TRY ON

   As part of the exhibit, visitors will:

   * Explore a 25-foot-long model of a double helix while learning about the
basics of DNA

   * Navigate a giant cell and see how cells multiply into a complex organism

   * Look up the recipe for their color hair in the giant genetic recipe book

   * View an animated cookie machine that mimics a cell pumping out proteins

   * Discover how DNA analysis has helped solve crimes and mysteries

   *Learn how scientists manipulate genes to improve health

   (CHART) UNDERSTANDING GENES MAY CURE DISEASE

   The Human Genome Project has sequenced the human genetic structure, which
includes about 35,000 genes. Many diseases are caused by genetic flaws. By
sequencing the genes, scientists hope to understand how changes in DNA cause
disease, an important step in developing cures.

   For example, a flawed gene can stop a pancreatic cell from making insulin, an
important protein.

   By understanding how that gene works, it might be possible to make a drug
that corrects the flaw, allowing the cell to produce insulin.

   Knowing how a person's genetic code predisposes for disease, doctors could
pursue early drug treatments and prevention.

   Cell

   A cell's nucleus contains 22 pairs of chromosomes, plus one that determines
gender.

   Chromosomes are tightly coiled strands of DNA

   A gene is a DNA sequence that alters a cell's function.

   Reporter Kurt Loft can be reached at (813) 259-7570.

   Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: SCIENCE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 3 CHART 3
Clear Channel MOSI's "Genome: The Secret of How Life Works" brings the science
of human DNA to the people with a new, 5,000-square-foot exhibit. Tribune photos
by MICHAEL SPOONEYBARGER (2) Muktsar Ali, left, sets up a giant model of a DNA
double helix at MOSI, and Stephen Chapman readies an exhibit of a giant cell.
More than 5 million people are expected to participate in the exhibit, which
opens Saturday in Tampa, as it tours 15 cities during five years.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                             414 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              June 20, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: Universities trumpet increase in research grants

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   In the swank surroundings of the Plimsoll Club, Tulane University held a
celebration last week so its officials could hand out plaques and plaudits to
researchers who garnered $71.1 million in federal research grants last year.

   Besides celebrating that achievement, Tulane used the reception to call
attention to its steady ascent in the ranks of about 3,000 universities
competing for money from the National Institutes of Health, up from 112th place
in 2000 to 78th place last year.

   "We've gone up 34 positions, which is pretty incredible," said Dr. Paul
Whelton, Tulane's senior vice president for health sciences. "We're in the top
2.5 percent of all institutions in terms of NIH awards. "

   Tulane isn't the only local research institution reporting progress in this
category. Scientists with the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
received nearly $26.5 million in NIH grants last year, up from $17.8 million in
2000.

   Even though the amount of grants rose by nearly 50 percent, LSU's ranking on
the NIH list dropped from the 138th spot to 146th last year.

   Some of the grant money will be used to bolster two LSU-Tulane projects  --
the centers for cancer and gene therapy  --  as well as LSU's work in alcohol
research, said Joseph Moerschbaecher, the LSU center's vice chancellor for
academic affairs.

   The grants' impact extends beyond the medical center, said Tommy Kurtz,
Greater New Orleans Inc.'s senior vice president for jobs development.

   "The more grants that universities get, they bring additional talent into the
marketplace, which can spur additional technological development," he said.
"They pay good salaries, so that's an economic development."

   According to one estimate, every $1 million in grant money can create as many
as three dozen jobs, Whelton said.

   One such project involving both institutions is the conversion of the Wirth
Building in the 1400 block of Canal Street to the New Orleans BioInnovation
Center, which will be an incubator where researchers can work to make their
products go commercial.

   The building is expected to be ready for occupancy by late next year or early
in 2006, Whelton said.

   Despite the general good feeling about the increases in federal grant money,
New Orleans and its component institutions have a long way to go to catch up
with other regional cities that are major medical centers.

   While New Orleans ranked 49th on the NIH list, Houston placed 10th;
Birmingham, Ala., ranked 18th; Nashville, Tenn., was 22nd; and Atlanta occupied
the 24th spot.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2004


                             415 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Special interests killed worthy MRI amendment

BYLINE: By Cosmo MACERO, Jr.

BODY:

   Good ideas often die ugly, undignified deaths in the unforgiving machinations
of Beacon Hill.

   Such was the case this week when budget negotiators killed an amendment that
sought to eliminate a troubling profit motive from medical-imaging procedures -
the fastest growing health care expenditure in America.

   By the sometimes rancid rules of State House engagement, the measure died a
classic budget battlefield death.

   It won early approval from House lawmakers - who were suitably outraged by
the notion that doctors with financial interests in magnetic resonance imaging
clinics order up MRIs at alarmingly high rates.

   Yet Senate negotiators, siding with physician groups such as Harvard
Vanguard, deep-sixed it, partly because such policy moves deserve legislative
hearings.

   Meanwhile, Harvard Vanguard doctors enlisted their own patients to lobby
lawmakers on Beacon Hill.

   ``How's that knee?''

   ``Can you do a phone bank?''

   ``Write a letter?''

   But what really did in the MRI amendment was the camp from which it
originated: it was offered by state Rep. Paul Kujawski (D-Webster), best known
as the man from Commerce Insurance Group.

   It was guided to House approval by old-guard lobbyists David Finnegan and
Richard Underwood.

   And it was quietly supported by Thomas Shields - an old political hand and
founder of Shields Health Care, the largest group of MRI centers in
Massachusetts.

   That Shields' own interests fell on the side of the health care consumer
meant little to Senate leaders and physician group advocates, who blindly
decried the amendment as ``the worst kind of special interest legislation.''

   Actually, it was the best kind.

   Because when one interest in the marketplace also serves the larger interests
of patients, that's good policy in the making.

   Too bad.

   Now the practice of doctors referring patients to MRI clinics where they hold
a stake - and not disclosing it - will go on, and maybe expand. It's a practice
decried by the American Medical Association, abhorred by the American College of
Radiology and confirmed by the General Accounting Office as a health care
boondoggle.

   It's also of grave concern to community hospitals, which can't afford to lose
MRI billings to individual doctors in on the action.

   When profit becomes a motive in diagnostic decisions, bad things can happen.

   Consider the recent Superior Court ruling in the case of Roger Darke. Five
years after undergoing triple-bypass surgery, Darke's cardiologist concluded
that he was a good candidate for an experimental gene-therapy program at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital.

   What he didn't disclose: The doctor, according to Massachusetts Lawyers
Weekly, had a 20percent interest in the company that had developed the
treatment. St. E's had a similar interest.

   Barely a day after undergoing the experimental treatment in 1999, Darke died.

   Judge Janet Sanders, Lawyers Weekly said last week, ruled that Darke's estate
can sue the doctor and St. E's for failing to disclose their interests in the
program.

   In Darke's case, it's worth noting, the doctor's interest was merely a
passive equity stake.

   How do you think MRI decisions are being handled by doctors who get regular
cash flow from the clinics they partner with?

   Shields played this one from the sidelines. Quietly.

   And the Senate still trumped a good health care reform play with a bogus
``special interest'' card.

   Let's hope Shields - or somebody - is willing to come back and take full
pride of ownership the next time around.

   And if it's a hearing they want in the Senate, let's make sure they hear it
loud and clear.

   Send e-mail to: cosmo@bostonherald.com

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                             416 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: Scientists invent monogamous mouse

SOURCE: Gannett News Service

BODY:


   Could the day come when a bit of gene therapy cures infidelity?

   In a report Thursday, researchers say they performed that bit of molecular
magic on the meadow vole, a mouse-like rodent. The genes involved are the same
in humans, they say, though the mechanism is likely far more complex.

   By transferring a single gene to the pleasure center of the naturally
promiscuous male vole, researchers at Yerkes National Primate Research Center at
Emory University in Atlanta were able to make it happily monogamous, they say in
a letter in the journal Nature.

   They're not suggesting gene therapy can fix human infidelity, but the
research has implications for brain disorders, such as autism, that make it
difficult for people to bond.

   "It really highlights the connections between social behavior and gene
expression," says Gene Robinson of the University of Illinois.

   The male meadow vole is promiscuous, but his cousin the prairie vole is not.
Researchers found that when the monogamous prairie vole mates, the pleasure
hormone dopamine is released in its brain. The receptors for dopamine are
located near the receptors for the vasopressin which is linked to social
learning. That is not the case for the promiscuous meadow vole.

   Gannett News Service

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                             417 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      June 17, 2004 Thursday Home Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: Critters' family values in the genes

BYLINE: DAVID WAHLBERG

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   How do you make a promiscuous male loyal to his mate?

   Gene therapy --- if he's a vole.

   After scientists at the Yerkes National Primate Research Center at Emory
University put a gene for a social bonding hormone into the brains of
indiscriminate voles, the mouselike critters started cuddling with their mates
and ignoring other females.

   But women shouldn't conjure up monogamy chasers for their man's Viagra pills
just yet.

   The hormonal wizardry performed on the voles could lead, though, to a better
understanding of drug addiction and behavioral disorders such as autism.

   As for faithful coupling, humans are more complicated creatures, the
researchers say. And the family values displayed by the voles have more to do
with sleeping under the same roof than in the same bed.

   In biology circles, monogamy carries a social, not sexual, definition. It
means a male and female hang out, mate, nest and raise offspring together. But
they still sometimes get a little action on the side.

   "Most people assume monogamy means exclusive mating with your partner, but
animals don't do that," said Larry Young, a Yerkes neuroscientist and an author
of the study on voles published in today's edition of the journal Nature.
"People don't really do that either, unless you have another factor, like
religion, that enforces strict monogamy."

   The scientists studied two species of voles that behave differently in
nature: prairie voles from the Midwest, which are monogamous, and meadow voles
from the East Coast, known to liberally mess around.

   Both species, like many mammals, release a hormone during sex called
vasopressin. But the reward centers in the brains of prairie voles are much more
responsive to the substance than those of meadow voles, Young said. That leads
prairie voles to associate the pleasure of sex with the odor of a specific mate,
while meadow voles learn to like sex with any vole that's handy, researchers
believe.

   The scientists used a harmless virus to inject a vasopressin gene receptor
into the brain reward centers of several male meadow voles. A month later, they
placed the furry animals in cages with female voles and videotaped the pairs to
verify they mated.

   The next day, the males were put in cages between their mates and new
females. The male meadow voles canoodled and groomed with their mates seven
times longer than with the fresh enticements --- just as prairie voles normally
do. But that was a big departure from the meadow voles' pre-injection days, when
they haphazardly spent time with all females, no matter their sexual history.

   The study suggests that love --- or at least some sort of devotion --- is
biochemically hard-wired, Young said. The key is not if animals have the
vasopressin gene receptor, but if the gene is activated in the right spot.

   "This shows that a single gene in a single part of the brain can have a
profound impact on social behavior and the ability to form social bonds," Young
said.

   Humans also produce vasopressin, but Young said it's not clear which parts of
people's brains respond to it. Besides, human social bonding is much more
complicated than one gene or one hormone.

   Yet future research on vasopressin could better explain addiction and autism,
which involve problems with biochemical circuits related to social bonding, the
neuroscientist said.

   And someday, it just might help say why we stay or stray.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Randy voles changed their ways through gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                             418 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             June 17, 2004 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 791 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
DNA Tweak Turns Vole Mates Into Soul Mates;
Promiscuous mammals become stay-at-home dads in a study. There's no cure yet for
humans.

BYLINE: Alan Zarembo, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists working with a rat-like animal called a vole have found that
promiscuous males can be reprogrammed into monogamous partners by introducing a
single gene into a specific part of their brains.

   Once they have been converted, the voles hang around the family nests and
even huddle with their female partners after sex.

   The results suggest that "a mutation in a single gene can have a profound
impact on complex social behavior," said Larry Young, a neuroscientist at Emory
University who reports the results in the current issue of the journal Nature.

   The research, Young said, could help shed light on monogamy -- a rare social
behavior -- and hints that perhaps specific genes could play a role in human
relationships.

   But don't expect gene therapy for human swingers.

   "This is not something that we should be playing around with," Young said.

   Voles, found in the wild throughout much of North America, have been
particularly useful in studying monogamy, which in biology refers more to the
complicated social bonds based on partnership than to absolute sexual fidelity.

   One variety -- the prairie vole (Microtus ochrogaster) -- pairs up like
humans. Males may occasionally stray from their lifelong partners, but they
inevitably return to their nests and help care for litter after litter.

   In contrast, meadow voles (Microtus pennsylvanicus), a similar but separate
species, prowl their habitat for any available female and show no interest in
staying in touch.

   The difference, it turns out, is a receptor for the hormone vasopressin.
Prairie voles have such receptors in a part of the brain known as the ventral
pallidum. Meadow voles do not.

   To make promiscuous male meadow voles behave like their loyal prairie
cousins, the scientists used a common gene therapy technique. They injected the
animals' forebrains with a harmless virus carrying the gene responsible for
expressing the receptors.

   Each vole, a young virgin that had never before encountered a member of the
opposite sex, then spent 24 hours caged with a female that had been injected
with estrogen. They mated.

   Each male was then placed in his own plexiglass complex. Leashed in one room
was his original partner. Down the hall was another female primed for mating.

   The 11 genetically altered voles overwhelmingly stuck to their first partner.
The couples mated. They then nestled together and exchanged licks.

   The voles in the control group did not consistently seek out their original
partners.

   What looks like romance, the researchers suggested, may be the product of two
neural pathways in the pleasure center of the brain.

   There is the gratification of sex, which depends on dopamine receptors in a
part of the brain known as the nucleus accumbens. But nearby, in the ventral
pallidum, are the vasopressin receptors, which allow for individual recognition.

   The result: sexual preference for a specific partner.

   Fewer than 5% of mammals are monogamous. Monogamy has rarely suited males
when it comes to propagating their own genes. More often it has been in their
interest to reproduce with as many females as possible.

   In some cases, however, monogamy makes sense. For example, if predators are
particularly rampant, males are better off staying around their homes to protect
their offspring.

   Scientists believe that monogamy evolved from polygamy. The results released
Wednesday suggested that flipping one genetic switch might have been enough to
spur a massive social reordering, Young said.

   But Evan Balaban, a neuroscientist at McGill University in Montreal,
questioned whether a single gene could cause such a dramatic change. He said
that in the wild, many genes were likely involved in the expression of
vasopressin receptors.

   In female voles, it is another hormone, oxytocin, that appears to be involved
in pair bonding.

   The same hormone systems also operate in all other mammals, including humans.

   The genes that control expression of vasopressin receptors vary widely in
healthy men.

   Human relationships, of course, are complicated, and culture and
socialization probably matter as much as biology. Even so, Young suggested that
genetic differences could help explain why some men have trouble maintaining
relationships.

   Gene E. Robinson, head of neuroscience at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, cautioned against extrapolating the results to humans. "The
behavior of animals is much simpler than the behavior of humans," he said.

   Even if the findings could lead to an elixir for fidelity, a single gene
would not solve every problem at home. The genetically altered meadow voles
spent more time with their partners, but unlike their naturally faithful prairie
relatives, they did not help care for the pups.

   That, Young said, probably depends on other neural pathways.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER: Larry Young

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                             419 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      June 17, 2004 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: He'll love her forever: Gene shift makes voles faithful;
Research advances insight into social disorders

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER jfauber@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Forget couples therapy, the secret to marital fidelity appears to be gene
therapy.

   Using that high-tech approach, scientists say they have transformed
promiscuous male meadow voles, which have a reputation as the Casanovas of the
vole world, into monogamous creatures that willingly stand by their mates.

   The research, which appears today in the journal Nature, opens an intriguing
window into the neurobiology of romantic behavior and helps improve
understanding of disorders such as autism, in which social bonds are difficult
to form.

   It also shows that a little minor tweaking of brain chemistry can produce big
changes in behavior.

   "These people are hot on the trail of molecular traits that make animals show
very specific behavior," said Geert de Vries, a professor of neuroscience at the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

   While the technology would not likely ever help make humans more monogamous,
it might someday be used in disorders such as autism, obsessive-compulsive
disorder and schizophrenia, he said.

   For their study, researchers at the Yerkes National Primate Research Center
at Emory University looked at two kinds of voles: prairie voles and meadow
voles.

   Although the two species are closely related, when it comes to social
activity there are night and day differences.

   Prairie voles are one of the only monogamous members of the rodent family. In
fact, only about 5% of all mammal species are monogamous. Prairie voles form
lifelong bonds with a single mate.

   Meadow voles, on the other hand, mate with multiple partners.

   Neurobiologically, there's another big difference.

   Prairie voles have abundant receptors for vasopressin, a chemical that is
released in the brain after sex. Receptors are molecules on the surface of brain
cells that can bind to neurotransmitters and other substances.

   The vasopressin receptors are in a region known as the ventral pallidum,
which is found within the so-called reward center of the brain.

   "You put them (a male and female prairie vole) together for a day, and they
mate and they prefer their mates to females they have never seen," said Brandon
Aragona, a researcher at Florida State University who was not part of the study.
"It's the opposite case for other rodents."

   That includes meadow voles,- which have no vasopressin receptors in that
brain region. Meadow voles will mate with multiple partners.

   However, when the Emory researchers introduced a gene that produced a large
number of vasopressin receptors in the brains of 11 meadow voles, they started
acting like prairie voles.

   The once-promiscuous voles formed bonds with single female partners and
started spending a lot more time with them, even when they had the choice of
being around other females.

   "What we did was re-create what the prairie voles have," said co-author Larry
Young, a researcher at Emory. "If they don't have that receptor, they still
learn that mating feels good, but they don't care which female it is."

   Young said it is believed that the vasopressin receptor allows voles to
associate the smell of their mate with the rewarding feeling that comes with
mating.

   Might that also apply to people?

   "I don't think we would ever want to do gene therapy to make people become
more monogamous," he said. "That's a person's free will."

   Still, he conceded, "Theoretically, you might alter their behavior."

   Other research suggests that vasopressin receptors may be implicated in human
disorders, such as autism, that involve the inability to form social bonds.

   Young said it is possible that individual differences in vasopressin
receptors might affect how people form relationships, although culture and
environment undoubtedly play a major role as well.

   The researchers also noted the similarity between romantic behavior and drug
addiction.

   "The brain process of bonding with one's partner may be similar to becoming
addicted to drugs," co-author Miranda Lim, an Emory researcher, said in a
statement. "Both activate reward circuits in the brain."

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                             420 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     June 17, 2004, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 402 words

HEADLINE: Report: Rodents may offer insight to monogamy

BYLINE: Elizabeth Weise

BODY:
Could the day come when a simple bit of gene therapy might cure infidelity?

   In a report out today, researchers say they were able to perform that bit of
molecular magic on the meadow vole, a mouse-like rodent. The genes involved are
the same in humans, they say, though the mechanism is likely to be far more
complex.

   By transferring a single gene to the pleasure center of the naturally
promiscuous male vole, researchers at Yerkes National Primate Research Center at
Emory University in Atlanta were able to make it happily monogamous, they say in
a letter in the journal Nature.


   They're not actually suggesting gene therapy can fix human infidelity, but
the research has important implications for brain disorders, such as autism,
that make it difficult for people to bond with others.

   "It really highlights the connections between social behavior and gene
expression," says Gene Robinson, director of the neuroscience program at the
University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, who was not involved in the study. He
calls the research "exciting."

   The male meadow vole is promiscuous, but his cousin the prairie vole is the
settle-down-and-raise-a-family kind of guy. In studying the brain chemistry of
the two mammals, researchers found that when the monogamous prairie vole mates,
the pleasure hormone dopamine is released in its brain. The receptors for that
dopamine are located in the brain's pleasure center, which also happens to be
where the receptors for the hormone vasopressin are located. And vasopressin is
linked to social learning.

   "They recognize that this good feeling is associated with that particular
female," says Larry Young, a psychiatry professor at Emory University in
Atlanta.

   In contrast, the dopamine and vasopressin receptors are not located together
in the promiscuous meadow vole. So when they mate, "they don't make that
specific connection to a specific female, they just think that mating feels
good," he says.

   When Young and his team took the prairie vole vasopressin receptor gene and
injected it into the pleasure center of a meadow vole, the meadow vole suddenly
preferred just one partner.

   Scientists can't see the receptors in humans yet. But it seems likely, says
Young, that this gene is somehow linked to human's ability to form social bonds
with others. Other studies have found links between variations in the gene and
autism.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Yerkes National Primate Research Center; Prairie voles:
These rodents are social animals that often mate for life, unlike meadow voles.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                             421 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     June 16, 2004 Wednesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 737 words

HEADLINE: Seizing the moment

BYLINE: Paul S. Fishman

BODY:

   I HAVE SEEN dramatic improvements in understanding the basic biology of
Alzheimer's disease in the past 25 years and am encouraged that public
awareness, medical knowledge, support and care for Alzheimer's patients have
never been better.

   But I remain frustrated with the limits of current treatments to improve the
outcome for patients dealing with a cruel and malignant condition that
progressively robs them of the ability to remember, reason, speak, understand
and function independently.

   With the publicity about Alzheimer's at a peak with the death of President
Ronald Reagan after more than a decade of his family's struggle with the
illness, we as a nation should take a hard look at where we stand in the fight
against the disease.

   Much is understood about how the Alzheimer's-diseased brain produces the
toxic amyloid protein and how it interferes with brain cell function. The brain
cells that are particularly affected by Alzheimer's and their signaling
chemicals are known and have provided the basis for development of the first
drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration; all five of them were
permitted for sale within the last decade.

   These medications provide modest but significant improvement in symptoms,
with a better preservation of patients' abilities to function. Public and
medical awareness is leading to earlier and more accurate diagnosis. Patients
and families can receive counseling at an early stage to avert emotional and
financial crises. Medications and counseling also help relieve the anxiety,
depression, paranoia and apathy that commonly occur throughout the course of the
disease.

   Strategies to reduce the risk of Alzheimer's are gaining evidence to support
them. Practical lifestyle changes such as increased intellectual and physical
activity or diets rich in antioxidants, along with medications such as
cholesterol-lowering statins or anti-inflammatory drugs, may lower the eventual
risk of Alzheimer's. These risk-reducing factors may help blunt a rise in the
number of new Alzheimer's patients as the life span of Americans increases.

   All of these advances in understanding and treatment are little consolation
to patients and families faced with the reality of this progressively worsening
brain disease and inadequate resources for their care. We hope for treatments
that will not only relieve symptoms but also prevent further worsening and
restore patients to normal.

   The scientific understanding of Alzheimer's is at a point at which radical
therapies are in development. Human experiments with a vaccine against the toxic
amyloid protein have resulted in a tragic failure and the trial was halted for
safety reasons, according to a report released last month. A handful of patients
developed an allergic response within the brain after vaccination. The brain of
a patient who died from this reaction, an inflammation, showed that much of the
amyloid had been successfully removed, stimulating new research into this
approach.

   Further, drugs that block the brain's ability to produce amyloid are about to
start testing in humans after years of basic and animal research. Gene therapy
for Alzheimer's has also begun to drive increased production of a factor
important to brain cell growth and survival. Although this form of therapy has
the potential to reverse the disease process, it has resulted in two deaths from
brain hemorrhage.

   The greatest potential cure of Alzheimer's may be embryonic stem cells, but
they are also the most difficult form of treatment to apply. Research is just
beginning into the complex process needed to engineer embryonic cells reliably
as replacements for the wide variety of brain cells lost in Alzheimer's.

   These radical experimental treatments with wide-ranging potential benefits
are unlike any form of current medical therapy; their chances for success or
serious side effects are difficult to predict.

   Borrowing from the late President Reagan and his reference to the Soviet
Union, I have my own "evil empire" -- made up of neurodegenerative diseases,
with Alzheimer's as its most heavily populated republic. Like Mr. Reagan, I am
prepared to persevere in a long battle with a formidable enemy but would gladly
welcome its abrupt collapse.

   Paul S. Fishman, M.D., is a professor of neurology and director of the
Division for Neurodegenerative Diseases at the University of Maryland School of
Medicine.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION(S), M. RYDER

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                             422 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        June 14, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 2177 words

HEADLINE: Buying more time;
Scientists test growth factors in fight against brain diseases

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER jfauber@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Twice a day, Martha Stolar takes a vial out of the refrigerator and injects
herself in the stomach with a clear liquid. The syringe contains either a
placebo or a cutting-edge drug that may delay the death sentence she received
when she was diagnosed with ALS.

   To buy herself some time from the Alzheimer's disease that's slowly
destroying her brain, Lola Crosswhite endured a considerably more invasive
treatment:

   Two small bore holes were drilled into her head. Long needles, inserted deep
in her brain, injected millions of cells engineered to produce a substance
crudely described as plant food for ailing brains.

   These are two examples of experiments, using various growth factors to treat
diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and ALS, that are sprouting up around
the country.

   Short of a cure, these trials are designed with the hope of buying time --
more than that offered by the best available medicines and possibly enough to
keep the diseases at bay for a few years.

   Stolar, 69, a retired Cudahy High School teacher, was enrolled in the study
on ALS, which stands for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, at the Medical College
of Wisconsin.

   The college is one of several centers around the nation that are taking part
in the trial. The results probably won't be known for a couple of years.

   Crosswhite, 75, was one of eight, early-stage Alzheimer's patients treated at
the University of California at San Diego, the first patients to get a gene
therapy treatment for the incurable disease.

   Promising results from that trial were reported at the American Academy of
Neurology conference in April. And this month, researchers in Chicago will begin
a follow-up study with as many as 12 more patients.

   The expectations of scientists in the field range from highly optimistic to
calmly practical.

   If growth factors continue to prove to be safe, they may someday even be
administered to older people who don't have brain disease but who may be
forgetful or a little slow in moving around, said Clive Svendsen, a University
of Wisconsin-Madison scientist.

   "It won't cure aging," he said. "It would just give you a boost. You may get
your tennis stroke back."

   Svendsen is part of an ongoing landmark experiment in which a type of growth
factor is being pumped directly into the brains of Parkinson's patients, an
approach that seems to be fending off their decline. He also has engineered
immature brain cells to produce their own growth factor and wants to transplant
those into people.

   However, Jeffrey Rothstein, an ALS researcher and professor of neurology and
neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University, said growth factors most likely will
offer only incremental improvement in the treatment of brain diseases, not a
magic bullet.

   Either way, he said, growth factors represent a reversal of the conventional
approach to fighting disease.

   With diseases such as cancer, the goal is to kill cells, as is done with
chemotherapy.

   With growth factors, the goal is to keep them alive.

   "We are trying to slow a process where cells are dying," he said.

   Growth factors, also known as neurotrophic factors, are a family of proteins
that help brain cells develop and maintain their function. They also may be able
to repair damaged brain cells.

   "It's very clear that these neurotrophic factors can protect nerve cells,"
said Mark Mattson, chief of the laboratory of neurosciences at the National
Institute on Aging, part of the National Institutes of Health. "What's not clear
is to what extent they can delay the progression of disease. We'll see what
happens."

   Much of the optimism with growth factors stems from animal research showing
that the substances do indeed keep cells alive and healthy for long periods of
time.

   A microscopic view of brain tissue from an old monkey shows an atrophied
network of brain cells and the root-like appendages known as axons. But an aged
monkey brain that has been treated with a substance known as nerve growth factor
shows a restored network of cells and dendrites as extensive as that found in a
young monkey.

   Interest in growth factors waned in the mid-'90s after a couple of trials
failed to produce positive results. Researchers now say those failures likely
stemmed from flawed methods of delivering the drugs.

   The latest experiments target specific brain regions or types of nerve cells.

   And they use novel delivery systems:

   Parkinson's

   UW's Svendsen is part of team of scientists in Great Britain and Madison who
are conducting a small trial in which a type of growth factor is pumped directly
into the brains of Parkinson's patients.

   The approach uses a pump implanted in the abdomen and a catheter to deliver
the drug GDNF -- glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor -- to the putamen area
of the brain, which is important to movement control. It is believed that the
GDNF stimulates dopamine release by brain cells, and it may also protect against
brain cell death.

   In April, researchers announced that after two years, the five patients who
were treated experienced more than 40% improvement in their motor function.
Brain scans also showed a significant increase in dopamine storage at the tip of
the catheter.

   Svendsen said the drug firm that makes GDNF is expected to announce the
results of a similar U.S. study involving 32 patients at the end of July.

   Ultimately, he said, the best approach will be to use neural stem cells that
have been genetically engineered to make growth factor and then transplant them
into the brains of patients.

   Using stem cells obtained from fetal tissue rather than engineered viruses or
implanted pumps has several advantages, he said.

   "Once they get to the brain, they swim out," he said. "Each of the stem cells
is a little pump. We can engineer them to make anything."

   In addition, Svendsen said, his team has been able to control growth factor
production in those cells by turning it on or off by using a common antibiotic.

   Svendsen has received a five-year, $1.8 million grant to bring his research
from the lab, to rodents, to monkeys and to people.

   "The beauty is you don't have to take a drug every day," he said. "It's just
minor surgery, a drill hole in the head and a few stem cells."

   Ironically, the simplicity of such therapies could hinder their development.

   Drugs companies normally develop new medicines that can be taken daily during
the course of many years.

   How will they make money on a one-time treatment?

   "It won't be a viable company if it charges you $10," said Rothstein, of
Johns Hopkins. "Will it be $20,000 or $100,000?"

   ALS

   About a year and a half ago, Stolar was diagnosed with ALS and told she had
two to five years to live.

   ALS is a disease that attacks nerve cells in the spinal column and brain that
control voluntary movement. While thinking, vision and hearing remain relatively
intact, muscles waste away.

   Stolar, who lives in Brookfield, said the disease primarily affects her
speaking and also causes some weakness in her right hand. But she still lives by
herself and drives.

   In February, she was offered the chance to take part in a clinical trial of a
substance known as insulin-like growth factor-1. The study, which is being
coordinated by the Mayo Clinic, involves 330 ALS patients from 16 medical
centers around the nation.

   For up to two years, patients will get small vials of a clear liquid, either
IGF-1 or a placebo, and must inject themselves in the abdomen twice a day. It is
believed that the drug improves the health of nerve endings and that it may also
travel back to nerve cells in the spinal column from nerve endings in the
abdomen.

   In a European trial, IGF-1 failed to show effectiveness. But in an earlier
U.S trial, it slowed the progression of disease by 26%. This third trial will
determine whether the drug is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
said Eric Sorenson, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic.

   "I'm hoping we'll have people engaging in a higher quality of life and that
we can extend survival by 25 percent," said Paul Barkhaus, a professor of
neurology at the Medical College and Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital.

   Stolar said she enrolled in the study for herself and others.

   "If it helps me survive, fine," she said. "If it helps other people, maybe I
won't be around, but that's all right."

   Alzheimer's

   The gene therapy approach that was taken with Crosswhite and seven other
early-stage Alzheimer's patients offers at least a glimmer of hope that a new
treatment could be available in a few years.

   After bore holes were drilled into their heads, about 5 million genetically
engineered cells were injected slowly into the nucleus basalis, a region deep in
the front of the brain that is associated with cognitive decline in the early
and middle stages of Alzheimer's.

   While the study only was intended to look at safety, patients showed about a
50% reduction in the expected decline over a period of up to two years.

   Brain imaging also showed increased levels of healthy metabolic activity at
the site of the gene therapy.

   The initial results show the approach is safe, said Mark Tuszynski, the
study's lead author and a professor of neurosciences at the University of
California, San Diego School of Medicine.

   "They (the engineered cells) act as biological pumps," he said. "They don't
divide. They don't form tumors. They don't cause disease.

   "You're not flooding the brain with gene therapy. You're using
precision-guided therapy."

   Because the brain cell death in Alzheimer's occurs during a period of many
years, it's best to intervene early, he said.

   "This will not be a cure for Alzheimer's," he said.

   But the approach may significantly slow the disease, he said.

   A follow-up to the trial will begin this month at Rush University Medical
Center in Chicago. Initially, six to 12 Alzheimer's patients and, eventually
about 32 patients, are expected to undergo the treatment.

   "I don't want to use therapy because we don't know if it will be of benefit,"
said Zoe Arvanitakis, a neurologist at Rush. "Ultimately, if we could prevent
and not only treat, we'd be a lot better off."

   However, for patients like Crosswhite, prevention and cure are not possible.

   Crosswhite, who lives by herself and still drives, said she first noticed
something was wrong about five years before she was diagnosed.

   Since then, she has tried to stay active by walking and doing photography.

   Crosswhite and her daughter Diana Shaw say they both believe the treatment
has helped.

   "We are starting to see some decline again," Shaw said. "I think she got two
years of very cognitive thinking. I definitely think there have been benefits."

   Crosswhite said that even if the treatment has not helped, it was worth it to
be a part of the experiment.

   "Somebody has to be in these things," she said. "Plus, there is the hope that
there will be help, if not for me, then someone along the line."

   ------------

   For more information about the ALS trial at the Medical College of Wisconsin,
call (414) 805-5270.

   BRAIN DEGENERATION EXPERIMENTING WITH GROWTH FACTORS

   Several clinical trials of growth factors, proteins that promote the growth
of brain cells, are looking at whether they can temporarily halt degeneration of
aging brains. If proven to be safe, the proteins may be effectively used to
delay early stages of fatal brain diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

   WHAT ARE GROWTH FACTORS?

   Growth factors determine early development of brain cells, or neurons, in the
peripheral and central nervous systems. The brain consists of about 100 billion
neurons. Different regions of the brain are made up of different types of
neurons that convey specific signals.

   Dendrite: Receives chemical signals from other neurons

   Axon branch: Conveys these signals as electrical impulses.

   When released by a neuron, growth factors bind to receptors on a nearby
neuron. The binding cause the production of a signal for the increased
production of protein associated with survival of neurons.

   TREATING ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE

   This is how the experimental gene therapy was conducted at University of
California, San Diego.

   1 Gene that produces growth factors is tucked inside a virus, which works as
a carrier.

   2 The virus is put inside a cell, taken from the patient's skin. The genes
are deposited into the cell's nucleus.

   3 A 1-inch hole is drilled on each side of the skull.

   4 About 5 million of the genetically modified cells are slowly injected into
the brain through the injection needle. The needle passes about 3.5 inches into
the brain to reach nucleus basalis, an area believed to degenerate in early
stages of Alzheimer's disease.

   MONKEY RESEARCH

   Injecting growth factor into an old monkey's brain promotes the sprouting of
brain cell appendages known as axons.

   Sources: University of California, San Diego; Society of Neuroscience RIKA
KANAOKA/rkanaoka@journalsentinel.com

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2004


                             423 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JUNE 13, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1066 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell research flourishes;
Amid controversy and federal limits, study goes on in the region.
New Jersey will even fund an institute, but a Pa. abortion law deters some.
Despite limits, many avenues of stem-cell study

BYLINE: Marie McCullough and Josh Goldstein INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Stem-cell research is flourishing at major universities, medical centers and
biotechnology companies in Pennsylvania and New Jersey despite radically
different political climates in the two states.

   New Jersey is the only state other than California to adopt a law allowing
all types of stem-cell research, including studies using stem cells from human
embryos. And with plans to spend $6.5 million to launch a $50 million Stem Cell
Institute, New Jersey is poised to become the first state to directly fund
stem-cell work - and circumvent federal funding restrictions that Nancy Reagan
and other prominent Republicans have criticized.

   Meanwhile, in Pennsylvania, the state's abortion-control law was interpreted
by the Ridge administration to forbid the creation of human embryonic stem-cell
colonies. That has had a chilling effect on all research using the cells, which
can morph into all tissues and organs in the body.

   "It's probably not a felony to work with them, but just the fact that the law
is there is a deterrent," said Alan Russell, director of the McGowan Institute
for Regenerative Medicine at the University of Pittsburgh.

   But research using stem cells obtained by destroying human embryos is just
part - the most contentious part - of a vast field. Scientists are making
inroads using animal stem cells, as well as human stem cells from mature tissues
such as blood or nerves. No one yet knows whether these "adult" stem cells,
which produce subsets of specialized tissues, can be programmed to be as
versatile as embryonic stem cells.

   "I look at this and say there are dozens and dozens of questions that have to
be answered before we can treat diseases, and many of those questions can be
answered without embryonic stem cells," Russell said.

   So far, no institution in Pennsylvania or New Jersey has emerged as a
research hotbed on a par with, say, Johns Hopkins University or Harvard
University. Hopkins is where embryonic stem cells were first isolated six years
ago, while Harvard recently announced the creation of 17 new colonies of human
embryonic stem cells.

   Harvard plans to freely share the colonies - a rebuke to the Bush
administration, which has limited federal funding to about 19 colonies that
existed before restrictions took effect.

   Debate over the federal obstacles has intensified with the death of former
President Ronald Reagan, who suffered from Alzheimer's disease, one of the
illnesses for which embryonic stem cells hold the hope of treatments.

   The controversy has also made private firms even more reticent than usual to
discuss their work. Debbie Hart, president of the Biotechnology Council of New
Jersey, said relatively few firms had announced that they were doing stem-cell
research, and fewer still said they used embryonic stem cells.

   One company that has talked about its stem-cell work is Neuronyx Inc., of
Malvern. It is working on one of the most immediately promising therapeutic
areas, coaxing bone marrow stem cells into becoming cardiac cells to repair
damage from heart attacks.

   "There is a lot of controversy about whether we can regrow heart muscle,"
said John Epstein, a cardiologist doing stem-cell work at the University of
Pennsylvania. "As always, hopes are raised early. . . . We have a long way to
go."

   Ira Black, a neuroscientist at Robert Wood Johnson Medical Center in New
Brunswick and founding director of the Stem Cell Institute of New Jersey, is
more optimistic. His colleagues have done "promising work," at least in animals,
to repair hearts, spinal-cord damage, and brain damage.

   "Stem-cell therapy is not just about some future Utopia. It's about now as
well," he said.

   That is why philanthropic foundations and international drug companies are
already lining up to fund the new institute. "I'm not at liberty to say who they
are . . . but we're optimistic," Black added.

   Scientists from Pennsylvania and New Jersey institutions are involved in the
stem-cell conferences, symposia and organizations that are springing up around
the world. Epstein, for example, is an organizer of a new stem-cell symposium,
to be held this summer in Maine, aimed at marine biologists and scientists using
fish models.

   "Fish make perfectly good models of many human diseases, including leukemia,
anemia and heart disease," he said.

   Jefferson Medical College colon cancer researcher Bruce Boman presented his
research at last year's first meeting of the new International Society for Stem
Cell Research. Using mice, his lab has found strong evidence that mutant stem
cells in the lining of the colon are where colorectal cancer starts.

   Boman theorizes that errant stem cells may also be the culprit in breast,
brain and certain other cancers. If so, then stem cells may be a target for
halting malignant growth, as well as the key to regrowing diseased or damaged
tissue.

   "I think the field of cancer research is just starting to catch on to this
concept," he said.

   No one has a comprehensive list of stem-cell research in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania, much less estimates of the costs or funding of that research.

   What's more, stem-cell research often blends with related work in gene
therapy. For example, RheoGene Inc. in Norristown, a spin-off of Philadelphia
chemical company Rohm & Haas Co., develops technologies to regulate gene
signaling. Those innovations, Russell said, may help to turn stem cells on or
off.

   A sampling of other stem-cell research shows the diversity of the field:

   University of Pittsburgh urologists have used stem cells from muscles to
reverse incontinence in animal models.

   A University of Pennsylvania team has found stem cells in the hair follicles
of mice, raising hopes of a fix for human baldness. Another group is studying
genes that signal embryonic stem cells in mice to turn into nerves or other
types of tissue.

   At Jefferson, researchers are using rodent and rhesus monkey models to try to
stabilize a brain disease similar to Alzheimer's. Another research group is
using zebrafish to understand how embryonic stem cells become either sperm or
egg cells and then migrate to the proper spot in a growing embryo.

   At Rutgers University in New Brunswick, researchers are using rat models to
understand spinal-cord injury and develop therapies.

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720 or
mmccullough@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2005


                             424 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1227 words

HEADLINE: Making the rounds

BYLINE: SUSAN TODD, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Going into another day of marathon meetings with investors, potential
partners and bankers, Stuart Peltz, the chief executive of a small New Jersey
biotechnology company, has money on his mind.

    And he will have a captive audience.

    The Biotechnology Industry Organization's annual convention, which took
place during four days last week at the sprawling Moscone Center here, is much
more than a bustling trade show and celebrity speakers.

    BIO, as it is known, is serious business for Peltz and hundreds of other
biotech executives, who are looking for audiences, especially with possible
investors and partners. More than 16,000 people attended the conference.

   "Everyone is here," Peltz says during a brief reprieve between morning
appointments Wednesday. "That's why we have a meeting every 30 minutes.
Otherwise, I would be on planes all the time."

   "Not that I won't be on planes afterward," adds the burly 44-year old, "but
this helps."

    In the business of biotech, few things are as intense as the drive of a
scientist/entrepreneur building a company.

    Peltz's Wednesday begins at 7:30 a.m. at a breakfast with investment bankers
and ends almost 12 hours later in his hotel room, getting ready for yet another
meeting the next day. In between, the talk is dominated by money and how to get
it from investors and partners who are hoping for a payoff that may be years
away.

    And with plenty of biotechnology investments proving to be disappointments
in recent years, investors are increasingly demanding.

    "The standards are much higher now," says Zev Scherl, a managing partner at
Commerce Health Ventures, a venture capital firm in New York. "Investors are
looking for multiple shots on goal.

    "Companies need to show more, both in terms of science and effectiveness,"
he said.

    During the past five years, Peltz has raised $100 million in financing for
PTC Therapeutics, a South Plainfield company that employs 92 people. One
objective at BIO was to find investors to provide another $11 million, which
could help take PTC through 2006, when it is contemplating a public offering of
stock.

    "Until you attain revenue from products, the key to success in biotech is
investments, grants and business development deals," he says. "You're constantly
trying to make sure you have enough financing."

    A morning at BIO provides a glimpse of the pursuit of investors and the need
to add chapters to the story, showing the company's work has progressed.

    The first meeting of the day, however, is more about visibility than
financing.

    During an interview with a reporter from Chemical & Engineering News
magazine, Peltz skips through PTC's history, from its inception as a spinoff of
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in 1998 to its pipeline, which includes a
compound moving into human studies tomorrow.

    The company's science is complicated, but Peltz launches into an explanation
anyway. "May I?" he asks, reaching for the reporter's yellow pad of paper. "It's
easier."

    The gist is this: PTC is developing drugs to treat genetic disorders and
diseases by altering how ribonucleic acid produces human protein. PTC's
compounds could provide a treatment for muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis,
as well as cancer and infectious diseases.

    Interviews like this one help get the company's message out. "We're pretty
well-known," he says, "but it all helps."

   CLINICAL TRIALS

   Cl udia Hirawat, PTC's vice president of corporate development, arrives to
accompany Peltz to his next appointment. "You only have an hour," she tells him
as they leave.

    As Peltz rides the escalator in the Moscone Center for the umpteenth time,
the discussion shifts to the start of clinical trials on the company's lead drug
for cystic fibrosis. The studies, which will test the safety of the drug in
humans, are scheduled to begin tomorrow.

    Some of the company's researchers will be in Florida to experience the
milestone and learn from the 35 volunteers participating in the study.

    Peltz says there are details the scientists are curious about. For one
thing, they want to know what the pill tastes like.

    If the drug works and receives the approval of regulators, the pill will be
given to young children. Scientists at PTC are considering the idea of flavoring
the medicine.

    It is one of hundreds of details Peltz and his staff will weigh as their
drug progresses through development.

   MARKET HASN'T BEEN KIND

   The next stop for Peltz is a suite on the 17th floor of the San Francisco
Hilton, where he meets with a pair of New York investment bankers who have
recently taken several biotech companies public.

    The market hasn't been kind to the industry lately. The most recent IPOs,
Critical Therapeutics and Acadia Pharmaceuticals in May, barely raised half of
what the companies had hoped.

    "It used to be all you had to do was say genomics or proteonomics, and you
would get money," says David Spencer, chief operating office of Biolex, a
privately held company in Pittsboro, N.C. "Now investors want to see products."

    The gathering this day in the Hilton is an introduction, a start in PTC's
discussions about a possible IPO.

    At first, there is general discussion about the market's valuation of recent
biotech stock offerings, but soon, Peltz tirelessly launches into PTC's story.

    "It's really like small molecule gene therapy," he says. "It's pretty
exciting."

    As he speaks, one of the bankers, Andrew Weisenfeld of Bank of America,
scribbles notes on a loose-leaf binder, nodding his head as Peltz describes the
company's first product.

    Peltz sets out the timeline of potential approvals. The drug could be
approved as a treatment for cystic fibrosis next year, with approval for
muscular dystrophy a year later, he says.

    "We're very much looking at this to achieve fast-track status," he says,
referring to the Food and Drug Administration's accelerated approval process.

    The conversation then turns to the company's financing and how the market
could value PTC. Even though an IPO is still at least two years away, Peltz
worries about the element of serendipity.

    "It's all a matter of timing," he says. "I'd like to go out right after
something is approved or someone comes out with good data."

    The meeting ends with no commitments. They agree to talk again.

    By the time Peltz and William Baird, his vice president of finance, reach
the top of the escalator at Moscone Center West, venture capitalist Scherl is
already waiting.

    The three men head for a round table set up for impromptu meetings in a
second-floor foyer. Peltz has brought his laptop computer to give Scherl a mini
slide presentation.

    Scherl, whose venture capital fund invests in Northeast health-care
companies, had asked for the meeting with Peltz after an economic development
official listed PTC among New Jersey's most interesting private companies.

    Again, Peltz emphasizes the science and the company's progress. This time,
he gets questions. Scherl asks about the company's finances, its investors and
how much cash it is burning through - $20 million a year.

    There are more questions about how the company's first compound will work,
its safety and the potential risk.

    It's close to 1 p.m. and Baird throws Peltz a glance. They have to run to a
lunch.

    "It's interesting; it's very interesting," Scherl tells Peltz.

    And then Peltz is off to the next meeting.

   Susan Todd can be reached at stodd@starledger.com or (973) 392-4125.

GRAPHIC: Chip Baird, left, vice president of finance, and Stuart Peltz, CEO of
PTC Therapeutics in South Plainfield, try to get some work done in a taxi during
last week's BIO convention in San Francisco. 2. Below, Peltz sits for an
interview with a tech publication.

LIST: A morning of meetings, a day of discussions

7:30 a.m.       Breakfast meeting with investment bankers.
9:15 a.m.       Meet employees at pavillion inside Moscone Center exhibit hall.
9:30 a.m.       Meeting with reporter for trade publication.
11:00 a.m.      Discuss prospective stock offering with Bank of America
                investment bankers.
12:15 p.m.      Pitch company's story to Commerce Health Ventures, a potential
                investor.
1:00 p.m.       Lunch meeting with potential partner.
2:30 p.m.       Interview with biotech magazine.
3:00 p.m.       Meeting with large pharmaceutical company over possible
                collaboration.
3:30 p.m.       Meeting with another large pharmaceutical company, which has an
                interest in making investment.
4:00 p.m.       Explore possible collaboration with biotech company.
6:00 p.m.       Dinner at the home of a major, longtime investor.
9:00 p.m.       Return to hotel room. Organize slides for Pacific Growth
Equities
                Conference the next morning.
10:30 p.m.      Check e-mail.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             425 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2004 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BRANDON; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1496 words

HEADLINE: Coping In The Face Of A Deadly Disease

BYLINE: SUSAN M. GREEN, sgreen@tampatrib.com

DATELINE: VALRICO

BODY:

   The paralyzing disorder amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is also known as Lou
Gehrig's disease.

   By SUSAN M. GREEN

   sgreen@tampatrib.com

   VALRICO -- When college student Jack Ratcliffe spotted a pretty, big-eyed
stranger on a city street and followed her into a bank he didn't do business
with, it sparked a romance that turned into a 36-year partnership.

   Jack, a successful banker and businessman, built the nest egg. His wife,
Rita, tended the nest.

   Their marriage began in their hometown of Roanoke, Va. He taught their two
sons to play golf and run a business. She taught them how to cook. In 1988, the
family moved to Florida.

   But the Ratcliffes' world toppled about two years ago, when Rita started
having problems moving her left leg. She later was diagnosed with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, more commonly known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

   "Now she can't walk at all," said her husband. "She's in a wheelchair."

   The Ratcliffes are 58.

   The effects of the disease spread through Rita's body, stiffening her arms,
hands and even her mouth. Speech became almost impossible.

   "It got to the point you couldn't leave her alone," Jack said. "If a mosquito
gets on her, she can't even get the mosquito off."

   So, about a year ago, he gave up his daily involvement in the family-run
business, Pro Golf Superstore, to stay home with his wife. He learned to dress
her, apply her makeup, wash clothes and take her shopping for new ones. The
couple's sons, Eric, 36, and Grant, 34, manage the store and a dozen employees.

   "It was really life-changing," Jack said.

   Two years ago, he hadn't heard of ALS. "I had heard of Lou Gehrig's disease,"
he said. "I didn't know what it was."

   The neurological disorder that struck Rita Ratcliffe received notoriety when
it ended the career of record-setting Yankees baseball player Lou Gehrig.
Sixty-five years later, there is still no cure.

   The Ratcliffe men want to spread the word about the fast-crippling illness
that affects up to 30,000 Americans, including an estimated 1,000 to 1,200
Floridians, according to the Florida chapter of the ALS Association in Tampa.

   The Ratcliffes are organizing fund-raising golf tournaments this fall. The
first, scheduled for Sept. 24 at Summerfield in Riverview, is intended to raise
money for respite care for families dealing with the illness. The proceeds of a
second tournament, planned for Oct. 23 at Walden Lake in Plant City, are
earmarked for medical research.

   ALS is characterized by the breakdown of nerve cells in the brain and spinal
cord that control voluntary muscle movement, according to the National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. The unused muscles waste away, leading to
paralysis. The disease usually kills within five years, though some people have
lived more than twice that long.

   The onset varies among cases, depending on what muscles are first affected.
Rita Ratcliffe's battle began with her toes.

   American Dream

   Pro Golf is a family-run store started in 1994. The Ratcliffes initially sold
golf clubs, clothing and related sporting goods out of a 6,000-square-foot space
near what is now Westfield ShoppingTown mall in Brandon.

   Over time, the store more than doubled its space and moved to its current
location at 9329 E. Adamo Drive.

   Rita's job was to manage the sportswear section, ordering golf clothes for
men, women and children. She worked 30 to 40 hours a week, her sons said.

   Diagnosed with breast cancer in 2001, Rita was scheduled for surgery when she
got a serious infection in one of her toes, her husband recalled.

   The surgery was postponed about a week but went off successfully. Rita moved
on to several weeks of radiation, and the cancer disappeared. In 2002, however,
Rita's toes on her left foot began to curl under, and she had difficulty
walking.

   "We took her to doctor after doctor," Jack said, adding that the family
thinks the presurgery infection may have triggered her later problems.

   Medical tests confirmed a diagnosis of ALS in March 2003, the family said,
and Rita's condition spiraled into decline.

   The couple traded their big two-story home in the Waterford subdivision for a
smaller place in Riverhills. With no stairs and all-tile floors, rolling the
wheelchair is easier.

   Rita's mind is as agile as ever, her family says. But, unable to speak
clearly, she must click out her desires using a computer mouse and a
communicating device called a Dynavox that sells for $9,000. Her medication
costs about $2,100 a month.

   Thanks to health insurance, Medicare, disability checks and the savings the
Ratcliffes stashed away, the family isn't hurting financially, the couple said.

   Yet the disease has affected them in countless ways.

   Rita reports to doctors in Miami every few months. Otherwise, the couple,
once world wanderers, shun long-distance travel, believing airplanes can't
accommodate Rita's needs. She cried softly when her husband talked about looking
for a cruise line with cabins that accommodate the disabled.

   "We used to go out to eat," Jack remembered. "But she doesn't want people to
see me feeding her."

   Rita now takes comfort in everyday pleasures, such as lying on a float in the
pool or sitting outside in the sun.

   Changes Big And Small

   The men in her life marvel that Rita, an immaculate housekeeper, has
developed a sudden fondness for dogs. Her husband said a neighbor's Shih Tzu
sneaked in through the garage door one day. He found it snuggled against his
wife in her living room recliner.

   "Rita woke up the next morning and said, "I want one with a bow in its hair,'
" Jack said.

   The family now includes a brown-and-white Shih Tzu puppy named Marley, after
one of Rita's favorite performers, reggae singer Bob Marley.

   Jack said his sons, mother-in-law and sister-in-law stay with his wife
whenever they can, and the ALS Association recently began providing respite care
that allows him to leave the house for a few hours each week.

   Christine Bright coordinates patient services for the association's Florida
office in Tampa. She said the chapter resulted two years ago from the merger of
several regional organizations, including a Tampa Bay chapter that had started
in the late 1980s.

   The nonprofit organization, which depends on private donations, provides
services to about 500 people with ALS and helps 15 support groups around the
state, including one in Tampa, Bright said. The Tampa group meets on the third
Saturday of every month at Tampa General Hospital.

   The association also lobbies for more research dollars.

   "There's been more research focused on ALS in the past five years than in the
previous 150," Bright said.

   Experts say they don't know what causes the disorder. Scientists have
identified a gene mutation they believe is linked to the disease, but a cure is
not considered imminent, Bright said.

   Asked if the disease causes pain, Rita shakes her head. A family member wrote
out a statement for her, describing her bout with ALS as the biggest challenge
of her life.

   "Through my strong faith in God and the precious love of my family, I awake
each morning knowing I am receiving the greatest care in the whole wide world,"
she said. "Please help us find a cure."

   Jack said the family that has worked together for years to build a business
will pull together to fight the disease.

   "We've always been a very close family," he said. "A lot of people say, "Man,
I could never work with my family.'

   "But we knew what we had to do. We enjoyed being with family. Now we get
together more than ever."

   For information about the tournaments, call Pro Golf at (813) 621-7775. For
information about ALS, call the Florida ALS Association at (813) 637-9000.

   (CHART) A LOOK AT ALS

   What is it? Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is a motor neuron disease that
typically strikes between ages 40 and 70 and eventually leads to paralysis. An
estimated 30,000 Americans have it.

   What are the symptoms? They may vary, but often include tripping and falling,
problems moving hands or arms or difficulty in speaking or swallowing. Average
life expectancy after diagnosis is about 5 years.

   What's being done? The nonprofit ALS Association has invested $25 million in
research during the past decade. Current efforts are focused on stem cell and
gene therapy research.

   Sources: ALS Association and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke

   (CHART) HOW TO HELP

   Two golf tournaments are scheduled to raise money to fight Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

   On Sept. 24, a tournament at Summerfield Golf Course in Riverview will raise
money for respite care for families dealing with the illness.

   On Oct. 23, proceeds from a tournament at Walden Lake Golf & Country Club in
Plant City are earmarked for medical research.

   For information about the golf tournaments, call Pro Golf at (813) 621-7775.

   For information about ALS, call the Florida ALS Association at (813)
637-9000.

   Reporter Susan M. Green can be reached at (813) 657-4529.

   Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART
Tribune photos by JIM REED Jack Ratcliffe has learned to do everything for his
wife, Rita, including putting on her makeup. She suffers from ALS and has lost
control of most of her voluntary muscles. The Ratcliffes are organizing
fundraising golf tournaments to raise awareness of ALS. The disease affects an
estimated 1,000 to 1,200 Floridians. Tribune photo by JIM REED Jack Ratcliffe
moved himself and his wife to a house in Riverhills with no stairs and all-tile
floors to make it easier to move her wheelchair through the home.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                             426 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     JUNE 12, 2004 Saturday JERSEY EDITION

SECTION: SOUTH JERSEY & REGION; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Bancroft has high hopes for leader;
It has hired Robert Martin, who helped bail out Penn's health system.

BYLINE: Troy Graham INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Officials at Bancroft NeuroHealth, the sprawling Haddonfield-based nonprofit
that has been the subject of three state investigations in the last two years,
announced yesterday that they had hired a veteran troubleshooter to turn around
the organization.

   Robert Martin, who recently helped pull the University of Pennsylvania Health
System out of a financial tailspin, was appointed as interim chief executive
officer by Bancroft's Board of Trustees at the end of last month.

   Shortly after Martin's arrival, both president Joseph Hess and executive vice
president Ronald Savage departed, said Paul Healy, a Bancroft spokesman. He
would not say whether they were fired.

   "They have left Bancroft," he said. "We wish them the best of luck in their
future endeavors."

   The board has given Martin, who left the Penn Health System last year, a
mandate to fix Bancroft's problems. In recent years, the institution has faced
the death of a 14-year-old patient and been hit with a $132,200 penalty levied
by the state.

   "It's been a challenging few years," Healy said.

   In April, it was revealed that the state Office of the Child Advocate was
investigating Bancroft, which has served developmentally disabled and
brain-injured children and adults for more than 100 years. The office,
responding to parents' complaints, has requested documents dating to 2002.

   Healy said that Martin's hiring was not prompted by the latest investigation.
The chief executive position at Bancroft has been vacant since George Niemann
retired in January 2003. The president and executive vice president positions
were eliminated with the departure of Hess and Savage, Healy said.

   Hess had been at Bancroft for about 10 years, and Savage for about five, he
said.

   The board will search for a permanent chief executive, but Healy said he did
not know whether Martin was a candidate.

   When Martin took the top position at Penn in 2000, the health system had been
rocked by two years of financial crisis - deficits of nearly $300 million - and
the highly publicized death of a patient in a gene-therapy trial.

   Bancroft board chairman James B. Carson credited Martin with leading the Penn
system "from one of the most challenging periods in its history to its current
position as one of the premier health systems in the country."

   "We are very pleased that Dr. Martin will be leading Bancroft forward,"
Carson said in a statement.

   Martin has been meeting with staff, patients and their families since his
arrival, Healy said.

   Bancroft, a nonprofit organization with $80 million in annual revenue, has
1,500 employees and 120 locations throughout Camden, Burlington, Gloucester and
Salem Counties, as well as in Delaware, Maine and Louisiana. They provide an
array of education, rehabilitation and treatment services.

   "I am confident that, working together with Bancroft's excellent, dedicated
staff, we can ensure that the organization is able to provide those vital
services well into the future," Martin said in a statement.

   Bancroft has faced a variety of public troubles. In 2002, 14-year-old Matthew
Goodman, a Bucks County native, died of aspiration pneumonia, acute respiratory
stress, and a blood infection after he became unconscious and was driven by
Bancroft employees to Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   Goodman's family blamed Bancroft for his death, saying he was abused and
neglected there. Bancroft has denied responsibility for Goodman's death, but the
organization paid a $2,500 penalty related to the handling of his care.

   After separate investigations, the state Division of Developmental
Disabilities substantiated allegations that abuse and neglect had taken place at
Bancroft, but the Division of Youth and Family Services said those conditions
did not lead to Goodman's death.

   The Camden County Prosecutor's Office also looked into the Goodman case, but
declined to press criminal charges. Janice Roach, Goodman's mother, filed a
civil suit last year against Bancroft, Children's Hospital, and a doctor there.

   Also last year, the state hit Bancroft with the largest fine ever levied
against an institution providing long-term care - $132,200 - after an inspection
found deficiencies ranging from a failed fire drill to incomplete
record-keeping, according to state officials.

   For a time after the inspection, New Jersey stopped all referrals and
admissions to Bancroft. That ban was lifted in July when Bancroft agreed to some
changes and was assessed the fine.

   Bancroft has also wrestled with the temporary suspension of its accreditation
and the threat of a possible state takeover for health violations, but the
takeover was averted.

   A state Division of Human Services spokeswoman said earlier this year that
Bancroft has been cooperative and "remedied many things."

   In early May, however, a 19-year-old Bancroft patient was arrested and
charged with sexually assaulting another patient, a 16-year-old male. Healy said
Bancroft was investigating.

   Contact staff writer Troy Graham at 856-779-3893 or tgraham@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2005


                             427 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 9, 2004 Wednesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 953 words

HEADLINE: Researchers push for Alzheimer's cure;
 THE PASSING OF A PRESIDENT

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   With the number of Alzheimer's victims expected to double or triple in the
next 50 years, researchers are scrambling as never before to find treatments and
ultimately a cure that could stave off a public health disaster.

   Few who have delved into the mysteries of the disease that claimed the life
of former President Ronald Reagan dare to predict when breakthroughs will occur.
The most optimistic say a cure is at least a decade away.

   Backed this year by $679 million in federal funds and more from private
sources, researchers are working on multiple fronts. They are testing new
medications and old ones, stem cells and vitamins, gene therapies and vaccines.
They are studying mice given Alzheimer's genes and the brains of people who died
from the disease for clues to its devastating path.

   Reagan's death could spur more research.

   In mourning the former president yesterday, the Chicago-based Alzheimer's
Association lauded Reagan and his wife, Nancy, for raising the visibility of the
disease and championing research. The group called for a $40 million increase in
federal funding.

   Sen. Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the Aging
subcommittee, and Sen. Christopher S. Bond, a Missouri Republican, said they
would introduce a bill in Reagan's name that would double federal funding to
$1.4 billion for Alzheimer's research.

   "My family, we know the long goodbye," said Mikulski, who lost her father, a
Highlandtown grocer, to the disease.

   Sadness and urgency can be heard in the voices of those who have cared for an
Alzheimer's patient.

   "She said, 'It destroys my sense of worthiness,'" said Peter Savage of Roland
Park, whose wife, Ina, died of the disease last year. "She would just cry at
that."

   As the population ages, the number of Americans with Alzheimer's is expected
to increase from 4 million to as many as 12 million in the next 50 years.
Modest advances

   Though the past 10 years have produced the first drugs that slow the
deterioration from Alzheimer's disease, their effects are modest and
short-lived. Ina Savage, a Baltimore teacher who spoke five languages,
experienced an unusual benefit. In 1998, just weeks after taking Aricept, one of
five Alzheimer's drugs now on the market, she could suddenly read a page of
print without forgetting the previous one.

   The effects lasted three months, long enough to digest a best-seller about
the lives of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt and discuss with her husband the
history of slavery in Brazil. Then she continued her decline.

   "In general, people to some extent with Alzheimer's are doing better than a
decade ago," said Dr. Paul Fishman, who heads the neurodegenerative disease
division at the University of Maryland Medical Center. "They are not cures and
they are modestly effective, but they are better than nothing."

   Ten percent to 15 percent of people on the drugs can stay at home a few
months longer, said Dr. Constantine G. Lyketsos, head of the Alzheimer's Center
at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

   The disease is named for Dr. Alois Alzheimer, a German neurologist who in
1906 discovered strange clumps and knots in the brain of a woman who died after
suffering from a mental disease. Today, it is recognized as the leading type of
dementia, one that diminishes not only memory but life's basic functions,
including walking and eating.

   Like Reagan, victims typically suffer for 10 to 12 years before the disease
kills them. At greatest risk are people over 80, though the disease also strikes
younger people, including, in rare cases, those in middle age. Ina Savage
received the diagnosis in her 50s, and died at 62.

   A hallmark of Alzheimer's disease are deposits known as plaque that appear
throughout the brain. Researchers aren't sure if the deposits cause Alzheimer's
or are byproducts of the disease. Other features are twisted fibers, known as
tangles, within brain cells.

   "The brain is shrinking, cells are dying, connections are lost," said Dr.
Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad, who heads the neuroscience program at the National
Institute on Aging.
Alzheimer's research

   The drugs generally work by supplying a brain chemical that becomes depleted
when Alzheimer's sets in. Today, scientists are looking for treatments that
would stop the progress of the disease. One would interfere with a gene that
produces a protein that, when clipped apart, forms the plaques. Another would
stop the proteins from being clipped.

   Other scientists are hoping to harness stem cells to regenerate brain cells
killed by Alzheimer's. Mrs. Reagan was a vocal sup-  porter of such research,
saying that the potential to save lives should outweigh any ethical concerns.

   Still others are conducting clinical trials of cholesterol-lowering drugs
known as statins, anti-inflammatory medications and antioxidants such as vitamin
E, which they hope will prevent Alzheimer's if taken years before symptoms
emerge.

   Dr. Majid Fotuhi, director of the memory disorders unit at Sinai Hospital,
believes that people can reduce their risk of Alzheimer's the same way they
reduce risk of a heart attack.

   "The most exciting thing in Alzheimer's research today is prevention," he
said.

   Studies have identified high blood pressure and cholesterol, smoking,
diabetes, poor diet and chronic stress, among other things, as risk factors.
Aside from eliminating those, Fotuhi said, patients can protect their brains by
reading, doing crosswords and even socializing.

   "When you do exercise with your muscles, your muscles get stronger," he said.
"The same thing happens with the brain. Neurons get stronger."

   Sun staff writers Erika Niedowski and Kimberly A.C. Wilson contributed to
this article.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION(S), Alzheimer's progression; KNIGHT RIDDER/TRIBUNE

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2004


                             428 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                      JUNE 8, 2004, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 732 words

HEADLINE: ON THE RECORD;

Thomas Dietz and Steven Burrill

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff

BODY:
Thinking about investing in biotech stocks? Worried about the industry's
continuing financial losses? Puzzled about how to distinguish companies?

    To get some answers, The Chronicle interviewed two industry experts --
Thomas Dietz, co-chief executive officer of San Francisco's Pacific Growth
Equities, an investment bank specializing in technology, telecommunications and
health care companies; and Steven Burrill, chief executive officer of Burrill &
Co., a life sciences merchant bank in San Francisco.

    Following are excerpts from the telephone interviews, which were conducted
separately.

    Q: Do you have any advice for ordinary investors who may be considering
biotech stocks for the first time?

    Dietz: Individual investors should not focus on individual stocks in this
sector. The details are incredibly important; the management teams are critical.
The nuances and timing of developments are really critical to the success of the
investment. Individuals should turn to a professional money manager for help.
(Note: Pacific Growth Equities does not provide money management services).

    Burrill: Because of the industry's cumulative financial losses, the typical
kinds of financial indicators -- price/earnings ratios, historical trends --
aren't meaningful.

    Instead, you should focus on what diseases a company is trying to cure,
where they are in the stages of development and how well-financed a company is.
You should be looking at the management team and the investor group.

    Q: Are there any public companies you'd recommend?

    Dietz: We like three stocks:

    Dyax Corp. in Cambridge, Mass., which is developing a replacement for an
enzyme that's deficient in patients who have hereditary angioedema (a rare
genetic disorder that leads to acute attacks of localized swelling and
inflammation).

    Transkaryotic Therapies, also based in Cambridge, which develops enzyme
replacement therapies.

    And Pharmacyclics of Sunnyvale, which is developing a drug applicable to
blood-borne cancers and solid tumors.

    (Note: Pacific Growth Equities makes a market in all three. In addition,
Dietz or a member of his immediate family owns shares in all three, and his firm
has done investment banking work for them in the past year.).

    Burrill: I'm not smart enough to pick a single stock. But a portfolio of
stocks with products in different stages of development, such a basket of
securities, would do very well for you over time.

    Q: What's your view of the industry's financial performance?

    Dietz: We've had a resurgence in the first quarter with lots of deals. But
it's good to keep in mind that, although there are almost 600 public companies
in the sector, just about 35 to 40 companies currently are profitable.

    Burrill: "The industry was started in the 1960s and 1970s, but it wasn't
until the 1980s and 1990s that it really started developing. Today, it has a
market cap of about $300 billion.

    What I would argue is that 80 percent of the capital that's come in so far
has gotten 20 percent of the return. The next 20 percent coming in is going to
get 80 percent of the return. We're (at) the point of the hockey stick where
things are going up dramatically.

    Q: What areas of research are you excited about?

    Dietz: Research into new antibiotics, new antifunguls. We like the oncology
space, new therapies for treating pain and gastrointestinal diseases.

    Burrill: Developments with regard to obesity and Alzheimer's disease. We're
interested in AIDS and immune system diseases. We at Burrill are very interested
in developments regarding wellness, not just sickness.

    Q: Outside the Bay Area, what other regions are developing a reputation for
biotech research?

    Dietz: Boston; Munich, Germany, with the Max Planck Institute; the
Zurich-Basel corridor in Switzerland; Cambridge in the U.K.; and Stockholm.

    Burrill: Boston, San Diego, Research Triangle Park in North Carolina and the
Seattle area. Emerging areas in the U.S. include Wisconsin, Michigan, Illinois,
Indiana and Princeton -- places where there are powerful medical schools.

    On the international scale, there's a lot of activity in Europe, principally
around Munich and Amsterdam, some in Belgium, a little bit in France, the
Cambridge area in the U.K. and pockets in eastern Europe.

    There's a lot of money being thrown at biotech in Singapore. There's a lot
of activity in China.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                             429 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2004 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                      June 7, 2004 Monday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B09

LENGTH: 104 words

HEADLINE: PRESSURE LIBYA ON HUMAN RIGHTS

BODY:

   I must commend The Oregonian for the editorial "A clean bill of health for
Gadhafi?" (May 18), which brought attention to the diabolical treatment of the
foreign health care workers in Libya.

   The White House recently rewarded Libya for its renunciation of weapons of
mass destruction by the removal of trade sanctions. Let us hope that a show of
public outrage at the treatment of these health care workers will similarly
pressure the Libyan government to alter its position on human rights.

   MICHAEL A. JARVIS Assistant professor Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute
Oregon Health Sciences University Southwest Portland

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                             430 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                              June 6, 2004 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 1550 words

HEADLINE: RONALD WILSON REAGAN / 1911-2004;
Search Is On for Alzheimer's Cure as Boomers Age

BYLINE: Marlene Cimons and Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writers

BODY:

   In the 10 years since Ronald Reagan hand-penned his poignant letter to the
American people disclosing his diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, great
scientific progress has been made in understanding the nature of the affliction,
but few of the findings have made their way into clinical practice.

   Five drugs are now available in the United States that provide some relief of
symptoms -- and dozens more are under study. An experimental vaccine against
Alzheimer's proved toxic in humans, but researchers are studying an improved
version.

   Small preliminary studies hint that gene therapy or implants of new brain
cells may slow the course of the disease, but such approaches are years away
from wide use.

   Stem cell research, in particular, has been slow because of controversies
surrounding the use of stem cells taken from human embryos. In May, Nancy Reagan
made a plea for an acceleration in such research, saying that it could lead to a
cure for people like her husband.

   Federal research funding devoted to Alzheimer's has jumped from $298 million
in 1994 to more than $650 million in the current fiscal year. The Alzheimer's
Assn. has been lobbying for a $40-million increase in this year's funding and
has a goal of $1 billion per year for the disease.

   But it is still a race against time.

   "There have been great increases in the amount of information, and it's an
accelerating process," says Bill Thies, vice president for medical and
scientific affairs for the Alzheimer's Assn.. "We are moving in the right
direction, but it's clear that we aren't finished yet."

   What worries experts the most is the explosion of cases that will almost
certainly occur in the coming years with the aging of the baby boom population.
Without a cure or more effective treatment -- the therapies available provide
only moderate symptomatic relief, with no effect on the causes -- Alzheimer's
will burgeon into a major public health problem.

   Alzheimer's is a brain disorder that gradually destroys a person's memory.
The number of people developing this affliction is expected to more than triple
from the current 4.5 million to 16 million by the year 2050 -- when every baby
boomer will have turned 85.

   Researchers are probing the mysteries of Alzheimer's on many fronts. Among
them:

   * Brain cell regeneration: Most scientists believed that once a brain nerve
cell died, it could not be replaced, and its function was lost forever. Their
thinking has since changed, the result of studies in mice and monkeys that have
shown cell regeneration, leading them to feel more optimistic about new cell
growth, and the possibility of applying this knowledge to Alzheimer's disease.

   One potential approach focuses on a substance in the brain called nerve
growth factor. Scientists aren't yet sure exactly how nerve growth factor works;
however, it is known to be one of several such neurotrophic factors in the
brain. Although nerve cells in the brain cannot divide, they can repair
themselves after injury, and neurotrophic factors promote this regeneration.

   Researchers at UC San Diego in April reported results from an eight-patient
study that suggested gene therapy increasing the concentration of nerve growth
factor in the brain could slow the progression of the disease. They took skin
cells from the patients, inserted the gene for nerve growth factor, then
implanted the cells into brain regions affected by Alzheimer's. Although the
purpose of the study was to determine the safety of the procedure, Dr. Mark H.
Tuszynski and his colleagues found that deterioration of the patient's faculties
slowed after the procedure.

   * Diagnosis: There is no laboratory test that can diagnose Alzheimer's. But
researchers such as Dr. Gary W. Small, director of the UCLA Center on Aging,
have shown that positron emission tomography, or PET, scanning can accurately
detect Alzheimer's in its early stages.

   * Drugs: This is regarded as a crucial area of exploration. Five drugs have
been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of
Alzheimer's disease: tacrine (Cognex); donepezil (Aricept); rivastigmine
(Exelon); galantamine (Reminyl); and memantine (Namenda). Tacrine was the first
to be approved but is rarely used anymore because of the possibility of serious
side effects, including liver damage.

   Tacrine, donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine belong to a class of drugs
called cholinesterase inhibitors. Each acts in a different way to block the
breakdown of acetylcholine, a brain chemical that is important for memory.
Memantine shields the brain from overexposure to another neurochemical called
glutamate. High levels of glutamate associated with Alzheimer's kill brain
cells.

   Each of the drugs provide limited benefits to select groups of patients, but
none provides dramatic results in delaying the course of the disease. All cost
about $120 per month, and more than 1 million Americans are taking them
regularly.

   At least two dozen other potential drugs are being studied, but there is no
evidence so far that any will provide a major breakthrough.

   Strong evidence suggests that vitamin E in relatively high doses may slow
disease progression in some patients. Some evidence suggests that the
Parkinson's drug selegiline (Carbex or Eldepryl) may also improve thought
processes.

   Some studies also suggest that prednisone and a group of drugs called
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs -- such as aspirin and ibuprofen -- may
benefit patients by limiting the inflammation associated with Alzheimer's.

   Some research had also suggested that estrogen could benefit female
Alzheimer's patients, but a major clinical trial showed that it was of no value.

   Studies in mice had indicated that an experimental vaccine developed by Elan
Corp. could remove the brain plaques thought to cause Alzheimer's, but human
trials were halted in 2002 when the vaccine was found to provoke inflammation in
the brains of 6% of the patients. Elan is now studying an improved version that
researchers hope will overcome this problem.

   * Genes: Currently, at least four genes can be linked to Alzheimer's.
Although researchers know a considerable amount about the genetics of
Alzheimer's, they suspect that other genes also play a role in the development
of the disease.

   * Stem cells: In the long run, researchers hold the greatest hope for the use
of stem cells to replace lost brain cells.

   Stem cells are primitive cells, usually derived from embryonic tissue, that
have the potential to become any type of body cell. Injected into the brain, the
stem cells would become brain cells themselves, replacing those lost to disease
and restoring function -- or at least delaying further deterioration.

   Nancy Reagan's embrace of stem cell research comes as a challenge to
President Bush.

   By executive order, he has limited the use of federal funds to researching a
small number of cell colonies already extracted from embryos, to avoid doing
anything that would "encourage further destruction of human embryos."

   In an implicit referendum on Bush's order, a California initiative qualified
last week for the November ballot that would have state taxpayers underwrite $3
billion worth of stem cell research.

   Advocates said it could lead to breakthroughs in curing Alzheimer's, as well
as numerous other diseases.

   *

   'Able to raise public awareness'

   Text of the letter written by Ronald Reagan in November 1994 announcing that
he had Alzheimer's disease:

   My Fellow Americans,

   I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will
be afflicted with Alzheimer's disease.

   Upon learning this news, Nancy and I had to decide whether as private
citizens we would keep this a private matter or whether we would make this news
known in a public way.

   In the past, Nancy suffered from breast cancer, and I had my cancer
surgeries. We found through our open disclosures we were able to raise public
awareness. We were happy that as a result many more people underwent testing.

   They were treated in early stages and able to return to normal, healthy
lives.

   So now, we feel it is important to share it with you. In opening our hearts,
we hope this might promote greater awareness of this condition. Perhaps it will
encourage a clearer understanding of the individuals and families who are
affected by it.

   At the moment, I feel just fine. I intend to live the remainder of the years
God gives me on this earth doing the things I have always done. I will continue
to share life's journey with my beloved Nancy and my family. I plan to enjoy the
great outdoors and stay in touch with my friends and supporters.

   Unfortunately, as Alzheimer's disease progresses, the family often bears a
heavy burden. I only wish there was some way I could spare Nancy from this
painful experience. When the time comes, I am confident that with your help she
will face it with faith and courage.

   In closing let me thank you, the American people, for giving me the great
honor of allowing me to serve as your president. When the Lord calls me home,
whenever that may be, I will leave with the greatest love for this country of
ours and eternal optimism for its future.

   I now begin the journey that will lead me into the sunset of my life. I know
that for America there will always be a bright dawn ahead.

   Thank you, my friends. May God always bless you.

   Sincerely,

   Ronald Reagan

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2004


                             431 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 6, 2004 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: BOOK REVIEW: IN BRIEF

BYLINE: SUSAN OKIE, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   His Brother's Keeper: A Story   From the Edge of Medicine   Jonathan Weiner
Ecco, 356 pp., $26.95    REVIEWED BY SUSAN OKIE    Jamie and Stephen Heywood are
companions and cocky, affectionate rivals, in the familiar way of brothers born
two years apart. In their brainy, close-knit and taciturn New England family,
play is the language of love. As boys, they sneak out together to ride the
rapids on a creek during a storm and to play night laser tag in the woods. As
young men living in different cities, they spar online in computer games. At
every family gathering, they arm-wrestle.

   Oddly, it is Jamie, the older one, who takes these duels seriously and cares
about the outcome. So it is Jamie who crows with glee one summer day when, to
his surprise, he forces his carpenter brother's mighty right arm to the table.
Neither man realizes that Stephen's defeat is no fluke, but the first indication
of a dreaded ailment: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, also called Lou
Gehrig's disease. Within two years, Stephen will be diagnosed with early signs
of a nerve-destroying paralysis that slowly robs its victims of strength until
they can no longer talk, then can no longer breathe.

    Jonathan Weiner is a Pulitzer prize-winning science writer whose previous
subjects have been biologists intellectually obsessed with finches and fruit
flies. Jamie Heywood, the central figure in Weiner's superb new book, is also
obsessed - but what drives Jamie is love and a "maddening hope." When his
younger brother develops ALS, the dream of engineering and delivering a cure to
save Stephen becomes the organizing principle of Jamie's life. The hubris of his
quest is all the more breathtaking because he is not a scientist, but a
charismatic young entrepreneur watching from the sidelines at an especially
optimistic moment in scientific history.

   In "His Brother's Keeper," the biology of nerve cells and the dawning history
of gene therapy play supporting roles in a plot as finely crafted as that of the
best novels. Weiner uses the Heywoods' story to illuminate the unexpected ways
in which a serious illness reveals character and shifts the balance within a
family. Stephen Heywood is both brave and enigmatic: The center of a storm, he
manages to downplay the terrifying reality of his disease while staying solidly
connected with those he loves. The Heywood parents, John and Peggy, lend
financial and emotional support to Jamie's headlong campaign but seem to remain
clear-eyed, without false hopes. Jamie's wife, Melinda, and Stephen's fianc e,
Wendy, give voice, aloud and in their journal scribblings, to the fear, guilt
and anger of which the Heywoods themselves never speak.

   But it is Jamie who fascinates. He draws the reader into Weiner's tale the
way he drew scientists onto his team - and drew Weiner himself into his family
and into his obsession. Jamie's brilliance and energy are at first dazzling,
then unsettling. The longer Weiner follows the story, the more ambiguous Jamie's
motives appear, and the more bizarre seems his wish to inject a virtually
untested treatment into his brother's nervous system. Meanwhile, the nation's
early optimism about gene therapy is dashed by the death of a teenager in a
medical experiment in Philadelphia, the same city where Jamie's scientific
collaborators have been busily engineering genes to treat Stephen's ALS.

   Weiner has a master's eye for the telling detail and a spare, often poetic
style. In this book he brings home the question of whether the revolution in our
understanding of genetics can and should be harnessed at will to save a brother
or to create a child.

    Susan Okie reviews books for the Wash ington Post.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             432 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              May 31, 2004 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1757 words

HEADLINE: Economics enters debate on cloning;
Research ban could cost state, some say

BYLINE: By Laura Maggi, Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE  --  Arguments about allowing cloning-based research in Louisiana
have tended to follow two lines in the Legislature this session, with opponents
saying it would destroy potential human lives and proponents arguing the
technology is the most promising avenue available to find cures for diseases
such as Parkinson's and juvenile diabetes.

   But research proponents and people trying to bring biotechnology companies to
the state have recently offered a new argument, contending that any restriction
on scientific inquiry into embryonic stem cells produced by human cloning could
damage the state's attempts to recruit scientists and lure start-up businesses
in that field.

   That new argument could put Gov. Kathleen Blanco in a tough position, pitting
her top priority  --  economic development  --  against the arguments of the
Catholic Church, of which she has been a lifelong member. So far, the governor
has yet to take a side in the cloning debate, only acknowledging that the issue
is complicated.

   Asked last week about the potential impact of a complete ban on cloning
research at state-financed institutions whose whole purpose is to attract
biotechnology companies to the state, Blanco said, "That is a big concern." But
she added, "I haven't made up my own mind as to where exactly I am on the
issue."

   For nearly three years, the federal government has been at a stalemate on the
promotion and financing of human embryonic stem cell research. No legislation
has made it through Congress to pass even a ban on reproductive cloning or
creating a new human person through cloning technology. Even those who want to
allow cloning-based research, however, believe that reproductive cloning should
be outlawed.

   This has led several states to take up the issue themselves.

   Six states have banned reproductive cloning as well as any research that
involves harvesting stem cells from human embryos, with lawmakers saying the
cloning process destroys potential human life in the quest for treatments.

   But seeing a prime economic development opportunity, states such as New
Jersey and California are moving in the opposite direction, not only allowing
the research to take place, but providing money for local universities to move
ahead.

   Pending La. legislation

   In Louisiana, bills on both sides are moving through the process. All of the
bills would ban cloning to create a new human being. Legislation by Senate
President Donald Hines, D-Bunkie, would allow embryonic stem cell research to
occur in the state, but two other bills would not.

   For those who base their opposition to embryonic stem cell research on moral
or religious views, discussion of the economic development impact of a ban
misses the point, they say.

   "We want economic development, but we don't want it to be done for immoral
purposes," said Danny Loar, a lobbyist with the Louisiana Catholic Conference.
The church thinks the cloning process used to create embryonic stem cells
involves the creation of a human life, albeit one that can live in a petri dish.

   The human embryo that can spawn a stem cell line does not contain any organs
and is about 200 cells, what one scientist described as about the size of the
point of a pin. Research proponents say that at this stage of development, less
than 10 days old, the embryo is merely a collection of "undifferentiated cells."

   However, church representatives have argued to legislative committees that
those cells represent a potential human being, which is destroyed in the process
to make those stem cell lines.

   That follows the same logic as the argument President Bush embraced when he
declared that federal dollars could not be used for research on human embryos
destroyed after Aug. 9, 2001, when he announced his policy on the issue.
Researchers can use federal grant money only to work on the limited number of
stem cell lines created before that date.

   In a recent letter to members of Congress, the director of the National
Institutes of Health explained that position by saying Bush believes "that
taxpayer funds should not 'sanction or encourage further destruction of human
embryos that have at least the potential for life.' "

   Abortion no, research yes

   While the arguments about whether embryonic stem cell research destroys human
life tend to follow those reminiscent of debates about abortion, some abortion
foes have come out in favor of cloning research. Nancy Reagan, whose husband,
former President Reagan, suffers from Alzheimer's disease, spoke this month in
favor of the research. In a 2002 statement, Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, explained
his support for research by saying, "At the core of my support for regenerative
medicine research is my belief that human life requires and begins in a mother's
nurturing womb."

   The majority of the scientific community supports the view that cloning
research should be allowed to move forward. For example, the Coalition for the
Advancement of Medical Research includes many patient and research groups,
including a number of universities and medical schools.

   Because they have the potential to be coaxed into becoming any kind of cell,
from a spinal cord cell to an insulin-producing cell to help diabetics,
embryonic stem cells show promise for helping devise treatments for diseases
that have resisted other cures. Several Louisiana researchers said that if the
Legislature passes a ban on embryonic stem cell research, it could send a signal
to biotechnology companies that Louisiana is not pro-science.

   During the administration of former Gov. Mike Foster, the state put up $30
million to develop incubators associated with state research laboratories in
Shreveport, Baton Rouge and New Orleans. These incubators, which are still being
developed, are intended to provide space for small biotech businesses to set up
headquarters and develop products, possibly based on the research developed at
the nearby universities.

   "There is great potential and great promise in this (stem cell) area," said
Jack Sharp, president of the Biomedical Research Foundation of Northwest
Louisiana, a nonprofit group that is helping to attract businesses to the
Shreveport incubator. The foundation also works to commercialize technology
developed at the LSU Health Sciences Center in Shreveport.

   Sending a message

   If legislation to ban research becomes law, Sharp said his group would have a
harder time recruiting companies. "Companies would be looking for adjacency to
institutions with research they could draw from," he said. "If other states are
allowing it, they will want to be near that activity."

   That might be a boon to California and New Jersey, which have passed
legislation allowing scientists to engage in embryonic stem cell research.
Lawmakers in New Jersey intend to put $50 million into the area. Research
proponents in California propose to be even more aggressive, collecting more
than a million signatures to put an initiative on the ballot that asks voters to
approve $3 billion in bond sales to pay for state universities to delve into
such research.

   "I think few doubt the future of medicine is in biotechnology," said Michael
West, the chief executive officer of Advanced Cell Technology, a
Massachusetts-based company that works in the stem cell field. If the California
initiative passes, he said his company would likely relocate there. But some
opponents of embryonic stem cell research question whether the economic
development angles are compelling.

   For one thing, they say, the field may fall flat, not producing the cures
that people and patients are hoping for. Plus, translating research into
commercial products is always a risky venture.

   Moreover, though stem cell research is an important component of
biotechnology, there are many other aspects of the field. And much of the work
being done on stem cells is on adult cells or those taken from umbilical cords
or placentas.

   Michigan passed the nation's first ban on embryonic stem cell research in
1998. But in the past three years, more than 70 new biotechnology companies have
opened in the state, said Dorinda Bordlee, who heads the Coalition for Ethical
Stem Cell Research. She also pointed out that a leading researcher from West's
company, Advanced Cell Technology, took a job with Michigan State University.

   Bordlee argued that researchers should focus on adult stem cell research,
which she said has "resulted in scores and scores of actual clinical treatment."
In comparison, embryonic stem cell research is "fruitless," so far failing to
produce clinical treatments, she said.

   Darwin Prockop, director of the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy who works on
treatments to cure severe brittle bone disease using adult stem cells,
disagreed.

   "Science does not support that position," he said, adding that scientists
have not determined whether adult stem cells or embryonic stem cells will
eventually produce better results. The discoveries of people working on
embryonic stem cells helps those working on adult stem cells figure out what
directions to go in, Prockop said. "That is the way science works," he said.

   Stealing talent

   Several universities are trying to move forward with stem cell research, even
without the federal grant money they typically rely on. For example, Harvard
University has a plan to come up with $100 million in private donations to
finance a stem cell institute. The University of Texas' Health Science Center in
Houston recently received a $25 million private donation for its stem cell
program. Researchers warn that if Louisiana passes a ban, its laboratories and
universities could have trouble competing to acquire top talent.

   "If California continues being a haven the way it is and Louisiana passes
prohibitive legislation, you can be sure that your best people will move to
California," said Larry Goldstein, a professor at the University of California
at San Diego School of Medicine, who supports the ballot initiative. "We will
come after them."

   Researchers in the various gene-therapy programs in Louisiana are not working
with embryonic stem cells, but instead stem cells taken from adults. But several
scientists agreed that a ban on embryonic stem cells could hurt attempts to
recruit researchers.

   "It is going to send a message out to young investigators at early stages of
their career who might be movable," said Jeff Gimble, who works on adult stem
cells at the Pennington Biomedical Research Center in Baton Rouge. "It would
make them question what level of support science would have here."

   . . . . . . .

   Laura Maggi can be reached at lmaggi@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-5590.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004


                             433 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Company Discontinues Trial Of Hemophilia Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   In what might be another blow to the field of gene therapy, a small
biotechnology company is discontinuing its closely watched attempt to treat
hemophilia, apparently because its trial ran into technical and safety problems.

    The company, Avigen, said yesterday that it was ending the hemophilia trial
so it could shift its strategic focus to neurological diseases. But it also said
that the hemophilia therapy faced ''certain scientific, regulatory and clinical
hurdles.''

    Dr. Mark A. Kay, a professor at Stanford who was helping conduct the trial,
said some safety issues had arisen. He said he had been asked by Avigen not to
discuss them until the company conducts a conference call with investors this
morning.

    ''There hasn't been anything really severe in regards to patients getting
sick or what have you, but there are some safety hurdles that will have to be
overcome,'' Dr. Kay said. ''There are things in the human trial that weren't
predicted in animal studies.''

    The hemophilia trial was closely watched because the treatment showed some
hints of working, which could have made it one of the first successful gene
therapies. Dogs have been essentially cured of hemophilia using the approach,
and Bayer licensed the rights to Avigen's treatment.

    Gene therapy generally has not worked, and there have been recent safety
problems. In France last year and the year before, two infants who were cured of
a rare immune disorder by gene therapy subsequently developed leukemia linked to
the treatment. And in 1999, a teenager died while undergoing gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania.

    Hemophiliacs lack certain proteins needed for blood to clot. Avigen was
trying to give patients the gene to allow them to produce Factor IX, the
blood-clotting protein lacked by people with hemophilia B, the less common of
the two forms of the disease.

    Gene therapy often uses genetically engineered viruses to carry the desired
gene into patients' cells. The type of virus used by Avigen, known as an
adeno-associated virus, is increasingly used in gene therapy because it is
supposed to be safer than the type of virus used in the trial in which the
teenager died. So if Avigen's issues relate to the virus itself, it could mean
problems for much of the gene therapy field.

    But Avigen said it thought the problems were ''specific to hemophilia.'' Dr.
Kay said he was not sure whether the problems were related to the virus. But he
said that ''all of these issues are solvable'' and that he had ''no doubt'' that
gene therapy for hemophilia could be made to work.

    The trial had run into several safety issues and delays previously. Indeed,
after several years the trial was still in Phase 1, the first of three stages,
and only a handful of patients had been treated.

    The slow progress apparently contributed to a corporate refocusing. The
longtime chief executive, John Monahan, resigned, apparently under pressure, in
March, and was replaced in that post by the chief operating officer, Kenneth
Chahine.

    Avigen's stock, which has been dropping steadily for more than three months,
fell 3 cents yesterday, to $3.90. The company's announcement was made after the
close of trading.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                             434 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Economic Growth Revised Upward for First Quarter
The economy grew slightly faster than previously thought in the first quarter of
this year, the Commerce Department reported, providing fresh evidence of
momentum heading into the summer.

    Gross domestic product from January through March increased at a 4.4 percent
annual rate, the department said. That was an improvement from both the 4.2
percent pace first estimated for the quarter a month ago and the 4.1 percent
growth rate in the final quarter of 2003. [Page C5.]

A better-than-expected report on the gross domestic product helped send stocks
higher. The Dow Jones industrial average was up 95.31 points, at 10,205.20. The
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index was up 6.34 points, at 1,121.28, and the
Nasdaq composite index gained 8.35 points, to 1,984.50. [C7.]

Fewer 'American Idol' Viewers
''American Idol,'' Fox's hit talent contest, finished its season Wednesday night
with another impressive ratings performance, but the show's viewership
significantly trailed that of last year's finale. The two-hour final night of
''Idol'' attracted 28.8 million viewers on Wednesday, making it one of the
most-watched entertainment shows of the season. The winner was Fantasia Barrino,
above. [Page C4.]

Company Ends Gene Therapy Trial
In what might be another blow to the field of gene therapy, a small
biotechnology company is discontinuing its closely watched attempt to treat
hemophilia. [C2.]

Merger Fervor in the Gold Industry
Iamgold expressed interest in buying Wheaton River Minerals in March. Now,
Golden Star Resources wants to buy Iamgold, but not Wheaton River, and Coeur
d'Alene wants to buy Wheaton River, but not Iamgold. [C2.]

Snow's Holdings to Be Reviewed
The Treasury Department inspector general's office will review Secretary John W.
Snow's past ownership of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac debt. [C5.]

Ex-Rite Aid Chief Is Sentenced
The former chief executive of Rite Aid, Martin Grass, was sentenced to eight
years in prison for directing an accounting fraud that prompted the company to
erase $1.6 billion in reported profit. [C11.]

Hollinger to Focus on Telegraph Sale
Hollinger International said that it would focus on selling just its Telegraph
assets, and it has put a $1.1 billion floor on the bidding, according to people
involved with the deal. [C4.]

Costco Earnings Increase 29%
Costco Wholesale posted a better-than-expected 29 percent jump in quarterly
profit, thanks to strong spring sales and tighter cost controls. Analysts have
long criticized Costco for failing to turn its sales performance into profit,
but in the latest quarter, profits increased twice as fast as sales. Shares of
Costco rose 63 cents, or 2 percent, to close at $38.07. [C2.]

U.S. and Bahrain Reach Trade Pact
The United States reached a free trade agreement with Bahrain, the first with a
Middle East nation since President Bush announced his goal of creating a free
trade area for the region. [World Business, Section W.]

Jobless East Germans Are Fleeing
As the former East Germany enters its 14th year of double-digit unemployment,
residents are emigrating west and leaving behind an eerie still-life landscape
of shrinking cities, depression-level unemployment and empty apartments. [World
Business, Section W.]


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PhotoChart: ''YESTERDAY''Dow industrials -- 10,205.20 up 95.31Nasdaq
composite -- 1,984.50 up 8.3510-yr. Treasury yield -- 4.60% down 0.05The euro --
$1.2268 up 0.0151The dollar -- 110.99 yen down 0.76Graph ''TODAY'' shows the
percentage change in personal income from Oct. 2003 - March 2004.April figures
due at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time.Expected: -0.5%Graph tracks the share price of
Costco since last Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                             435 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 24, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 911 words

HEADLINE: Medical research re-examined;
25 years later, protecting the vulnerable still vital

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE mmarchione@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   In the past, it was illiterate black men in the South, poor Mexican-American
women, orphans and the mentally retarded.

   Today it might be prisoners, children with incurable diseases, central city
toddlers, people with certain gene profiles . . . maybe even people on Medicare.

   What they have in common is vulnerability, and a need for protection from
medical research that could intentionally or unintentionally exploit that
vulnerability.

   Twenty-five years ago, 11 men and women sat down to ponder how to protect
such people while allowing scientific research that could benefit humanity to go
forward. They wound up producing the Belmont Report, a set of broad ethical
principles that led to regulations known as the Common Rule for conducting
experiments on humans.

   This month, surviving members of the Belmont Report commission and key
advisers to it met at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Wauwatosa to discuss
how the report and its key principles square with the reality of biomedical
research today and new concerns over privacy and genetic information.

   The meeting was attended by about 300 bioethicists, health care lawyers,
patient advocates and others from around the country, many of whom are involved
in interpreting the Common Rule as it applies to studies that their universities
or hospitals want to conduct.

   In a videotaped message to the group, U.S. Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy G. Thompson said that science and research are important, "but
they are never more important than a human subject."

   Scientists today, he said, still need to follow the Belmont Report's three
guiding principles:

   -- Respect -- allowing people to decide freely whether to participate in
research after being fully informed of risks and benefits.

   -- Beneficence -- watching out for participants' welfare.

   -- Justice -- not exploiting a group or individual.

   It's easy to see why rules were needed. The past is full of examples of
abuse, such as the 40-year-long Tuskegee experiment in which syphilis was
studied in poor black men who were never offered treatment for it, and notorious
experiments on mentally retarded children, orphaned babies and prisoners.

   More recently, the family of Jesse Gelsinger filed suit against researchers
after the Arizona teen died in a gene therapy experiment in 1999, alleging that
researchers hadn't fully informed them of the risks or adequately watched out
for his welfare.

   Some wary of research

   These cases have made many people wary of research, experts at the conference
said.

   "Public trust is not high, and that translates into difficulty in enrolling
subjects" into medical studies, said Bernard Schwetz, director of the federal
Office for Human Research Protections and a former acting commissioner of the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   People who enroll in studies hope to help humankind as well as themselves,
but there is a difference between being a patient and being a research subject,
he said.

   "All research has at least some components that are not intended to be
therapeutic," said Robert Levine, a physician and bioethicist at Yale University
who helped write the Belmont Report.

   For example, study participants may have to endure painful liver biopsies
even though they're only in the placebo group of a study, because treating them
differently than those getting the drug being tested would tip off researchers
to which patients were which and potentially bias the results.

   Sometimes people will accept too much risk because their disease or condition
for which there is no cure or good treatment makes them feel vulnerable.

   "Early on I asked myself, 'From whom do human subjects need to be protected?'
" said Stephen Toulmin, an anthropologist at the University of Southern
California who was chief philosophical consultant to the commission. Sometimes
it's scientists, but sometimes it's themselves, he concluded.

   "Parents are very eager to volunteer their children" if a study offers hope
for an incurable disease, and scientists must be careful not to exploit that
desperation, said Robert Cook, former chief of pediatrics at Johns Hopkins
University and a member of the Belmont Report commission.

   Children especially vulnerable

   Children need special protection because of their inability to give informed
consent themselves, said Patricia King, a lawyer and medical ethicist at
Georgetown University who also was on the commission. For example, she asks, is
it even ethical to do public health research on lead poisoning levels if you
can't take children out of homes where high lead levels are found?

   Prisoners are another vulnerable group because there's such a difference in
power between them and their caretakers that they may not truly be able to
exercise free choice about participating in a study.

   "There are some who say research shouldn't be done in prisons at all," said
the federal government's Schwetz.

   Unfair enticements are another problem. Medicare recipients hard-pressed to
afford drugs may be pressured by their economic circumstances into participating
in a study that gives them medicine, for example.

   Consent forms often are overly technical and full of things that protect
institutions doing the research from lawsuits rather than things that protect
patients, Schwetz said, citing a 107-page consent form he once saw for a
pediatric cancer study.

   Too much regulation can be just as bad as too little, he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2004


                             436 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 5; Book Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: Family Ties

BODY:


    To the Editor:

    I am writing to add to Stephen S. Hall's excellent review of Jonathan
Weiner's book ''His Brother's Keeper: A Story From the Edge of Medicine'' (April
18).

   Because our story, as Jonathan perceives it, depends on my brother Jamie's
meteoric rise and fall for dramatic emphasis, recent events are, unfortunately,
played down. There are two important areas that are ignored in order to add to
the story. Of course, these are the two fundamental themes of the book, the
scientific and the personal.

    Jonathan's book chronicles our exciting attempt to create a gene therapy for
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. When this fails, Jonathan, and indeed all of us,
suffer the inevitable disappointment that follows. However, this marks only the
beginning of Jamie's efforts. Without pausing for breath, he goes on to create
the largest A.L.S. animal-testing facility in the world. His revolutionary
method enabled us to test more drugs in our first year than all published
studies in the history of A.L.S. research.

    The book ends with Jamie seemingly defeated, unable to bear visiting me
because of the progression of my disease. This is the greatest inaccuracy in the
book. Jamie is the one person responsible for my communication with my wife and
son, as well as the outside world. From my wheelchair to my computer to several
unique devices he created, he has drastically improved the quality of my life,
as well as the lives of many A.L.S. patients.

    Between running a large foundation and tending to his new duties as a single
father, Jamie still manages to see me almost every day. The only possible
interpretation of his actions over the past five years is that they have been
heroic.

Stephen Heywood
Newton Highlands, Mass.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                             437 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Book World; T10

LENGTH: 876 words

HEADLINE: Miracle Hunter;
One man's crusade to cure a fatal illness.

BYLINE: Reviewed by Susan Okie

BODY:

   HIS BROTHER'S KEEPER

   A Story From the Edge of Medicine

   By Jonathan Weiner. Ecco. 356 pp. $26.95

     Jamie and Stephen Heywood are companions and cocky, affectionate rivals, in
the familiar way of brothers born two years apart. In their brainy, close-knit
and taciturn New England family, play is the language of love. As boys, they
sneak out together to ride the rapids on a creek during a storm or to play night
laser tag in the woods. As young men living in different cities, they spar
online in computer games. At every family gathering, they arm-wrestle. Oddly, it
is Jamie, the older one, who takes these duels seriously and cares about the
outcome. So it is Jamie who crows with glee one summer day when, to his
surprise, he forces his carpenter brother's mighty right arm to the table.
Neither man realizes that Stephen's defeat is no fluke, but the first indication
of a dreaded ailment: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS, also called Lou
Gehrig's disease. Within two years, Stephen will be diagnosed with early signs
of a nerve-destroying paralysis that slowly robs its victims of strength until
they can no longer talk, then can no longer breathe.

    Jonathan Weiner is a Pulitzer prize-winning science writer whose previous
subjects have been biologists intellectually obsessed with finches and fruit
flies. Jamie Heywood, the central figure in Weiner's superb new book, is also
obsessed -- but what drives Jamie is love and a "maddening hope." When his
younger brother develops ALS, the dream of engineering and delivering a cure to
save Stephen becomes the organizing principle of Jamie's life. The hubris of his
quest is all the more breathtaking because he is not a scientist, but a
charismatic young entrepreneur watching from the sidelines at an especially
optimistic moment in scientific history.

    Even as weakness creeps up and down Stephen's limbs, possible genetic fixes
are being cobbled together and readied for testing in dozens of diseases. Jamie
asks, Why not for Stephen? If Stephen Heywood had fallen ill a decade earlier,
reputable doctors and researchers would have summarily dismissed Jamie's scheme
to devise an experimental gene therapy for ALS and try it on his brother. But in
the late 1990s, several highly regarded scientists and physicians listen and
agree to become acrobats in his high-wire act.

    In His Brother's Keeper, the biology of nerve cells and the dawning history
of gene therapy play supporting roles in a plot as finely crafted as that of the
best novels. Weiner uses the Heywoods' story to illuminate the unexpected ways
in which a serious illness reveals character and shifts the balance within a
family. Stephen Heywood is both brave and enigmatic: The center of a storm, he
manages to downplay the terrifying reality of his disease while staying solidly
connected with those he loves. The Heywood parents, John and Peggy, lend
financial and emotional support to Jamie's headlong campaign but seem to remain
clear-eyed, without false hopes. Jamie's wife, Melinda, and Stephen's fiancée,
Wendy, give voice, aloud and in their journal scribblings, to the fear, guilt
and anger of which the Heywoods themselves never speak.

    But it is Jamie who fascinates. He draws the reader into Weiner's tale the
way he drew scientists onto his team -- and drew Weiner himself into his family
and into his obsession. Jamie's brilliance and energy are at first dazzling,
then unsettling. The longer Weiner follows the story, the more ambiguous Jamie's
motives appear, and the more bizarre seems his wish to inject a virtually
untested treatment into his brother's nervous system. Meanwhile, the nation's
early optimism about gene therapy is dashed by the death of a teenager in a
medical experiment in Philadelphia, the same city where Jamie's scientific
collaborators have been busily engineering genes to treat Stephen's ALS.

    Weiner has a master's eye for the telling detail and a spare, often poetic
style. His terse recounting of the seminal advances and setbacks in genetic
engineering in the late 1990s provides the scientific counterpoint to the
Heywood family drama. His Brother's Keeper could be considered the third volume
of a trilogy that began with The Beak of the Finch, Weiner's chronicle of
biologists watching bird evolution in the Galapagos, and continued with Time,
Love, Memory, his probing of the genetic basis of behavior. In this book he
brings the biology home, asking whether the revolution in our understanding of
genetics can and should be harnessed at will to save a brother or to create a
child.

    The larger question is whether we will be able to use what we are learning
to make us more fully human, or whether our new knowledge and power will
obstruct that journey. "I wanted what I had seen and felt when I was small to
have some connection with what I would see, learn and know in the end," Weiner
writes. "I thought the whole human race wanted something like that. The
beginning, middle and end should make one unbroken story. The stem should lead
up to the rim of a cup from which we can drink and still be ourselves." *

   Susan Okie is a science reporter currently on leave from the Washington Post.
Her book about fighting the childhood obesity epidemic will be published in
early 2005.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                             438 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: COLUMNS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1004 words

HEADLINE: Techies harness business potential

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

BODY:

   It was the meeting of mice and meat.

   Imagine lab-engineered "super-smelling" mice whose noses are 10,000 times
more sensitive than those of their peers. And imagine these mice trained to
detect bombs or even people buried under rubble after a disaster.

   What about a quick way to detect mad cow disease in meat or in cattle feed?
Or a bandage for sports enthusiasts that radiates the wound to speed healing?

   Out-of-the-box and timely technology research under way at 13 Florida
universities was on display - and under review for possible commercialization -
at Florida's first statewide conference on technology transfer this week in
downtown St. Petersburg.

   Two broad areas of research dominated the inaugural conference: homeland
security and anti-cancer projects. And why not? That's where the funding dollars
are. Researcher after researcher noted their work was supported in part by the
military or by big pharmaceutical companies looking for the next blockbuster
drug.

   The two-day meeting attracted a crowd of 400 university researchers, business
entrepreneurs, intellectual property lawyers, venture capitalists and even
"scouts" paid by corporations to prowl university research labs and meetings
like this one to find the next big thing - or at least something that might
prove profitable as a business product.

   "I met a young man, a corporate technology scout from Applied NanoSystems in
Austin, who complained there were so many things to see at the meeting that he
could not look at them all," said David Day, director of the University of
Florida's office of technology licensing and a veteran of the
convert-research-to-business wars.

   Were any deals done? None were announced. But there was plenty of
conversation among researchers, university tech transfer directors (the folks
who help "sell" their university's most commercially promising research),
investors and businesses.

   The meeting also gave the Tampa Bay area a brief glimpse at Florida's own big
biotech bet: the $500-million-plus commitment of public funds to bring a version
of California's Scripps Research Institute to West Palm Beach.

   "The Florida model for Scripps is to leverage its San Diego success, to
diversify the Florida economy and to create an engine of growth in the state,"
said John Kozarich, a bioscience professor at Scripps and the president of
ActivX Biosciences, a pharmaceutical firm based in La Jolla, Calif. It's a
spin-off based on the research of Benjamin Cravatt at nearby Scripps.

   No conference of this kind would be complete without the Great Retelling of
the most successful technology transfer deal in Florida history. It was a tale
told Wednesday by Charles Linzner, a vice president of the giant drug company
Bristol-Myers Squibb, of how research first done at Florida State University
turned into the powerful and mega-selling anti-cancer drug called Taxol.

   Via royalties and licensing agreements, Taxol has generated more than
$300-million to FSU since the mid 1990s.

   Linzner told his audience that, in all, Bristol-Myers had 250 Taxol licensing
agreements with 80 different academic and government institutions. By 2002, he
said, his company had spent $1-billion on the drug.

   But every drug has its day. For Bristol-Myers, sales of Taxol rose 9 percent
last year to $934-million. International sales of Taxol were $882-million, up 23
percent from 2002. But domestic sales of Taxol last year fell 62 percent to just
$52-million. Why? Competition from generic drugs.

   That's why businesses - especially the giant drug companies known as Big
Pharma - must constantly haunt university labs searching for promising drugs.

   Which brings us back to the research on super-smelling mice, among other
unusual projects:

   FSU's Dr. Debra Ann Fadool, in collaboration with Yale University, outlined
how her research mice with the super-sensitive noses might be new soldiers in
the homeland security effort. After a cartoon depicting her mice at airport
security appeared in an American Scientist article, Fadool said she received
hundreds of e-mails inquiring about the use of such mice for detecting
explosives.

   The mice do have some advantages over bomb-sniffing dogs. They breed quickly,
they can be trained in two weeks, they can search in tight spaces and - if lost
- there is less emotional attachment to them than to dogs, she said.

   Another FSU researcher, Dr. Peggy Hsieh, discussed how her work helped
identify contamination in meats, including mad cow disease, and animal feeds.
Some of her work is used in products already offered by a company called Elisa
Technologies in Gainesville.

   At the University of South Florida in St. Petersburg, marine microbiologist
Dr. John H. Paul outlined research that allowed easier monitoring of pollution
and Red Tide contamination in coastal waters. Paul and his team developed
hand-held monitors that can assess ocean water quality. And they are working on
monitors that act like buoys and will be able to transmit water quality
information back to a central station.

   These are just a few examples of the multitude of interesting and, yes, at
times nearly incomprehensible research presentations.

   Speaker Sue Washer, chief executive of Applied Genetic Technologies Corp. in
Alachua, Fla., strongly urged university researchers to learn how to talk in
plain English to potential business partners. Several months ago, Washer's
company closed on $15.25-million in new funding - big bucks by Florida standards
- from the venture capital firm InterWest Partners. The drug research company
develops gene therapy treatment to help treat emphysema.

   For a first-time statewide tech transfer meeting, this gathering deserved a
big thumbs up. "This is a meeting of geeks," said one satisfied attendee, Eric
Coffin of St. Peterburg's Engineering Matrix Inc.

   What higher words of praise? Next year's conference in Orlando should build
on this strong start.

   - Robert Trigaux can be reached at trigaux@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8405.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                             439 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                May 19, 2004 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1005 words

HEADLINE: Techies harness business potential

SERIES: COLUMN

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

BODY:

   It was the meeting of mice and meat.

   Imagine lab-engineered "super-smelling" mice whose noses are 10,000 times
more sensitive than those of their peers. And imagine these mice trained to
detect bombs or even people buried under rubble after a disaster.

   What about a quick way to detect mad cow disease in meat or in cattle feed?
Or a bandage for sports enthusiasts that radiates the wound to speed healing?

   Out-of-the-box and timely technology research under way at 13 Florida
universities was on display - and under review for possible commercialization -
at Florida's first statewide conference on technology transfer this week in
downtown St. Petersburg.

   Two broad areas of research dominated the inaugural conference: homeland
security and anti-cancer projects. And why not? That's where the funding dollars
are. Researcher after researcher noted their work was supported in part by the
military or by big pharmaceutical companies looking for the next blockbuster
drug.

   The two-day meeting attracted a crowd of 400 university researchers, business
entrepreneurs, intellectual property lawyers, venture capitalists and even
"scouts" paid by corporations to prowl university research labs and meetings
like this one to find the next big thing - or at least something that might
prove profitable as a business product.

   "I met a young man, a corporate technology scout from Applied NanoSystems in
Austin, who complained there were so many things to see at the meeting that he
could not look at them all," said David Day, director of the University of
Florida's office of technology licensing and a veteran of the
convert-research-to-business wars.

   Were any deals done? None were announced. But there was plenty of
conversation among researchers, university tech transfer directors (the folks
who help "sell" their university's most commercially promising research),
investors and businesses.

   The meeting also gave the Tampa Bay area a brief glimpse at Florida's own big
biotech bet: the $500-million-plus commitment of public funds to bring a version
of California's Scripps Research Institute to West Palm Beach.

   "The Florida model for Scripps is to leverage its San Diego success, to
diversify the Florida economy and to create an engine of growth in the state,"
said John Kozarich, a bioscience professor at Scripps and the president of
ActivX Biosciences, a pharmaceutical firm based in La Jolla, Calif. It's a
spin-off based on the research of Benjamin Cravatt at nearby Scripps.

   No conference of this kind would be complete without the Great Retelling of
the most successful technology transfer deal in Florida history. It was a tale
told Wednesday by Charles Linzner, a vice president of the giant drug company
Bristol-Myers Squibb, of how research first done at Florida State University
turned into the powerful and mega-selling anti-cancer drug called Taxol.

   Via royalties and licensing agreements, Taxol has generated more than
$300-million to FSU since the mid 1990s.

   Linzner told his audience that, in all, Bristol-Myers had 250 Taxol licensing
agreements with 80 different academic and government institutions. By 2002, he
said, his company had spent $1-billion on the drug.

   But every drug has its day. For Bristol-Myers, sales of Taxol rose 9 percent
last year to $934-million. International sales of Taxol were $882-million, up 23
percent from 2002. But domestic sales of Taxol last year fell 62 percent to just
$52-million. Why? Competition from generic drugs.

   That's why businesses - especially the giant drug companies known as Big
Pharma - must constantly haunt university labs searching for promising drugs.

   Which brings us back to the research on super-smelling mice, among other
unusual projects:

   FSU's Dr. Debra Ann Fadool, in collaboration with Yale University, outlined
how her research mice with the super-sensitive noses might be new soldiers in
the homeland security effort. After a cartoon depicting her mice at airport
security appeared in an American Scientist article, Fadool said she received
hundreds of e-mails inquiring about the use of such mice for detecting
explosives.

   The mice do have some advantages over bomb-sniffing dogs. They breed quickly,
they can be trained in two weeks, they can search in tight spaces and - if lost
- there is less emotional attachment to them than to dogs, she said.

   Another FSU researcher, Dr. Peggy Hsieh, discussed how her work helped
identify contamination in meats, including mad cow disease, and animal feeds.
Some of her work is used in products already offered by a company called Elisa
Technologies in Gainesville.

   At the University of South Florida in St. Petersburg, marine microbiologist
Dr. John H. Paul outlined research that allowed easier monitoring of pollution
and Red Tide contamination in coastal waters. Paul and his team developed
hand-held monitors that can assess ocean water quality. And they are working on
monitors that act like buoys and will be able to transmit water quality
information back to a central station.

   These are just a few examples of the multitude of interesting and, yes, at
times nearly incomprehensible research presentations.

   Speaker Sue Washer, chief executive of Applied Genetic Technologies Corp. in
Alachua, Fla., strongly urged university researchers to learn how to talk in
plain English to potential business partners. Several months ago, Washer's
company closed on $15.25-million in new funding - big bucks by Florida standards
- from the venture capital firm InterWest Partners. The drug research company
develops gene therapy treatment to help treat emphysema.

   For a first-time statewide tech transfer meeting, this gathering deserved a
big thumbs up. "This is a meeting of geeks," said one satisfied attendee, Eric
Coffin of St. Peterburg's Engineering Matrix Inc.

   What higher words of praise? Next year's conference in Orlando should build
on this strong start.

- Robert Trigaux can be reached at trigaux@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8405.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                             440 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              May 16, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: METRO - EDITORIAL; Stephanie Grace; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: Fine, just don't go cloning the politicians

BYLINE: Stephanie Grace

BODY:

   It's a good bet that most members of the Louisiana Legislature don't think
it's a good idea to clone people. Really, who does, other than the aspiring mad
scientists among us?

   The debate over legislation to ban human cloning, though, has taken a
fascinating turn, one that has plunged the Legislature into an emotional
discussion being echoed across the country  --  and that has left the social
conservatives who generally hold the upper hand in Baton Rouge in a precarious
position.

   In the House last week, a far-reaching anti-cloning bill was amended to
permit so-called "therapeutic cloning," a procedure that can lead to the
creation of embryonic stem cells, which in turn may be used to develop
potentially revolutionary treatments for diabetes, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and
other diseases. The House approved the amendment, sponsored by Rep. Eric
LaFleur, D-Ville Platte, prompting the bill's original sponsor, Rep. Gary Beard,
R-Baton Rouge, to table it.

   Over in the Senate, one committee passed a bill by physician and Senate
President Don Hines, D-Bunkie, that tracks LaFleur's amendment, while a bill by
Sen. Art Lentini, R-Kenner, that echoes Beard's remained stalled in committee.

   Like the parallel controversy over research using existing embryonic stem
cells that are languishing in the nation's fertility clinics, this fight pits
major medical groups and disease-fighting foundations against those who think
any procedure that destroys an embryo  --  actually, therapeutic cloning
involves unfertilized eggs  --  is wrong.

   And like that debate, the traditional lines aren't necessarily holding.

   Recently, national stem cell research proponents added a new public champion:
Nancy Reagan, who cited the heartbreak of slowly losing her husband, still so
revered in conservative circles, to Alzheimer's. Reagan and a long list of
members of Congress, including some vocal abortion opponents, have asked
President Bush to loosen the federal government's tight restrictions on funding
research. Reagan has also reportedly quietly lobbied against congressional
attempts to ban therapeutic cloning, including a bill co-sponsored by U.S. Sen.
Mary Landrieu.

   Meanwhile, "states are being divided very quickly into those who ban it and
those who don't," according to Darwin Prockop, director of the Tulane Center for
Gene Therapy. Prockop's own research involves adult stem cells, which are not
part of the controversy, but he thinks prohibiting therapeutic cloning here
would inhibit the state's ability to attract researchers and take part in
cutting edge science.

   On the one side are New Jersey and California, both biotech industry centers,
which are actively encouraging stem cell research. Other states, including
Michigan and Iowa, have restricted therapeutic cloning.

   Louisiana would certainly seem a good bet to join that list, but dissension
in the conservative ranks might keep that from happening.

   Republican state Rep. Peppi Bruneau of New Orleans voted for LaFleur's
amendment, saying he was swayed both by diabetes research advocates and by Nancy
Reagan's pleas. So did Jim Tucker, another New Orleans Republican, who said the
research "can save many, many lives."

   On the Senate side, Sen. Tom Schedler, R-Mandeville, was part of a unanimous
Health and Welfare committee voice vote in favor of Hines' bill, although he
said he would also vote for Lentini's. Schedler, a recently diagnosed diabetic
who considers himself "consistently pro-life," admits the issue has given him
some sleepless nights, putting his religious convictions directly at odds with
his feeling that stem cell research "could be used for some tremendously good
purposes."

   "I would be lying if I told you this did not give me heartburn," he said.

   Lentini too said he sympathizes with parents of diabetic children, and
children of Alzheimer's patients. But he said he just can't make the leap.

   "You cannot end a human life in order to possibly benefit another human
life...I and many others consider the embryo as the having the same rights as a
born human being," he said.

   Lentini hopes to amend therapeutic cloning out of Hines' bill before the full
Senate votes on it  --  basically the reverse of what happened in the House.
Gov. Kathleen Blanco, meanwhile, hasn't taken sides.

   Still, Hines is feeling pretty encouraged.

   "Before, I don't think the members understood the bill. It sounded like
something real sinister," he said. "The potential that this thing has for
relieving suffering and disease is the overriding factor. . . . When you realize
the good that can come out of this, it's amazing."

   . . . . . . .

   Stephanie Grace is a staff writer. She may be reached at (504) 826-3383 or at
sgrace@timespicayune.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2004


                             441 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     May 13, 2004, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1552 words

HEADLINE: LAPSES CITED IN HARVARD CLINIC TRIALS

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:
[PUBLISHED CORRECTION - DATE: Wednesday, May 19,2004: Correction : Because of a
reporting error, a Page One story Thursday about ethical lapses in Harvard
Medical School research incorrectly described another institution where the
federal government has found similar problems. The Office of Human Research
Protections identified ethical lapses in social sciences research at the
University of Texas at Austin. That university has no medical school.

   Federal health officials recently found ethical lapses in eight Harvard
Medical School experiments involving human subjects and have asked the school to
enact measures that would heighten protections for patients involved in clinical
trials there.

   The lapses involved errors by the medical school's institutional review
board, or IRB, a 12-member ethics panel that reviews all planned experiments to
make sure human subjects are protected and understand the risks involved.


       No patients were hurt in the Harvard experiments cited. Two of the
experiments are taking place abroad, in China and Tanzania.

   The lapses were found in a random government audit, which reviewed 25
experiments conducted over the last four years.

   According to a summary of the audit obtained by the Globe, the Harvard IRB
mistakenly approved six experiments in which patients were given inadequate or
confusing consent forms, the documents that spell out the risks of participating
in a medical experiment. In another case, the IRB failed to conduct a second
review of an experiment that had been modified by researchers after an initial
review. In one case, a scientist launched an experiment involving human subjects
without any review, a serious lapse that the IRB caught but failed to report to
federal health officials.

   The federal government also determined that the Harvard IRB panel was too
dominated by white males, lacking the racial and gender diversity reflective of
patients that participate in clinical trials.

   Harvard has admitted to the lapses. In a recently submitted letter to the
federal government, provided to the Globe, medical school officials "acknowledge
the need to improve and enhance our existing program and to address the concerns
you raised with appropriate corrective action plans."

   The letter outlined plans for more aggressive IRB reviews at Harvard. It also
noted that the medical school plans to add black and Asian members to the IRB
"within the next several months."

   The government audit was part of an effort by federal regulators to improve
ethical standards at the nation's medical schools and hospitals, said federal
officials. They have investigated two other comparable medical schools in recent
months, the University of Alabama at Birmingham and the University of Texas at
Austin, finding a relatively similar set of IRB lapses. [SEE CORRECTION ABOVE

   Harvard and federal officials described the audit process as amicable. The
case will remain open until federal officials are satisfied with Harvard's
response. A spokeswoman for the Office of Human Research Protections, which
conducted the audit, refused to comment on the Harvard case.

   Dr. Raphael Dolin, Harvard Medical School's dean for academic and clinical
programs said: "There's no real controversy involved here. The recommendations
they've made we think will strengthen our program."

   The lapses described appear to be mild in comparison to recent ethical
scandals at other institutions, most notably at the University of Pennsylvania,
where researchers did not fully disclose the risks of a gene therapy experiment
that led to a teenage boy's death in 1999. That case prompted much of the
federal government's effort to police clinical trials.

   Medical research at Harvard is widely considered guided by a model of ethical
conduct, and the lapses at Harvard would probably turn up at any medical school
examined, said medical ethics specialists. Nonetheless, they illustrate the
complexities involved in protecting human subjects.

   "The larger message is the prevention of any kind of risk to subjects
involved in human research," said Dr. Carolyn M. Connelly, Harvard Medical
School's director of research subject protection. "What we need to do, and
continue to do, is educate researchers on how to do research and protect
subjects."

   The audit was conducted by the Office of Human Research Protections, a branch
of the US Department of Health and Human Services. The office performs "several"
random audits annually, according to a spokeswoman.

   Four agency officials arrived at Harvard's medical school campus in Boston on
March 17. Harvard gave them a list of about 400 IRB-reviewed experiments run by
the medical school. The auditors selected 25 and spent nearly three days
reviewing paperwork and interviewing Harvard scientists and administrators.
Their prime concern was the IRB's performance.

   Every hospital and medical school that conducts research on humans must have
an institutional review board. At Harvard, the 12-member panel is split between
scientists and laypeople, including a lawyer, a retired nurse, and a rabbi. All
but two have Harvard affiliations, working for one of the many schools or
hospitals connected to the university. All are unpaid, and meet monthly to
review cases. The federal investigators generally praised their work.

   Neither the federal government nor Harvard would reveal the scientists
involved in the experiments with ethical lapses.

   One experiment used anonymous survey data about gambling habits taken in
another state, according to Harvard officials. The researcher began working with
the data without IRB approval, believing anonymous data didn't require it. The
IRB flagged the researcher, but failed to report its finding to the federal
health officials, drawing a rebuke.

   Another experiment involved a pilot study in Shanghai on improving treatment
of patients with depression. During an initial review, the IRB asked for more
information about how researchers would deal with potentially suicidal subjects,
pregnant women, and those stigmatized by their families and communities. The IRB
gave the go-ahead to the project before getting those answers, according to the
audit summary. Harvard has promised to follow the rules more closely in these
types of cases.

      Two years ago, three Harvard-affiliated institutions were criticized by
the Office of Human Research Protections for lax patient protections during
genetic research experiments in China. That case, which federal officials
consider far more serious than the recent Harvard audit, was launched after a
Harvard whistleblower made specific allegations.

   Another experiment cited in the recent audit was a study of how villages in
Tanzania cope with HIV. The consent form should have been written at a
fourth-grade reading level, but contained such words as "participation,"
"organized," and "assessment," which federal officials deemed possibly confusing
for the test subjects signing it.

   Medical ethics requires that patients fully comprehend the risks of any
experiment before they agree to participate. Harvard said it will retain a local
grade-school teacher to review consent forms intended for patients with limited
education.

   Two other experiments were cited for overly complex consent forms a small
immune-system study and a dental experiment. Another experiment compared
chiropractic treatment to acupuncture and to standard therapies for lower back
pain. The consent form read: "We anticipate no harm associated with this
survey." But the government determined there were risks and that this was not an
"adequate description."

   The government also found other minor problems in the consent forms for two
other experiments involving a survey on medical school curriculums and heart
disease.

   But the government assertion that Harvard's IRB lacked diversity caused the
most concern at the medical school.

   "We are looking to increase our racial diversity," said Margaret L. Dale,
Harvard's associate dean for faculty affairs. At the time of the audit, three of
12 IRB members were women, and one member was a minority. Federal officials said
increased diversity would improve the IRB's ability to monitor experiments,
which typically involve patients from a broad array of social groups. Harvard
has since added a female member. The school is looking to add two black and one
Asian member in the coming months, said medical school officials.

   Harvard officials said they have been working closely with federal officials
to enact the suggested improvements. In addition, government ethics specialists
plan seminars on patient protections at Harvard. The federal Office of Human
Research Protections recently received Harvard's reply and will respond soon,
though the case could remain open for months.

   "We don't usually set a time frame," said an agency spokeswoman, Patricia
El-Hinnawy.

   Boston University medical ethicist George Annas said: "You could go to any
IRB in the country and find this stuff."

   Annas faulted one aspect of the audit. "What you'd like to see them do is go
talk to some research subjects," he said. "How were they taken care of? Did they
know what they were getting into?"


   Raja Mishra can be reached at rmishra@globe.com.


LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                             442 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A04

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: WASHINGTON IN BRIEF

BODY:

   The Senate, nearing its first major update to special education since 1997,
agreed yesterday  to accelerate spending on disabled children but refused to
lock in specific increases.

    Senators considered  competing plans to fulfill the promise Congress made
almost three decades ago: to provide federal funding to cover 40 percent of the
cost of educating children with special needs.

    States and school districts must pay for whatever Congress does not. That
can amount to billions of dollars for teachers, training, supplies and
construction.

   Spending is the major sticking point in the renewal of the Individuals With
Disabilities Education Act, the 1975 law guaranteeing equal education to
children with disabilities. As many as 6.7 million students are in special
education.

    Senators of both parties agree on the underlying bill, which aims to improve
identification and intervention for  those with disabilities, simplify paperwork
for teachers, reduce lawsuits by parents and give schools more flexibility.

    The Senate is likely to pass the bill today,  aides said.

   Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, will pay a $3.1 million
fine to settle a Clean Water Act violation stemming from excessive storm-water
runoff from its construction sites,  federal officials said.

    Wal-Mart also agreed in the settlement with the Environmental Protection
Agency and Justice Department to improve runoff controls at the more than 200
sites each year where the company builds stores, including Sam's Club outlets.

    Wal-Mart spokesman Gus Whitcomb said the company, based in Bentonville,
Ark., will make changes at its construction sites.

    Storm-water runoff carries sediment and dirt into waterways, killing fish,
destroying habitat and blocking light that spurs growth of beneficial plant
life. The runoff  can contain pesticides, chemicals, solvents and other toxic
substances.

    The settlement cites Wal-Mart violations at 24 construction sites.

   Researchers who use human subjects in medical and scientific experiments
should set up careful reviews of their work that are independent of any
potential for profit, the government said.

    New guidance from the Department of Health and Human Services said every
experiment involving people should be reviewed for financial conflicts of
interest.

    HHS has been examining the use of human research volunteers since the death
in 1999 of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, during a gene therapy experiment. His doctors
stood to profit from the gene therapy.

    The issue has become increasingly important as academic scientists set up
companies to exploit their research.

    --  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                             443 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             May 12, 2004 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Editorial Pages Desk; Part B; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Moral Ramifications of Stem Cell Controversy

BODY:

   I cannot thank The Times enough for publishing the story about Nancy Reagan
calling for more research with stem cells in order to find a cure for
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease (May 9). This issue is extremely
important. For a while, I thought that I was the only Republican who was angry
with President Bush's policy against stem cell research. How could anybody in
his or her right mind be opposed to such a great endeavor? What could be the
reason for such ignorance?

   To be against this important research because of this silly notion that a
stem cell is a human being is unthinkable. When the male sperm unites with the
female egg, this gamete is about the size of a period at the end of a sentence.
It is barely visible to the naked eye. To call this organism a baby or a human
being is just plain ignorance. Now I know why Ronald Reagan loves this woman so
deeply.

   James R. Buch

   Redondo Beach

   *

   Nancy Reagan has joined the ranks of people urging increased funding for stem
cell research. We need a cure for the horrible disease that has ravaged the mind
of her husband. But serious moral questions still exist over the harvesting of
stem cells from human embryos.

   Where is the justification for such research? How many human victims of
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, spinal cord injuries, multiple sclerosis, heart
disease, diabetes, etc., have actually been cured or improved by the use of stem
cells?

   Some might say that a good end never justifies an evil means, and the
destruction of a human embryo is an evil means. But can we be sure that there's
even a good end in sight? Or should stem cell funding be applied instead to new
drug research, new surgical techniques, gene therapy, etc.? Sooner or later,
someone will have to address this question in detail.

   Barbara Schenach

   Thomas Schenach

   Huntington Beach

   *

   As great as it is to have Reagan speak up for stem cell research, I ask where
was she when her husband was president? We so often see people speak out after
something directly affects them. Why can't these people see the pain in others
and act? If more of them had, maybe they could have prevented the cuts her own
husband made in the budgets of things such as Alzheimer's research.

   Kelwin Hagen

   Los Angeles

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER: Gary Viskupic Tribune Media Svcs.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2004


                             444 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 10, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 929 words

HEADLINE: Her painless ;
Her painless, dangerous world;
Girl's rare nerve disorder blocks signals to brain

BYLINE: JOSHUA FREED Associated Press

BODY:

   Elk River, Minn. -- Gabby Gingras was about a day old when a nurse pricked
her heel to draw blood -- a sting that makes most newborns howl. Gabby slept
through it.

   What a good baby, her parents thought.

   When Gabby teethed, she gnawed on her fingers until they were bloody. One
day, as her father massaged her gums with his finger, she bit him, hard. When he
reflexively yanked his finger back, one of Gabby's teeth came with it. She
didn't cry.

   When it comes to pain, she never does.

   An extremely rare nerve disorder called hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy Type 5 keeps pain sensations from reaching Gabby's brain. Gabby, now
3, simply does not feel injuries that would make others cry out.

   Pain protects us

   That might not sound so bad to anyone who has ever stubbed a toe. But it's
ruinous for Gabby's health. Pain is what keeps a child from poking her finger
straight into her eye, as Gabby has done, repeatedly. Pain is why we limp to
favor a twisted ankle, so it can heal. Pain teaches children to recoil from a
hot stove.

   When Gabby was teething, "she would chew on her fingers until they were
bloody," her father, Steve Gingras, recalled. "She would chew on her tongue like
bubble gum."

   Without the pain that could prevent it, Gabby has injured herself over and
over.

   She broke several teeth by chewing on plastic toys before her parents knew
what her condition was. The ones that didn't break were pulled or lost when
doctors removed part of a broken jaw that had been weakened by a bacterial
infection.

   As a toddler, Gabby poked and scratched her eyes, oblivious to the damage she
was doing. Her parents worked with her doctors, frantic to get her to stop.
Nothing worked until Steve, ignoring a doctor who told him they wouldn't work,
bought a pair of ordinary swimming goggles.

   Gabby wears her "glasses" 24 hours a day, and her right eye has begun to heal
now that she keeps her fingers out of it.

   But the goggles were too late for her left eye. Cataracts ruined it, a side
effect of medication Gabby took for the scratches on her cornea. It has swelled
to about twice the size of her right eye, where her vision has been measured at
20-300.

   Gabby's condition baffled her doctors before it was diagnosed.

   As she continued to hurt herself during her first year, her parents decided
that they had just as good a chance of figuring out what was wrong with her as
her doctors did. So while Gabby visited neurologists, Trish, an editor at a
trade journal before she quit her job after Gabby's birth, started her own
Internet search for a name for her daughter's condition.

   She found an article in a dental journal about treating symptoms similar to
Gabby's. The children described in the article had bitten their fingers and
tongue, just like Gabby. It described five types of hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy. The first four included symptoms that Gabby didn't have, such as
mental retardation.

   Type 5, however, blocked pain sensation, but didn't cause mental retardation.
Type 5 sufferers also retain their other nerve senses -- heat, cold, vibration
and the ability to perceive movement, which is how you know your foot just
pressed on the gas pedal even though you can't see it.

   A nerve biopsy confirmed that Gabby, then just 12 months old, had HSAN Type
5. Steve and Trish finally knew why their daughter was hurting herself.

   Extreme rarity

   The Type 5 variety is so rare that Peter Dyck, a neurologist at the Mayo
Clinic in Rochester, estimates that 25 people in the United States have HSAN
Type 5 -- taking into account those who have not been diagnosed. Steve and Trish
know of only one other person in this country who has it.

   There are no support groups, no how-to books for parents, little medical
research. And no cure.

   Keeping their children as healthy as possible is the only option for parents
of children with HSAN, Dyck said.

   He was part of a team that classified the five types of HSAN in 1983. One
girl he studied held her hand on a hot stove until her mother smelled the
burning flesh and removed it. The same girl poked a pencil through her cheek.

   In other ways, Gabby is like any other 3-year-old. She hops out of a
preschool minivan with purple paint smeared from her elbow to her wrist from a
butterfly she painted. She loves the "Lion King" movie and books. On request
she'll roar like Mufasa, or mimic Simba's soft growl.

   While playing with her 7-year-old sister, Katie, behind their house in rural
central Minnesota, she points out that the crossed chains of her swing look like
the letter X.

   Dyck said that perhaps someday HSAN can be cured through gene therapy, where
healthy genes would replace the mutated ones that cause the disease. But a
breakthrough, if there is one, could take decades.

   Constant monitoring

   So Steve and Trish rarely let Gabby out of their sight. Every fall brings a
thorough check of her knees, or an inspection for a cut or break that they might
not have noticed.

   The Gingrases recently visited another American HSAN patient, a 24-year-old
woman in Sioux Falls, S.D., who they said was the patient described by Dyck in
the 1983 article.

   The meeting finally allowed the Gingrases to compare notes with another
parent who had a child with the disease. But the meeting was difficult, too.

   The woman is in a wheelchair now, after losing both legs to knee infections
because as a girl she had hurt her knees but didn't know it. She lost her first
leg at age 4.

   "It's discouraging," Steve said. "It's like seeing Gabby in a wheelchair."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                             445 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                       May 9, 2004, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 614 words

HEADLINE: GLOBALWARE SOLUTIONS

BODY:

   GlobalWare Solutions Inc., a Haverhill provider of supply-chain management,
e-commerce, fulfillment, and reverse logistics, has named Michael T. Liess
president. Most recently, Liess was chief operating officer of T/R Systems.


   DEMANTRA

      Demantra, a Waltham provider of marketing and supply-chain planning
solutions, has named Mike Morin executive vice president of worldwide sales and
marketing and Jim Sheehan chief financial officer. In addition, David Lind and
Robert McCloskey have joined the company's sales force. Prior to joining
Demantra, Morin was vice president of worldwide sales at Dirig Software. Sheehan
has been with Demantra since 2002 and most recently served as senior director of
worldwide finance. Previously, Lind held senior-level sales positions with
Agilisys, Synquest, and i2 Technologies. McCloskey held sales positions at Aceva
Technologies, Lilly Software Associates, and SSA.

BTS PARTNERS


      BTS Partners, a telecommunications engineering firm in Boston, has named
Doug Schremp chief technology officer. Prior to joining BTS in 2003, Schremp was
a principal consultant for Predictive Systems.

MASSDEVELOPMENT

      MassDevelopment, the state's economic development authority, has named
Janet L. Hookailo senior vice president of marketing and communications.
Previously, Hookailo was communications director and interim university
relations director at Northeastern University, and earlier, was director of
communications for the Executive Office of Consumer Affairs and Business
Regulation and also for the Massachusetts Office for Children.

TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES

      Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. has named Wayne P. Yetter chairman of the
board to succeed Rodman W. Moorhead III.  Moorhead will remain on TKT's board
and continue to chair its compensation committee. Yetter has served as a
director at TKT since November 1999 and is chairman of its audit committee and a
member of the nominating and corporate governance committee. Yetter is the
former chairman of the board of directors and chief executive of Synavant Inc.,
formerly a subsidiary of IMS Health Inc. He was previously president and chief
executive of Novartis Pharmaceutical Corp. and president and chief executive of
Astra Merck Inc.

STARGEN

      StarGen, a semiconductor company in Marlborough, has named Ernest Grella
director of chip development. He joins StarGen from Fabric Networks, where he
was a founder and vice president of hardware engineering.

WEEI

      WEEI Sports Radio 850 of Boston has named Craig Berkel marketing director.
Prior to joining WEEI, Berkel was the director of corporate and player relations
at Woolf Associates.

AUTHORIA

      Authoria Inc., a Waltham provider of Web-based human resource
communication, has named Elizabeth Ricci vice president of engineering.
Previously, Ricci headed core platform engineering at MatrixOne.

EPSILON

      Epsilon, a relationship marketing company in Wakefield, has named Steven
Roth chief privacy officer. Roth will continue in his position as Epsilon's vice
president of CRM strategy and planning.

COLUBRIS NETWORKS

      Colubris Networks has made the following appointments to its senior
management team: Marty Falaro , vice president of enterprise and channel sales;
Karen Barton , vice president of marketing; and Roger Sands , vice president of
enterprise development. Waltham-based Colubris develops and manufactures
wireless networking products.


      E-mail announcements to who@globe.com; fax to 617-929-3183; or mail to
Who's What Where, The Boston Globe, P.O. Box 55819, Boston, MA 02205-5819.


NOTES:
WHO'S WHAT, WHERE

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2004


                             446 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2004 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             May 5, 2004 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: USF Researchers Pioneer Heart Attack Prevention

BYLINE: GARY HABER, ghaber@tampatrib.com

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

   GENETIC APPROACH PRELIMINARY

   By GARY HABER

   ghaber@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA -- Let's say you're one of the 865,000 Americans who suffered a heart
attack last year.

   If you're lucky, you lived -- but with the fear of a second heart attack.

   You would sleep a lot better if you knew your heart were protected by a
sensor, one capable of recognizing an oncoming attack and releasing a gene that
vastly increases blood flow to keep one from happening.

   A team of scientists at the University of South Florida College of Medicine
led by Ian Phillips, professor of medicine and USF's vice president for
research, is working on this gee-whiz project.

   Phillips' team developed a biosensor that functions like a switch. It trips
when the level of oxygen in the heart drops. It can tell when a lack of blood
flow to the heart, or cardiac ischemia, has caused the level of oxygen to fall.
It then activates a protective gene called heme oxygenase-1 that increases blood
flow. The heme oxygenase-1 turns off when the oxygen level returns to normal.

   In tests with mice, the therapy reduced heart attack damage to heart cell
muscle, according to findings Phillips' team released in a peer-reviewed
journal, Hypertension, in February.

   It could be years before this therapy becomes widely available. First there
will have to be testing in humans, Federal Drug Administration approval and the
backing of a pharmaceutical manufacturer to pay for multimillion-dollar clinical
trials.

   If the therapy makes it to market, it could prove a lifesaver to the 300,000
Americans a year who suffer a second heart attack. It could become an important
way, along with artery-opening stents, of preventing a second heart attack.

   "It is another armament in the arsenal," said Rao Musunuru, a cardiologist at
Regional Medical Center Bayonet Point and immediate past president of the
American Heart Association's Florida-Puerto Rico board of directors.

   Phillips started the project three years ago at the University of Florida,
where he was a professor of cardiology and vice president for research and
graduate programs.

   Phillips has $5.8 million in research grants from the National Institutes of
Health to work on the project. Yao Liang Tang, a postdoctoral fellow Phillips
brought with him from UF, received an $80,000 grant from the American Heart
Association.

   Phillips and his team have garnered national attention.

   Hypertension published a favorable editorial, saying the work could lead to
gene treatment of heart diseases such as hypertrophy and arrhythmia.

   Tang received an outstanding researcher award in April from the
cardiovascular research center at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston for
his work on the project.

   "They've done a substantial amount of work on this very early on, even before
gene therapy attracted the interest it has now," said Roger Hajjar, associate
professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, who selected Tang for the
award.

   Hajjar is not the only one watching the research.

   "The findings are exciting," said Paul Velletri, hypertension group leader at
NIH's Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. "But it's going to take a lot of work to
see if this will be of use in humans."

   Reporter Gary Haber can be reached at (813) 259-8285.

   (CHART) FEAR FACTORS

   These factors can contribute to a heart attack:

   * High blood pressure

   * Obesity

   * Smoking

   * Diabetes

   * Inactivity

   * High cholesterol

   * High triglyceride levels (level of fat in blood)

   Source: American Heart Association

   Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 3 CHART
Tribune photo by JAY CONNER Ian Phillips, left, professor of medicine and USF's
vice president for research, and Yao Liang Tang, a postdoctoral fellow, examine
slides with samples of heart tissue. The two are working on a project to prevent
heart attacks. Tribune photos by JAY CONNER Leping Shen, part of a team at the
University of South Florida College of Medicine, works in a lab in St.
Petersburg. Findings from the team were released in a peer-reviewed journal,
Hypertension. Keping Qian works in gene switch preparation for the project. It
could be years before the therapy becomes widely available.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2004


                             447 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 4, 2004 Tuesday REGION EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-5

LENGTH: 1235 words

BODY:

   Special Events

    n Fifth annual Asthma Fair, 1 to 5 p.m. May 8. Station Square, South Side.
Presentations on asthma triggers, asthma medicines, exercise-induced asthma,
food allergies and allergy-free cooking. Events and activities in the Chevrolet
Amphitheatre. Sponsored by the American Respiratory Alliance of Western
Pennsylvania in partnership with GlaxoSmithKline. For free tickets, call:
1-800-220-1990.

    n"Keeping Kids Healthy & Safe," 1 to 4 p.m. May 8. Chevrolet Amphitheatre at
Station Square, South Side. Children can meet Pluggie the Fire Hydrant, learn to
dial 911, see germs, etc. Sponsored by Clear Channel Communications, AGH Kids,
the American Respiratory Alliance and HealthAmerica. Call: 412-919-8586.

    n"Taking Charge of Lupus" seminar, 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. May 8. Four Points
Sheraton, Greensburg. Keynote speaker: journalist and lupus patient Maureen
Pratt. $15 for Lupus Foundation members; $20 nonmembers. To register:
1-800-800-5776.

    n The 12th annual Komen Pittsburgh Race for the Cure will be held May 9 in
Schenley Park. New this year is chip timing for the 5K run portion of the race.
For registration information and other details, call 412-521-2873 or check the
Web: www.pittsburghraceforthecure.org.

    n A free conference for families: "Treating Children, Helping Families,
Clinical and Research in Psychiatric Care," 8 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. May 7 at William
Pitt Union at University of Pittsburgh. Organized by a mother of a child with
mental illness to help other families. Doctors at Western Psychiatric Institute
& Clinic will give updates on mental illness affecting children. Includes
lunchtime Q&A session with experts. For reservations and details, call Stephanie
Costa at 412-246-5596.

    n "Meeting the Challenge: A Program to Support Seniors and Caregivers," 9
a.m. to 1:30 p.m. May 13. Fox Chapel Yacht Club. A town meeting for seniors,
with workshops. Keynote speaker: National Family Caregivers Association head
Suzanne Geffen Mintz. $7. To receive a brochure or to register: 412-784-4144.

    n "Living with Loss, Healing with Hope" seminar, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. May
12. Mountain View Inn, 1001 Village Drive (off Route 30), Greensburg. Keynote
speaker: Dr. Earl Grollman, national grief counseling expert. Open to the
public. $55. For a brochure or to register: 724-537-1526.

    nFree Medical Teleconference Series for women affected by breast cancer.
Brief presentations followed by Q & A sessions.

    -- Part I: "Understanding the Role of Aromatase Inhibitors," noon to 1:30
p.m. May 12.

    -- Part II: "New Approaches to Breast Cancer Treatment," noon to 1 p.m. June
22.

    Sponsored by Living Beyond Breast Cancer. To register: 1-610-645-4567.

    n"Timmy's Journey to Understand MS," 6 p.m. May 6. The Art Institute of
Pittsburgh Gallery of Art, 420 Boulevard of the Allies, Downtown. Presentation
created by Media Arts & Animation Department faculty and students to help
children of parents with multiple sclerosis understand the disease. Sponsored by
the Allegheny District Chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society and
The Art Institute. Hors d'oeuvres reception, 5:30 p.m. Free. 412-261-6347.

    n Zach Attack & Cadillac Mac Concert, 7 p.m. May 8. Oxford Athletic Club,
1000 Village Club Drive, Pine. Proceeds benefit the Zach Attack and Nathan's
Battle Foundation to fund upcoming gene therapy clinical trials for Batten
Disease. $25 adults, $10 ages 12 and younger, free for ages 5 and younger. For
tickets: 724-452-4330.

    nHealth and Wellness Fair, 4:30 to 6:30 p.m. May 11. The Western
Pennsylvania Hospital School of Nursing auditorium, Bloomfield.  Free
screenings, Medicaid and PACE prescription info, demonstrations, etc.


    Screenings

    nAnxiety and depressive disorders, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. May 5. Boyd Community
Center, 1220 Powers Run Road, O'Hara. Free National Anxiety Disorders Screening
Day event.Call: 412-828-8566, ext. 11.

    For a screening site near you, also visit www.freedomfromfear.org or call:
1-888-442-2022.

    n Allegheny General Hospital also will host depression and anxiety
screenings, 5:30 to 7:30 May 5 at the hospital's Synder Auditorium. For details,
call 412-330-4000.


    Blood Drives

    nTo find a blood drive near you call:

    -- The Central Blood Bank, 412-209-7000 or 1-800-310-9551.

    -- The American Red Cross, 1-800-993-6667.


    Seminars/Lectures

    n"Happy Feet" lecture, 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. May 7. Jewish Community
Center of Greater Pittsburgh, 345 Kane Blvd., Scott. Learn the value of shoe
inserts, the best shoes to buy, treatments for heel pain, etc. $3 JCC members,
$5 nonmembers. Reservation deadline, May 5. Call: 412-278-1975

    n Special programs at Canonsburg General Hospital:

    -- "A New Testing Method for Evaluating Diabetic Neuropathy," 7 p.m. May 11.

    -- "When Mourning Dawns" six-part bereavement series, 6:30 to 8 p.m.
Wednesdays, May 12 to June 16. Free. To register: 1-877-284-2000.

    nFree "A Reason to Hope" presentations, sponsored by UPMC Cancer Centers:

    -- Colorectal cancer, 6 to 7:30 p.m. May 5. Clarion Hotel, 300 Tarentum
Bridge Road, New Kensington. To register: 1-800-533-8762.

    -- Melanoma, 6:30 to 8 p.m. May 11. Hillman Cancer Center, Shadyside. To
register: 412-623-3651.

    n "Second Sight" seminar for persons with macular degeneration, 9:30 to
11:30 a.m. May 8 (registration, 9 a.m.). Waterworks Cinemas, The Waterworks
Mall, 930 Freeport Road, near Aspinwall. Free. Call: 412-683-5300, ext. 219.

    nNatural Vision Improvement, 7 p.m. May 11. East End Food Co-op, 7416 Meade
St., East End. Lecture on how to reduce eyestrain, improve balance and
coordination, etc. Free. Call: 412-242-3598.


    Classes/Workshops

    nStress and Pain Management through "Gentle Yoga," 12:30 p.m. May 7.
Theodore Marchbein Center for the Healing Arts, 2107 Sidney St., Suite B, South
Side. $5 in advance; $7.50 at door. For reservations: 412-481-1021.

    n "Improving Your Health through Stretching and Strengthening Exercises,"
5:30 to 6:30 p.m. May 11. Led by a licensed exercise physiologist. Sponsored by
the Mercy Diabetes Program. To register, call: 1-800-232-5660.

    nFive-week diabetic education classes, 6:30 to 9 a.m. Thursdays, May 6
through June 3. Allegheny Valley Hospital, Harrison. Free. To register:
724-226-7262.

    nMedicare/Medigap Selection workshops, 10:30 a.m. May 6. Allegheny Valley
Hospital, Harrison. Free. To register: 1-877-284-2000.

    n Classes at Canonsburg General Hospital:

    -- Pediatric CPR, 6 to 9 p.m. May 5.  $25.

    -- Basic First Aid, 9 a.m. to noon May 8. $35.

    To register: 1-877-284-2000.

    n"Sexual Responsibility for Sons," 6 to 9 p.m. May 6. Magee-Womens Hospital,
Oakland. A class to ease the dialogue between parents and their sons ages 12 to
15 regarding sexuality. To register: 412-641-4492.


    Support Groups

    nSelf Help Group Network, a service of HelpLine, provides a database of
support groups. Call: 412-255-1155.

    nNew support group for Charcot Marie tooth disease, 1 to 3 p.m. May 8. UPMC
Shadyside, West Wing auditorium. Presentation on current research, sponsored by
the Pittsburgh CMT Association. Charcot Marie is a group of genetic diseases
that cause progressive muscle weaknesses, diminished sensation and atrophy in
outer limbs. Free. For details, call: Janet at 412-761-0910, Newt at
412-683-1741, or 1-877-296-2341.



    -- Compiled by Kathy Samudovsky

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2004


                             448 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 4, 2004 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-5 HEALTH CALENDER

LENGTH: 1232 words

BODY:

   Special Events

    * Fifth annual Asthma Fair, 1 to 5 p.m. May 8. Station Square, South Side.
Presentations on asthma triggers, asthma medicines, exercise-induced asthma,
food allergies and allergy-free cooking. Events and activities in the Chevrolet
Amphitheatre. Sponsored by the American Respiratory Alliance of Western
Pennsylvania in partnership with GlaxoSmithKline. For free tickets, call:
1-800-220-1990.

    * "Keeping Kids Healthy & Safe," 1 to 4 p.m. May 8. Chevrolet Amphitheatre
at Station Square, South Side. Children can meet Pluggie the Fire Hydrant, learn
to dial 911, see germs, etc. Sponsored by Clear Channel Communications, AGH
Kids, the American Respiratory Alliance and HealthAmerica. Call: 412-919-8586.

    * "Taking Charge of Lupus" seminar, 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. May 8. Four Points
Sheraton, Greensburg. Keynote speaker: journalist and lupus patient Maureen
Pratt. $15 for Lupus Foundation members; $20 nonmembers. To register:
1-800-800-5776.

    * The 12th annual Komen Pittsburgh Race for the Cure will be held May 9 in
Schenley Park. New this year is chip timing for the 5K run portion of the race.
For registration information and other details, call 412-521-2873 or check the
Web: www.pittsburghraceforthecure.org.

    * A free conference for families: "Treating Children, Helping Families,
Clinical and Research in Psychiatric Care," 8 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. May 7 at William
Pitt Union at University of Pittsburgh. Organized by a mother of a child with
mental illness to help other families. Doctors at Western Psychiatric Institute
& Clinic will give updates on mental illness affecting children. Includes
lunchtime Q&A session with experts. For reservations and details, call Stephanie
Costa at 412-246-5596.

    * "Meeting the Challenge: A Program to Support Seniors and Caregivers," 9
a.m. to 1:30 p.m. May 13. Fox Chapel Yacht Club. A town meeting for seniors,
with workshops. Keynote speaker: National Family Caregivers Association head
Suzanne Geffen Mintz. $7. To receive a brochure or to register: 412-784-4144.

    * "Living with Loss, Healing with Hope" seminar, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. May
12. Mountain View Inn, 1001 Village Drive (off Route 30), Greensburg. Keynote
speaker: Dr. Earl Grollman, national grief counseling expert. Open to the
public. $55. For a brochure or to register: 724-537-1526.

    * Free Medical Teleconference Series for women affected by breast cancer.
Brief presentations followed by Q & A sessions.

    -- Part I: "Understanding the Role of Aromatase Inhibitors," noon to 1:30
p.m. May 12.

    -- Part II: "New Approaches to Breast Cancer Treatment," noon to 1 p.m. June
22.

    Sponsored by Living Beyond Breast Cancer. To register: 1-610-645-4567.

    * "Timmy's Journey to Understand MS," 6 p.m. May 6. The Art Institute of
Pittsburgh Gallery of Art, 420 Boulevard of the Allies, Downtown. Presentation
created by Media Arts & Animation Department faculty and students to help
children of parents with multiple sclerosis understand the disease. Sponsored by
the Allegheny District Chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society and
The Art Institute. Hors d'oeuvres reception, 5:30 p.m. Free. 412-261-6347.

    * Zach Attack & Cadillac Mac Concert, 7 p.m. May 8. Oxford Athletic Club,
1000 Village Club Drive, Pine. Proceeds benefit the Zach Attack and Nathan's
Battle Foundation to fund upcoming gene therapy clinical trials for Batten
Disease. $25 adults, $10 ages 12 and younger, free for ages 5 and younger. For
tickets: 724-452-4330.

    * Health and Wellness Fair, 4:30 to 6:30 p.m. May 11. The Western
Pennsylvania Hospital School of Nursing auditorium, Bloomfield.  Free
screenings, Medicaid and PACE prescription info, demonstrations, etc.


    Screenings

    * Anxiety and depressive disorders, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. May 5. Boyd Community
Center, 1220 Powers Run Road, O'Hara. Free National Anxiety Disorders Screening
Day event.Call: 412-828-8566, ext. 11.

    For a screening site near you, also visit www.freedomfromfear.org or call:
1-888-442-2022.

    * Allegheny General Hospital also will host depression and anxiety
screenings, 5:30 to 7:30 May 5 at the hospital's Synder Auditorium. For details,
call 412-330-4000.


    Blood Drives

    * To find a blood drive near you call:

    -- The Central Blood Bank, 412-209-7000 or 1-800-310-9551.

    -- The American Red Cross, 1-800-993-6667.


    Seminars/Lectures

    * "Happy Feet" lecture, 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. May 7. Jewish Community
Center of Greater Pittsburgh, 345 Kane Blvd., Scott. Learn the value of shoe
inserts, the best shoes to buy, treatments for heel pain, etc. $3 JCC members,
$5 nonmembers. Reservation deadline, May 5. Call: 412-278-1975

    * Special programs at Canonsburg General Hospital:

    -- "A New Testing Method for Evaluating Diabetic Neuropathy," 7 p.m. May 11.

    -- "When Mourning Dawns" six-part bereavement series, 6:30 to 8 p.m.
Wednesdays, May 12 to June 16.  Free. To register: 1-877-284-2000.

    * Free "A Reason to Hope" presentations, sponsored by UPMC Cancer Centers:

    -- Colorectal cancer, 6 to 7:30 p.m. May 5. Clarion Hotel, 300 Tarentum
Bridge Road, New Kensington. To register: 1-800-533-8762.

    -- Melanoma, 6:30 to 8 p.m. May 11. Hillman Cancer Center, Shadyside. To
register: 412-623-3651.

    * "Second Sight" seminar for persons with macular degeneration, 9:30 to
11:30 a.m. May 8 (registration, 9 a.m.). Waterworks Cinemas, The Waterworks
Mall, 930 Freeport Road, near Aspinwall. Free. Call: 412-683-5300, ext. 219.

    * Natural Vision Improvement, 7 p.m. May 11. East End Food Co-op, 7416 Meade
St., East End. Lecture on how to reduce eyestrain, improve balance and
coordination, etc. Free. Call: 412-242-3598.


    Classes/Workshops

    * Stress and Pain Management through "Gentle Yoga," 12:30 p.m. May 7.
Theodore Marchbein Center for the Healing Arts, 2107 Sidney St., Suite B, South
Side. $5 in advance; $7.50 at door. For reservations: 412-481-1021.

    * "Improving Your Health through Stretching and Strengthening Exercises,"
5:30 to 6:30 p.m. May 11. Led by a licensed exercise physiologist. Sponsored by
the Mercy Diabetes Program. To register, call: 1-800-232-5660.

    * Five-week diabetic education classes, 6:30 to 9 a.m. Thursdays, May 6
through June 3. Allegheny Valley Hospital, Harrison. Free. To register:
724-226-7262.

    * Medicare/Medigap Selection workshops, 10:30 a.m. May 6. Allegheny Valley
Hospital, Harrison. Free. To register: 1-877-284-2000.

    * Classes at Canonsburg General Hospital:

    -- Pediatric CPR, 6 to 9 p.m. May 5.  $25.

    -- Basic First Aid, 9 a.m. to noon May 8. $35.

    To register: 1-877-284-2000.

    * "Sexual Responsibility for Sons," 6 to 9 p.m. May 6. Magee-Womens
Hospital, Oakland. A class to ease the dialogue between parents and their sons
ages 12 to 15 regarding sexuality. To register: 412-641-4492.


    Support Groups

    * Self Help Group Network, a service of HelpLine, provides a database of
support groups. Call: 412-255-1155.

    * New support group for Charcot Marie tooth disease, 1 to 3 p.m. May 8. UPMC
Shadyside, West Wing auditorium. Presentation on current research, sponsored by
the Pittsburgh CMT Association. Charcot Marie is a group of genetic diseases
that cause progressive muscle weaknesses, diminished sensation and atrophy in
outer limbs. Free. For details, call: Janet at 412-761-0910, Newt at
412-683-1741, or 1-877-296-2341.


LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2004


                             449 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                               May 2, 2004 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 893 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Without Pain, Girl's Life Is a Trauma;
Toddler with a rare disorder has poked her eyes, broken her teeth and inflicted
permanent injuries.

BYLINE: Associated Press Writer

DATELINE:  ELK RIVER, Minn.

BODY:

   Gabby Gingras was about a day old when a nurse pricked her heel to draw blood
-- a sting that makes most newborns howl. Gabby slept through it.

   What a good baby, her parents thought.

   When Gabby teethed, she gnawed on her fingers until they were bloody. One
day, as her father massaged her gums with his finger, she bit him, hard. When he
reflexively yanked his finger back, one of Gabby's teeth came with it. She
didn't cry.

   When it comes to pain, she never does.

   An extremely rare nerve disorder called hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy Type 5 keeps pain sensations from reaching Gabby's brain. Gabby, now
3, simply does not feel injuries that would make others cry out.

   That might not sound so bad to anyone who has ever stubbed a toe. But it's
ruinous for Gabby's health.

   Pain is what keeps a child from poking her finger straight into her eye, as
Gabby has done repeatedly. Pain is why we limp to favor a twisted ankle, so it
can heal. Pain teaches children to recoil from a hot stove.

   When Gabby was teething, "she would chew on her fingers until they were
bloody," said her father, Steve Gingras. "She would chew on her tongue like
bubble gum."

   Without the pain that could prevent it, Gabby has injured herself over and
over.

   She broke several teeth by chewing on plastic toys before her parents knew
what her condition was. The ones that didn't break were pulled or lost when
doctors removed part of a broken jaw that had been weakened by a bacterial
infection.

   As a toddler, Gabby poked and scratched her eyes, oblivious to the damage she
was doing. Her parents worked with her doctors, frantic to get her to stop.
Nothing worked until her father, ignoring a doctor who told him that they
wouldn't work, bought a pair of ordinary swimming goggles.

   Gabby wears her "glasses" 24 hours a day, and her right eye has begun to heal
now that she keeps her fingers out of it.

   But the goggles were too late for her left eye. Cataracts ruined it, a side
effect of medication Gabby took for the scratches on her cornea. It has swelled
to about twice the size of her right eye, where her vision has been measured at
20-300.

   Gabby's condition baffled her doctors before it was diagnosed.

   As she continued to hurt herself during her first year, her parents decided
that they had just as good a chance of figuring out what was wrong as her
doctors did. So while Gabby visited neurologists, her mother Trish, an editor at
a trade journal before she quit her job after Gabby's birth, started an Internet
search for a name for her daughter's condition.

   She found an article in a dental journal about treating symptoms similar to
Gabby's. The children described had bitten their fingers and tongue, just like
Gabby. It described five types of hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy. The
first four included symptoms that Gabby didn't have, such as mental retardation.

   Type 5, however, blocked pain sensation, but didn't cause mental retardation.
Type 5 sufferers also retain their other nerve senses -- heat, cold, vibration
and the ability to perceive movement, which is how you know that your foot just
pressed on the gas pedal even though you can't see it.

   A nerve biopsy confirmed that Gabby, then 12 months old, had Type 5. The
couple finally knew why their daughter was hurting herself.

   The Type 5 variety is so rare that Dr. Peter Dyck, a neurologist at the Mayo
Clinic, estimates that 25 people in the United States have HSAN Type 5 -- taking
into account those who have not been diagnosed. The Gingrases know of only one
other person in this country who has it.

   There are no support groups, no how-to books for parents, little medical
research. And no cure.

   Keeping their children as healthy as possible is the only option for parents
of children with HSAN, Dyck said.

   He was part of a team that classified the five types of HSAN in 1983. One
girl he studied held her hand on a hot stove until her mother smelled the
burning flesh and removed it. The same girl poked a pencil through her cheek.

   In other ways, Gabby is like any other 3-year-old. She hops out of a
preschool minivan with purple paint smeared from her elbow to her wrist from a
butterfly she painted. She loves the "Lion King" movie and books. On request,
she'll roar like Mufasa or mimic Simba's soft growl.

   While playing with her 7-year-old sister, Katie, behind their house in rural
central Minnesota, she points out that the crossed chains of her swing look like
the letter X.

   Dyck said that perhaps someday HSAN can be cured through gene therapy, where
healthy genes would replace the mutated ones that cause the disease. But a
breakthrough, if there is one, could take decades.

   So the Gingrases rarely let Gabby out of their sight. Every fall brings a
thorough check of her knees, or an inspection for a cut or break that they might
not have noticed.

   They recently visited another American HSAN patient, a 24-year-old woman in
Sioux Falls, S.D., who they said was the patient described by Dyck in the 1983
article.

   The meeting finally allowed the Gingrases to compare notes with another
parent who had a child with the disease. But the meeting was difficult too.

   The woman is in a wheelchair now. She lost both legs to knee infections
because, as a girl, she had hurt her knees but didn't know it. She lost her
first leg at age 4.

   "It's discouraging," Steve Gingras said. "It's like seeing Gabby in a
wheelchair."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: MEDICATION: Steve Gingras places drops in Gabby's eyes, which
she had scratched as a toddler.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Jim Mone Associated Press PHOTO:
SWING TIME: Gabby Gingras, 3, wears swim goggles to protect her eyes, which was
her father's idea. Doctors insisted it would not work.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Photographs by Jim Mone Associated Press PHOTO: (A2) Gabby Gingras welcomes big
sister Katie, 7, home from school. The 3-year-old from Elk River, Minn., has a
nerve disorder that keeps pain sensations from reaching her brain. She has
injured herself repeatedly and wears goggles to protect her eyes.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Jim Mone Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2004


                             450 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                             April 30, 2004 Friday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SUBURBAN; SPOTLIGHT ON GREAT PEOPLE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: STUDENT CHALKS IT UP TO TEACHER

BYLINE: BY CLEM RICHARDSON

BODY:

   Manpreet Singh had a pretty good idea where his career was going.

   The Richmond Hill, Queens, resident enrolled in New York City College of
Technology three years ago intent on majoring in computer science.

   "I've always liked computers," he said.

   Then he met Prof. Laina Karthikeyan, almost by accident. He enrolled in
Karthikeyan's Biology 101 class simply to fill a science requirement toward his
degree - or so he thought.

   Things have changed for the City Tech junior.

   Last October, Singh, 21, took first prize in the neuroscience category at the
annual Biomedical Research Conference for Minority Students in San Diego,
beating out entries from a host of colleges and universities - including several
Ivy League schools - from across the country.

   Though he spoke no English when he emigrated here from the Punjab region of
India 10 years ago, Singh now plans to seek a joint doctor of medicine and
master of public health degree and become a medical researcher.

   In June, he will head to California, where he landed a lucrative fellowship
at the Biotechnology Institute in San Francisco. For two weeks, he will shadow
institute researchers as they work on various projects.

   He credits Karthikeyan for his success.

   She says it's him.

   Clearly, it was both.

   "It's the way she teaches," Singh said. "She explains things so you
understand it, and if you don't understand it, she will meet with you after
class to help you. And if you don't get it then, she will let you come to her
office for more help."

   "He was inquisitive in class," said Karthikeyan. "He paid attention and asked
a lot of questions. It let me know he was a good student with an inquiring
mind."

   Singh and Karthikeyan, who holds a doctorate in molecular biology from New
York University, are working with Dr. Pullani Shashidharan, associate professor
of neurology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, in a genetic analysis of
dystonia. The neurological disorder causes abnormal, involuntary muscle
contractions marked by twisting and repetitive movements, often resulting in
abnormal body positions.

   Shashidharan, Karthikeyan, Singh and other researchers are looking at the
role proteins play in activating a gene mutation that activates the disease in
people.

   Singh's paper centered on experiments he performed on a protein, torsin-A,
and how it reacts with other proteins to activate the disease. Only 20% to 40%
of people with the gene mutation develop dystonia, Karthikeyan said.

   Singh, a Richmond Hill High School graduate who still lives with his
cab-driver father, Satnam Singh, taught himself to speak English by watching
cartoons. He said he enjoys doing research, and spends hours in the lab at Mount
Sinai in Manhattan working on various projects.

   'I love doing research because you are always learning something," he said.
"Even when things don't come out as you expected them to, you learn, because
then you know what does not work."

   When it works out, he said, "you find out something no one found out before
you did; you make a name for yourself. That is a real sense of achievement."

   Singh said he hopes to work in gene therapy after he gets his doctorate.

   Karthikeyan, 46, was born in Singapore to parents of Indian ancestry. Early
on, she heeded her mother, who always stressed the need for education.

   She turned to teaching at City Tech after years of working as a senior
scientist doing gene therapy research at Profile Diagnostic Sciences, a
Manhattan biotech company.

   "Teaching is instant gratification - you can see the progress your students,
like Manpreet, make in the course of a semester and how you've nurtured their
interests," she said. "With research, it can be years before you know the
results. I feel lucky to have been able to make a career doing both."

   Karthikeyan considers Sri Sathya Sai Baba of Puttaparthi, India, her
spiritual guru. She teaches a course called Sathya Sai Education in Human Values
for the Flushing Sai Center and has directed several plays for the group.

   E-mail: crichardson@edit.nydailynews.com.

   SIDEBAR.

   Dystonia is a neurological movement disorder characterized by involuntary
muscle contractions that force certain parts of the body into abnormal,
sometimes painful, movements or postures. Dystonia can affect any part of the
body, including the arms and legs, trunk, neck, eyelids, face or vocal cords.

   If dystonia causes any type of impairment, it is because muscle contractions
interfere with normal function.

   Features such as cognition, strength and the senses, including vision and
hearing are normal. While dystonia is not fatal, it is a chronic disorder and a
prognosis is difficult to make.

   It is the third most common movement disorder after Parkinson's disease and
tremor, affecting more than 300,000 people in North America.

   Dystonia does not discriminate - it affects all races and ethnic groups.

   Source: Dystonia Medical Research Foundation Web site:
www.Dystonia-Foundation.org

GRAPHIC: ANDREW THEODORAKIS WORD OF THANKS Award winner Manpreet Singh (l.)
credits his teacher, Prof. Laina Karthikeyan of the New York City College of
Technology, with helping inspire him. Singh won first place in neuroscience
competition last year.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2004


                             451 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 30, 2004, Friday 3 STAR EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: A; Pg. 25 MetFront

LENGTH: 982 words

HEADLINE: Letter warned of 'crisis' if Baylor, hospital split

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RON NISSIMOV

BODY:

   A group of prominent physicians at Baylor College of Medicine tried to
prevent last week's breakup between the medical school and The Methodist
Hospital by warning of "a crisis of major proportions" that could cause the
school to "implode financially."

   On April 21, Baylor announced that Methodist would no longer serve as its
primary adult teaching hospital, ending a 50-year partnership between the Texas
Medical Center institutions.

   Baylor said it would instead forge an alliance with St. Luke's Episcopal
Hospital, another Medical Center facility and longtime Methodist rival.

   On April 18, seven Baylor faculty members wrote a strongly worded letter to
the boards of trustees at Baylor and Methodist pleading that their affiliation
not come to an end.

   "If the St. Luke's affiliation proposal is adopted, a crisis of major
proportions for Baylor will develop, and we will struggle to avoid devastating
consequences," the letter said. "With (St. Luke's), the college will be burdened
by more debt and, in fact, may implode financially."

   The Houston Chronicle obtained a copy of the letter, but it did not include
the names of those who signed it. A hospital official familiar with the letter
who wished to remain anonymous said it was signed by seven faculty members who
are either department chairs or division chiefs.

   The letter said Baylor had never "faced such an alarming crisis over its
future."

   The school has 25 departments, 17 of which are clinical and therefore use
hospital facilities, said Baylor spokeswoman Lori Williams. Departments often
have more than 20 divisions, which are led by division chiefs, she said.

   Peter G. Traber, president and CEO of Baylor, said in a statement Thursday
that 43 of Baylor's 46 board members approved the new arrangement, and three
abstained.

   "When such a complex and consequential decision is considered by an
institution of higher education, there will always be different views among
faculty," Traber said. "The decision made by the Baylor Board of Trustees was a
difficult one, but a decision made with thoughtful consideration and careful
analysis of all the information before them."

   Methodist and St. Luke's officials declined to comment.

   Traber said that on April 19, Baylor's academic council unanimously supported
the board's decision to form the new affiliation. But the letter from the
previous day painted a much different picture.

   It said many of Baylor's faculty members would "undoubtedly" keep their
clinical practices at Methodist because Baylor and Methodist over the years have
established so-called "centers of excellence" in various medical fields,
including cardiovascular surgery, neurosurgery, psychiatry, ophthalmology and
gene therapy.

   The letter said St. Luke's does not have the money or facilities to build
such programs in the near future but acknowledged that "eventually St. Luke's
may be able to meet Baylor's requirements." St. Luke's also does not have
sufficient operating rooms or bed space to meet Baylor's needs, the letter said.

   "It is certain that most of the (Methodist clinical department heads) will
not abandon the programs they have worked so hard to establish at Methodist and
move to St. Luke's because their patients and centers of excellence cannot be
accommodated as well as they are currently at Methodist," the letter said.

   It predicted that some Baylor faculty members would become "voluntary
faculty" to avoid moving to St. Luke's while others would "leave Baylor and
Methodist altogether."

   "After such an exodus, replacing these invaluable faculty members will take
years, will be costly in money and prestige, and will adversely impact Baylor's
financial condition, which, in turn, will seriously impact the basic sciences,"
the letter said.

   Only one of many physicians contacted at Methodist and St. Luke's on Thursday
commented on the breakup.

   Dr. Dick Stansey (SEE CORRECTION), an ear, nose and throat specialist at
Methodist who is a unpaid lecturer at Baylor, said, "It's very upsetting that a
50-year marriage ended."

   "It's going to hurt Baylor a lot more than Methodist," added Stansey, who
said he was not one of the faculty members who signed the letter.

   As part of the new agreement, Baylor's programs with Methodist in breast
cancer study and treatment, cardiovascular disease, multiorgan transplant and
psychiatry will stay at Methodist.

   One of the main issues that led to the split between Baylor and Methodist is
a new outpatient clinic that will located between Travis and Main.

   Methodist offered to pay for the clinic but didn't give Baylor the control it
wanted. Under the new agreement, the school will foot the construction bill in
exchange for that control.

    . . .

    'DEVASTATING CONSEQUENCES'

    Seven prominent physicians at Baylor College of Medicine submitted a letter
to the boards of trustees at Baylor and The Methodist Hospital strongly
objecting to the new affiliation between the medical school and St. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital, announced April 21. The following are excerpts from that
letter:


   "The Methodist Hospital is the premier private adult teaching hospital in the
Texas Medical Center to which our patients wish to go and be cared for by their
doctors (the full-time and voluntary Baylor doctors.)"


   "If the St. Luke's affiliation proposal is adopted, a crisis of major
proportions for Baylor will develop, and we will struggle to avoid devastating
consequences."


   "Many of Baylor's current full-time clinical faculty will undoubtedly remain
at TMH: several will change their Baylor status and become voluntary faculty and
others will leave Baylor and Methodist altogether. After such an exodus,
replacing these invaluable faculty members will take years, will be costly in
money and prestige, and will adversely impact Baylor's financial condition,
which in turn, will seriously impact the Basic Sciences."

CORRECTION-DATE: May 1, 2004

CORRECTION:
CORRECTION: This story misspelled the name of Dr. Dick Stasney.

GRAPHIC: Graph: 'DEVASTATING CONSEQUENCES' (p. 31, text)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2004


                             452 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                            April 28, 2004 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
Gene Therapy Appears to Slow Alzheimer's, Research Finds;
A study shows a frontal lobe treatment delays the disease's progression by up to
50% for at least two years.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A preliminary study at UC San Diego has found promising signs that using gene
therapy to introduce nerve growth factor into the brain may retard the
progression of Alzheimer's disease.

   The team, led by Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski, studied five women and three men,
with an average age of 70, who were in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease.

   The study focused on determining the safety of the procedure and not its
effectiveness. But in the process, the researchers found that the treatment
delayed progression of the disease by 40% to 50% for at least two years,
Tuszynski said.

   By contrast, the Alzheimer's drugs now available delay progression about 5%
and the effects persist for about six months, he said.

   "If the magnitude of these effects is borne out in larger, controlled trials,
this could be a significant advance over existing therapies for Alzheimer's
disease," said Tuszynski, who presented the results Tuesday at a San Francisco
meeting of the American Academy of Neurology.

   The team is already planning a larger follow-up study that will be overseen
by Dr. David A. Bennett and Dr. Zoe Arvanitakis of the Rush University Medical
Center in Chicago.

   That trial will include 30 to 40 patients and will have a control group of
patients who receive only sham surgery.

   Results should be available in about a year and a half, Tuszynski said. If
everything goes well, the treatment could be widely available in about four
years, he added.

   The approach is based on preliminary studies in rats and monkeys that showed
that implanting cells that secrete nerve growth factor into the brain restored
atrophied brain cells to near normal size and quantity, and also restored axons
connecting the brain cells -- essential for communication between the cells.

   The San Diego researchers collected skin cells from each patient, genetically
engineered them to produce nerve growth factor, then implanted them through
needles inserted into the center of the frontal lobe, which is important in
memory and cognitive function.

   One of the patients died five weeks later of a heart attack not related to
the surgery.

   The patients received standard cognitive testing before and after the surgery
and their rate of decline was estimated by physicians.

   The patients also underwent Positron Emission Tomography imaging, which
showed a sharply increased metabolic rate in the region of the brain where the
cells were implanted.

   And finally, when surgeons autopsied the brain of the patient who died from a
heart attack, they saw a marked growth response to the added cells, Tuszynski
said.

   The new clinical trial will use a simpler procedure that has proved equally
effective in animal studies. Instead of using skin cells, surgeons will inject
the vector -- the virus used to modify the skin cells in the earlier studies --
directly into the affected area of the brain, thus inserting the nerve growth
factor gene directly into brain cells.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2004


                             453 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 28, 2004 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-2

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY DELAYS ONSET OF ALZHEIMER'S

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   A preliminary study at the University of California-San Diego has found
promising signs that using gene therapy to introduce nerve growth factor into
the brain may be able to retard the progression of Alzheimer's disease.

    The team, led by Dr. Mark Tuszynski, studied five women and three men, with
an average age of about 70, who were in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease.

    The study was focused on determining the safety of the procedure and not its
effectiveness. But in the process, the researchers found that the treatment
delayed progression of the disease by 40 percent to 50 percent for at least two
years, Tuszynski said.

    By contrast, the Alzheimer's drugs now available delay progression only
about 5 percent, and the effects persist for only about six months, he said.

    "If the magnitude of these effects is borne out in larger, controlled
trials, this could be a significant advance over existing therapies for
Alzheimer's disease," said Tuszynski, who presented the results yesterday at a
San Francisco meeting of the American Academy of Neurology.

    The team is already planning a larger follow-up study whose results should
be available in about a year and a half, Tuszynski said.

    If everything goes well, the treatment could be widely available in about
four years, he added.

    The San Diego researchers collected skin cells from each patient,
genetically engineered them to produce nerve growth factor, then implanted them
through needles inserted into the center of the frontal lobe, which is important
in memory and cognitive function.

    The patients underwent standard cognitive testing before and after the
surgery and the rate of their decline was estimated by physicians.

    The patients also underwent Positron Emission Tomography imaging, which
showed a sharply increased metabolic rate in the region of the brain where the
cells were implanted.

    The new clinical trial will use a somewhat simpler procedure that has proved
equally effective in animal studies. Instead of using skin cells, surgeons will
simply inject the vector -- the virus used to modify the skin cells in the
earlier studies -- directly into the affected area of the brain, where it will
insert the nerve growth factor gene directly into brain cells.


LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2004


                             454 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 28, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-5

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: Patient believes gene therapy improved her memory capacity

BYLINE: SCOTT LAFEE

BODY:

   Lola Crosswhite may be walking, talking proof that an experimental gene
therapy to slow Alzheimer's disease works -- or, at the very least, that it's
safe enough to merit further research.

   Crosswhite, a genteel woman of 75, was the third of eight patients to
volunteer for the safety phase of the UCSD trials and the first to receive
multiple injections of nerve growth factor in both halves of her brain. In
theory, NGF stimulates neuron activity and growth, delaying the degenerative
effects of Alzheimer's.

   Crosswhite says she first began experiencing memory lapses in her early 50s.
Her long-term memory was fine, but she would forget recent appointments, the
name of her favorite restaurant, even phone conversations just ended. She didn't
know what was wrong, but felt her mind was somehow slipping. A neurologist
eventually diagnosed her with early stage Alzheimer's.

   Crosswhite underwent the gene therapy procedure in February 2002 and was
released the next day. She went skiing a week later. "Having the operation
didn't create any problems for me, other than having my head shaved, which meant
a lot of explaining to friends. I got on with my life."

   Did the procedure help?

   It's impossible to know for sure. The Phase 1 study was small and contained
no placebo controls, but Crosswhite thinks it helped her.

   "I have a much better feeling that I'm in charge, that I'm hanging on to
things better, that when I go looking for a memory, it will be there. I'm more
comfortable, more at ease.

   "Maybe it's just the fact that I did something, that there was a change made.
I don't know for sure, but I'm glad I volunteered. I hope it will help
researchers better understand what's going on with Alzheimer's. I hope something
good comes out of this for others."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: In 2002, Lola Crosswhite, a 73-year-old San Diegan
diagnosed with early stage Alzheimer's, underwent an experimental surgery to
inject genetically modified cells into her brain. The cells were intended to
promote new neuron growth.; PHOTOBY: Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2004


                             455 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 28, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1290 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy surgery might slow Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   An experimental surgical procedure that involves injecting genetically
modified skin cells into the brains of patients with Alzheimer's appears to
significantly slow the disease's progression, a UCSD neurologist reported
yesterday.

   The findings, reported by Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski at a meeting of the American
Academy of Neurology in San Francisco, emerge from the 2 1/2 -year study
involving eight patients diagnosed with early-stage Alzheimer's.

   The study -- the first to use human gene therapy to treat a neurological
condition -- represents the initial phase of broader planned clinical trials. It
was conducted by Tuszynski, Dr. Hoi Sang U, a UCSD neurosurgeon, Dr. Leon Thal,
director of the UCSD Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, and colleagues.

   The principle purpose of the first phase is to assess the safety and toxicity
of the gene therapy treatment. Six of the patients, ages 59 to 78, suffered no
ill effects and have resumed their lives. Two patients experienced bleeding in
the brain during their surgeries: One recovered quickly, but the other did not
and died of a heart attack five weeks after treatment.

   "The gene therapy did not cause the heart attack," said Tuszynski of the
deceased patient -- a male in his 70s. "But I think that the bleed, which kept
him in the hospital, may have contributed to increased stress levels that
culminated in the attack."

   While the first-phase study was not intended to broadly or deeply assess
therapeutic value, Tuszynski said the gene therapy treatment produced some
encouraging data.

   First, cognitive testing of the patients before and after treatment, using
two common tests for evaluating mental function, indicated a significant
reduction in the rate of mental decline, an overall slowdown of roughly 50
percent. As time passed, greater reductions in decline were recorded.

   "If the effect of our treatment -- and the numbers -- hold up, I would say
this approach represents a very significant improvement over existing therapies.
It doesn't cure Alzheimer's or stop the progression of the disease, but it may
substantially slow it down, which can have real-life benefits such as delaying
entry into a nursing home," said Tuszynski.

   Second, UCSD researchers were able to compare the metabolic rates of two
patients from PET scans taken before and after treatment. In both patients,
brain metabolism increased, an indication of greater cellular activity and
possibly of neuron growth.

   Third, an autopsy of the patient who died revealed that brain cells exposed
to the grafted genetic material grew new extensions. "That response was
surprising in that it occurred in just five weeks," said Tuszynski.

   Daunting disease

   Alzheimer's disease is a progressive neurological condition characterized by
escalating brain-cell death and subsequent loss of mental functions, such as
memory and learning. It afflicts more than 4 million Americans, with estimates
projecting this figure to double within 20 years and triple by 2050. Currently,
there is no cure or even an effective treatment.

   The UCSD study was based on earlier animal tests. In those experiments,
published in 1999, Tuszynski, Fred Gage of The Salk Institute and others
reported that injecting additional nerve growth factor or NGF -- a naturally
occurring protein -- into the brains of rats and monkeys halted brain-cell
death, sometimes dramatically. Monkeys that had suffered neuron loss due to
ordinary aging showed significant brain growth after being injected with NGF.
Existing neurons re-established lost connections, producing rejuvenated brains
in treated monkeys that biologically mirrored their younger counterparts.

   The big question was whether a similar effect could be induced in humans. The
first step was to make sure the surgical procedure was safe and the gene therapy
caused no harm. Essentially, the treatment worked like this:

   Doctors extracted skin cells from each patient and genetically altered them
in a laboratory to express human NGF, a protein that serves as a kind of
brain-cell stimulant.

   The modified cells were then carefully injected through ultrathin needles
deep into the brain, into a thumb-sized region called the nucleus basalis of
Meynert, which is broadly wired to the cortex and significantly involved in
higher cognitive functions such as memory and learning.

   Injecting the modified cells, about two drops' worth, requires incredible
precision, not only because the target areas are small but also because the NGF
does not migrate far from where it is infused -- just one or two millimeters.

   A millimeter is about the thickness of a nickel.

   All eight patients were immobilized in a specially designed metal frame that
fitted around and screwed into their shaved heads, but the first few patients
were only mildly sedated and remained awake so doctors could monitor their
mental function during the daylong operations.

   In two of the surgeries, researchers say, patients moved while needles were
still inside their brains, causing bleeding. Tuszynski said in neither case was
the amount of fluid sufficiently large to require surgeons to drain the brain,
but in the case of the patient who later died, cerebral clotting was enough to
disable him.

   Dead patient

   A report by Tuszynski to the university's Human Research Protection Program
said that the patient who later died suffered two bleeds in the brain during his
surgery, most likely due to patient movement and/or a bit of surgical glue
lacerating a blood vessel.

   As a result of the bleeding episodes, UCSD researchers altered treatment
protocol. To reduce the chance of inadvertent movement, subsequent patients were
completely anesthetized without complication, Tuszynski said. To reduce the risk
of bleeding in the brain, surgeons eliminated the use of fibrin glue and
required that patients temporarily suspend use of any drug that might affect the
ability of blood to clot.

   And they changed the patient consent form to better represent the risk of
bleeding, from a 1 percent chance to a 20 percent chance.

   Despite the death of one patient, Tuszynski believes the study has been a
success.

   "We learned three things," he said. "We can do the procedure safely with full
anesthesia. We can deliver the NGF safely. And that the gene therapy is safe.
There were no adverse events related to the therapy at all."

   Next steps

   Plans for the second phase of the trial have begun, but they will not happen
at UCSD. Instead, the second phase will be conducted at the Rush University
Alzheimer's Disease Center in Chicago.

   Moving the second phase to a new city, Tuszynski said, will widen the pool of
potential patients -- the second phase may involve 40 or more volunteers -- and
expose more doctors to the procedure. Tuszynski noted that there are also plans
to eventually add a third testing site on the East Coast.

   In addition, Tuszynski is stepping back from the trial due to a conflict of
interest. In the course of developing the gene therapy, Tuszynski and others
founded a biotechnology company -- Ceregene -- to develop and promote gene
therapies for neurological disorders including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's disease
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

   The safety phase of the trial was funded by The Shiley Family Foundation and
the Institute for the Study of Aging in New York. The next phase will be funded
by Ceregene, thus requiring an outside researcher to oversee testing.

   There is one other change. Researchers have switched to a different vector or
carrier of NGF, from modified skin cells to an adeno-associated virus, a
naturally occurring virus that is not known to cause disease in humans.

   The virus, said Tuszynski, expresses NGF longer and farther and has already
been used successfully in 24 clinical trials, including three involving the
brain.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: UCSD neurologist Mark Tuszynski (right) and colleagues
scrutinize MRI brain images during an experimental gene therapy surgery in
2002.; PHOTOBY: Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2004


                             456 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    APRIL 28, 2004, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: First-ever gene therapy for treating Alzheimer's;

San Diego researcher tells of positive results with a few patients in report to
S.F. meeting

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Writer

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall

BODY:
Despite some early disasters, a novel gene-therapy treatment for Alzheimer's
disease has produced encouraging results in the first half-dozen patients,
scientists reported Tuesday.

    After years of animal studies, researchers led by Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a
neuroscientist and neurologist at UC San Diego, began the first human safety
trial of the new approach in April 2001. Tuszynski summarized the results during
the annual meeting of the American Academy of Neurology, which is under way this
week in San Francisco.

    The study has drawn attention as the first attempt to use gene therapy to
treat an incurable neurodegenerative disorder. Alzheimer's disease currently
affects about 4 million people in the United States, and that number is growing
as the population ages.

    Gene therapy has been touted as a way of curing some of the most intractable
diseases known, typically by injecting a benign virus or other "vector" to
deliver therapeutic genes inside a patient's own cells. But the first studies
were fraught with safety problems that cooled some of the early enthusiasm.

    In the Alzheimer's study, the idea was to increase the output of a natural
protective substance called nerve growth factor in a thumbnail-size region of
the brain, from which a critical type of nerve cell sends projections throughout
the cortex. Those cells have been shown to die off in Alzheimer's cases,
contributing to the profound memory loss and confusion that are hallmarks of the
disease.

    The scientists took skin cells from each patient, modified the cells
genetically so they would secrete the nerve growth factor, then injected the
cells into holes drilled into the patients' heads. Eight patients were enrolled
in the study, which was designed only to establish whether the elaborate method
could be safely tried in humans.

    Two patients suffered brain hemorrhages from injuries incurred during the
implantation surgery, Tuszynski said, leading to the death of one person five
weeks after the procedure. The other patient recovered.

    Patients initially were kept awake during the surgery, as is often the case
in neurosurgery. The accidents happened when the patients moved their heads at a
critical time, Tuszynski said.

    That forced a change in procedures so that the other study participants were
put under anesthesia and immobilized, which prevented more incidents.

    The trial produced no evidence of any safety problems involving the altered
cells or the nerve growth factor, which can produce powerful toxic effects if
overabundant in the wrong brain regions.

    Nor did the injection cure anyone's disease. On standard neurological tests,
the six patients showed a marked slowdown in the rate of cognitive decline
typical for an Alzheimer's patient. Also, an autopsy of the patient who died
showed the injected cells functioned as hoped -- Tuszynski likened them Tuesday
to "biological pumps" implanted in the brain.

    "This is the kind of results you like to see in a Phase 1 safety trial," he
said.

    But the apparent benefits could just be the result of chance -- or the
wishful thinking of the researchers.

    The experiment included none of the standard controls researchers must use
in trials designed to prove that a treatment truly works. Two of the scientists,
including Tuszynski, are co-founders of a San Diego biotechnology firm, Ceregene
Inc., which holds a commercial stake in the enterprise.

    The planned next step will be another six-month safety trial of a modified
approach, in which the critical genes are to be injected directly into the
brains of patients, eliminating the need for using the doctored skin cells.
Assuming that study reveals no new safety concerns, the first true test of
efficacy could begin in about 30 patients, including sham surgeries and other
experimental controls. Those patients are expected to be tracked for about two
years.E-mail Carl Hall at chall@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2004


                             457 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                  April 27, 2004 Tuesday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: VENTURE CAPITAL PROGRESS; STATE'S IMPROVED SUM STILL JUST A SLIVER OF
U.S. TOTAL

BYLINE: By Jane Larson, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Arizona's venture capital picture brightened in the first quarter as a
startup semiconductor company and three other firms landed more than $14 million
in funding.

   The MoneyTree Survey, released today by PricewaterhouseCoopers, Thomson
Venture Economics and the National Venture Capital Association, found four
Arizona companies raised $14.3 million during the quarter. The Quarterly Venture
Capital Report, released Monday by Ernst & Young and VentureOne, found four
Arizona companies had received $14.8 million in funding.

   In both surveys, the results bettered the results for both the previous
quarter and the same period a year earlier.

   But the Arizona funding still amounted to just 0.3 percent of the national
total, continuing the state's meager showing compared with perennial powerhouses
California and Massachusetts.

   Venture capitalists typically invest in private companies that are considered
too risky for bank loans but whose innovations and technologies could bring
significant returns. The payoff could be a company that grows in the state,
creating jobs and wealth.

   "It feels like it's building, but it's hard to gauge from one quarter," said
Kevin McHolland, a partner in Ernst & Young's Phoenix office who works with
emerging companies. The variety of industries funded and the funding of newer
companies are encouraging signs for Arizona, he said.

   Wil Salhuana, president and chief executive officer of Tempe-based RF Power
Devices Inc., said his start-up semiconductor company raised its funding from
out-of-state venture funds in less than three months.

   "It is an environment looking for compelling business plans," Salhuana said.

   Nationally, venture capital investments dipped in the first quarter but were
still higher than a year ago, the MoneyTree Survey said.

   Investors put $4.6 billion into 618 companies nationally in the period, it
said, down from $5.2 billion in the fourth quarter of 2003 but slightly higher
than the $4.2 billion of a year ago.

   Funding nationally has been steady for nearly two years, ranging between $4.2
billion and $5.2 billion per quarter.

   Biotechnology and medical-devices investments continued to be the most
popular, attracting $1.3 billion during the quarter.

   The Ernst & Young survey found national investments totaled $5.1 billion in
465 companies, with biopharmaceuticals and information technology among the
strong performers.

   The four Arizona companies funded during the quarter, according to the
MoneyTree Survey, were:

   * RF Power Devices, a first round of $6 million.

   * ImaRx Therapeutics Inc. of Tucson, a sixth round of $5 million.

   The company is developing drug delivery systems and gene therapy technology.

   * Andigilog Corp. of Chandler, a third round of $2.5 million.

   The company develops temperature-sensing computer chips.

   * Southwest Windpower Inc. of Flagstaff, a first round of $750,000.

   It makes wind-powered electric generators.

   The Ernst & Young report, which does not name companies, said investors put
$7 million into an Arizona biopharmaceutical company, $6 million in a company in
an unspecified industry, $1 million in a software company, and $790,000 into an
energy company.

   The surveys are based on information from venture capital firms and other
sources.

   /

   Reach the reporter at jane.larson@arizonarepublic.com or (602) 444-8280.

GRAPHIC: Venture funding picks up Venture capital financing for Arizona
companies improved slightly during the first quarter, according to the MoneyTree
Survey. In millions 2003 1Q $11.3 2Q $13.3 3Q $29.2 4Q $12.5 2004 1Q $14.3
Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers, Thomson Venture Economics, National Venture
Capital Association MoneyTree Survey

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005


                             458 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             April 25, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 59

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: 3-year-old never hurts -- and that could kill her

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: JOSHUA FREED

DATELINE: Elk River, Minn.

HIGHLIGHT:
Nerve disorder so rare, her doctors were baffled

BODY:


   Gabby Gingras was about a day old when a nurse pricked her heel to draw blood
-- a sting that makes most newborns howl. Gabby slept through it.

   What a good baby, her parents thought.

   When Gabby teethed, she gnawed on her fingers until they were bloody. One
day, as her father massaged her gums with his finger, she bit him, hard. When he
reflexively yanked his finger back, one of Gabby's teeth came with it. She
didn't cry.

   An extremely rare nerve disorder called hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy Type 5 keeps pain sensations from reaching Gabby's brain. Gabby, now
3, simply does not feel injuries that would make others cry out.

   That might not sound so bad to anyone who has ever stubbed a toe. But it's
ruinous for Gabby's health.

   Pain is what keeps a child from poking her finger straight into her eye, as
Gabby has done, repeatedly. Pain is why we limp to favor a twisted ankle, so it
can heal. Pain teaches children to recoil from a hot stove.

   When Gabby was teething, "she would chew on her fingers until they were
bloody," her father, Steve Gingras, recalled. "She would chew on her tongue like
bubble gum."

   Without the pain that could prevent injuries, Gabby has hurt herself over and
over.

   She broke several teeth by chewing on plastic toys before her parents knew
what her condition was. The ones that didn't break were pulled or lost when
doctors removed part of a broken jaw that had been weakened by a bacterial
infection.

   As a toddler, Gabby scratched her eyes, oblivious to the damage she was
doing. Her parents worked with her doctors, frantic to get her to stop. Nothing
worked until Steve, ignoring a doctor who told him they wouldn't work, bought a
pair of swimming goggles.

   Gabby wears her "glasses" 24 hours a day, and her right eye has begun to heal
now.

   But the goggles were too late for her left eye. Cataracts ruined it, a side
effect of medication Gabby took for scratches on her cornea. It has swelled to
about twice the size of her right eye.

   Gabby's condition baffled her doctors before it was diagnosed.

   As she continued to hurt herself during her first year, her parents decided
that they had just as good a chance of figuring out what was wrong with her as
her doctors did. So while Gabby visited neurologists, Trish, an editor at a
trade journal before she quit her job after Gabby's birth, started her own
Internet search for a name for her daughter's condition.

   She found an article in a dental journal about treating symptoms similar to
Gabby's. The children described in the article had bitten their fingers and
tongue, just like Gabby. It described five types of hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy. The first four included symptoms that Gabby didn't have, such as
mental retardation.

   Type 5, however, blocked pain sensation, but didn't cause mental retardation.
Type 5 sufferers also retain their other nerve senses -- heat, cold, vibration
and the ability to perceive their own movement, which is how you know your foot
just pressed on the gas pedal even though you can't see it.

   A nerve biopsy confirmed that Gabby, then just 12 months old, had HSAN Type
5. The Gingrases finally knew why their daughter was hurting herself.

   The Type 5 variety is so rare that Dr. Peter Dyck, a neurologist at the Mayo
Clinic, estimates that 25 people in the United States have HSAN Type 5 -- taking
into account those who have not been diagnosed. The Gingrases know of only one
other person in this country who has it.

   There are no support groups, no how-to books for parents, little medical
research. And no cure.

   Keeping their children as healthy as possible is the only option for parents
of children with HSAN, Dyck said.

   In other ways, Gabby is like any other 3-year-old. She hops out of a
preschool minivan with purple paint smeared on her arm. She loves the "Lion
King" movie and books. On request she'll roar like Mufasa, or mimic Simba's soft
growl.

   While playing with her 7-year-old sister, Katie, behind their house in rural
central Minnesota, she points out that the crossed chains of her swing look like
the letter X.

   Dyck said that perhaps someday HSAN can be cured through gene therapy, where
healthy genes would replace the mutated ones that cause the disease. But a
breakthrough, if there is one, could take decades.

   The Gingrases recently visited another American HSAN patient, a 24-year-old
woman in Sioux Falls, S.D. The meeting finally allowed the Gingrases to compare
notes with another parent who had a child with the disease. But the meeting was
difficult, too.

   The woman is in a wheelchair now, after losing both legs to knee infections
because as a girl she had hurt her knees but didn't know it.

   "It's discouraging," Steve said. "It's like seeing Gabby in a wheelchair."

GRAPHIC: Associated Press, Gabby Gingras kept poking her eyes, unable to sense
she was hurting them and leaving her with a damaged, swollen left eye.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                             459 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             April 25, 2004 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1655 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Doctors See HDLs as Path to Healthy Hearts;
Drugs to boost high-density lipoproteins, the good cholesterol, are being tested
to keep cardiac arteries unclogged.

BYLINE: Associated Press Writer

BODY:

   Heart researchers may be closing in at last on a long-fantasized goal --
treatments that flush out the nasty globs of gunk that clog the heart's
plumbing.

   This idea goes beyond merely preventing new coronary artery disease. The
intention is to actually clear away what's already there, to clean up the source
of heart attacks before they happen.

   Ideally, the human body already does this on its own, and the new medicines
are intended to enhance the natural artery-cleansing process. If testing goes as
scientists hope, the strategy could prove to be as important for preventing
heart disease as the cholesterol-lowering statin drugs introduced in the late
1980s.

   "If it works, we are talking about the potential of reducing cardiac events
by 50 or 60% or more," said Dr. Steven Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic. "We are
talking about really controlling the disease."

   Nissen is working with about half a dozen of these drugs, and it is too soon
to know which of these and others in the pipeline will eventually make it into
drugstores. But when they arrive -- and many researchers seem confident that
some will -- the medicines will probably become part of a heart-protecting
cocktail of medicines doctors envision to increase good cholesterol, lower the
bad variety and reduce bloodstream inflammation.

   The new drugs boost high-density lipoproteins -- HDL. This is the friendly
half of cholesterol's yin and yang, often outgunned by its evil counterpart,
LDL.

   The interest in HDL is a big shift in attention for the field of heart
disease prevention. Ever since the arrival of statins, its main preoccupation
has been reducing LDL, which carries in the cholesterol that clogs the arteries.

   The statins' benefits have been impressive, even though cardiovascular
disease remains the world's biggest killer. They cut LDL in half, which helps
stabilize the disease, and reduce heart attacks and deaths by one-quarter to
one-third.

   "To an optimist, that's terrific," said Dr. Prediman K. Shah, cardiology
chief at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. "But the glass is still
two-thirds empty. To contain the continuing ravages of this disease, there has
to be something else."

   He and many other believe that something is HDL. In its garbage truck role,
HDL scoops up cholesterol from the arteries and carries it back to the liver for
disposal.

   Doctors' have suspected its importance since the 1970s. Studies that follow
people through life show that the higher one's HDL, the lower the risk of heart
attacks. Each single point of increase is matched by a 2% to 3% reduction in
heart disease.

   In the United States, men's average HDL is about 45 and women's 55. HDL under
40 is an especially bad sign, while anything over 60 is considered good. Those
with HDL over 75 may even be blessed with what's called the "longevity
syndrome."

   "Just like your LDL can't be too low, your HDL can't be too high," said Dr.
Lori Mosca, head of preventive cardiology at Columbia University. "I have
patients with HDL over 120, and I tell them that's probably how long they will
live."

   Such off-the-chart amounts result from good genes, not healthy habits. For
most people, budging HDL upward is difficult, although exercising, losing
weight, drinking modestly and quitting smoking can all help.

   Attacking heart disease with HDL has been slow to take hold, in part because
of skimpy evidence that this tinkering will make a difference. Even though
people with high HDL tend to have healthy hearts, that does not prove that
raising everyone else's HDL will save lives.

   Some animal studies and other research suggest that it will, but "there has
not been an enormous amount of data to support the HDL-raising effect, in large
part because there was not enough financial interest in it," said Dr. Harvey
Hecht, head of preventive cardiology at New York City's Beth Israel Medical
Center.

   Until recently, the only pills that raised HDL even modestly were generic or
over the counter. The best of them, niacin, is a vitamin. Without exclusive
rights, drug companies have no incentive to prove that such compounds work.

   "We know lowering LDL saves lives. Now we need to know if raising HDL adds to
that," said Dr. Jennifer Robinson, a University of Iowa epidemiologist.

   For many skeptics, though, the doubts began to fade last fall with the
publication of a remarkable study. The story began in the early 1980s when
researchers discovered a man in the northern Italian village of Limone sul Garda
who had very low HDL but no sign of cardiovascular disease. Blood tests revealed
about 40 more villagers with the same peculiarity. All traced their origins to a
common ancestor born in 1780.

   Eventually it was discovered that these people carry a slightly unusual
version of the main protein that makes up their HDL. Researchers called this
ApoA-I Milano and wondered if it might be a supercharged version of HDL. In the
first of many animal studies, Shah injected the protein into rabbits with
clogged arteries. It quickly cleared them out.

   Researchers still argue over whether ApoA-I Milano is a better artery cleaner
than the normal version, but it hardly matters. The ordinary kind cannot be
patented, so it will never be developed as a drug. But the newly discovered
mutant could be.

   The biotech firm that owns the rights, Esperion Therapeutics, sponsored a
pilot study in people. When the results were released in November, heart
specialists were simply astonished. Artery clogging in people takes decades, so
many assumed that reversing it would be a slow business too. But after just five
weekly infusions, the volunteers' artery buildups had actually regressed about
4%. Nothing like this had ever been seen before.

   "Many of us didn't believe it would do anything," said Dr. Michael Miller,
head of preventive cardiology at the University of Maryland. "The big surprise
is that it happened within such a short time. It's unbelievable."

   Still, the study was small, involving just 47 patients. Years more testing
will be needed to prove the treatment truly safe and effective. Even then, it
will have to be given by intravenous infusion, probably making it unrealistic
for lifelong use. Instead, doctors envision giving it for a month or two to
quickly clean up patients' arteries, a treatment that Esperion head Roger Newton
estimates will cost between $2,000 and $4,000.

   The results set off a frenzy among drug companies, said Nissen, who directed
the study, all searching for a more practical pill version of the drug. However,
the next HDL pill is likely to be an entirely different variety of medicine.

   These drugs, being developed by several companies, work by blocking a protein
that allows HDL to give away its cholesterol. HDL ordinarily hauls much of its
load back to the liver, but it also hands off some of it to LDL, which in turn
may cart it back to the artery walls, among other places. Shutting down this
transfer can make HDL levels go up substantially.

   The version furthest along is Pfizer's torcetrapib, which Nissen is testing
in a two-year study on 886 volunteers. It increases HDL by 60%, but will it
clean arteries and save lives?

   Scientists are unsure. People who are naturally low in the
cholesterol-transferring protein do not seem to be protected from heart disease,
despite their high HDL. Notwithstanding its nasty reputation, LDL can actually
be helpful at times by hauling some of its cholesterol load back to the liver.
Some worry that blocking the transfer from HDL to LDL will thwart that
housekeeping.

   "That would be bad," said Dr. Daniel Rader, head of preventive cardiology at
Presbyterian Medical Center in Philadelphia. "There is a lot of disagreement and
uncertainty" over what will happen in people, even though the strategy works in
rabbits.

   Rader says the Holy Grail of HDL research is a drug that will stimulate the
liver to make more HDL on its own, but progress is slow. Among other approaches:

   * An experimental vaccine against the cholesterol-transferring protein raises
HDL about 8%, but only in those not already on statins. Una Ryan, president of
Avant Immunotherapeutics, said the twice-yearly shots could be targeted at the
estimated 21 million Americans with low HDL but normal LDL.

   * Several companies are testing new versions of drugs called PPARs -- for
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor -- that also help direct cholesterol
flow in the arteries. They raise HDL about 25%, lower triglycerides and improve
the body's use of insulin. The medicines may prove especially useful for those
at risk of diabetes.

   * Shah hopes within the next year or two to try gene therapy to prompt the
body to manufacture more HDL. His strategy: Insert large quantities of the gene
that makes ApoA-I Milano, the HDL protein found in the Italian village, into
volunteers' bone marrow. "The idea is to have a permanent supply from one single
treatment," he said.

   Meanwhile, many specialists recommend more use of niacin, the HDL booster
already on the market. No one has convincingly proven that niacin saves lives,
but doctors say evidence from a smattering of studies suggests that it may. High
doses -- typically two to three grams a day -- can raise HDL about 25% and
should be taken under a doctor's supervision.

   Niacin's main drawback is that it can cause unbearable flushing and itching,
and about one-third of patients cannot stay on it.

   "If we had a niacin with no side effects, it probably would be much more
widely used," said Dr. H. Bryan Brewer, chief of the molecular disease branch at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   Many experts say they are optimistic that at least some of the new
HDL-raising strategies will work because it is a logical target with a
potentially huge payoff.

   "I liken it to Mark McGwire taking a big cut," said Dr. Christie Ballantyne,
head of cardiovascular disease prevention at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
"This could be a grand slam or it could be a strikeout. But it's a bold
approach."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2004


                             460 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 20, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: Negroponte's S.D. staff could be Baghdad-bound

BYLINE: Diane Bell

BODY:

   Several staffers of John Negroponte, Bush's choice to be the new U.S.
ambassador to Iraq after the hand-over, are no strangers to San Diego. In fact,
Negroponte's press secretary, assistant press secretary, protocol chief and
deputy protocol chief all worked at San Diego's City Hall when Susan Golding was
mayor.

   Ric Grenell, press secretary for Negroponte, currently the U.S. ambassador to
the United Nations, was Golding's spokesman for about three years. Jana Chapman
is deputy press secretary, the same job she held with Golding in San Diego.
Nicole Wilkins-Bergman is Negroponte's chief of protocol (she was Golding's
deputy protocol chief), and Tracy Lavin (a scheduler for Golding) is deputy
chief of protocol.

   Grenell says the U.S. Embassy will be located temporarily in Saddam Hussein's
former presidential palace until a new building is constructed. It's undecided
whether Grenell or any of the other former San Diegans will join Negroponte in
Baghdad (assuming the Senate confirms the nomination). Grenell says the White
House may ask staff members to remain with the ambassador's successor at the
U.N.

   "I actually would like to get back to San Diego," says Grenell, who was
summoned to Washington, D.C., from New York yesterday morning for the
announcement, then held briefings at the White House, the State Department and
back at the U.N. in New York. His mom called while he was in a cab headed to the
White House. She lives in Michigan but is in San Diego visiting a high school
friend. When Judi Grenell heard yesterday's news, she was quick to let her son
know her preference: "I hope you don't go to Baghdad."

   Bring a flashlight

   Al Roker, NBC's genial "Today Show" weatherman, will be calling the weather
highs and lows on Friday from the Horton Plaza studio of NBC 7/39. As in New
York, the network hopes to have a welcoming crowd there for Roker's informal
on-air chit-chat with onlookers. There's one problem: The broadcast is live at 7
a.m. EST and that, of course, means 4 a.m. here. For an eye-opening incentive,
Channel 7/39 is holding a sign contest. Roker is here to address Friday
evening's gathering of the San Diego Association of Black Journalists.

   San Diegans Ink

   The CEO of the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center here is on a roll. In Oxford,
England, Albert Deisseroth was a featured speaker at the inaugural meeting of
the British Society of Gene Therapy while, back home, he's on the cover of
California CEO magazine. The article focuses on San Diego as an emerging biotech
hub and also highlights CEOs David Hall of CancerVax Corp.; Gerry Proehl of
Santarus Inc.; and Joe Panetta of Biocom . . . When the Dodgers came to Petco
Park last week, the familiar face of former team manager Tommy Lasorda was in
the crowd. Before and after Thursday's game he headed to Little Italy's
Trattoria Fantastica. There, he told owner Lisa Busalacchi, he likes the new
ballpark and sang a few tunes a cappella. The beefy Lasorda, who once endorsed
Slim-Fast, is now on the Atkins diet and swears he hasn't touched pasta in five
months. True to his word, he stuck with chicken piccata . . . Country singer
Naomi Judd comes to town to teach a Learning Annex class tonight at the Mission
Valley Marriott. Her topic? How to overcome obstacles and release the superstar
within . . . San Diego's retired Air Force Brig. Gen. Bob Cardenas is now
permanently "saluting" guests at Disney's California Adventure park in Anaheim.
That's because he was inducted this month into the Legends of Flight Hall of
Fame at the park's Soarin' Over California attraction, and his picture joined
the lineup. The Del Cerro resident earned several honors during World War II --
including a Meritorious Service Medal, a Presidential Citation and a Purple
Heart.

   Mums and Mustangs

   Lee Smith usually toodles around the family property, Simpson's Nursery in
Jamul, in his 1958 turquoise Edsel. His wife, Cathy, prefers a golf cart for the
nursery, but elsewhere she's often seen behind the wheel of a red VW turbo bug
adorned with magnetic black dots and 56 colorful ladybugs. The couple have
plenty of cars -- old Model T's, muscle cars from the '50s and '60s and a 1940
Ford coupe -- one of Lee's favorites. Enter Dennis Gage, the cable TV
personality behind "My Classic Cars" who travels the country in search of
unusual car collections. He stopped by the nursery's vehicle showroom last week
and spent a day filming the couple's 20 vintage trailers and 60 restored cars.
He even drove a few. The Jamul tour won't air until next spring, though.

   Diane Bell's column appears Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays. Fax items to
(619) 260-5009; call (619) 293-1518; e-mail to diane.bell@uniontrib.com; or mail
to The San Diego Union-Tribune, Box 120191, San Diego 92112-0191.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2004


                             461 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2004 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      April 18, 2004 Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C10

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: AROUND & ABOUT/

BODY:

   Adu scores first goal in D.C. loss


    EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. -- Freddy Adu's first professional goal didn't help
D.C. United win.

    The 14-year old, who joined Major League Soccer this season, scored in the
75th minute of Saturday's 3-2 loss to the MetroStars.

    "It's a great feeling to get my first goal, but it's a little unfortunate to
do it on a losing day," Adu said. "I didn't get a chance to celebrate because we
lost. Hopefully, this will lead to bigger and better things and there will be
plenty more to come."

    Adu, the youngest player in a major U.S. pro league in more than a century,
did not start but replaced Alecko Eskandarian in the 54th minute.

    Adu thrilled the crowd of 31,149 when he sneaked behind two defenders to
take a crossing pass from Joshua Gros and knocked a sliding, left-footed shot
past Jonny Walker.

    "Every player wants that first goal, because it opens everything else up. It
also makes it more special coming here," Adu said.


    Gene doping next big thing?


    UTRECHT, Netherlands -- Experts believe athletes and coaches will soon turn
to gene doping in an attempt to gain a performance edge.

    Authorities told a workshop on gene doping Saturday that recent discoveries
have made it inevitable that athletes and coaches will try to abuse gene therapy
to gain an edge in speed, strength or endurance -- despite huge health risks.

    "I'm very pessimistic -- I think it won't take very long," said Hidde
Haisma, a professor of gene therapy at the University of Groningen. The needed
tools "are available at labs around the world," he said.


    Plimpton is perfect for Billies


    Freshman Chelsea Plimpton is settling into her role as Williamsville South's
starting softball pitcher quite nicely. Plimpton pitched back-to-back perfect
games on Saturday in the 20th annual Lady Jacks Softball Tournament being held
at the Edward Belbas Fields.

    Plimpton was perfect in beating Lockport, 18-0 and Wilson, 16-0. The Billies
advance to next Saturday's final four where they'll face Hamburg. Amherst faces
North Tonawanda in the other semifinal.

    Amherst beat Kenmore East, 6-0 and JFK, 6-1. Hamburg edged Starpoint, 2-1
and Kenmore West, 6-5. North Tonawanda was a 3-2 winner over Sacred Heart and an
8-1 victor over Frontier.


    Amerks even series with Crunch


    SYRACUSE -- Domenic Pittis scored twice and Ryan Miller stopped 30 shots for
the Rochester Americans in a 6-0 shutout of the Syracuse Crunch in the American
Hockey League Calder Cup Playoffs.

    The Northern Division Semifinal series is tied at one.

GRAPHIC: MARK MULVILLE/Buffalo News/ Freshman Chelsea Plimpton of Williamsville
South pitched back-to-back perfect games in Saturday's Lady Jacks Tourney.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2004


                             462 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 2116 words

HEADLINE: Family Science Project

BYLINE: By Stephen S. Hall.

   Stephen S. Hall's latest book is ''Merchants of Immortality: Chasing the
Dream of Human Life Extension.''

BODY:


   HIS BROTHER'S KEEPER
A Story from the Edge of Medicine.
By Jonathan Weiner.
356 pp. New York:
Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $26.95.

     AMONG many exquisitely rendered moments in Jonathan Weiner's ''His
Brother's Keeper: A Story From the Edge of Medicine,'' a simple daily act of
fine motor skill early on quietly explodes into a moment of heartbreaking
significance, when a young carpenter named Stephen Heywood inserts a key one
morning into the front door of a cottage he has been lovingly restoring in Palo
Alto, Calif. A self-described slacker, a brown dwarf of a star in an otherwise
brilliant constellation of familial ambition, Stephen has struggled to find his
niche, professionally and perhaps emotionally, in a family of overachievers
based in Newton, Mass. His mother, Peggy, is a retired psychotherapist; his
father, John, is director of an engineering lab at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; his younger brother, Ben, is trying to make it in Hollywood as a
producer; and his other brother, Jamie, two years older, is not just an
M.I.T.-educated mechanical engineer of uncommon vision and intuition, but a
larger-than-life personality who has yet to meet a challenge he cannot overcome.
The family's greatest challenge begins to announce itself that morning in
December 1997, when Stephen discovers that try as he might, he is unable to turn
the key in the lock with his right hand. It is an early sign that he is
suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (A.L.S.), often called Lou Gehrig's
disease.

    The main story line of Weiner's gripping book follows the efforts of this
remarkable family, and especially Jamie, as they race to find a cure for
Stephen. But Weiner -- who won a Pulitzer Prize for his account of Darwinian
evolution, ''The Beak of the Finch,'' -- has a larger canvas in mind. He sees
the Heywood saga as a cautionary tale about the promise and peril of
contemporary biomedical research, when ''the power of human understanding had
reached a point at which it was possible to view all of life as a project in
molecular engineering, and the saving of life as nothing more than engineering
and genetic carpentry.''

    Hence, the cloning of Dolly the sheep in 1997 forms a dark backdrop against
which the more intimate narrative of the Heywood family unfolds in 1999 and
2000. The urgency of their quest is manifest. A.L.S. is an irreversible
neurodegenerative disorder in which motor neurons in the spine slowly die off,
one by one; in its particularly gruesome ending, the patient suffocates to death
or chokes on his own saliva. The very first paper about A.L.S. that Jamie
Heywood calls up on the Web reports that most patients die within two years of
diagnosis.

    Jamie, Weiner tells us, was known as ''the Repair Man,'' because he could
fix anything. He scours the Internet for clues. He cold-calls the top
researchers in the field, neuroscientists like Jeffrey Rothstein at the Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine and pioneering molecular biologists like
Matthew During at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia. He sets up a
foundation and later forms a biotech company with During; in fact, he eventually
helps During run his lab meetings, and even tries to fire one of his postdocs.
His wife, Melinda, a teacher of French literature who trained as a belly dancer,
performs at local benefits to raise money.

    As Jamie's grandiosity swells, everything becomes secondary to his quest
to+cure not only A.L.S. but ''one incurable disease after another.'' In one of
Weiner's recurrent and understated motifs, we see Stephen tiptoeing in the
background of all this well-intentioned hubbub. He slowly remodels his parents'
bathroom (he's moved back home), begins a courtship with his eventual wife,
Wendy, and quietly defends his independence and dignity.

    In a phenomenal job of reporting, Weiner practically becomes a sixth member
of the Heywood family. He stays at the home of the parents, goes to church with
them, visits scientists with them. When Stephen receives his ''death sentence''
diagnosis from a neurologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, Weiner is able
to recreate, from a tape of the conversation, every pained ''um'' and ''uh'' of
the doctor's remarks; never has such a grim discussion seemed more awkwardly
realistic on the page. In conveying the dysfunctional neural signaling that
characterizes diseases like A.L.S., Weiner creates an extended metaphor, drawn
from the Kafka short story ''An Imperial Message,'' that is as fine as any I
have read.

    But there is a meta-question here. If Jamie's quest is plausible, then this
story becomes a heroic effort worthy of our greatest respect. If he is in over
his head, it becomes something of a fool's errand, with a different set of
ramifications -- not only for the Heywoods, but also, to the extent that a
rushed and ill-considered experimental treatment can set back an entire field
for years, for all patients with neurodegenerative disease.

    While wrestling with this question, Weiner becomes a character in his own
narrative. First, we learn that his 74-year-old mother, known as Ponnie, suffers
from a rare, progressive and incurable neurodegenerative disease of her own;
suddenly, his observations are not entirely neutral (indeed, he's rudely
introduced to the pay-as-you-go ethic of entrepreneurial biology when Matt
During suggests that his lab can work on some animal experiments related to his
mother's condition -- for $10,000). As he admits at one point, ''I was falling
out of the reporter's role.'' It also becomes clear -- perhaps sooner to the
reader than to the author -- that Weiner has been seduced by Jamie and his
crusade. ''I thought that I had never seen anyone so young, gifted, ambitious
and deserving of a fortune,'' he writes. ''I would make his legend.''

    Thus the tension in the unfolding narrative stems not only from whether
Jamie can save Stephen, but whether Weiner will experience the storyteller's
version of buyer's remorse. There is a scientific component to his investment,
too. Jamie's grand plan to save Stephen involves a technology called gene
therapy. To Weiner, gene therapy, ''more than any other field of medicine, had
the aura of the future about it, the ring of impossible promise.'' But gene
therapy is also one of those stories in modern biomedicine that has never
progressed beyond sounding good to being true. Despite hundreds of clinical
trials by some very creative scientists with thousands of patients, gene therapy
has not had a single unambiguous success.

    And this leads to what is, in my view, the most fascinating aspect of ''His
Brother's Keeper.'' As Peter Medawar, the British immunologist and Nobel
laureate, shrewdly noted, scientific theories ''begin, if you like, as stories,
and the purpose of the critical or rectifying episode in scientific reasoning is
precisely to find out whether or not these stories are about real life.'' About
two-thirds of the way into the book, Weiner has what feels like a Medawar-like
epiphany. He begins to wonder whether the story he has been chronicling is
indeed a story about real life in the scientific sense. ''In retrospect, I can
see that the story already was jumbled in my head,'' he says. ''I could no
longer tell how much of our hope was real; and sometimes, when he was at his
most electric and charismatic, I still wondered how much of Jamie was real.''

    Those of us who write regularly about medicine have all been there; what
makes the craft particularly difficult is discerning when a story is real or not
in Medawar's sense, even as -- especially as -- it is unfolding. But this is an
extraordinary confession, and Weiner heard plenty of warnings along the way.
Arnold Levine, then president of Rockefeller University, told him he despised
''the hype and flimflam around gene therapy and regenerative medicine.'' Weiner
seasons his account with many caveats, but the narrative is so dominated by
Jamie's soaring -- and, as it turns out, misplaced -- confidence that they
barely register. This might qualify as a flaw, but actually it enriches the
book, because a riveting feature is Weiner's gradual, grudging and admirably
candid realization that he has perhaps bought into a story of hope that may not
be real. By February 2000, when his long account of the Heywoods in The New
Yorker comes out, the author has begun to distance himself -- not so much in the
article, but in the book, where he describes Jamie driving all over Boston,
snapping up more than 300 copies of the magazine. The heroic quest begins to
feel like an ego trip.

    The most disturbing aspect of this otherwise very engaging book is that when
Weiner crashes from his Jamie infatuation, he lands smack on the entire
biomedical research enterprise. Although it feels like a reach, he places the
Heywood story within the larger hubristic orbit of modern biomedical ambition,
including human cloning; a tone of elegant alarm colors his view of the research
paladins who, in attempting to do good, threaten to ''change human nature.''
Precisely because he is such an astute and thoughtful observer of the scientific
scene, I found these sentiments surprising. Several well-known -- if not
universally admired -- scientists get squashed by Weiner's crash landing.
Jacques Cohen, the flamboyant I.V.F. specialist at the Institute for
Reproductive Medicine and Science of St. Barnabas in Livingston, N.J., coyly
hints a willingness to clone a human child -- for $10 million. Lee Silver, a
molecular biologist at Princeton who has increasingly become a cheerleader for
human reproductive cloning, is described keeping a meticulous album full of his
press clippings.

    Therein, I think, lies a crucial distinction. With some of the scientists in
the book, and especially with Jamie, it is easy to confuse hype with science,
publicity hounds with serious researchers, presumptive stories with a ''real''
story. It's hard to argue that Jamie embodies the can-do arrogance and unbridled
power of modern biology when he is described, deep into the book, as being in
way over his head. Yet we -- not just the chroniclers of these stories, but the
consumers of them -- are part of the problem, because we much prefer the
uplifting mythology of ''brilliant'' mavericks and ''curing the uncurable'' to
medical stories with headlines like ''Small Step Forward Achieved; Much Work
Remains to Be Done.'' Perhaps the most valuable message of ''His Brother's
Keeper'' is that+hope is a precious resource, and like any precious thing it
should not be invested without due diligence.

    I don't entirely agree with Weiner's implication that ''the edge of
medicine'' is overrun with cowboys and rogues, though they surely share space
there with serious researchers. The larger point is that it's become harder and
harder to distinguish the two, which is why I think Weiner's analysis is
enormously valuable. Entrepreneurial biology has been inviting this kind of
eloquent, non-ideological backlash for years, not simply in the literal sense of
commercializing discoveries in the private sector (often at great personal
financial reward), but in the figurative and cultural sense of its relentless
salesmanship. As a lowly postdoctoral fellow tells Weiner: ''Science takes time.
Jamie wanted us to give him something he could put into his brother tomorrow.
And he felt like anything short of that was just -- being lazy, or that we just
simply didn't understand. And I think it was just the other way around. Jamie
just didn't understand how science worked.''

    In the fall of 1999, after an 18-year-old volunteer named Jesse Gelsinger
died in a clinical trial at the University of Pennsylvania, a huge cloud
gathered over the field of gene therapy. Jamie Heywood and Matt During had to
abandon their plans to attempt it for Stephen. Instead, in May 2000, he received
an experimental stem cell treatment -- a treatment that Rothstein, the Hopkins
neurologist, dismissed as ''just ludicrous. I'm appalled.'' By the end of ''His
Brother's Keeper,'' we learn, inevitably, that the treatment didn't work.
Jamie's wife has left him, and he rarely brings himself to visit Stephen.
Weiner's own ''family disaster,'' meanwhile, has seen his mother contract into a
shell of her former vibrant self, and he professes disgust with the edge of
medicine. But he also gives us a final satisfying glimpse of Stephen, in a
motorized wheelchair in the restored carriage house, communicating to his young
son, Alex, through a computer, happy with what he has rather than disappointed
at what Jamie, and science, could not give him. It is a beautifully told tale,
marred only by the intimation that we should not keep trying to rewrite its
ending.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Henrik Drescher)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                             463 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2004 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                             April 18, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 103

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: THE SPORTS BLOTTER

BODY:

   CLASHES: Yesterday's Primera Liga derby match between Atletico Madrid and
Real Madrid was marred by violent clashes involving Real's radical group of
Ultra Sur fans.

   Around 80 members of the group tried to gain access to the stadium with
forged tickets then clashed with members of the security forces after they were
denied entry.

   About 50 were detained in the stadium parking lot, but the remainder
proceeded to bombard police with stones and other objects until they were
dispersed.

   GENE DOPING: Experts said they believe athletes and coaches will soon turn to
gene doping in an attempt to gain a performance edge.

   Authorities told a workshop on gene doping that recent discoveries have made
it inevitable that athletes and coaches will try to abuse gene therapy to gain
an edge in speed, strength or endurance, despite huge health risks.

   Current blood and urine tests cannot detect gene doping, and Hidde Haisma, a
professor of gene therapy at the University of Groningen, said the most
promising technique of detection involved analyzing the proteins in blood
samples, looking for a suspicious spike.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2004


                             464 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 April 18, 2004 Sunday 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 13C

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: Adu gets first goal in United's loss

SERIES: IN BRIEF

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports

DATELINE: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.

BODY:

   Freddy Adu's first professional goal didn't help D.C. United win.

   The 14-year-old star scored in the 75th minute of United's 3-2 loss to the
MetroStars on Saturday in MLS play.

   "It's a great feeling to get my first goal, but it's a little unfortunate to
do it on a losing day," Adu said. "I didn't get a chance to celebrate because we
lost."

   Adu, the youngest player in a major U.S. pro league in more than a century,
sneaked behind two defenders to take a crossing pass and knocked a sliding,
left-footed shot past Jonny Walker.

   "Every player wants that first goal, because it opens everything else up. It
also makes it more special coming here," Adu said.

   Reserve forward Fabian Taylor scored twice in a 13-minute span of the second
half for the MetroStars.

   OTHER MLS: DeWayne DeRosario and Alberto Alvarez scored two minutes apart in
the second half to lead defending champion San Jose to a 3-1 victory over host
New England. Edward Johnson had a goal and an assist to help Dallas beat host
Chicago 2-0. Carlos Ruiz scored in the 20th minute to help Los Angeles tie host
Colorado at 1.

RUNNING

Jones heads outdoors

   Five-time Olympic medalist Marion Jones will compete in the Mt. SAC Relays
today, her first outdoors race since giving birth to her first child in June.
With the U.S. Olympic trials in July, Jones and others will use the meet in
Walnut, Calif., as an early tuneup. She is expected to run the 200 or 400
meters. Her boyfriend, Tim Montgomery, the world-record holder in the 100 meters
at 9.78 seconds, also is scheduled to run.

TENNIS

Venus advances to final

   Venus Williams beat Jelena Kostanic 6-4, 6-1 at the Family Circle Cup in
Charleston, S.C., capitalizing on a strong serve to reach her first final of the
year. Today she faces Conchita Martinez, who defeated Patty Schnyder 6-4, 6-3.
Martinez and Schnyder taunted each other in their match, and Schnyder refused to
shake her opponent's hand afterward.

   U.S. MEN'S CLAY COURT CHAMPIONSHIPS: Top-seeded Andy Roddick reached the
final for the fourth straight year with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Luis Horna in
Houston. Roddick, who improved to 32-5 for the season and won his 12th straight
match, faces Tommy Haas. Playing in his first final since 2002, Haas beat Andrei
Pavel 6-4, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4.

   ESTORIL OPEN: Marat Safin advanced to the final after back pain forced Irakli
Labadze to retire in Oeiras, Portugal. Labadze was ahead 3-2 in the first set
when he retired. Safin faces Juan Ignacio Chela, who beat Florian Mayer 6-3,
6-3. On the women's side, Emilie Loit goes for her second career title after
beating Marta Marrero 6-4, 6-4. Loit faces Iveta Benesova, who defeated
Stephanie Cohen-Aloro 6-3, 7-5.

   SHORT BREAK: Justine Henin-Hardenne will rest for two weeks because of a
viral infection, but she is optimistic she will be cleared to prepare for her
French Open title defense next month. The top-ranked Belgian has beenfeeling
fatigued and dizzy.

ET CETERA

   DOPING: Authorities told a workshop in Utercht, Netherlands, that recent
discoveries have made it inevitable that athletes and coaches will try to abuse
gene therapy to gain an edge in speed, strength or endurance - despite huge
health risks. The idea of manipulating genes to enhance performance has been
around for more than a decade, but it gained attention this year after a
University of Pennsylvania study showed that muscle mass, strength and endurance
in rats can be increased by altering their genes.

   FOOTBALL: The host Tampa Bay Terminators forced five turnovers in the second
half to pull away from the Orlando Starz 14-0 in an Independent Women's League
game. Elizabeth Wozniak returned an interception 34 yards for a score, and Kim
Shaw threw a 13-yard touchdown. Adrian McPherson threw four touchdowns to help
Indiana run its winning streak to six with a 67-49 victory over host Grand
Rapids in Arena league play. Also, host Carolina stopped Philadelphia's Ricky
Ross just short of the goal line on the final play, giving the Cobras a 63-59
victory.

   - Compiled from Times wires.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                             465 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 17, 2004, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 29 MetFront

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: Prairie dog fans want government ban lifted

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ROBERT CROWE

BODY:

   Houston pet store owner Char Close-Bunting had always seen prairie dogs in
the wild while growing up in Kansas, but she never imagined she would later sell
or keep the pudgy rodents as pets.

   For three years, she sold about 60 prairie dogs annually at $ 100 each until
the federal government banned their sale and trade in June after a monkeypox
outbreak in humans was linked to the rodents.

   "This ban is way, way, way blown out of proportion," said Close-Bunting,
owner of Char's Reptile Store in the Montrose area. "Before they ban anything, I
think restrictions might be better alternatives."

   Close-Bunting and others who comprise a multimillion-dollar niche industry in
the sale of prairie dogs want the government to lift the temporary ban.

   They contend prairie dogs are scapegoats for the monkeypox outbreak.
Monkeypox was contained, they said, and prairie dogs aren't the original source
of the disease's virus.

   Last spring, a Gambian rat at an Illinois pet store infected some prairie
dogs with monkeypox, and those prairie dogs infected people who bought them at
Midwest pet stores. The sick rat was imported from Ghana.

   At least seven people were hospitalized with monkeypox last summer, but no
one died. All 37 confirmed cases were recorded between May and June 2003.
Monkeypox symptoms include fever, skin lesions, chills, sweats and headaches.

   "Everyone's blaming prairie dogs when monkeypox is an African disease found
in monkeys. It's not prairie dog pox," said Lynda Watson, the "prairie dog lady"
of Lubbock, who said she had captured and sold about 2,500 prairie dogs annually
before the monkeypox scare.

   The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug
Administration said the ban is necessary to stop monkeypox from spreading like
the West Nile virus.

   The agencies said in November they are establishing new restrictions on the
import, capture and sale of African rodents and prairie dogs. Monday is the
deadline to submit public comments.

   "We do not have a timetable for when a decision will be made on extending or
ending the prohibition," said Rae Jones, an FDA spokeswoman.

   Mark Slifka, a scientist with Oregon Health and Science University's Vaccine
and Gene Therapy Institute, said monkeypox, though contained, is a lethal and
promiscuous virus that can infect many species.

   "We are extremely lucky that things hadn't been worse," Slifka said.

   Close-Bunting and Cliff Schoeffler, a Houston-area pet distributor, said most
pet stores and distributors separate species and quarantine animals to prevent
the spread of disease.

   "I don't want my animals getting sick, and I don't want you to buy a sick
animal," Close-Bunting said.

   Prairie dogs are found in the wild in large colonies throughout West Texas,
Colorado and other Plains states. About 30,000 were sold nationally in 2001.
Half were captured in Texas by trappers like Watson. Annual sales had been about
$ 4.5 million.

   Daryl Rebrovich, owner of Go 3 Pets in Spring Branch, thinks the FDA and CDC
should be more concerned with banning the sale of cattle to prevent a more
lethal epidemic of mad cow disease.

   "Is this about public health and welfare, or about money and politics?" he
asked.

   Slifka said Rebrovich overlooks a major fact.

   "People (in the United States) didn't come down with avian flu or the human
equivalent of mad cow, but people came down with monkeypox from prairie dogs,"
Slifka said.

   Dianne James, Web master of www.prairiedoglover.com, said CDC officials told
her the agency recommended that the FDA lift the ban.

   "Both (of the agencies) are waiting for the other to make a decision, but I
think they're afraid to do something," said James, who has 16 prairie dogs at
her Indiana home.

   Christine Pearson, CDC spokeswoman, said the agency's position has not
changed.

   Monica Engebretson of the California-based Animal Protection Institute said
the monkeypox outbreak is an example of why wild animals like prairie dogs and
African rodents - which she calls "pocket pets" - should not be in the pet
trade.

   "Prairie dogs are darn cute," she said, "but any time you put a wild animal
in the pet trade, it is bad news for animals."

   Close-Bunting, however, sees the temporary ban as infringing on the rights of
Americans to own and possess pets.

   "You start taking our animals away from us, starting with the so-called
exotics, and how long before it moves on down to what we consider normal pets?"
she said.





   PRARIE DOGS


   Officials suspect that human cases of monkeypox in the United States were due
to exposure to pet prairie dogs.

   30,000 were sold as pets in 2001 15,000 were captured in Texas

    MONKEYPOX

    Origin

   37 confirmed or suspected U.S. cases were reported in May to June 2003. The
disease is usually found in remote villages in Central and West Africa.

   1958: First detected in monkeys.

   1970: First reported in humans in Zaire.

   2003: Dozens of people in at least six Midwestern U.S.  states became ill
after buying pet prairie dogs. A Gambian rat infected the animals at an Illinois
pet store.

   The virus

   Related to the smallpox virus; being vaccinated against smallpox provides
protection against it. Since the eradication of smallpox in 1980, people are no
longer routinely vaccinated for smallpox.

   The death rate among those with monkeypox ranges from 1 to 10 percent with
the highest rates among young children.


GRAPHIC: Graph: 1. PRARIE DOGS (TEXT); Photos: 2. Lesions on the hand of a
patient infected with monkeypox; 3. Char Close-Bunting, owner of Char's Reptile
Store in the 1400 block of Westheimer, holds Poxy, one of her three pet prairie
dogs. She fears the temporary ban on prairie dog sales, in response to last
summer's monkeypox outbreak, will become permanent. (p.33); 1.- 2. B.C. Oren /
Chronicle , Sources: U.S.  Food and Drug Administration; New England Journal of
Medicine; World Health Organization; Associated Press; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; Marshfield Clinic in Marshfield, Wis.; New York Times,
3. Melissa Phillip / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2004


                             466 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 15, 2004, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 1130 words

HEADLINE: Gene alteration sets off alarm in doping fight

BYLINE: Sal Ruibal

BODY:
The World Anti-Doping Agency will meet Saturday in the Netherlands to create a
battle plan for detecting and deterring perhaps the most nefarious doping method
yet developed: genetic alteration of an athlete's body.

   Although experts say the prospects of a genetically manipulated athlete
participating in the 2004 Athens Olympics is highly improbable, scientists who
advise WADA say it is only a matter of a few years before the high-tech
procedures -- and their incredible promise of massive improvements of athletic
performance -- enter the world's sports arenas through a growing international
black market.

   "No one should worry about (genetically altered) athletes today," says Lee
Sweeney, professor of physiology and medicine at the University of Pennsylvania
and a pioneer in the use of the IGF-1 gene (insulin-like growth factor I) to
rebuild diseased muscle tissue. "But if you're WADA, you've got to anticipate so
you won't be blindsided when that day comes."


   The agency's conundrum is substantial: Although medical therapeutic
gene-transfer research has been slowed by the need to ensure the safety of
patients after three deaths in human trials, the black market is quickly moving
to meet the needs of sports cheaters undeterred by the possibility of
catastrophic results.

   Add to that grim scenario the prospect that the former Soviet Union's
once-powerful scientific apparatus may be the breeding ground for 21st-century
illicit gene transformations.

   "That's a fair fear, a real fear," says Sweeney, who gets dozens of calls
every week from athletes eager to volunteer for IGF-1 human trials after hearing
of his success in building huge muscles in lab mice. For safety reasons, those
trials are at least five years away, but that knowledge hasn't deterred those
eager for transformation now.

   "There are a number of scientists who have the wherewithal to do this to a
human," he says. "There are plenty of athletes willing to spend $ 100,000 for a
new set of muscles.

   "Many scientists lost funding for their research when the Soviet Union
collapsed, and they could now easily set up a small clinic for these purposes.
There have already been some clinics set up in the former Soviet Union that
advertise muscular dystrophy therapies using stem cells."

   Russian authorities say the threat is very real.

   "What the West does not realize is that borders no longer exist, and the
emergence of new forms of doping in Russia will spread easily to other
countries," says Nikolai Durmanov, appointed by Russian President Vladimir Putin
to lead that country's anti-doping efforts.

   "When it comes to doping, Russia will become to Europe what Colombia is to
the United States," he recently told the French sports newspaper L'Equipe. "In
Colombia the farmers have no alternative but to grow coca (for cocaine); with
our sports people, it's the same thing.  . . .  We have all the ingredients (in
Russia) for it to only worsen and become completely uncontrollable."

   Theodore Friedmann, arguably the world's leading authority on gene transfer
and a member of WADA, says creating a lab in the USA would be neither difficult
nor expensive.

   "It could well be going on in cities such as San Francisco or New York," he
says, citing those cities' access to major research universities.

   "If someone would try such a thing, it would have to be the gene version of
(the alleged doping laboratory) BALCO, a very high-risk-taking venture," he
says. "They would be putting safety and scientific methodology aside. But they
can do it without much brainpower or money. The road to illicit gene transfer is
not all that difficult. And it is not out of the reach of people who want that
kind of result."

   Friedmann says creating a lab would cost about $ 10 million and would only
require the skills of a "standard graduate student in molecular biology. They do
these procedures every day."

   Masking reality

   Not all experts are so sure a genetic doomsday is just around the corner.

   Jacques de Ceaurriz, head of the Paris laboratory that developed the urine
test for the banned erythropoietin blood-boosting drug and is retesting samples
from the track and field world championships for the designer steroid
tetrahydrogestrinone (THG), told the Nigerian newspaper Vanguard, "The worst
thing we can do is to make up catastrophic scenarios. It's good to make
predictions, but we must not let pie-in-the-sky ideas mask reality."

   He says: "For the moment, genetic doping does not exist. The system of
distribution, its traceability are extremely closely controlled. Even in 10 or
15 years it will not be done easily. The scientific community will not let it
happen."

   Detection difficult

   WADA is eager to fund research into gene-doping detection methods, but so far
there is a lack of detection procedures that can be adapted to the global and
mobile nature of modern sport.

   Because gene transfer uses a person's own body to create the changes at a
cellular level, chemical evidence of doping is not as apparent as it is in the
use of drugs such as steroids or amphetamines.

   Friedmann says the best technology available includes the use of muscle
biopsies, imaging scans such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and the
placement of some type of marker into the vector viruses that transport the
altered gene in the body.

   There are problems with all of those methods, however.

   An MRI scanner is a large, expensive piece of equipment not easily
transportable to the finish line of a Tour de France stage or an athlete's home
for an out-of-competition test.

   Sweeney says markers could add an unpredictable element to the already
tenuous work of delivering genes safely into a human.

   "There's no need to add to that risk," he says.

   That leaves muscle biopsies, which involve a needle inserted into the muscle.


   A small "plug" of tissue remains in the needle when it is removed. The tissue
is sent to a pathologist, who searches for signs of gene implantation. More than
one needle insertion may be needed to obtain a large enough specimen for testing
and examination.

   "That's going to be a huge stumbling block," Sweeney says. "There aren't
going to be many athletes willing to undergo that procedure dozens of times a
year."

   Friedmann says that despite the roadblocks, the elimination of gene doping
must be accomplished. Medical researchers working with gene therapies to
alleviate human suffering understand the risks involved, he says, and are
willing to take the time to make sure all gene transfers are done as ethically
as possible.

   "There can be serious damage, but that can be tolerated if your goal is to
overcome a terrible disease.

   "But athletic performance enhancing is simply not worth it."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research (BAR
GRAPH); PHOTO, B/W, Mark Stehle; In the lab: Penn researcher Lee Sweeney and
muscle-bound mice.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2004


                             467 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 15, 2004, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: Genes: Body's computer code

BYLINE: Sal Ruibal

BODY:
How do genes work in the body? Here's a simple explanation of a complex subject:


   Think of your genes as the software of your body. Like computer software,
genes contain codes that tell every cell in your body what to do and when to do
it.

   Gene transfer is similar to making changes to the software in your personal
computer.

   If you have a faulty code that is preventing your computer from working
properly, a computer technician can insert a segment of corrected code to make
things right.

   When that's done with genetic material instead of computer code and in a
living organism instead of a computer, that's gene therapy.

   If your computer is otherwise OK but you want to upgrade its performance in a
certain area, you can download software that overrides your existing codes to
make your computer more powerful or you can add tools.

   Overriding otherwise healthy normal genetics with a gene transfer to improve
strength or endurance is the basis of enhancement gene therapy, or in the case
of athletes, gene doping.

   Unlike crashing your computer, however, mistakes in genetic manipulations can
have serious, sometime fatal results.

   "Gene transfer is at such an early state that it is very dangerous and
foolish to attempt," says Theodore Friedmann, a leading authority on the
subject.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2004


                             468 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 5; Science Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: In Michigan, a Milestone For a Mouse Methuselah

BYLINE: By ANAHAD O'CONNOR

BODY:

   Could the elusive secret of longevity be a diet heavy in cheese?

    Probably not. But scientists are celebrating the birthday of the world's
oldest known living mouse. The animal, a dwarf mouse named Yoda, turned 4 on
Saturday, or roughly 136 in human years.

     The average life span of a laboratory mouse is just over two years. A
number of other mice have fallen just short of the five-year mark, but Yoda is
the first to make it to four years on a diet that was not calorically
restricted.

    ''It would amaze me if he survived more than another 6 months, but we can
always hope,'' said Dr. Richard A. Miller, associate director of the geriatric
center at the University of Michigan Medical School, where Yoda was raised. ''We
don't want to jinx him. If a person is in their 90's or 100's, their life span
is usually only another year or so.''

    Though not a calorie counter, Yoda, like other dwarf mice, has a genetic
mutation that chokes off production of growth and thyroid hormones. Dwarf mice
tend to grow to only about a third the size of normal mice, which helps them
live about 40 percent longer.

    ''It's similar to small dogs,'' Dr. Miller said. ''They have low levels of
growth hormone, though they're always longer-lived than Great Danes and other
large dogs.''

    Dwarf mice are usually so small and frail that they require the constant
company of a larger mouse. Without baby-sitter mice to keep them warm, Dr.
Miller said, dwarfs would freeze to death. But they also can avoid the diseases
of old age until extremely late in life. While another mouse might have reached
old age and developed arthritis or cancer, a dwarf mouse born at the same time
might still be in the equivalent of middle-aged health.

    By studying hormonal changes in dwarf mice, Dr. Miller said, scientists may
be able to slow the aging process in humans as well.

    ''This is not a lead-in for gene therapy, but the idea is to find out what
the key controlling chemicals are so the problems people see now in their 60's
or 70's could be delayed for another 20 or 30 years,'' he added.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At 4 years old Yoda, left, is the equivalent of a 136-year-old
human. His companion, Princess Leia, is responsible for keeping him warm. (Photo
by Dr. Richard A. Miller, University of Michigan)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2004


                             469 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       April 9, 2004 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 786 words

HEADLINE: Caddie Edwards, 49, loses fight with ALS;
 Watson of close friend: 'He's with us in spirit';
 The Masters

BYLINE: Don Markus

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

DATELINE: AUGUSTA, GA.

BODY:

   AUGUSTA, Ga. -- Tom Watson remembered the day he heard from Bruce Edwards
after his longtime caddie had learned that he had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Edwards, whose disease had been diagnosed at the Mayo Clinic, tried to comfort
Watson by using a golf term for a bad score.

   "When he got on the phone, he said, 'Well, I just made a quad,' " Watson
recalled yesterday, using the term for quadruple bogey. "That's how he brushed
it off. I said, 'Yeah, but we're going to get back to even par.' "

   Edwards, who worked for Watson for most of the past 30 years, lost his
15-month battle with Lou Gehrig's disease yesterday, dying at his home in
Florida at age 49. Watson got the news as he prepared for the opening round of
the 68th Masters.

   "I was in the champions' locker room and a guy at the door said Hilary
(Watson's wife) was at the door, and I knew exactly what it meant," an emotional
Watson said later at a news conference after shooting a 4-over-par 76. "He's not
with us in body anymore, but I can tell you that he's with us in spirit."

   Watson, who used local caddie Grey Moore yesterday, didn't feel alone inside
the ropes.

   "He (Edwards) was out there on the first tee with Boogie Tom," Watson said,
referring to a caddie friend of Edwards' who died in a car accident in the late
1970s. 'I told him the last time I saw him that "You're going to be with Boogie
really soon."

   Having Edwards in his thoughts didn't prove as inspirational as having him on
his bag. Despite his physical deterioration from a disease that causes a
breakdown in all voluntary motor functions, Edwards caddied most of last year
for Watson.

   The highlight came at the U.S. Open when Watson took a share of the
opening-round lead at Olympia Fields outside Chicago with a 5-under-par 65. It
helped publicized Edwards' condition.

   "If I go in a year or less, I've had a wonderful life," Edwards said at the
Open. "I've been lucky. I had one of the greatest golfers in the world. I've had
a wonderful ride, a lot of wins, a lot of great moments."

   Among those moments was the celebration of Watson's U.S. Open victory at
Pebble Beach in 1982, after Watson chipped in for birdie from the rough around
the green on the par-3 17th hole and wound up beating Jack Nicklaus by two
strokes.

   "I think the hug at the 18th hole at Pebble Beach was probably the most
wonderful memory that we both shared together," Watson said yesterday.

   "But that was the only major that he won on my bag. You know, that was the
major that I wanted to win the most and he knew it."

   Among Watson's biggest regrets was not making the cut here last year.

   "When I left Bruce last year, he was crying in the parking lot," recalled
Watson. "He thought it was going to be his last Masters. Of course, it was."

   Watson kept his emotions in check throughout yesterday's round, but they came
pouring out afterward.

   "Damn this disease. Damn it," Watson said, his eyes flooded with tears. "They
are going to find a cure. We just don't have one right now."

   According to Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, the director of the Robert Packer Center
for ALS Research at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Watson has raised
about $500,000 for the center's funding of a new gene therapy program that is
expected to begin next year.

   Watson also donated the $1 million annuity he received last year on the
Champions Tour to ALS research. Watson has reportedly raised an estimated $3
million for ALS research during the past year through his own donation and other
charity events he has held.

   Rothstein said that the publicity generated by Watson's play and Edwards'
fight has accomplished a great deal in a short amount of time.

   "Anytime a relatively rare disease can get that kind of attention --
specifically for the relation they had and that emotive force -- it helps move
the research forward," Rothstein said yesterday from Baltimore.

   Edwards' death came hours after his parents came here to accept the Ben Hogan
Award on behalf of their son from the U.S. Golf Writers Association, given each
year to the person who demonstrates courage in dealing with an illness or
injury.

   Last year's winner was former tour player Jeff Julian, who also suffers from
ALS.

   Watson took a reminder of Edwards on the course with him for the opening
round -- a yardage book his caddie used in marking the distances on Watson's
shots at previous Masters.

   "I did something I rarely have done in the last 25 years, and that was to
carry a yardage book in my hip pocket," said Watson.

   "Maybe that's the reason I shot 76, out of whack up here somewhere. Maybe I
can play half decent tomorrow and make the cut and get back in this tournament
somehow. It would be fun."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Bruce Edwards, who died yesterday, had been Tom Watson's
caddie for most of the past 30 years. Watson has helped raise millions for ALS
research.; GETTY IMAGES

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2004


                             470 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              April 9, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 74 words

BODY:

   A front-page article on Aug. 19, 2003, about an experimental gene therapy
treatment for Parkinson's disease at New York-Presbyterian Hospital misstated
the given name of a neurology professor at Mount Sinai School of Medicine who
criticized the experiment. He is Dr. C. Warren Olanow, not Walter. (The error
was reported to The Times's public editor this week by a reader who said an
e-mail message about it in September had gone unacknowledged.)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2004


                             471 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             April 8, 2004 Thursday

SECTION: COVINGTON PICAYUNE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: Talk will put the 'gene' in genealogy;
DNA's growing role in field to be discussed

BYLINE: By Amy Althans; Contributing writer

BODY:

   "Louisiana Family History and Genetics" will be the topic of the St. Tammany
Genealogical Society meeting on Tuesday.

   The meeting, at 1:30 p.m. in the Covington library conference room, will
focus on the growing connection between DNA and genealogy research, featuring
John P. Doucet as speaker.

   Doucet, associate professor of biological sciences at Nicholls State
University and a member of the Center for Acadiana Genetics and Hereditary
Health Care at LSU Health Sciences Center in New Orleans, is a native of Golden
Meadow and a descendant of the Lafourche Doucets, who arrived in Louisiana in
1785.

   In his presentation, Doucet will talk about a connection between descendants
of French Acadians exiled from Canada in the mid-18th century and medical
research today.

   "A small number of these Acadians happened to be born with certain conditions
that caused health problems," Doucet said. "Through the selflessness of today's
Acadians, we are discovering the causes of those health problems and ways to
remediate them."

   Presenting information he gathered while looking for genetic markers of the
Acadian people, Doucet will link the study of genetics and genealogy. Because
the Acadians lived in an isolated and semi-closed society, both in Canada and
Louisiana, the potential to develop unique biological traits, including some
rare health problems, in some cases higher than the general population.

   Doucet and others are continuing the work initiated by Dr. H. Warner
Kloepfer, who founded the genetic counseling service at Tulane University
Medical Center in the 1950s.

   "With the human genome project and new technology, we can find genes at a
rapid pace, but it all starts with genealogy," Doucet said. Knowing the
Louisiana Acadians had common ancestors allows the researchers to determine
significant conclusions in a much shorter time and with fewer study
participants.

   Although Doucet is not a genealogist, his research takes the use of DNA
evaluation to verify and identify genealogy connections to another level with
his knowledge of molecular anthropology and gene therapy.

   "Genealogy research is changing so quickly with the use of the Internet and
now DNA testing, which we didn't even have two years ago," said Mandeville
resident Rob Noles, first vice president of the St. Tammany Genealogy Society.
"Using DNA testing to trace the surnames can prove or disprove genealogy
research already completed."

   Noles is familiar with the use of DNA in genealogy since he is the project
manager for the Knowles Surname DNA Project, which is using Y-chromosome testing
for Knowles/Knoles/Noles male family members across the country to identify
family lines.

   "In general, the U.S. is a big melting pot so the gene pool is large," Noles
said. "However, Louisiana is different in a lot of respects and the Acadians
were pretty isolated for a long time and their genes were not mixed but passed
down."

   Noles added that the study of DNA and genetics has ramifications beyond
genealogy but that some genealogists are beginning to appreciate the value of
this new research tool.

   "I would encourage anyone to come to this meeting if they have the slightest
interest in genealogy, DNA testing or gene therapy," Noles said. "You never have
to be a member to attend our monthly meetings, which always meet on the second
Tuesday of the month at the Covington library."

   For more information, call 845-4688.

   Doucet and Dr. Bronya Keats of LSU Health and Sciences Center in New Orleans
co-edit the Genetics and Louisiana Families Web site, which contains a wealth of
genetics information on health issues important to Louisiana families. For more
information see, www.lsuhsc.edu/no/centers/genetics/Louisianafamilies.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2004


                             472 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      April 7, 2004 Wednesday, Final / All

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: Byrne advises salon industry

BYLINE: Ginger Burnett, Special to The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   When she isn't working as a soap artisan, Jody Byrne forecasts trends for the
ever-changing salon industry.

    Her client list includes some of the biggest names in the business -
L'Oreal, Clairol and Matrix. Managers at those companies say Byrne has a knack
for knowing what's next and how big an impact it will have. (Byrne was an editor
at American Salon magazine before becoming a lavender farmer and entrepreneur.)

    "Jody's reputation in the industry is second to none," says David Craggs,
president of the professional product division for L'Oreal USA Inc. in New York.
"She has encyclopedic knowledge of a complex, diverse business."

    Jeanne Matson, general manager of Clairol Professional in Stamford, Conn.,
agrees.

    "She really keeps her finger on the pulse of what's happening," says Matson.
"I kind of think of her as a research house."

    Byrne does her research by traveling and studying beauty regimens and
products women use in other countries, by visiting spas and fashion-forward
salons and by studying pop culture and street fashion.

    One trend forecast by Byrne was the rising number of hairdressers working
independently.

    "Jody caught onto it early," says Matson, noting that 90 percent of
hairdressers in California are independent hair contractors who operate out of a
rented space.

    Their prices are slightly lower than those at traditional salons,
appointment times are generally more flexible, and, in some cases, they even
make house calls.

    The trend is sprouting in the Cleveland market, where a handful of
independent hair contractors are renting booths and free-lancing salon services.
Among them are Felicia De Lappi, a well-known West Side hairdresser, who opened
Felicia's - a cheery one-room boutique on Lorain Road in Fairview Park - where
she and fellow independent hairdresser Wendy Yako provide a full-range of
services.

    According to Byrne, the biggest trend is the end of mass trends. "Rampant
individuality abounds. . .What we all want is to be the best possible version of
ourselves that we can be."

    So it's no longer as common for people to slavishly copy a popular celebrity
haircut. Instead, trendsetters will seek a haircut fitting their personal style.
"That means finding a technically sophisticated hairdresser who asks questions
first, listens second and cuts third."

    The following are some of Byrne's other recent forecasts:

   Brown is beautiful. This year will bring innovative hair-color options for
brunettes, who make up 75 percent of the population.

   Curly or straight? The choice will be made by women, not their hair. A new
generation of styling products with incredible hold and memory allow people to
choose curly or straight looks. Yes, slick, straight hair is ultra-elegant - but
65 percent of women wear their hair curly part of the time. So both will be
options.

   A 'skin care'-like approach to hair. New products to maintain costly hair
color - such as nourishing hair masks, moisturizers and toners - will continue
to grow in popularity. It's part of looking at hair care as people have looked
at skin care, an emerging trend since 1999 that has yet to peak. Byrne suggests
finding a salon that offers as many hair-treatment services as it does
hair-color services.

   Laser color. By about 2015, hair color will be influenced by lasers, which
will be able to remove certain types of melanin molecules and leave others.

   Bald be gone. In the next decade, baldness might become a thing of the past,
thanks to genetaceuticals combined with gene therapy and technology.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                             473 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      APRIL 6, 2004 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1411 words

HEADLINE: Medical testing suffers from a lack of volunteers;
The difficulty of finding subjects "is the number-one roadblock to getting drug
trials done."

BYLINE: Virginia A. Smith INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The medical world needs more Phyllis Morellos.

   This self-effacing nursery-school teacher from Garfield, N.J., volunteered
for one of the hundreds of clinical trials in this region, agreeing to have an
experimental pacemaker implanted in her stomach to see whether it would help her
digestive problems.

   Although millions of other sick people are enrolled in clinical trials to
test new treatments, the number falls far short of the growing demands of
corporations and medical centers that compete in a mad, expensive dash to market
new products.

   Hard as it is to attract patient volunteers, it's even harder to keep them.
Three million Americans do complete clinical trials each year, but so many
others drop out that 90 percent of trials never make it to the end, according to
Thomson CenterWatch, a Boston nonprofit that tracks the clinical trials
industry.

   "You can't bring drugs through the pipeline if you can't adequately test
them, and the patient recruitment problem has slowed the pipeline to a crawl,"
said Dan McDonald, CenterWatch vice president.

   There are many possible explanations.

   Patients may not know enough about clinical trials. They may be scared off by
the risks, or by revelations of deaths or abuses. They may fear being given a
placebo. They may be too busy.

   And then there are the trials themselves - bigger, longer and more complex,
requiring more patients than ever.

   "Patient recruitment is the number-one roadblock to getting drug trials
done," said Kathleen Drennan of Iris Global Clinical Trial Solutions in Chicago.

   In true American fashion, the problem has spawned a new growth industry:
private companies such as Drennan's that recruit and retain volunteers, a
growing number of whom now come from India, Eastern Europe and South America,
where patients are often desperate for treatment.

   It's a scramble with a potentially grand payoff. The drug giants' future
earnings depend on finding the next breakthrough treatment or blockbuster drug,
which in turn can mean life or death for sick people.

   "People have to realize this is serious business," said John I. Gallin,
director of the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center in Bethesda, Md.,
where 1,100 clinical trials are going on. "This is what's going to move us
forward in developing better care and prevention of disease."

   Clinical trials test potential new drugs, devices or procedures in patient
volunteers over time to see whether they meet standards for general use. Some
trial subjects are paid.

   More than 70,000 trials are conducted annually in this country alone, funded
by about $6 billion a year from private drug and biotech companies and the NIH.

   They are carried out by research institutes, medical schools, hospitals and
private trial-management firms, and overseen by local review boards and the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration.

   Merck & Co. of Whitehouse Station, N.J., has about 170,000 patients involved
in 300 trials; 120 of the trials are in 58 countries overseas. In September, for
example, Merck launched an HIV vaccine trial in 18 cities in the United States,
Puerto Rico, Brazil, Haiti, Malawi, Peru, South Africa and Thailand.

   Jacobo Sabbaj, vice president of clinical research operations worldwide, said
Merck had no problem enrolling patients. "If you know where to look for those
patients, you will find them," he said.

   Some trials easily attract volunteers, said Ken Getz, founder of CenterWatch
and now chairman of the Center for Information and Study on Clinical Research
Participation in Boston. He cited male pattern baldness and other so-called
vanity illnesses.

   But everyone else in the industry, he said, "is having a terrible time. It's
the biggest problem today."

   And the need for patients doesn't go away after a drug wins FDA approval.

   GlaxoSmithKline, based in London with U.S. headquarters in Philadelphia and
North Carolina, will invest $300 million in long-term studies of Avandia, a drug
for Type II diabetes that won FDA approval in 1999.

   "You have to look at it for years and years, even after the drug is
approved," company spokesman Rick Koenig said.

   Getting one new drug tested and approved, drugmakers estimate, takes seven
years and costs $897 million, a figure "Big Pharma" critics say is inflated to
justify high drug prices.

   Whatever the true cost, none of this can happen without patients such as
Morello, 46, who was despondent on arrival at Temple University School of
Medicine two years ago.

   For years, she had suffered from gastroparesis, a common disorder that
prevents even small amounts of water from being digested. She was throwing up 24
times a day. "It was depressing," she said.

   Morello had never heard of clinical trials but figured if this one failed,
she was no worse off. "If you're sick, you have nothing to lose," she said.

   Things slowly began to improve. "I could sit in the car or go to the mall and
have a bottle of water with me," she said. "It's just a normal thing for
everyone else, but I was ecstatic."

   Aaron Shostack, 43, of Pottstown, hasn't been so lucky.

   Shostack, who is HIV-positive, has volunteered for several Philadelphia drug
trials since 1990. None helped, but he remains committed to volunteering.

   "When you have an illness and there's no real light at the end of the
tunnel," he said, "the way I look at it, anything I can do, I'm willing to do."

   The biggest recruiting problem, many believe, is that patients haven't heard
of clinical trials and don't know that a commitment might last only eight to 18
months. "Industry and the medical profession have done a pretty lousy job of
educating the public about clinical trials," said Drennan.

   And bad news travels fast: One in 30 patient volunteers experiences a serious
side effect and one in 10,000 dies, according to CenterWatch.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died during a gene-therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania in 1999. Traci Johnson, 19, of Bensalem, committed suicide Feb. 7
during an Eli Lilly & Co. drug trial in Indiana.

   Sometimes, patients are just too busy.

   "The patient may say, 'I'm from New York' or 'There's a traffic jam' or 'I
work' or 'Can I come see you on Saturday?' " said Henry P. Parkman, the Temple
gastroenterologist who runs Morello's trial, one of 101 at the medical school.

   Sometimes it's the primary-care physicians who are too busy to refer patients
to trials.

   Women are hard to recruit, investigators say, because of family
responsibilities. The underrepresentation of African Americans in studies is
often blamed on the legacy of the government-sponsored Tuskegee syphilis study
in the mid-1900s. Four hundred black Alabama sharecroppers received no treatment
for syphilis so the disease could be studied.

   "Tuskegee . . . is still an important part of the African American
relationship with the health-care establishment," said Vanessa Northington
Gamble, a medical historian and physician at Johns Hopkins School of Public
Health.

   She cautioned, however, that the black community's distrust of medical trials
did not begin - or end - with Tuskegee.

   Jane Shull, executive director of Philadelphia FIGHT, said her AIDS service
organization has enrolled hundreds of minority patients in clinical trials. She
suggested that "provider behavior" is the problem.

   "It's prejudice," she said. "They believe people of color either won't
understand the study or will be unreliable. The truth is, they just don't try to
sign them up."

   CenterWatch estimates that $500 million will be spent this year on
advertising to recruit patients. And everywhere the talk is about educating the
public and making the trial experience more customer-friendly.

   Meanwhile, Morello may never be able to handle a Thanksgiving feast, but she
eats salads and raw vegetables and occasionally goes out for dinner.

   She now throws up "only" four or five times a day. "Everybody has something,"
she said cheerfully. "This is what I have to deal with."

   Contact staff writer Virginia Smith at 215-854-5720 or vsmith@phillynews.com.

   To Learn More on Clinical Trials

   For more information, consult your doctor or go to www.clinicaltrials.gov or
www.centerwatch.com. They provide general information and locations of clinical
research studies, what they treat, who may participate, who is sponsoring and
how to volunteer.

   How it works: Select a medical condition, click on your city or state and
trial information pops up.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
WILLIAM F. STEINMETZ, Inquirer Staff Photographer
"If you're sick, you have nothing to lose," said Phyllis Morello of Garfield,
N.J. She volunteered for a trial of a treatment for gastroparesis, a common
disorder that prevents water from being digested.
This experimental pacemaker was implanted in the stomachs of volunteers,
including Morello, in a clinical trial at Temple University.
WILLIAM F. STEINMETZ, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Phyllis Morello (right) of Garfield, N.J., is part of a Temple University trial
of a device to treat her stomach ailment. Henry P. Parkman, who runs Morello's
trial, holds the implant.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2005


                             474 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 6, 2004 Tuesday SOONER EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.B-4

LENGTH: 2580 words

HEADLINE: WANTED: WALKERS, RIDERS, HOOPSTERS, BIKERS AND MORE;
 CHARITIES WANT ACTIVE FOLKS FOR THEIR SPRING AND SUMMER MOVE-A-THONS

BODY:

   Here come the walks, runs, motorcycle rides, bike treks, hoop-a-thons and
golf classics to raise money and awareness for disease charities and other
health-related efforts. Our health news assistant Kathy Samudovsky has pulled
together a list of spring and summer events that have been submitted by local
organizations. This list also will be available on the Health page of the
Post-Gazette Web site at www.post-gazette.com.

    In addition to the events listed below, the American Cancer Society has 30
Relay For Life 24-hour events scheduled from April to August throughout the
region. These are team relay events, often held on school tracks, to raise money
to fight cancer and celebrate survivorship.

    To find an event near you, check the society Web site, www.cancer.org and
click on "Relay for Life" and type in your ZIP code, or call 1-888-227-5445.



    April 17

    * Deloitte Consulting "Run Your Heart Out" 15K Run/5K Run-Walk at Allegheny
County Fairgrounds in South Park. Event day registration start, 7 a.m.; 15K, 9
a.m.; 5K, 9:15 a.m. Proceeds benefit The Caring Place, a grieving center
dedicated to families who have lost a loved one.

    For details, visit www.de-loitte15k.com or call 412-402-5999.

    * Hoop-A-Thon to benefit the Huntington's Disease Society of America/Western
Pennsylvania Chapter, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., Northgate High School, Bellevue.
Participants shoot baskets for sponsors' pledges per basket.

    To register as a shooter or for more information, call 412-761-2271 or
1-888-779-4372 or visit www.hdsawpa.org.

    * President's Challenge 5K Run/Walk/Wheel on the North Shore Riverwalk,
starting between Heinz Field and PNC Park. Registration start, 8 a.m.; event, 9
a.m. Sponsored by the Western Pennsylvania Trial Lawyers Association to benefit
the Pittsburgh Steelwheelers, a sports organization for the physically
challenged. To register and for other details, call Laurie Lacher, 412-630-9744.

    * 5K Run/Walk for Spina Bifida, 4 p.m. CCAC North Campus, 8701 Perry
Highway, McCandless. Course runs through a residential area behind the college;
downhill start and uphill finish. Registration, 3 p.m. in the upper parking lot
(next to the Sheetz store). Sponsored by the college's Supportive Services
Student Club. Proceeds will benefit the Family School Partnerships division of
the Spina Bifida Association of Western Pennsylvania. For an application or more
details, visit www.smileymiles.com or call Tom McKelvey at 412-855-6601.

    * Race for the Moon & Stars 5K, 9 a.m. White Oak Park's Redwood Grove.
Registration, 7:45-8:45 a.m. Run or walk to benefit programs mainly for cancer
patients and families who live in communities served by the American Cancer
Society's Mon Yough chapter. For details, call 412-885-2537.

    * Vintage 5K Race and 2-Mile Walk, 9 to 11 a.m., Vintage senior community
center, 401 N. Highland Ave., East Liberty. Registration start, 8 a.m. Proceeds
support programs for older adults. To register, visit www.active.com or call
Marilyn at 412-361-5003, ext. 106.


    April 18

    * 2004 MS Walk, beginning at the Chevrolet Amphitheater at Station Square,
South Side. 5-, 10- and 1-mile routes. Check-in start, 8 a.m.; walk, 9 a.m.
Proceeds benefit the Allegheny District chapter of the National Multiple
Sclerosis Society, which serves 4,900 residents with MS living in the region.

    For information, call 412-261-6347 or visit www.nmss-pgh.org. Walks also
planned for the same day or April 25 in Clarion, Greensburg and Meadville.


    April 24

    * 10th annual Neurofibromatosis 5K Walk & Fun Run at Schenley Park Ice Oval,
Oakland. Registration start, 9 a.m.; walk, 10 a.m. To benefit the
Neurofibromatosis Clinics Association, which provides research, social services
and education for the common genetic disorder. To register, call 412-795-3029 or
visit http://trfn.clpgh.org/nfca

    * Blow the Whistle on Asthma 5K Walk, 10 a.m. North Shore Riverfront Park
(behind Heinz Field near Gate A). To benefit the American Lung Association of
Pennsylvania. Registration start, 9 a.m. Asthma screenings offered on site.

    To register, visit www.-asthmawalk.org or call 724-933-6180.


    April 25

    * March of Dimes WalkAmerica 2004 10K (6.2 miles) traditional walk and 5K
family walk to raise money to fight birth defects. At Point State Park, Downtown
and 15 other Western Pennsylvania sites, including Butler Memorial Park in
Butler, Lynch Field in Greensburg and Brady's Run Park in Beaver. Pittsburgh's
walk start, 10 a.m.

    Register online at www.walkamerica.org or to find a walk near you, call
1-800-422-2437.


    May 6

    * Cystic Fibrosis Great Strides: Taking Steps to Cure Cystic Fibrosis, a
6.1-mile walk for all ages to benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation/Western
Pennsylvania Chapter. The first area walk: May 6 on the North Shore "Rails to
Trails," with check-in at 6 p.m. and walk start 7 p.m. There also are six May 16
walks, one each at Boyce, North and South parks, and in Beaver, Butler and
Westmoreland counties. Flat donations are collected prior to walks.

    To find a site near you or to register online, visit
www.cff.org/great_strides or call Tammi Fleet at 412-321-4422.


    May 8

    * Zach Attack & Cadillac Mac Concert, 7 p.m., Oxford Athletic Club, 1000
Village Club Drive, Pine. Buffet, 7:30 to 9 p.m.; band, 8 p.m. Proceeds benefit
the Zach Attack and Nathan's Battle Foundation to fund upcoming gene therapy
clinical trials for Batten Disease. The foundation is named after Zachary Balog,
8, of Cranberry, and Nathan Milto, 9, of Greenwood, Ind., who have the disorder,
which causes mental impairment, worsening seizures and progressive loss of sight
and motor skills.

    For tickets, call 724-452-4330.


    May 14

    * 13th annual Jay Simon Golf Classic at Beaver Valley Golf Club, 725 Sixth
Ave., Beaver Falls. Shot-gun start, 9 a.m. 18 holes of golf (four-player
scramble). Proceeds benefit the Norma L. Simon ALS Patient Equipment Fund, which
provides equipment not covered by insurance for ALS patients. Jay's mother,
Norma, died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's
Disease, in 2000. For registration details, call 724-742-2307.


    May 15

    * 24th annual Run For Mental Health, a 5K run/walk starting at 10 a.m.,
Torrance State Hospital, off Route 217, Blairsville, Indiana County.
Registration, 8 to 9:45 a.m. Proceeds benefit programs for indigent patients.
Call Georgiann Palek at 724-459-4424.

    * American Heart Association Heart Walks will be held at six sites on two
dates:

    On May 15, the Westmoreland County Heart Walk will be held at Kennametal
Fitness Trail, Latrobe. On Oct. 2, in addition to the Pittsburgh Heart Walk at
the Riverplex at Sandcastle in Homestead, walks will take place in Beaver,
Butler, Fayette and Washington counties.  To find a walk near you, visit
www.americanheart.org and search for your local branch, or call the
association's Western Pennsylvania Region at 412-243-5393.


    May 16

    * Fun Walk to Raise Awareness of mitochondrial diseases, 9 to 11 a.m., South
Allegheny High School, 2743 Washington Blvd., Port Vue. Proceeds from the pledge
walk benefit the Kaitlin Vasilich "Hope" Fund, which supports research for the
disease and scholarships for college students pursuing degrees in education.

    For details, call Patrick Cortazzo at 412-829-3491.

    * Race for Life 5K /1-Mile Fun Walk, 8:30 a.m. North Boundary Park, 100
North Boundary Park Drive, Cranberry. Proceeds will benefit the Rick Restelli
Cancer & Heart Foundation. Restelli, a Cranberry resident, has a malignant brain
tumor and cardiomyopathy. For details, visit www.troop403.org or call Matt Kuzma
at 724-776-5971.

    * 16th annual Fitness Classic 5K Run/Walk, 8:30 a.m., at UPMC St.  Margaret
on Freeport Road, near Aspinwall. Check-in start, 7:30 a.m. Proceeds benefit
community education programs of the hospital foundation.  For details, visit
http://stmargaret.upmc.com or call 412-784-5169.


    May 22

    * 15th annual Charlotte's Run, 9 a.m., Beaver Valley Mall. A 5-mile
run/1-mile fun walk to benefit the Huntington's Disease Society of
America/Western Pennsylvania Chapter. Registration, 7:30 to 8:30 a.m. Race
honors Charlotte Andres, who died in 1991 of Huntington's disease. To register,
call 724-375-4416 or 1-888-779-4372 or visit www.hdsawpa.org.

    * Highmark Blue Cross/Blue Shield's second annual Walk for a Healthy
Community at Chevrolet Amphitheater, Station Square, South Side.  Registration
start, 7:45 a.m.; 5K walk, 9 a.m.; 1-mile fun walk, 9:15 a.m. Benefits 12
organizations. Participants indicate which organization(s) they are supporting.
Sign up by May 10 and receive a $2 discount off parking.  Call 412-544-3776.

    You can pre-register directly with these organizations:

    -- ABOARD (Advisory Board on Autism & Related Disorders), 1-800-827-9385,
www.aboard.org

    -- Achieva, 412-995-5000, www.achieva.info

    -- American Red Cross Southwestern Pennsylvania Chapter, 1-888-217-9599,
www.swpa.redcross.org

    -- American Respiratory Alliance of Western Pennsylvania, 1-800-220-1990,
www.healthylungs.org

    -- Arthritis Foundation Western Pennsylvania Chapter, 412-566-1645,
www.arthritis.org

    -- Center for Healthy Hearts & Souls, 412-371-3282
www.healthyheartsandsouls.com

    -- Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank, 412-460-3663,
www.pittsburghfoodbank.org

    -- Lupus Pennsylvania, 1-800-800-5776, www.lupuspa.org

    -- Project Bundle-Up, 412-394-4848, www.salvationarmy-wpa.org

    -- Sickle Cell Society Inc., Murray-Irvis Genetic Disease Center,
412-371-0628, www.sicklecellsocietypgh.org

    -- Variety, the Children's Charity of Pittsburgh, 412-747-2680

    www.varietytent1.org

    -- YMCA of Pittsburgh, 412-227-3824 ww.ymcaofpittsburgh.org


    May 23

    * Three Rivers Liver Walk, along the Three Rivers Heritage Trail starting at
Washington's Landing. Registration start, 8:30 a.m.; 5K walk, 9:30 a.m. Proceeds
benefit the new American Liver Foundation, Western Pennsylvania Chapter. For
details, visit www.liverfoundation.org or call 412-434-7044.


    May 30

    * 15th annual Animal Walk, 9 a.m. at the National Aviary, North Side. The 5K
walk through historic North Side neighborhoods benefits animal health and
welfare services at Western Pennsylvania Humane Society, Animal Rescue League,
Animal Friends, Homeless Cat Management Team and other organizations. To
register or for more details, call Robin Miller at the North Side Chamber of
Commerce, 412-231-6500.


    June 5

    * Church Army USA's third annual 4-mile Walk for the Needy, 10 a.m. to noon,
North Shore Riverwalk, Allegheny Gardens. Check-in, 9:30 a.m. For details, visit
www.churcharmyusa.org. or call Lisa Faulkner, 412-231-1851.


    June 6

    * 10th and Last Pittsburgh AIDS Walk, a 5K at Flagstaff Hill in Schenley
Park. Check-in start, 7:30 a.m.; pre-walk festivities, 9 a.m.; walk, 10 a.m.
Benefits the Pittsburgh AIDS Task Force and other local AIDS service
organizations. To register or for information, call 412-242-2500, ext. 122 or
visit www.patf.org.

    * C.C. Riders sixth annual Charity Motorcycle Ride to benefit the
Make-A-Wish Foundation. Registration and breakfast, 9 a.m. at Peter's Place, 119
Washington Pike, Kirwan Heights. Ride starts at 11:30 a.m., ends at the North
Shore pier (near Heinz Field). For details, call the Make-A-Wish office at
412-471-9474 or visit www.ccriderspa.org.

    * Fifth annual Walk F.A.R. (Family and Friends for Autism Research) for
NAAR. Three-mile trek organized by the National Alliance for Autism Research and
volunteers and held at Heinz Field. Registration start, noon; walk, 2 p.m. For
details, visit www.autismwalk.org or call the Pittsburgh NAAR Office at
412-487-6851.


    June 12-13

    * 19th annual MS 150 Bike Tour: Escape to the Lake. A one-way, 150-mile ride
along scenic backroads from Cranberry, Butler County to the shores of Lake Erie
in Conneaut, Ohio, with a shuttle return. Meet at Three Rivers Aluminum Co., 71
Progress Ave., Cranberry. Check-in, 6:30 a.m.; ride start, 7:30 a.m. Benefits
the Allegheny District chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society. Call
412-261-6347 or register online at www.nmss-pgh.org.


    June 19

    * 16th annual Pirates Family Fun Run/Walk at PNC Park. Registration start, 8
a.m.; 5K run and 2-mile walk, 9:30 a.m. Benefits the Epilepsy Foundation of
Western/Central Pennsylvania. For details, visit www.efwp.org or call Colleen
Kaufman or Kristin Lesker, 412-261-5880.


    June 27

    * 2004 American Diabetes Association Tour de Cure bicycle ride at Seneca
Valley High School in Harmony. Includes: 10-mile family fun ride and scenic
tour, 11 a.m. (10:30 a.m. check-in); 30-mile (or 20-mile option) fitness test
and singles mixer, 10 a.m. (9 a.m. check-in); 50-mile training ride and fat tire
challenge, 8:30 a.m. (8 a.m. check-in); and 100-mile ultimate challenge, 7 a.m.
(6:30 a.m. check-in).

    For ride details or to register, visit www.diabetes.org/tour or call
412-824-1181, ext. 4609.

    * 12th annual Tour de Sewickley through scenic areas of Allegheny and Beaver
counties, benefitting The Early Learning Institute. Sixty-mile bike ride starts
between 7 and 8 a.m.; 30-mile bike ride, between 8 and 9 a.m.; five-mile family
fun ride, 11 a.m.; and a new 2.5-mile in-line skating loop, 9 a.m. All events
depart from/conclude at the Sewickley YMCA. The Institute serves learning
disabled children ages birth through 5 and their families.

    To register, call 412-922-8322, ext. 27.

    * "Walk With Me" 1K family stroll or 2-mile walk, Schenley Park Oval Track,
Oakland. Check-in and warm-up, 8 a.m.; opening ceremony, 8:30 a.m.; walk, 9 a.m.
Proceeds benefit Easter Seals of Western Pennsylvania, which serves people with
disabilities. Visit www.walkwithme.org or call Karen Kavic at 412-281-7244, ext.
272.


    June 28

    * National Pancreatic Foundation Golf Tournament at Highland Country Club,
West View. Registration, 10:30 a.m., followed by a buffet lunch and noon shotgun
start. Prize is a Mercedes Benz for a hole-in-one. For details, visit
www.pancreasfoundation.org or call Patter Birsic at 724-933-0076 or Susan Payne
at 724-935-4661.


    July 4

    * Third annual Race for Virginia & Friends, a 5K run/walk, Cranberry
Community Park (off Route 19), Cranberry.  To benefit childhood cancer research
at Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh. In memory of Virginia Clark, 9, of Seven
Fields, Butler County, who died in 2002 after battling neuroblastoma for seven
years. Check-in start, 6:30 a.m.; race start, 7:45 a.m. To register, visit
www.raceforvirginia.org, or call Dave Porco or Bob Markovich at 724-772-7429.


    July 18

    * Kayla's Run For SIDS, a 5K run/2-mile walk starting at 9 a.m., Baldwin
High School, Route 51, Whitehall. Check-in start, 7 a.m. Benefits the Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome Alliance, South Side, in memory of Kayla Mangan, race
director Gary Mangan's daughter who died in 1998 from SIDS. Call 412-885-3858.


    Aug. 22

    * "Pick up the Pace" pledge walk for pancreatic cancer, North Park
Boathouse. Registration, 9 a.m.; walk start, 10 a.m. Sponsored by PanCan, an
action network. For details, check www.pancan.org or call Heidi Fortwangler at
724-457-1447.


    Aug. 28

    * Fifth annual Cigna Motorcycle Ride. At the Meadows (formerly Ladbroke)
parking lot, Harmar. Led by John Cigna and the Cigna Riders to benefit the
Little Sisters of the Poor home. Distance depends on weather. Registration at 10
a.m.; 2-hour ride begins at 11 a.m. For details, call Colleen Gaughan at
412-761-5373.


CORRECTION-DATE: April 7, 2004

CORRECTION:
The first name of Joe Strauss' son Matthew was given incorrectly in a story
yesterday about the installation of automated external defibrillators in local
health clubs. Also, in a list of charity walks/runs, the Pirates Family Fun
Run/Walk at PNC Park will be held on June 19. The date was given incorrectly.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Bob Donaldson/Post-Gazette: CLOWNING FOR A CAUSE/Dressed as a
colon polyp, Sharon Skiles runs out ahead of the pack of 5K runners and walkers
to start the Big Blue Quest colorectal cancer awareness event in North Park
March 28. About 500 people participated. (Photo, Page B-1)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                             475 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial; A25

LENGTH: 849 words

HEADLINE: The Limits of Medicine

BYLINE: Phillip Longman

BODY:

     Faith in medicine runs deep in America. We spend more per person on health
care than any other nation. Most of us are confident that we will live longer,
more active lives than our parents. Whether we eat too much or exercise too
little, whether we're turning gray or feeling blue, we increasingly look to some
pill or procedure to make us better. No one likes to hear official projections
such as those that came out last week about Medicare, which show that the
program will be running multitrillion-dollar annual deficits just when baby
boomers need it. But a common response is: What's a more important priority for
society's resources?

   Good question, assuming that devoting ever more dollars to medicine will
bring us longer, healthier lives. But there is mounting evidence that each new
dollar we devote to the current health care system brings small and diminishing
returns to public health. Today the United States spends more than $4,500 per
person per year on health care. Costa Rica spends less than $300, and has half
as many doctors per capita. Yet life expectancy at birth is nearly identical in
both countries.

   Despite the ballyhooed "longevity revolution," life expectancy among the
elderly in the United States is hardly improving. Since 1990 Medicare
expenditures per senior have more than doubled. Yet life expectancy among
American women at age 65 was lower in 2003 than it was in 1991, according to
estimates released by the Social Security Administration last week. Yes, we are
an aging society, but primarily because of falling birthrates.

   Younger Americans, meanwhile, are far more likely to be disabled than they
were 20 years ago. Most affected are people in their thirties, whose disability
rates increased by nearly 130 percent, due primarily to obesity. Americans of
all ages are also increasingly likely to die from a host of infectious diseases
and chronic conditions. Between 1980 and 2000, the age-adjusted death rate from
diabetes increased by 39 percent, chronic lung disease by 49 percent, and kidney
disease by 21 percent.

   Why has our huge investment in health care left us so unhealthy? Partly it is
because so many promised "miracle cures," from Interferon to gene therapies,
have proven to be ineffective or even dangerous. Partly it's because health care
dollars are so concentrated on the terminally ill and the very old that even
when medical interventions "work," the gains to average life expectancy are
small. And partly it is because of medical errors and adverse reaction to
prescription drugs, which cause more deaths than motor vehicle accidents, breast
cancer or AIDS. Each year roughly 200,000 seniors suffer fatal or
life-threatening "adverse drug events" due to improper drug use or drug
interaction. Will Medicare's new prescription drug benefit save more lives than
it ends? The answer is not obvious.

   There are some simple ways to improve the effectiveness of medicine. Each
year 90,000 patients in the United States die from infections they contract in
hospitals, and doctors and nurses who fail to wash their hands are the biggest
vector. To cut down on medical errors, many hospitals are adopting sophisticated
quality control measures similar to those used by manufacturers to reduce
"defect rates." Today only 1 cent out of every dollar spent on the National
Institutes of Health goes to establishing "best practices" in medicine.
Redirecting more funds from basic research to studying the effectiveness of
different treatments would go a long way toward preventing such lethal medical
fads as high-dose chemotherapy and bone marrow transplants.

    But it is also time for Americans to recognize the limits of medicine. Why
don't Americans live any longer than Costa Ricans? Overwhelmingly, it's because
of differences in behavior. Americans exercise less, eat more, drive more, smoke
more, and lead more socially isolated lives. Even at its best, modern medicine
can do little to promote productive aging, because by the time most people come
in contact with it their bodies are already compromised by stress, indulgent
habits, environmental dangers and injuries. Today, about 127 million adults in
the United States are obese or overweight, 47 million still smoke, 14 million
abuse alcohol, and 16 million use addictive drugs.

   Yes, there is a better way for government to spend its money than on simply
expanding Medicare or covering its yawning deficits. For example, it could offer
people who avoid large lifestyle risks partial relief from Medicare taxes and
premiums. It could regulate sprawl to make walking possible for more Americans.
And it could put far more effort into discovering and providing more effective
treatments for addiction. Unless we adopt such approaches, life expectancy for
the next generation of seniors is likely to decline, even as the cost of
treating chronic disease and disability overwhelms the next generation of
taxpayers.

    Phillip Longman, a senior fellow at the New America Foundation, is the
author of "The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten Global Prosperity
and What to Do About It."

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                             476 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1350 words

HEADLINE: Evolving field at crossroads;
Leader to retire, leaving industry with provocative issues, promise

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The outgoing leader of the national Biotechnology Industry Organization
recently recalled the first time in his tenure that he felt the world spotlight
focused fully on the industry -- and on him as its voice.

   Around 6:30 a.m. on a Sunday in 1997, Carl Feldbaum stood stunned in his
driveway, reading a New York Times front page story about a sheep named Dolly,
the world's first cloned animal. The Scottish company responsible for the
historic breakthrough hadn't thought it newsworthy enough to warn BIO it was
coming.

   The article was about more than the science of cloning a sheep. It speculated
whether biotech would clone Saddam Hussein's army and whether Christ could be
cloned from the Shroud of Turin, Feldbaum recalled. At that point BIO's board
had not even discussed cloning as a policy issue, he said.

   Working on instinct, Feldbaum appeared on national television that morning
and said human cloning was definitely not something the industry endorsed. The
cork was back in the bottle, at least for a while. And it turned out he
correctly stated the policy the board would later adopt.

   Seven years later the promise of biotechnology is widely known. BIO
represents more than 1,000 companies. Feldbaum, who helped the industry and BIO
establish a national presence, is retiring. And cloning is just one of many
provocative issues his successor will have to confront.

   Prescription drug reimbursement, stem cell research, genetically modified
crops and animals and questions about whether the drug regulatory process is too
antiquated to deal with cutting-edge therapies such as gene therapy are just a
few of the issues Feldbaum's successor will face.

   Meanwhile that person will have to lobby for the industry on Capitol Hill,
continue to capitalize on the promises of the industry's science and lead its
growing membership.

   "It's going to take a super-person," said Joseph Panetta, president of
Biocom, the San Diego biotechnology industry organization. "I'm even wondering
if this is still a job for one person."

   Too bad they just can't clone Feldbaum.

   "I've been doing this for 10 years and haven't heard any member being
disgruntled about Carl, which means a lot," said Karin Duncker, leader of the
New York Biotechnology Association.

   Respected leader

   Among regional leaders such as Duncker and Panetta, Feldbaum earned a
reputation as earnest, knowledgeable, down-to-earth yet politically savvy and
accessible.

   He came to BIO 11 years ago after building an impressive resume in
Washington. In 1973 he served as an assistant special prosecutor working with
Watergate prosecutor Archibald Cox. He was chief of staff to Sen. Arlen Specter,
R-Pa., and was president and founder of a national security think tank. He also
served as assistant to the secretary of energy and was the inspector general for
defense intelligence in the Department of Defense.

   Some industry insiders hope his successor will possess as much experience of
inside the beltway politics and business acumen. Others think a science
background and knowledge of running a biotech or health care startup is
important.

   Feldbaum thinks working with an industry organization will require some
unique skills, such as consensus building and an ability to articulate that
consensus.

   "Given the organization's stature and the excitement around the industry, I
think it could draw a much more prominent figure than it got the first time," he
said.

   Search under way

   With the help of the executive recruitment firm Russell Reynolds, BIO has
begun searching for its new leader. Feldbaum, who is assisting in the search,
said he told members of BIO's board that a dozen years ago he would have gone
for a Sen. George Mitchell type.

   "A political figure with with an excellent reputation for integrity," he said
referring to the Maine democrat. "Now I think they can actually go for that
type."

   The industry and its organization drives its relatively new political clout
from its newsworthiness, and not its ability to raise political contributions,
Feldbaum said.

   "It's not the industry's ability to say `we have so many constituents in
every state,'" Feldbaum said. "It is the fact that everyone, including a great
many politicians, now understand the power the industry has in terms of health
care and agriculture. And its potential for economic development, even though
it's going to take a while to build those economic benefits."

   He doesn't consider the industry fully matured.

   He has shepherded it from infancy to adolescence, and his replacement must
now take it to adulthood.

   Panetta said the role requires a solid understanding of the science behind
the industry and the challenges of running a startup company, either in
biotechnology, the sciences or health care.

   "Biotechnology has grown up and is now sitting at the big boys' table," said
Duncker. "For years big pharma had to deal with issues like drug reimbursement,
and biotechnology was able to remain neutral. Now that more biotechnology
companies have products on the market and hundreds have products in trials, the
industry is going to have to address issues and take a stand whether it wants to
or not."

   Challenges ahead

   On the ethical side, the issue of stem cell research in biotechnology isn't
going away. Industry insiders complain their hands have been tied in publicly
funded research because of federal restrictions on cell lines. California and
New Jersey now have funding initiatives in the works in an attempt to keep
funnelling money to projects that the industry predicts will one day cure
diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and Lou Gehrig's, and correct spinal
cord injuries.

   The industry must also stem the movement against genetically modified
organisms, Duncker said.

   "No one wants to see it anti-GMO here like in Europe," she said.

   Another broad and provocative issue that will challenge Feldbaum's successor
is the Medicare bill enacted in September, Feldbaum said.

   "It's going to require a high level of vigilance to make sure some of the
positive reforms don't get undone," he said.

   The leader will have to fight to see that companies are fairly compensated
for cutting-edge and expensive therapies such as biologics, he said. And the
person will no doubt be involved with the current controversy over the
re-importation of prescription drugs from Canada, he said.

   "In a political year the pressure on drug pricing can crack a diamond,"
Feldbaum said. "How to get other countries to pay the cost of innovation takes
more than a sound bite."

   Meanwhile the new leader will have to press and challenge the FDA for the
evolution of a drug approval process to keep pace with the treatments sprouting
from biotechnology, he said. The regulations accumulated over 20, 30 and 40
years of drug testing may not be as relevant as they need to be, Feldbaum said.

   "Going forward, as the industry develops new innovative combinations,
biotechnology products may not fall neatly into existing departments at the FDA.
So how do you get these new combinations reviewed expeditiously? And who does
it?"

   And last, there is the challenge of dealing with the media, Feldbaum said.

   He deals with the topic in his typical, down-to-earth and fun manner: with an
anecdote. Another one involving Dolly, the cloned sheep.

   Upon the death of Dolly last year, Feldbaum said he received several
telephone calls from reporters.

   "It was a first for me to participate in the obituary of a farm animal," he
said. But he answered the reporters' questions as thoroughly and seriously as he
could. Including the reporter who posed the question of whether he thought
Dollly died a premature death because she was cloned.

   "I had several opportunities to see and visit with Dolly over the years,"
Feldbaum recalled telling the reporter. "And Dolly was incredibly obese. She was
obese because every time a photographer or reporter visited her, they would feed
her a treat. Every time Dolly saw a camera or a reporter's pad, she would run up
and expect a treat.

   "So the answer, I told the reporter, was no," Feldbaum said.

   "Cloning didn't kill Dolly. It was the media."

   Terri Somers: (619) 293-2028; terri.somers@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Techniques used to create animals such as
Dolly the cloned sheep (right) and Polly the transgenic lamb led to government
bans on cloning research and continue to fuel controversy. 2. Carl Feldbaum,
president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, is retiring after spending
11 years leading the group during its rise to national prominence. 3. Issues;
PHOTOBY: 1. Associated Press file photo

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2004


                             477 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY/BODYSHOP; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1596 words

HEADLINE: Seeking an infusion

BYLINE: MEG NUGENT, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Alicia Somma is a 19-year-old theater major who's fearless about being on
stage.

   "I love to get attention and to get in front of people and sing and act,"
says the Holmdel resident, a freshman at Brookdale Community College in
Lincroft.

   Somma will be on a stage of a different kind today in Washington, D.C., when
she appears with her father before a congressional subcommittee to urge members
to continue federal funding for research and programs dedicated to thalassemia,
a deadly blood disease Somma has had all of her life.

   This will be Somma's second time before the House Subcommittee on Labor,
Health and Human Services and Education. She was 15 years old the first time.
She knows her role is to put a human face on a disease that affects thousands of
people worldwide, most of them children living in poverty.

   She says she plans to tell the subcommittee members, ""I need your help
because this is real. Look at me. This is about me."

   Somma says she's been "fixing" her blood disorder her entire life through
rigorous treatments that include twice-monthly blood transfusions and almost
nightly, eight-to-10-hour drug infusions, which involve a pump and insertion of
a needle into her stomach. Somma recently started taking calcium supplements to
combat osteoporosis. As a result of the thalassemia, she's in the early stages
of the bone-thinning disease that usually surfaces in people much older.

   "If we go down to Washington and get a whole bunch of money, then they can
fix it for good and I'll live to be 102," says Somma, who, despite her
condition, is able to maintain an active lifestyle that includes managing a
local pizzeria and spending time with her family, friends and boyfriend.

   Her testimony will give Somma an opportunity to spread the word about this
relatively little-known disease.

   "Nobody knows what it is. I'm shocked when somebody says they know what it
is." The nutshell version of Somma's condition is that "her blood does not
work," says Jayne Restivo, executive director of the Cooley's Anemia Foundation,
a national, nonprofit organization dedicated, in part, to seeking federal money
to finance efforts to improve medical treatments and find a cure. The foundation
is named for Thomas Cooley, a Detroit physician who first diagnosed the disease
in 1925.

   Thalassemia is a group of genetic blood disorders that involve defective or
decreased production of hemoglobin, a molecule produced in red blood cells that
is crucial to distributing life-sustaining oxygen to all parts of the human
body.

   It is one of the most ancient diseases in the world, dating back 6,000 years.
Researchers believe thalassemia developed to protect against malaria. The
condition is disproportionately prevalent in countries where malaria is or was
present, such as those on the Mediterranean Sea (Italy, Greece and Turkey), as
well as Africa, the Middle East, Malaysia, China and Southeast Asia.

   Somma's parents, Frank and Deborah, are typical of parents of kids with
thalassemia.

   They didn't know they each carried the gene for the disease until they
underwent testing for it as part of attempts to find out why their then
2-year-old daughter was listless and sick, says Frank Somma, who volunteers as
president of the Cooley's Anemia Foundation. He says he's of Italian descent,
while his wife is of Greek heritage. Two people who each carry the thalassemia
gene, while not affected by the disease themselves, have a 25 percent chance of
passing the condition along to a child they have together.

   Thalassemia cases range from very mild to life-threatening. Alicia Somma has
beta thalassemia major, the most severe form of the disease. She is among 700
known cases of thalassemia major in North America, according to Restivo.

   It is believed the number of cases in North America are on the rise because
of changing immigration patterns, in which more people from countries with
malaria are moving to the United States.

   "The point is, there is no malaria in the U.S. The majority of people arrived
here from countries where there was no malaria. Now that's changing; there are
more people coming from Southeast Asia," says Stefano Rivella, assistant
professor of genetic medicine at Weill Medical College of Cornell University in
New York. Rivella is researching a cure for the disease at Jaffe Genetics
Laboratory, where he is director.

   "There's no agreement on how many people have thalassemia worldwide. However,
it is estimated that, worldwide, there are 100,000 children born with
thalassemia major every year," says Craig Butler, a spokesman for the Cooley's
Anemia Foundation. "As many as 80 to 90 percent of these newborns die every
year, mostly in countries in which the population does not have access to
adequate health care."

   Worldwide, about 150 million people carry the thalassemia gene and an
estimated 2 million of those are in North America.

   People with thalassemia "don't have the same life expectancy you or I would
have," says Butler. For years, the median age for death from thalassemia was in
the twenties. Since drug treatments have become more advanced and more available
to a greater number of patients within the past 25 to 30 years, "people have
started living into their thirties and forties," he says.

   People with thalassemia are at greater risk of developing a wide range of
complications aside from osteoporosis, such as diabetes, organ failure,
hepatitis and blood-borne infections such as West Nile Virus and HIV.

   Alicia Somma doesn't worry too much about life expectancy.

   "I don't think I'm going to live less than anyone else because I take care of
myself," she says.

   Treatment of thalassemia is often time-consuming and complicated. Like most
people with thalassemia major, Somma needs blood transfusions twice a month
because the lack of beta protein in her hemoglobin causes a life-threatening
type of anemia. The blood transfusions give her a temporary supply of healthy
red blood cells with normal hemoglobin, according to the Cooley's Anemia
Foundation.

   The downside of the frequent blood transfusions is that iron within the
transfused blood cells builds up in the body, which is unable to naturally
eliminate it. This results in "iron overload," which can lead to an early death
because toxins in the iron can cause organ failure.

   Somma and other thalassemia major patients combat the iron buildup with
chelation therapy, in which they self-administer a drug, Desferal. By binding to
the iron, the Desferal enables the body to eliminate it through urine or in the
stool.

   But the therapy, usually called "doing the pump," is "horrific, barbaric,
ridiculous," says Frank Somma.

   At least five evenings per week, Somma prepares for her 8- to 12-hour
infusions of the drug by mixing the powder with sterilized water. She attaches a
needle to a small, battery-operated infusion pump and inserts the needle into
the subcutaneous tissue of her stomach. Somma prepares the pump and attaches it
to herself before going to bed.

   The Sommas are hopeful about two chelation drugs in pill form that are
currently under review by the Food and Drug Administration. If approved, the
pills would free thalassemia patients from their pumps.

   A big problem with the pump therapy is that kids often stop doing it all
together or don't do it as often as they should because of the discomfort and
length of the treatments, according to Frank Somma. He said a young friend of
the family who was reluctant to comply with the treatment demands recently died.

   Part of the problem is that young people don't feel they're in any real
danger because they feel fine even if they skip treatments.

   "If you're a diabetic and you don't take your insulin, you're going to have
an effect in a few hours," Frank Somma says. "But with a kid with thalassemia,
if you don't do the pump, you may not feel the effects for several months or up
to a year." He adds there are cases in which a young person will skip the pump
treatments for two or three years.

   Alicia Somma says she's good with her chelation therapy. Her dad keeps track
of her pump use on a spreadsheet. The required treatment for most patients is 70
percent of the time, he says. Alicia's usage is about 63 percent. "And that is
with me on her back!!" he writes in a recent e-mail. "Imagine someone her age in
a dorm room or (in) their own apartment. What chance do they have?"

   Today the Sommas will be asking the subcommittee to continue funding several
grants that are up for renewal or come with application deadlines that are
drawing near.

   The largest one would disperse $12 million over five years to five major
thalassemia treatment centers in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Oakland,
Calif., and Canada.

   These treatment centers are part of the Thalassemia Clinical Research
Network, which brings together researchers working on improving treatment and
finding a cure.

   Another major source of funding is a $2.2 million annual grant to those
centers plus two more in Chicago and Los Angeles from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention's Thalassemia Prevention Education and Outreach Program.
One effort, known as Blood Safety and Surveillance, which is dedicated to
ensuring blood supplies are safe for thalassemia patients needing transfusions,
is part of the CDC program, according to Restivo of the Cooley's Anemia
Foundation.

   Asked if the programs are in any imminent danger of losing federal funding,
Somma said, "The funding you have in place is always in danger, if you know
government and budgets."

   "There are two things we want," says Restivo, "better care, like an oral
pill, and, of course, tomorrow we want a cure."

GRAPHIC: Alicia Somma of Holmdel was born with thalassemia, a rare blood
disorder. Here she prepares to inject her medication at home.

LIST:

The search for a cure

The only available cure for thalassemia is a bone marrow transplant.

 But this is a procedure that's impossible for many thalassemia patients because
it demands a "perfect" genetic match, which usually comes from a sibling or
other family member. Just a "close" or "best" match is required for cancer
patients needing a marrow transplant.

 The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute says 60 percent of kids with
thalassemia don't have a perfect match with a sibling or other relative. But
researchers are pursuing other avenues for a cure, the chief goal of which is to
help the body produce healthy hemoglobin that is able to carry oxygen throughout
the body and eliminate the need for blood transfusions.

 Here are a couple of the more promising types of research for a cure, as
described on the Cooley's Anemia Foundation Web site (www.cooleysanemia.org) and
by researcher Stefano Rivella, assistant professor of genetic medicine at Weill
Medical College of Cornell University:

 Gene therapy: This therapy focuses on "fixing" a patient's own stem cells by
replacing defective genes with normal ones. Gene therapy is still a long way
from being applied to human subjects in a clinical setting.

 Fetal hemoglobin manipulation: Before birth, human blood is made up of alpha
globin it will have throughout life and gamma globin that exists primarily
during fetal life. Shortly after birth, a "hemoglobin switch" takes place in
which gamma globin decreases and is replaced by the increased beta globin - in
other words, fetal hemoglobin is changed into adult hemoglobin. But in infants
with thalassemia, sometimes the beta globin fails to be switched on properly and
the resulting imbalance in beta and alpha globin causes transfusion-dependent
anemia. The theory behind fetal hemoglobin manipulation is that, if the
hemoglobin switch can be delayed or reversed and the fetal hemoglobin can be
maintained or turned back on, then the transfusion-dependent anemia caused by
the defective beta genes can be reduced or eliminated. This type of therapy is
being tried on humans with limited success.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             478 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 27, 2004, Saturday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 102 words

HEADLINE: TRANSKARYOTIC SHARES LEAP

BYLINE: Bloomberg

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. regained European rights from partner Aventis SA
for the Dynepo anemia drug, which the companies have been unable to market
because of a patent dispute. Transkaryotic shares surged $6.10, or 50.8 percent,
to $18.10. Aventis got undisclosed royalties in exchange and will keep the
marketing rights for the United States, Cambridge-based Transkaryotic said. The
companies haven't been able to sell the treatment because of a patent fight with
Amgen Inc. Transkaryotic expects to begin selling Dynepo in Europe in 2006, two
years after Amgen's patent there expires.


NOTES:
BUSINESS IN BRIEF / THE REGION

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2004


                             479 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4; COMPANY NEWS

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: TRANSKARYOTIC REGAINS RIGHTS TO ANEMIA DRUG

BYLINE: Reuters

BODY:

   Shares of the biotechnology company Transkaryotic Therapies rose more than 50
percent yesterday after the company said it won back European marketing rights
to an anemia drug from Aventis. Transkaryotic, which is based in Cambridge,
Mass., and the French-Swiss drug company Aventis had been feuding over marketing
rights to the drug, Dynepo. Transkaryotic developed the drug, which is injected
to treat anemia, and then licensed it to an Aventis unit. Under the deal,
Transkaryotic will market the drug outside the United States and Aventis will
keep rights inside the United States. Transkaryotic will pay Aventis a scaled
royalty for sales outside the United States. Transkaryotic will position the
drug to aim at the $1.5 billion market for drugs to treat anemia outside the
United States, the chief executive, Michael Astrue said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2004


                             480 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                   March 22, 2004 Monday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: 'BIG THINKER' TO DIRECT ASU'S BIODESIGN UNIT

BYLINE: By Kerry Fehr-Snyder, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   A half-mile out the window of George Poste's temporary office, a crane juts
skyward above the single-biggest construction project in the 119-year history of
Arizona State University.

   The crane is a place holder for Poste's Arizona Biodesign Institute, a
research and education initiative that will explain emerging bioterrorism
threats, explore new gene therapies in medicine and exploit the internal
machinery of plants for vaccines.

   At the helm of the seemingly disparate disciplines is Poste, a former
pharmaceutical executive and, for lack of a better phrase, a big thinker.

   "He's really something, isn't he," says Jeff Trent, president and scientific
director of the Translational Genomics Research Institute, or TGen, in Phoenix.
"He just has a catholic interest in science and medicine and can pull
information in one area and apply it to others."

   Indeed, Poste is versed in the sciences and society.

   Unlike a cardiologist who strives to know everything about the heart, Poste
understands heart disease while grasping informational technology. His job is to
connect the two.

   "A lot of people are linear thinkers and process it on one path," Trent says.

   Making an analogy to mathematics, Trent adds, "He's a multivariant equation
instead of sort of an additive one."

   The analogy is ironic for Poste, 59, who admits being "mathematically
innumerate."

   He also admits being an "inevitable bibliophile" who keeps 20,000 books --
many more than he's read, he says -- in an underground library at his north
Scottsdale home. That doesn't include the magazines, scientific journals and
newspapers he consumes.

   "It requires sort of an 18-hour day to keep up with the pace of science,"
Poste says in his native British accent.

   He credits himself with a "different kind of intelligence" that allows him to
assimilate "tidal waves of information and see patterns."

   Poste said the job for which he is paid $400,000 a year can be overwhelming.

   "Science is moving so fast that no single individual can be an expert on
everything," he says.

   That said, Poste has an opinion on virtually everything:

   * Society is becoming irrationally risk-adverse, refusing to take on even
modest amounts of risk.

   * Doctors and nurses should be vaccinated against smallpox in case of a
smallpox terrorism attack.

   * Scientists shouldn't congratulate themselves prematurely for identifying
the SARS virus without first understanding the organism better.

   Far from being superhuman, Poste comes across as down-to-earth and
hardworking in his tieless blue Oxford shirt, sleeves rolled up.

   His enthusiasm is contagious: "We're on the cusp of the biggest challenge the
world has seen. Something is in the air."

   Specifically, the next chapter in the history of mankind.

   In the beginning, humans were vulnerable to nature. Now, they harness it for
their benefit. The next step, Poste said, is duplicating nature by creating
nanotechnology robots that repair cellular damage.

   For Poste, science and technology are second nature.

   "I cannot think of something that is more fascinating, constantly changing,"
he says.

   But Poste sees danger if societal implications of emerging sciences aren't
considered. Nuclear fission, for instance, was once an emerging technology that
led to the creation of the hydrogen bomb.

   "Scientists should make as sober an assessment as we can of risks of science
and technology," he says.

   Despite his 18-hour days, Poste says, "I'm like everyone else. At the end of
a long day, I veg out. I can channel-surf with the best of them."

   Poste is married to Linda Lopez, a molecular biologist. They have three
children, two of whom graduated from ASU, and three grandchildren. He enjoys
photography, watching movies and motor racing, calling race car drivers "the
ultimate athlete."

   A race is "enormously tactical," he said, because driving conditions are
always changing and require unequalled mental concentration as drivers speed
more than 200 mph around a track just inches away from each other for hours at a
time.

   But right now, Poste's focus is on the crane puncturing the sky where AzBio
is being built not far from his southern campus conference room.

   The $346 million institute will make up 1 million square feet of research
space.

   The first building opens in September. Three other modules will open over the
next several years and initially house eight centers organized around the study
of infectious diseases, pharmaceuticals, nanotechnology, biophysics,
neuroscience, rehabilitation engineering and evolutionary biology.

   Organizers hope the institute will cement ASU's reputation as an emerging
scientific player, boosting its prestige, spawning biotechnology ventures and
bringing federal dollars.

   ASU President Michael Crow initially tried to recruit Reg Kelly, executive
vice chancellor at the University of California-San Francisco, for AzBio's top
job.

   "Reg said, 'Ya know, the smartest guy in the world on this is living in
Scottsdale,' " Crow said, referring to Poste.

   "That's the way to make things like this work. The researchers adapt. They
become the leading-edge scientists."

   /

   Bio

   George Poste

   Title: Director, Arizona Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University.

   Age: 59.

   Salary: $400,000.

   Experience: Former chief science and technology officer for pharmaceutical
giant SmithKline Beecham.

   Education: Doctorates in veterinary medicine and virology, University of
Bristol, United Kingdom.

   Accomplishments: Helped bring 29 drugs and vaccines to market; published more
than 350 scientific papers; edited several books on cancer research and drug
delivery. In 1999, granted the rank of Commander of the British Empire by Queen
Elizabeth II for contributions to biotechnology.

   Other posts: Chairman, diaDexus and Structural GenomiX; board member,
Monsanto and AdvancePCS; member, Defense Science Board of the Department of
Defense; chairman, Task Force on Bioterrorism; member, National Academy of
Sciences Working Group to control the proliferation of biological weapons;
distinguished fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford University.

   Personal: Married to a molecular biologist, Linda Lopez. They have three
children and three grandchildren.

GRAPHIC: George Poste

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005


                             481 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     March 22, 2004, Monday, Metro Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: VARIETY; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1502 words

HEADLINE: MONDAY PROFILE;
Soul searcher;
Philosopher Carl Elliott explores America's quest for perfection

BYLINE: Jon Tevlin; Staff Writer

BODY:

   I had discovered that a person does not have to be this or be that or be
anything, not even oneself. One is free.

                    _ Walker Percy

        Legal drugs for anxiety or shyness. Plastic surgery to stop time.
Self-help books to build esteem.

        Women are shortening their toes to fit into designer shoes. Men are
lengthening their penises to fit into designer lives.

        For University of Minnesota professor and bioethicist Carl Elliott, it's
all part of the perplexing, fascinating pastiche of the United States of All You
Can Be, where the undaunting pursuit of perfection meets what he calls the
nation's "tyranny of happiness."

         Elliott's 2003 book, "Better Than Well: Where American Medicine Meets
the American Dream," has been lauded as an intelligent, funny and
thought-provoking essay on how Americans are remaking themselves, their very
souls, through the wonders and horrors of "medical enhancements."

      The book is an intricately woven tapestry of history, social science,
literature, pop culture and personal anecdote. The result is a compelling and at
times unsettling view of the future of the human being.

        Elliott is continuing his psycho-social excavation in an enclave near
New Jersey's Princeton University with other big thinkers, his wife and two
kids. As visiting associate professor in the School of Social Sciences at the
Institute for Advanced Study, his job consists mostly of thinking, writing and
talking to other scientists and philosophers about why Americans strive so hard
to fill a hole that can't be filled. Some of that work is appearing in academic
journals, but he's also offering astute commentary for such venues as Slate.com.

   Rising star

        It's a prestigious post (the first recipient was Albert Einstein) for
the 42-year-old, who, even while he works on a bioethics program at the
institute, frets about the very nature of bioethicists: the growing discipline
of medical philosophers at universities and hospitals who help shape thinking
about the moral and social ramifications of science on medicine. They are the
ones who contemplate and set direction for the headlong lurch into stem cell
research and gene therapy, cloning and sexual enhancers.

        Even though Elliott is seen as a rising star, he bluntly declares: "I
don't like this idea of having these moral authorities out there to turn to," he
said. "It seems deeply undemocratic."

        The statement seems uncannily self-aware, but you'd expect that from the
author of a book that, rather than castigate those who tweak their personalities
with beta-blockers or order their botox by the boatload, ponders the
ramifications of (literally) self-made men and women.

         It's not the kind of job most kids jot down on the career form in the
high school counselor's office. But Elliott grew up in a family of thinkers and
readers where lively discussion was encouraged.

         He lived in Clover, S.C. His father was a family doctor, his mother a
teacher and librarian. One brother became a psychologist.

        Elliott didn't know what to do, so he studied pre-med as his father had.

        "In retrospect, I'm kind of baffled why I went into medicine," he said
in a phone interview. "It wasn't pressure from my parents. It was more a lack of
imagination. I didn't really know what philosophy was; it was Aristotle."

        Medical school bored Elliott. But near the end of his college days a
friend turned him on to novelist Walker Percy. In a book called "Love in the
Ruins," Percy wrote about a machine called an Ontological Lapsometer, a device
that would alleviate existential quandaries and the dread that people felt in
their lives. At the time, it hit him where he lived.

        Elliott dropped out of college, moved to Glasgow, Scotland, and earned a
doctorate in philosophy, much to the chagrin of his family and friends. But just
being outside the United States taught him to question the way he'd perceived
his life. "Travel makes you look at things differently," he said. "It knocks the
legs out of our concept of how to live, really."

        Later, his brother Hal, a psychiatrist, told him about a new drug called
Prozac and how it had profound effects on patients suffering from depression.
Some also said it made them feel more like themselves. It sounded a lot like
Percy's machine to cure the human soul.

        "My brother's characters sounded a lot like the characters in 'Love in
the Ruins,' " Elliott said. "I have always been interested in how people are
using medical technology and psychiatric drugs to fix existential alienation or
boredom or their inability to fit in."

   An industry skeptic

        Unlike some critics of psychotropic solutions, Elliott doesn't argue
that such drugs are wrong; he says they can help those truly suffering from
depression or other mental illness.

         "But it's this expansion, this enormous rise in diagnoses of
personality traits that are now being treated by drugs, and the sheer profits
being derived from them by pharmaceutical companies that worries me," he said.
"I'm an industry skeptic."

        Not long ago, he notes, someone who didn't care for parties was simply
shy. Today, that person suffers from a disease called "social phobia," which
(not coincidentally, he says) can be treated with a drug called Paxil.

        Not long ago, people who didn't like public speaking went to
Toastmasters to practice. Now they take beta-blockers to calm them down.

        The transformation from personality quirk to disease came during a time
when the nation's drug industry increased its marketing budget tenfold (to $13.9
billion in 1999), according to Elliott, with such slogans as: "Paxil . . . your
life is waiting," or "I got my playfulness back with Efflexor," a drug for
"depression relief."

        Elliott's critique of the industry has already had ramifications: After
he and colleague Peter D. Kramer, author of the bestselling "Listening to
Prozac," presented their concerns about medical enhancements in a not-for-profit
medical ethics journal, a drug company cut its funding of that institute.

        Elliott began writing down his thoughts on the self and its changing
nature, usually at the Dunn Brothers coffee shop at 34th and Hennepin in
Minneapolis.

        As a sought-after professor, Elliott explored not only the weighty
matters of the soul through the words of the masters, but also showed his less
stuffy side by bringing to his classes odd guests, such as people who engage in
extreme body modification.

        His work has taken him to the world of voluntary amputees, who feel
"whole" only after removing an arm, and to parents of short kids who want to
give them human growth hormone so they will be more successful. It's taken him
to a speech therapist who helps transgender subjects find their "real" voice,
and to another who helps Southerners talk like Midwesterners.

        Kramer met Elliott after a reading of his Prozac book in 1997 at the
former Hungry Mind bookstore in St. Paul, and now mentions Elliott's work in the
same breath as philosophers Stanley Cavell, Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo
Emerson.

        In the foreword to Elliott's book, he wrote that Elliott "is unafraid of
the messiness of human nature, although perhaps a bit worried over the moment in
which we find ourselves, when human nature may be changing, at our own hands."

       Kramer said Elliott has managed to talk about philosophical issues in "an
engaging way that allows us to look at ourselves."     Elliott is an admitted
carpetbagger of the human terrain, and he's witnessed enough oddness that he
hesitates to talk about how far we may go to reshape who we are. But he does
believe we will continue to seek the promise of the Declaration of Independence
_ the pursuit of happiness _ whatever the price.

        Elliott will probably be there to think about it, marvel at it, and try
to explain this "restlessness in the midst of abundance."

   .

   Jon Tevlin is at jtevlin@startribune.com.

   An excerpt from "Better Than Well":

         "Minnesotans are a prosperous people, but unlike many Americans, they
do not really trust their prosperity. Prosperity sounds too much like having a
good time. . . . This is why the Mall of America has been so successful here; it
turns pleasure shopping into an ordeal. Minnesota, it so happens, has been home
to three of America's most perceptive critics of the pursuit of happiness in a
consumerist age. Two were novelists: Sinclair Lewis, who made Babbitry a synonym
for the petty small-mindedness of the American middle class, and F. Scott
Fitzgerald, whose novels of doomed heroes and dazzling social climbers read like
parables of the American obsession with status and wealth. But the name of the
third, Thorstein Veblen, is less well-recognized outside academic circles. . . .
What Veblen saw, nearly a century before the Mall of America was constructed,
was how people will buy things for the sake of public display."



CORRECTION-DATE: March 25, 2004, Thursday

CORRECTION:

   - A picture caption on the Variety cover Monday incorrectly said the
Institute for Advanced Study is part of Princeton University.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2004


                             482 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             March 21, 2004 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Features Desk; Part R; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: The human face of gene therapy;
His Brother's Keeper: A Story From the Edge of Medicine; Jonathan Weiner; The
Ecco Press: 350 pp., $26.95

BYLINE: Mark Dowie, Mark Dowie teaches science at the Graduate School of
Journalism at UC Berkeley and is the author of "American Foundations: An
Investigative History."

BODY:

   Science is a difficult thing to communicate to nonscientists, now more than
ever with familiar sciences such as biology, physics, chemistry and cybernetics
morphing into new sciences, some of which exist beneath our line of sight, where
the laws of nature hover between Newtonian and quantum mechanics.

   Few scientists know how to make this world real to each other, let alone to
the rest of us, and those who do are often reviled by their peers for
popularizing something best left in the laboratory. Thus we laymen must rely on
articulate mass media science writers to keep us abreast of subjects we left
behind in our sophomore years. They master the language and complexity of new
fields such as cyber-, bio- and nanotechnology and carry us with ease through
the most arcane and baffling concepts. We are intrigued and empowered by their
gift.

   Jonathan Weiner, a Pulitzer Prize-winning writer-in-residence at Rockefeller
University and former editor of the Sciences magazine, has been justly awarded
for previous books about matters as diverse as the love life of fruit flies, the
ever-evolving beaks of Galapagos finches and the future of the planet we occupy.
Now he turns to medicine and recounts a desperate personal quest to cure an
intractable orphan disease with untried, highly controversial gene treatments.
The result is a captivating, suspenseful narrative, full of complex, fascinating
characters and loads of pathos.

   "His Brother's Keeper: A Story From the Edge of Medicine" is a science drama
involving the illness of one member of an amazing family. When Stephen Heywood,
the second of three brothers, is diagnosed at 29 with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, better known as Lou Gehrig's disease, his older brother Jamie
transforms himself overnight from a mechanical engineer to a genetic engineer in
a desperate quest to save him.

   ALS is a devastating, incurable neurological disorder that rapidly destroys
the motor nerves of its victims. Their lives end in unimaginable agony and
suffocation, generally, about two years after diagnosis. This is not something
Jamie Heywood ever wants to watch.

   As the story unfolds and Stephen's condition worsens, Jamie is variously
motivated by rage, ambition, curiosity, fame and profit to find a way to
regenerate lost neurons somewhere in the fast-growing but still infant field of
genetic medicine. But above all he is driven, at times into caffeinated frenzy,
by a compulsive resolve to save his brother's life.

   When Stephen is diagnosed, Jamie leaves a lucrative career in La Jolla,
Calif., and moves home to Boston where his brothers and their parents still
live. Weiner follows him to become all but a member of the family. And what a
family -- tight-knit, loving and defiantly loyal. Anyone would want to be part
of it, most of all a solitary writer accustomed to lonely nights in motels, long
rides in rented cars and impersonal interviews in neutral locations.

   I envied Weiner being with the Heywoods, although as a fellow reporter I
began to wonder how objective or dispassionate anyone could be when he stays
overnight in their houses, parties at their cottage, joins them at church and
drives thousands of miles up and down the East Coast with them, from Boston to
New York to Baltimore, as they raise money and beseech molecular biologists,
geneticists and clinical physicians to join their private war against ALS.
Weiner admits, "I was hooked." And I realized I would have been too.

   The plot thickens when Weiner's mother is diagnosed with a rare neurological
disorder called Lewy Body dementia. I can imagine his editor asking whether the
author and his mother needed to be injected into the drama that was engulfing
the Heywood family.

   But it turns out that Lewy Body is a condition that could be cured by some of
the same treatments being considered for Stephen. So this additional drama
works, and we join the Weiner family as Jon Weiner joins the Heywoods.

   In the course of his research into the science behind the treatments, Weiner
signs a can't-write-about-it-for-three-years contract and joins another
desperate voyage. A Caribbean cruise ship called the Galaxy sets sail from
Miami. On board is a small group of geneticists and fertilization specialists
who are dodging the glare of media, the judgment of bioethicists and the
intrusion of government for a week at sea.

   In safe international waters they discuss some of the more controversial and
ethically challenged procedures emerging in their practice. The most riveting
debate is over germ line engineering, which offers the ability to permanently
alter the human genome in such a way as to breed a superhuman species that
cannot interbreed with its genetically inferior ancestors.

   Weiner witnesses an exchange any journalist would die for. And he returns to
shore wondering whether this genetic manipulation is responsible medicine.

   That sort of question, alongside the growing doubts among bioethicists about
experimental procedures on consenting terminal patients, sends Jamie Heywood
into a rage. "That's just like totalitarianism," he tells another reporter. "If
we've gotten to the point where human beings aren't capable of making decisions
in their own best interests, then what kind of society do we believe in?" But
this is not a simple decision, Jamie is soon to discover, for either Stephen or
the dozens of scientists and physicians Jamie has recruited to his cause.

   There are two interventions possible for Stephen. One injects healthy stem
cells either into his spinal column or directly into his brain. The other
infinitely more experimental and complex procedure involves a neurological
vaccine made by inserting DNA into billions of viruses and injecting them into
the patient in the hope that they will penetrate nerve cell walls, find their
way to the nucleus and instruct it to produce a chemical that will block the
cellular production of glutamate, an amino acid that in excess kills nerve cells
-- the mechanism of ALS.

   Stem cells had been tried on a few ALS patients in their endgame. Results
were not encouraging. The vaccine was untried. Which was right for Stephen, the
stem cells or the neurovaccine? Or was either treatment right for anyone?

   Perplexed by that question, Weiner calls Arthur Caplan, the most widely
quoted bioethicist in the country, a man whom I have known to answer his phone
on the first ring. When he hears the question, Caplan does not hesitate to
express an opinion looming in his practice about stem cells and gene therapy.

   "My skepticism about all this is somewhere between unbounded and enormous,"
he tells Weiner. Stem cell therapies, Caplan says, belong "on a five year plan,
not a short term plan," and adds, "the fact is you can be made more miserable --
even though it doesn't seem possible -- by interventions."

   And therein lies the central question of this story and of regenerative
medicine itself. How far can we go in experimentation, even with dying patients
still competent to provide informed consent? The value of books like "His
Brother's Keeper" is that they force the healthy to address such questions while
they are healthy, rather than waiting until they and their frantic family are
driven by desperation to find a silver bullet. At that point they are at the
mercy of medical cowboys like the geneticists on board the Galaxy who discussed
practices and procedures they did not want us to know about until they had
mastered them.

   It's not the first time this has happened in medicine. Nor will it be the
last until we, the consumers of treatment, better understand what they are
talking about. For that we can be grateful to writers like Jonathan Weiner.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER: Paige Imatani For The Times

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2004


                             483 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2004 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             March 21, 2004 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: COMMENTARY; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: ALS Victim, Brother Enter Race For Cure

BYLINE: MARK F. LEWIS

BODY:

   By MARK F. LEWIS

   HIS BROTHER'S KEEPER: A Story From The Edge Of Medicine.

   By Jonathan Weiner. Ecco. 368 pages. $26.95.

   In "Tuesdays With Morrie," Mitch Albom watched helplessly while his college
mentor's body slowly succumbed to the ravages of ALS (amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis). When Stephen Heywood was diagnosed with this illness, his brother
Jamie was determined to do better -- he would find a cure and find it quickly
enough to save Stephen's life.

   Pulitzer Prize winner Jonathan Weiner has combined his knowledge of science
with insights into family dynamics to produce a touching and almost unbelievable
true story. He explains the applicable scientific principles in language readily
understandable to the average reader. In Stephen's case, the early symptoms
appeared in his right hand, first becoming noticeable when his brother bested
him in arm wrestling for the first time in five years. As Weiner explains,
"Stephen's motor neurons had begun to die, one by one, and messages were failing
to get through to his right hand."

   Despite the success of Albom's book and the fact that famed baseball player
Lou Gehrig also contracted it, Weiner notes that ALS is still considered an
orphan disease. The big pharmaceutical companies don't want to invest literally
billions of dollars to find a cure for an illness that affects only 25,000
patients in the United States.

   This situation was unacceptable to Jamie, a mechanical engineer. He gave up a
position in a California think tank to return home to Massachusetts where he
would put his engineering skills to work. In his view, it was really very
simple: "If what has broken is nothing but a system made of molecules, an
engineer can try to fix it." Working from this basic premise, Jamie recruited a
team of scientists to speed up research in the gene therapy that he believed
would be the cure.

   During this time, Weiner admits that he lost his ability to view this story
through the eyes of an objective journalist: "When I let myself hope for Jamie
and Stephen, I knew that I got carried away. Illness makes us all yearn for that
kind of magic cure." Many times throughout the book, Weiner had to remind
himself, and readers, of the almost impossible goal that Jamie had set for
himself.

   What made it all the more painful for him was knowing that his mother was
also losing a battle with a neurodegenerative disease.

   In addition to the virtual impossibility of trying to rush a major scientific
breakthrough, problems arose in the field of gene therapy that caused the
shutting down of much research. Since we haven't read about the discovery of a
cure for ALS, you know that the book unfortunately has the predictable ending
that you keep hoping would not happen. Even Weiner resigned himself to this
fact: "I knew it had to end badly. I think he [Jamie] knew it too. But I still
hoped that through sheer energy, will, and intelligence, Jamie would snatch some
kind of victory in spite of everything - and not be destroyed with Stephen."

   Throughout this work, Weiner also touches on some of the ethical problems
endemic in this field: "How much of life can we engineer? Are there any lines we
cannot or should not cross?" He stands in awe that "molecular biology was moving
so fast that it was capable of experiments as outrageous as anything in the
literature of science fiction."

   "His Brother's Keeper" can leave you frustrated with the realization that
despite the best efforts of the brightest people in the field, there are some
things that just cannot be done, at least not on a specific timetable. But it
will also give you hope for the future, knowing that there are men such as Jamie
Heywood who live by a credo, "If I think there is even a possibility, I can't
not do it." It will also leave you with a warm feeling about how one particular
family came together during a time of great crisis.

   Mark F. Lewis of Tampa is a prosecutor at the Hillsborough state attorney's
office.

   Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: BOOKS

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
(Book cover - His Brother's Keeper)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2004


                             484 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 20, 2004, Saturday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY LEAVES BIOTECH COUNCIL

BYLINE: By Ross Kerber Globe Staff

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. has pulled out of the Massachusetts
Biotechnology Council, a surprise move that comes on the heels of the departure
of the influential trade group's president and a significant dues increase.

      Michael J. Astrue, chief executive of Transkaryotic, said the company did
not renew its membership in the Cambridge organization this year, though he
declined to explain further. Transkaryotic is a mid-sized biotech company known
for marketing a therapy for Fabry disease.


           Another person involved in the council said Astrue was upset by
Bourque's departure.

      Astrue is a former chairman of the biotech council. With more than 400
members, the council's profile has been raised by the group's involvement in the
dispute over legislation to allow importation of cheaper Canadian drugs. The
council, which also represents pharmaceutical company interests, has been urging
Beacon Hill to reject any plans to allow the imports, arguing that such a move
would hurt the industry.

      Meantime, the group's longtime president, Janice T. Bourque, said last
month that she was stepping down but that she might remain in a different role.
But on March 10, the trade group said she was leaving in search of "new career
opportunities."

      Astrue's successor as chairman, Cynthia A. Fisher, didn't return telephone
messages yesterday. Fisher is chief executive of BioMed 20/20 Technologies Inc.,
a biomedical software and services provider in Auburndale.

      David J. McLachlan, a senior adviser at Genzyme Corp. and now the
council's interim chief operating officer, said he didn't know why Transkaryotic
had left. He said companies typically leave the group either because they are
dissatisfied with the organization, are acquired, or move out of state.

      McLachlan added that as the group looks for a new president it also plans
to take on a more aggressive role on policy issues such as drug pricing, which
are much more important to larger members such as his own employer and Biogen
Idec Inc., the state's two largest biotech companies.

      Under Bourque for the past decade, the trade group had also focused on
services such as bulk-purchasing arrangements for laboratory supplies, which are
helpful to smaller companies. That will continue, McLachlan said, but larger
companies have "outgrown" the need for such help. These members "want to see
more emphasis on legislative matters, particularly with a legislature that's
very receptive to us," he said.

      The lobby gained some traction on Thursday when House Speaker Thomas
Finneran said he's not in favor of importing cheaper drugs from Canada because
it could harm the state's pharmaceutical industry.

   The trade group also recently instituted a dues increase, raising the maximum
rate on members to $18,000 a year, McLachlan said. Smaller companies pay less.
He said he hadn't heard any complaints about the increase.


      Ross Kerber can be reached at kerber@globe.com.


LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2004


                             485 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            March 17, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Education Page; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: Massachusetts Student Wins Intel Science Prize With Cancer Study

BYLINE: By CLAIRE HOFFMAN

BODY:

   Before he arrived at the nation's top science fair competition last week,
Herbert Mason Hedberg had already written four pages of a how-to guide on
science fair strategies for fellow students at his high school in North
Attleboro, Mass. But yesterday, after his research on potential cancer therapies
won first prize and a $100,000 scholarship at the Intel Science Talent Search,
Mr. Hedberg, a senior, could have easily added a new chapter to his guidebook.

    ''I am trying to lighten the load and give these kids some answers,'' Mr.
Hedberg, 17, said in a telephone interview before the winners were announced. He
said the guide was meant to help students overcome one obstacle he had faced --
that his public school had only a small budget for science supplies.

     A group of 40 finalists, each of whom received at least a $5,000
scholarship, had competed over the last five days in Washington, D.C., for
$530,000 in college scholarships. The awards were presented last night by a
panel of a dozen scientists who had judged the competition.

    This year, the contest had a record number of applicants, with more than
1,600 from 46 states. The contest has long been considered a sort of junior
Nobel Prize and is one of the oldest science fairs in the country. It was
formerly sponsored by the Westinghouse Electric Corporation. Intel, the
semiconductor company based in Santa Clara, Calif., became the sponsor in 1999.

    Like many of the 300 semifinalists this year, Mr. Hedberg found inspiration
for his project in his own life. Pained by watching his grandmother's struggle
with cancer, Mr. Hedberg said he began research in his junior year on a process
to isolate telomerase, an enzyme found in most cancer cells. His process showed
how an effective enzyme inhibitor could stop the cells from growing.

    ''I consider myself lucky for stumbling on this idea and having this work,''
Mr. Hedberg said.

    Mr. Hedberg did his laboratory work during a summer internship at the
biotechnology company where his father works. He wrote letters to doctors around
the country asking for the human genes he needed for his research. Mr. Hedberg
plans to be a physician and researcher, and he has been accepted into an
eight-year medical program at Brown University.

    While many of the finalists will attend top colleges this fall, Dr. Andrew
M. Yeager, the head judge, said the contest is more than just another notch on
the belt for those applying to colleges. ''The students are doing this not out
of the pressure to do something else, but a true love of science,'' he said.

    Second place, and a $75,000 scholarship, went to Boris Alexeev, 17, of Cedar
Shoals High School in Athens, Ga. He won it for a computer science project that
he believes solves a fundamental problem in a theory that can be used in fields
like genetics and speech recognition. Ryna Karnik, 17, of Oregon Episcopal
School in Portland, won third place and a $50,000 scholarship for engineering a
new method for constructing microchips.

    New York State, long a powerhouse in science fairs, had 18 finalists this
week, but only two students made the top 10. Eduard Reznik, 17, of Ward Melville
High School in East Setauket, on Long Island, won fifth place and a $25,000
scholarship for examining Albert Einstein's equations concerning stars. Jayne
Wolfson, 18, of Byram Hills High School in Armonk, in Westchester County, won
sixth place and a $25,000 scholarship for exploring the role of ''pretend play''
in the cognitive development of toddlers.

    Felicia Yuen-Lee Yen, 17, of Dix Hills, on Long Island, was a finalist who
also examined gene therapy for cancer, focusing on tests for breast cancer.
''Science takes you out of the classroom,'' said Ms. Yen. ''It helps you learn
not just books and facts but experimenting. It is truly the definition of
discovery.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Herbert Mason Hedberg, winner of the Intel Science Talent
Search.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2004


                             486 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             March 14, 2004 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: LOS ANGELES TIMES MAGAZINE; Lat Magazine Desk; Part I; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 3617 words

HEADLINE: The Bionic Frontier;
While Actor Christopher Reeve Has Focused Public Attention on the Distant
Potential of Spinal Cord Regeneration, the Less Glamorous Science of
Neuroprosthetics Is Quietly Remaking Broken Lives.

BYLINE: Simon LeVay, Simon LeVay was until 1992 a neuroscientist at the Salk
Institute in La Jolla, and is best known for his research into the biological
basis of sexual orientation. He is the co-author, with Curt Freed, of "Healing
the Brain" and lives in West Hollywood.

BODY:

   Katie Lee Anderson doesn't say much on the July 2003, day when she arrives at
St. Vincent Medical Center in downtown Los Angeles. Kirk and Laura Lee Anderson,
parents of the slender, blond 19-year-old from Orem, Utah, do most of the
talking. But Katie is definitely the focus of conversation, because later that
day--if all goes well--she will make medical history. An array of electrodes
will be inserted into the base of her brain, and she will become a living,
breathing bionic woman.

   Katie's hearing problem became apparent five years earlier, when she was 14.
"She was no longer racing her siblings to answer the telephone," says her
father. "When we asked her why, she said she couldn't hear on the phone." An MRI
scan revealed the cause: noncancerous tumors were compressing the nerves that
connected her inner ears to her brain. Her condition, called neurofibromatosis
type 2, is genetic, but Katie is the only member of her large family to have it.
Her hearing continued to deteriorate despite two operations. By the time she
arrives in Los Angeles, she can't even hear claps of thunder. She speaks quite
normally, but she can't follow the conversation well enough to join in.

   Still, Katie opened up in a series of e-mails about the toll that deafness
had taken on her life. "I wasn't a popular kid at school," she wrote, "and at
some point I felt that I was a ghost because I didn't have a lot of friends. I
would just sit there and be quiet...I couldn't really hear the teachers." After
graduating, she worked for a while as a teacher's aide but eventually was laid
off. Her co-workers were "complaining that I couldn't answer the phone and that
it was a burden on them. I feel somewhat isolated from my friends'
lives--because I'm hardly ever invited to do stuff with anyone."

   Because Katie's auditory nerves no longer function, hearing aids or even
cochlear implants can't help. Her world has grown excruciatingly small. So when
her parents heard about a startling option in Los Angeles that hinted at the
emerging science of "neuroprosthetics"--the use of electronic devices to
substitute for damaged neural tissue--they began asking questions. The Andersons
eventually brought their daughter here for a revolutionary treatment--one that
offers a glimpse into what may be possible for those, like Katie, who have been
betrayed by their bodies and can't wait for the nascent promise of brain or
spinal-cord regeneration.

   Since becoming a quadriplegic in 1995, actor-director Christopher Reeve has
dedicated himself to the quest for spinal cord regeneration, the Holy Grail of
neurology. The bulk of the money generated by the Christopher Reeve Paralysis
Foundation has promoted research into biologically based therapies, such as
stem-cell research that could regenerate damaged brain cells and possibly
restore lost functions to patients such as Katie.

   Given that, the decision to implant an electronic device into Katie's brain
may come across as Rube Goldbergian, inadequate or unnecessary. Yet the
biological therapies have been much slower to develop than researchers had hoped
five years ago. Stem cells have proven tricky to control, and early clinical
tests of gene therapy have caused at least one death and two cases of leukemia.

   Neuroscientist Terry Hambrecht, a longtime researcher at the National
Institutes of Health, understands why Katie and those like her pursue potential
solutions now rather than wait for the next wave of scientific progress.
"Regeneration, stem cells--they have tremendous promise, but I'm very skeptical
that they are going to do anything useful in our lifetime," Hambrecht says.
"Neuroprosthetics not only promises, but has delivered." Ross Nathan, a Long
Beach-based hand surgeon who has implanted neuroprosthetic devices, echoes the
point. "It's hard to get up there and criticize Reeve," he says. "You feel bad
for him, and he does have good intentions. But his efforts are not improving
anyone's quality of life, I believe."

   Although Katie's operation was to be a world's first, scientists have been
developing the field of neuroprosthetics for many years. Hambrecht, who started
the NIH's neuroprosthetics program in 1972 and ran it until 1999, recalls an
account of an experiment performed around 1800 by electricity pioneer Alessandro
Volta. The ever-curious Italian put wires in each of his ear canals and
connected them to his newly invented battery, which put out about 60 volts. "I
received a shock in the head," wrote Volta, "and a few moments later, I began to
be conscious of a sound, or rather a noise, in my ears that I cannot define
clearly. Because of the disagreeable, and I feared dangerous, sensation of the
jolt in the brain, I did not repeat the experiment." What Katie's doctors
planned to do to her was, in principle, what Volta did to himself, but refined
by two centuries of advances in neuroscience and electrical engineering.

   Probably the best-developed application of brain-stimulation technology is in
the treatment of Parkinson's disease and other disorders of movement. For many
years, the only treatment for involuntary movements that did not respond to
drugs was to surgically interrupt the brain circuits that generate them. These
operations, with names such as thalamotomy and pallidotomy, occasionally had
devastating complications, such as affecting the patient's ability to speak.

   In the late 1980s, neurosurgeon Alim-Louis Benabid of the Joseph Fourier
University in Grenoble, France, tried implanting an electronic stimulator in the
brains of patients with Parkinson's disease. He found that activation of the
device subdued the patients' tremor just as effectively as the standard surgery,
without the destruction of any brain tissue. Benabid's device has become a
commercially successful product manufactured by the Minnesota-based Medtronic
Inc. and is now used routinely around the world. Refinements in the placement of
the stimulators have made it possible for the device to relieve other symptoms
commonly experienced by Parkinson's patients, such as their halting gait.

   The electronic wonder that was to be implanted in Katie's brain makes the
Medtronic stimulator seem as high-tech as a bowling ball.

   Katie isn't a particularly outgoing young woman, and this morning, waiting
for the anesthetist to arrive, she seems caught between her fears about brain
surgery and unwanted publicity and her hope that her hearing might someday
return to normal. Her e-mails are more explicit. "I am a little scared because I
am not really a person who goes first or who likes to do stuff in front of a
crowd," she writes. "I hope the implant will make it so I can hear sound. I hope
it will help me with my education and other things I want to do in life. I am
happy and proud too, because I am doing something that can make a difference in
people's lives."

   Less ambitious versions of the device destined for Katie's brain have been
around since 1979. Researchers at the House Ear Institute, located across the
street from St. Vincent Medical Center, introduced an "auditory brainstem
implant" that year that could be placed on the surface of the brainstem, near
where the auditory nerves enter it. That device has since been implanted in more
than 400 people, and it offers a rudimentary form of hearing that can be useful
as an adjunct to lip-reading. It also can alert the person to environmental
sounds such as a knock on the door. It doesn't usually allow for real speech
comprehension though. That's because the human auditory system works by breaking
sounds down into their constituent frequencies (or pitches) and transmitting
these frequencies through different neural pathways for analysis. A stimulating
device placed on the surface of the brain does a poor job of stimulating
specific pathways; it tends to stimulate them in non-specific ways, generating
noises that inhibit speech perception.

   But for the past several years, a team at the House Ear Institute and the
Huntington Medical Research Institutes in Pasadena has worked on the new implant
designed to address this shortcoming. The main innovation in the new device is a
set of eight tiny, needle-like electrodes, mounted on a button about three
millimeters across. When inserted directly into the auditory center in the
brainstem and connected to a microphone and a frequency-analyzing
microprocessor, the electrodes are designed to provide independent stimulation
of several different frequency pathways. If it works, the user should be able to
detect the rising and falling tones that are the building blocks of speech.

   That was the theory, at least, and the theory was supported by some limited
testing of the device on laboratory animals. But because the electrodes in the
new device were designed to enter the brain rather than lie on its surface,
their exact placement was crucial. Unfortunately, the anatomical layout of the
auditory centers is not as well understood in humans as it is in animals. The
only way to test the new device was to go ahead and implant it in a human
volunteer.

   Katie looks more like a vulnerable child than an adult as she lies
unconscious on the operating table, her long hair shorn away in a wide swath
behind her right ear. Derald Brackmann, an otologist who specializes in surgery
of the inner ear and auditory nerves, begins with an incision into Katie's
scalp. A group of House Ear Institute researchers who have been involved in the
project watches the proceedings by closed-circuit television. The team's
co-leader, auditory neuroscientist Bob Shannon, gives a running commentary.

   To expose Katie's brainstem, Brackmann drills through her right temporal
bone, an extremely dense part of the skull that reaches from behind the ear
almost to the center of the head. This through-the-bone route carries less risk
of neurological complications than the traditional route, which involves
exposing and raising the back of the brain. The main risk associated with
Brackmann's approach is hemorrhage, and in fact the operative site does bleed
alarmingly on several occasions. Each time, however, Brackmann stems the flow
with electrocautery and by packing the hole with coagulant foam.

   After four hours of painstaking work, Brackmann reaches Katie's brainstem,
the region of the brain where it narrows to connect with the spinal cord. At
this point he hands over the operation to neurosurgeon William Hitselberger, who
spends another hour removing every trace of the tumor that caused Katie's
deafness. His aim is not to restore Katie's natural hearing--the damage to her
auditory nerves cannot be reversed--but to prevent the tumor from encroaching on
the vital nerve centers in her brainstem such as those that control breathing.
Then, to supplement the new device Katie will receive, Hitselberger places the
old-style auditory implant so that its 14 electrical contact points are lying
against the surface of Katie's brainstem.

   Finally, the moment arrives to install the new device. To do its job
properly, the array of needle-like electrodes must be driven into the brain
tissue at the exact spot where the underlying auditory centers are located.
Hitselberger loads the device into a gadget that works like a miniature staple
gun. He roams over the exposed brain with the tip of the gadget, trying to
locate the slight bulges and folds in the terrain that identify the position of
the auditory centers. The movements of Hitselberger's instrument, viewed through
an operating microscope and displayed on a cinema-sized screen, seem unbearably
coarse and uncertain. In reality, they only range over a few millimeters. Doug
McCreery, the neurophysiologist who designed both the electrode array and the
insertion tool and who performed the animal testing, is in the operating room.
As he discusses the exact placement of the array with Hitselberger, his voice
betrays some anxiety, and with good reason: Ten years of his research are soon
to be validated, or not.

   Finally, the team agrees on the optimal location. Hitselberger pushes a
button, and the electrode array shoots into the brain in the blink of an eye.
There's no turning back now. All that remains is to arrange a rat's nest of
electrical leads within the deep hole Brackmann has created, pack the hole with
Katie's own fatty tissue (obtained from a mini-liposuction in her abdomen),
cover it with titanium mesh to replace the missing bone and sew her up. After a
night in the intensive-care unit, Katie returns to Utah with her parents. She is
to spend six weeks recuperating at home, then she'll return to Los Angeles in
September so that the device can be switched on and tested. Only then will Katie
know if it works.

   By opting for a neuroprosthetic solution, Katie joined a remarkable
collection of bionic medical pioneers, many of whom live in Southern California.
Lois Aguilar is a 57-year-old Japanese American woman who worked in the
purchasing department of a large store but was left a quadriplegic after
breaking her neck in a 1996 car accident. She now lives with one of her sons in
a spacious home in Rancho Cucamonga whose open layout allows her to maneuver her
bulky power chair around the house.

   Aguilar uses an implant called a Freehand that was developed by a team led by
biomedical engineer P. Hunter Peckham of Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland, Ohio. The Freehand doesn't reconnect Aguilar's severed spinal
cord--such a feat is still impossible. Rather, it senses the voluntary movements
that Aguilar can still generate in her right shoulder and converts these
movements into electronic command signals sent via implanted wires to
stimulating electrodes in the muscles controlling her left hand.

   When Aguilar's implanted device was first tested, she couldn't believe what
was happening. "I moved my shoulder and my hand was doing this"--she made a
grasping motion--"and I said 'Oh my God! It's actually moving!' " Controlling
the Freehand has since become second nature to her. She uses it for everything
from brushing her teeth to feeding herself, from changing channels on the TV to
turning the pages of books. "It's improved the quality of my life tremendously,"
she says.

   The movements provided by the Freehand--a simple pinching motion, as for
holding a key or a pencil, and a grasping motion for holding larger objects such
as cups--are far short of what an able-bodied person's hand can perform. But as
Ross Nathan, the surgeon who installed Aguilar's implants, noted, "For someone
who has nothing, a little is a lot." The same can be said of those who are
totally blind but may benefit from ongoing research into a "retinal prosthesis"
by USC ophthalmologist Mark Humayun in collaboration with the Sylmar-based
Second Sight Corp.

   There are, of course, plenty of researchers who remain committed to Reeve's
vision--the development of biological therapies based on stem cells, growth
factors, genetic engineering and the like. Neuroscientist Evan Snyder, for
example, who recently left Harvard Medical School to direct the developmental
and regenerative cell biology program at the Burnham Institute in La Jolla, has
isolated neural stem cells from human fetuses. He now can grow unlimited
quantities of these cells in the lab.

   Snyder believes that transplants of neural stem cells--cells that have the
capacity to replace any kind of cell in the brain or spinal cord--eventually
will be the method of choice for treating a wide variety of neurological
problems, ranging from injuries and strokes to brain cancer and inherited
diseases. Stem-cell therapies, says Snyder, have the potential to restore the
normal function of the nervous system better than any engineering solution. Even
Katie's deafness may respond to biological therapies, if the means can be found
to persuade her severed auditory nerves to regrow.

   Snyder even sees a place for neuroprosthetics in a future where damaged brain
cells can be regenerated. "It shouldn't be an either/or," he says. "It's
probably going to end up being a combination, intelligently orchestrating the
virtues of both approaches." Snyder says he is working on a project to see
whether electrical impulses, such as might be generated by a prosthetic device,
can help mold what the stem cells do, where they go and what connections they
make. "So the two approaches may interface with each other."

   When Katie returns to Los Angeles in early September, a dozen doctors and
researchers crowd into audiologist Steve Otto's tiny lab at the House Ear
Institute to watch the implants be switched on and tested. First, Otto attaches
a small radio transmitter to Katie's scalp and prepares to send electronic
pulses to the various electrodes now inside her head. Katie remains
expressionless and seemingly unexcited, but that's because the nerves that
control her facial muscles also were damaged by her tumors. Even a smile is
difficult for her. "I'm a little scared," she wrote in an e-mail a few days
earlier. "I hope that I will get to hear some type of sound even though I don't
know what it will be like. I'm hoping that it will help me step out of my box
and get a job and have a social life."

   Otto begins by testing the old-style brain-surface device. He activates one
of its electrical contact points with a very low current. Katie says nothing.
Then Otto gradually raises the current level, and as he does so he slowly raises
his hand in the air to show Katie how the stimulus is increasing. His hand is
about halfway up from the table when Katie says, "I feel a tingle in my face."
Apparently that particular contact is not located near enough to the auditory
center but is instead stimulating nerve cells that carry sensory information
from the face. Katie's parents look disconcerted, no doubt wondering if the
whole procedure has failed.

   Otto remains calm. He switches off the stimulation and activates a different
contact point. This time, when Otto raises his hand to a medium height, Katie
suddenly says, "I hear a ding." A collective sigh of relief goes around the
room. Whatever else happens, Katie is going to get some kind of hearing out of
the implant. When Otto finishes the tests, he concludes that 12 of 14 contact
points are capable of providing the sensation of sound. It's a good start.

   Now Otto turns his attention to the new, penetrating-electrode array--Katie's
best hope to again understand human speech. Here the results aren't as good:
Only one of the eight penetrating electrodes provides a sound sensation; others
produce a sensation of tingling in Katie's hand or have no effect at all.
Apparently, in spite of the surgeons' best efforts, the penetrating array has
not been implanted in precisely the right spot in Katie's brain. With only one
electrode connecting, the penetrating array is not likely to provide Katie with
the ability to understand speech. No one says as much, but the disappointment is
palpable.

   Detailed testing continues for several days, but the goal of speech
comprehension remains elusive. Her performance is roughly similar to that of
people who receive the standard surface implant.

   Seven months later, Katie says she is grateful for even the limited ability
she now has. "I use the implant every day," she writes. "I am lip-reading better
and hearing better. I was playing hide-and-seek with one of my nieces and she
was hiding in the closet. I knew she was somewhere close by but I didn't know
where till I could hear her giggling and I found her. I can be watching TV down
in our basement and if my dad calls sometimes I hear it and respond to him."

   She has no regrets about being a medical pioneer. "I always wanted to make a
difference in the world, even if the result is not like what I thought it would
be. I am grateful for it and happy it has helped me so much."

   There is a postscript: Molly Brown followed Katie down the pioneer's path, in
November of last year, allowing the same research team to implant a similar
electrode array. Like Katie, the 43-year-old mother of three from Lynden, Wash.,
became deaf as a consequence of neurofibromatosis type 2. Besides wanting to
regain her own hearing, Brown was especially motivated to volunteer for the
procedure on account of her children. Though they're currently healthy, her
children are at risk of developing the same hereditary condition. "My No. 1
reason is to give them hope," she says. "It's very lonely to be deaf, especially
if you didn't grow up that way."

   Brown knew that Katie's implant hadn't worked as well as had been hoped. "I
felt badly for her," she says, "but I was undaunted. I was maybe even more
determined to go through with it."

   Based on their experience with Katie, the researchers made some changes in
the procedure, especially in the placement of the penetrating electrodes. The
changes paid off. When Brown, accompanied by her husband Allen, returned for
initial testing in mid-January, the audiologists found that seven of the eight
penetrating electrodes produced sound sensations. What's more, the individual
electrodes were generating sounds of different pitches, just as they had hoped.

   Within 24 hours, Brown was able to distinguish some words by hearing alone.
Her comprehension of speech and her recognition of environmental sounds has
improved since then. "I'm thrilled," she writes. "I'm just astounded at the
technology! I was shown some X-rays of my brain with all the electrodes in there
. . . wow, it was just amazing . . . all those wires! I feel much more connected
to the world."

   But the most telling moment occurred on the day of her initial testing. Her
18-year-old son Michael telephoned Allen to see how Molly was doing, and Allen
handed his wife the phone. "I love you," said Michael. Without hesitation, Molly
replied: "I love you too."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER: Illustration by Malcolm Tarlofsky

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2004


                             487 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       March 14, 2004 Sunday, Final / All

SECTION: SUNDAY ARTS; Pg. J10

LENGTH: 1017 words

HEADLINE: Search for cure to ALS becomes inspiring tale

BYLINE: KAREN SANDSTROM, Plain Dealer Book Editor

BODY:

   NONFICTION

   His Brother's Keeper

   By Jonathan Weiner.

   Ecco Press, 356 pp., $26.95.

   In 1998, a young carpenter who was rehabilitating a Victorian home in Palo
Alto, Calif., stopped to examine his right hand. The hand had been weakening for
a while, but he assumed he had simply overextended himself working on the house.

    Now, having just smacked the hand on a mailbox, Stephen Heywood gave it a
quick look. He looked again. In a holy-cow moment, Heywood noticed that the
shape of his hand had changed.

    As journalist Jonathan Weiner writes in his new book, "Stephen held up his
left hand with the fingers together, the thumb pressed up against the pointer.
In a normal human hand, the muscle makes a bulge, a small, fleshy, wrinkled
bulge, right in the crook at the base of the thumb. This bulge is known to
anatomists as the thenar eminence. Stephen did not know what it was called, but
standing there on the sidewalk he could see that his right hand had lost it. His
right hand looked as if the crook between the thumb and the palm had been carved
away with a jigsaw."

    This discovery sent Heywood to the neurologists who would eventually deliver
what might be the worst news a person can hear inside a doctor's office. Still
in his 20s, Stephen Heywood had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou
Gehrig's disease. ALS causes a gradual loss of motor control, leading to
muscular atrophy and eventual death by suffocation. It usually kills its victims
between two and five years after diagnosis. "Compared with ALS," Weiner writes,
"even brain cancer is a lesser condition."

    In "His Brother's Keeper," Weiner presents the story of how Stephen's older
brother, Jamie, transformed himself from an MIT-trained engineer into a medical
entrepreneur whose ad hoc committee of scientists and researchers worked with
the hope of curing Stephen through gene therapy. It is by turns a wrenching,
inspiring and mystifying tale done justice by science writer Weiner, who won a
Pulitzer Prize for "The Beak of the Finch."

    Nonfiction books written by journalists often read like newspaper articles
run amok. Trained to write what they know and then prove how they know it,
reporters have a way of starching up the silky threads of a story.

    Weiner writes like a writer, not like a reporter. If it seems a touch forced
that he begins one chapter with a reference to Franz Kafka's short story, "The
Imperial Message," the reader soon will concede that a) Weiner makes good use of
the prop and b) it's reassuring to be in the hands of a reporter who reads
literature. The author maintains a grasp not only on his facts, factoids and
metaphors but also on the big picture - the broad beams of meaning on which all
else hangs.

    "His Brother's Keeper" is really three stories. The first explains the
technologies of modern genetics and their implications for the future of
humanity. Set in the late 1990s, around the time of the birth of Dolly, the
first cloned lamb, the book captures the fear and excitement that surrounded the
new scientific knowledge.

    "By the last decade of the twentieth century, the power of human
understanding had reached a point at which it was possible to view all of life
as a project in molecular engineering, and the saving of life as nothing more
than engineering and genetic carpentry," Weiner writes. "Now surgeons dreamed of
operating on molecules inside the bodies of their patients - hammering, sawing,
and polishing. . . . The molecular surgeons had a new and exalted maxim. To
teach the body to heal itself molecule by molecule would be to heal like God."

    Such God-playing is exactly what Jamie Heywood hopes to do for Stephen.
First, Jamie dives into ALS research to understand what doctors know about it.
One factor seems to be the overproduction of the neurotransmitter glutamate,
which can lead to the death of nerves in the spine, which cuts communication
between the brain and muscles.

    After speaking with a neuroscientist named Jeffrey Rothstein, who
specializes in ALS, Jamie concluded that the goal was to somehow fix the
messaging system in his brother's dying spinal nerves. Weiner follows as Jamie
tries this, fearlessly presenting scientific information that at times can be
hard for a lay reader to follow.

    Jamie surrounds himself with experts and information on genetic engineering,
gene therapy and stem cells, and builds a think tank. Although Jamie is not a
scientist, he throws himself with cowboy zeal into his race against time. The
odds of success seem almost too small to consider. Jamie's determination to defy
them gives the story its suspense.

    The second story Weiner tells is about the singular determination and sense
of purpose that the Heywood brothers, their wives and their parents bring to the
fight. Raised in suburban Boston, the Heywood boys are smart, accomplished and
cocky. As presented by Weiner, they identify themselves in terms of tribe, as in
"we are Heywoods." Not every reader will find this aspect of the family
appealing.

    Still, it's impossible not to admire how they (and especially Jamie)
translate pride into maverick action. In a book that charts levels of success
and failure, the decision to act is presented as its own kind of success.

    The third story concerns the author's relationship to his work as his own
mother succumbs to a rare and devastating neurological disorder. Whether Weiner
included this out of concern for full disclosure (he had more than a passing
interest in genetic treatment) or because the parallel seemed too striking to
ignore, the poignancy of his mother's illness deepens an already potent story.

    "His Brother's Keeper" fulfills the potential of every great science story.
It delves into the perfect mysteries of planet Earth while giving voice to how
our species struggles with imperfection. It lifts high the data, then celebrates
it with writing that lists toward poetry. It is only appropriate that Weiner's
rendering leaves his reader both sadder and more hopeful.

   To reach this Plain Dealer columnist:   ksandstrom@plaind.com, 216-999-4410

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2004


                             488 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       March 14, 2004 Sunday, Final / All

SECTION: SUNDAY ARTS; Pg. J10

LENGTH: 1017 words

HEADLINE: Search for cure to ALS becomes inspiring tale

BYLINE: KAREN SANDSTROM, Plain Dealer Book Editor

BODY:

   NONFICTION

   His Brother's Keeper

   By Jonathan Weiner.

   Ecco Press, 356 pp., $26.95.

   In 1998, a young carpenter who was rehabilitating a Victorian home in Palo
Alto, Calif., stopped to examine his right hand. The hand had been weakening for
a while, but he assumed he had simply overextended himself working on the house.

    Now, having just smacked the hand on a mailbox, Stephen Heywood gave it a
quick look. He looked again. In a holy-cow moment, Heywood noticed that the
shape of his hand had changed.

    As journalist Jonathan Weiner writes in his new book, "Stephen held up his
left hand with the fingers together, the thumb pressed up against the pointer.
In a normal human hand, the muscle makes a bulge, a small, fleshy, wrinkled
bulge, right in the crook at the base of the thumb. This bulge is known to
anatomists as the thenar eminence. Stephen did not know what it was called, but
standing there on the sidewalk he could see that his right hand had lost it. His
right hand looked as if the crook between the thumb and the palm had been carved
away with a jigsaw."

    This discovery sent Heywood to the neurologists who would eventually deliver
what might be the worst news a person can hear inside a doctor's office. Still
in his 20s, Stephen Heywood had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou
Gehrig's disease. ALS causes a gradual loss of motor control, leading to
muscular atrophy and eventual death by suffocation. It usually kills its victims
between two and five years after diagnosis. "Compared with ALS," Weiner writes,
"even brain cancer is a lesser condition."

    In "His Brother's Keeper," Weiner presents the story of how Stephen's older
brother, Jamie, transformed himself from an MIT-trained engineer into a medical
entrepreneur whose ad hoc committee of scientists and researchers worked with
the hope of curing Stephen through gene therapy. It is by turns a wrenching,
inspiring and mystifying tale done justice by science writer Weiner, who won a
Pulitzer Prize for "The Beak of the Finch."

    Nonfiction books written by journalists often read like newspaper articles
run amok. Trained to write what they know and then prove how they know it,
reporters have a way of starching up the silky threads of a story.

    Weiner writes like a writer, not like a reporter. If it seems a touch forced
that he begins one chapter with a reference to Franz Kafka's short story, "The
Imperial Message," the reader soon will concede that a) Weiner makes good use of
the prop and b) it's reassuring to be in the hands of a reporter who reads
literature. The author maintains a grasp not only on his facts, factoids and
metaphors but also on the big picture - the broad beams of meaning on which all
else hangs.

    "His Brother's Keeper" is really three stories. The first explains the
technologies of modern genetics and their implications for the future of
humanity. Set in the late 1990s, around the time of the birth of Dolly, the
first cloned lamb, the book captures the fear and excitement that surrounded the
new scientific knowledge.

    "By the last decade of the twentieth century, the power of human
understanding had reached a point at which it was possible to view all of life
as a project in molecular engineering, and the saving of life as nothing more
than engineering and genetic carpentry," Weiner writes. "Now surgeons dreamed of
operating on molecules inside the bodies of their patients - hammering, sawing,
and polishing. . . . The molecular surgeons had a new and exalted maxim. To
teach the body to heal itself molecule by molecule would be to heal like God."

    Such God-playing is exactly what Jamie Heywood hopes to do for Stephen.
First, Jamie dives into ALS research to understand what doctors know about it.
One factor seems to be the overproduction of the neurotransmitter glutamate,
which can lead to the death of nerves in the spine, which cuts communication
between the brain and muscles.

    After speaking with a neuroscientist named Jeffrey Rothstein, who
specializes in ALS, Jamie concluded that the goal was to somehow fix the
messaging system in his brother's dying spinal nerves. Weiner follows as Jamie
tries this, fearlessly presenting scientific information that at times can be
hard for a lay reader to follow.

    Jamie surrounds himself with experts and information on genetic engineering,
gene therapy and stem cells, and builds a think tank. Although Jamie is not a
scientist, he throws himself with cowboy zeal into his race against time. The
odds of success seem almost too small to consider. Jamie's determination to defy
them gives the story its suspense.

    The second story Weiner tells is about the singular determination and sense
of purpose that the Heywood brothers, their wives and their parents bring to the
fight. Raised in suburban Boston, the Heywood boys are smart, accomplished and
cocky. As presented by Weiner, they identify themselves in terms of tribe, as in
"we are Heywoods." Not every reader will find this aspect of the family
appealing.

    Still, it's impossible not to admire how they (and especially Jamie)
translate pride into maverick action. In a book that charts levels of success
and failure, the decision to act is presented as its own kind of success.

    The third story concerns the author's relationship to his work as his own
mother succumbs to a rare and devastating neurological disorder. Whether Weiner
included this out of concern for full disclosure (he had more than a passing
interest in genetic treatment) or because the parallel seemed too striking to
ignore, the poignancy of his mother's illness deepens an already potent story.

    "His Brother's Keeper" fulfills the potential of every great science story.
It delves into the perfect mysteries of planet Earth while giving voice to how
our species struggles with imperfection. It lifts high the data, then celebrates
it with writing that lists toward poetry. It is only appropriate that Weiner's
rendering leaves his reader both sadder and more hopeful.

   To reach this Plain Dealer columnist:   ksandstrom@plaind.com, 216-999-4410

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2004


                             489 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             March 14, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: WESTWEGO PICAYUNE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer battle becomes life lesson;
Survivor uses ordeal to educate, inspire

BYLINE: By Lisa Hollis; Contributing writer

BODY:

   Karen Thomas Stall never thought she'd have breast cancer because there was
no history of the disease in her family.

   "I thought I was free and clear," she said. On April 23, 2001, she discovered
a lump during a bath after her regular workout.

   The lifelong West Bank resident, who was 40 at the time, said she initially
thought her weight-lifting exercises had developed her pectoral muscles,
explaining the change in her breast. When she noticed the lump, however, she
showed it to her husband, Charlie, who agreed she needed to see a doctor.

   Stall saw her friend and internist, Dr. Maureen "Mo" Hecker-Rodriguez, a few
days later.

   She said she realized the diagnosis "wasn't good" when she saw her doctor's
"face fall upon examining the lump."

   A stage-3 cancer diagnosis led to a roller coaster of medical appointments,
tests, treatments and procedures. Now cancer-free for 2 1/2 years, Stall uses
her experience to educate other women and young girls about breast cancer and
the importance of having mammograms.

   One of her physicians, surgical oncologist Dr. Emery Minnard, said Louisiana
is "third in the nation's cancer mortality statistics," after the District of
Columbia and Delaware.

   In Louisiana, cancer is often "diagnosed at such a late stage that there is
little we can do. But if we can catch it at an earlier stage, that will bring
down the mortality," he said.

Testing and treatment

   After discovering the lump, Stall's next step was a mammogram. Two days after
the procedure, she saw Minnard. The next day, Minnard performed a lumpectomy.

   Stall was grateful that the tumor had not spread to her lymph nodes, but the
stage-3 diagnosis was a wake-up call.

   She said she was "devastated, and all I could think of was, 'I have to finish
raising my children.' " At the time, Stall's two sons were 16 and 11.

   Minnard refused to see the situation as hopeless, and he told Stall, "This is
not a death sentence. We just have some work to do."

   Stall underwent chemotherapy and radiation. She lost all of her hair, rested
for one day after each chemotherapy session and monitored her white blood cell
counts carefully.

   When her counts were low, she stayed home to avoid catching any sort of
infection while her immune system was weakened.

A good sense of humor

   Stall said she used humor to cope with her hair loss. "I looked on the bright
side. I never had a bad-hair day. I could be ready in 15 minutes, and that
summer I didn't need a bikini wax," she said.

   Chemotherapy, her first post-surgery care, involved four 8-hour rounds of
treatment every three weeks.

   Stall said she got through the chemotherapy treatments by "dressing to the
nines" and wearing "outrageous wigs" for her appointments.

   When she learned that the radiation treatment would involve tattooing the
targeted area, she laughed. "We teach our children not to get tattoos, and here
I was having one myself," she said, adding that she asked the radiation team,
led by Dr. Naga Shandresekaran, if they could include the message "born to ride"
on her tattoo. They declined.

   The radiation treatment lasted for seven weeks, with daily sessions that she
described as "not painful; I just felt tired."

   Just six months after she found the lump, Stall's treatments were completed.

   Her positive attitude was bolstered by a strong support network of family and
friends. She said her mother-in-law, Antoinette Stall, who had breast cancer 11
years before , "was a real inspiration."

   To stay in good spirits, she went on outings with friends. One day she
invited her girlfriends to a tea party at her house. She greeted her guests at
the door wearing a tiara and "no hair."

   She often wore her wigs in public places and asked strangers whether they
could tell it was a wig.

   Stall's faith was also an important part of her treatment. "It's amazing how
many prayers you'll say, how many holy cards and holy water you'll take, and how
many prayers you'll offer directly to the Blessed Mother," she said.

   Her life has changed quite a bit since she first found the lump. Now she
tries "not to have any bad days, to always look on the bright side, to
appreciate life more and live it to the fullest. Life is truly a gift, truly
special."

Three-pronged approach

   At the time of her diagnosis, Stall was teaching art classes to
sixth-graders, and she began telling her students about her illness, saying,
"It's not too early."

   That sentiment is echoed by physicians who also encourage women to have
regular mammograms and to perform self-breast examinations.

   Minnard offers a comforting statistic to those who have just found a lump:
"Eighty-five percent of all women who have a biopsy get a benign diagnosis."
And, he adds, "Ninety percent or higher of the 15 percent of tumors which are
malignant are curable."

   Breast cancer statistics in Louisiana from 1996 to 2000 show the incidence of
breast cancer among white women was 124.4 per 100,000 people, with a mortality
rate of 27.3 per 100,000, according to the American Cancer Society. The
incidence among African-American women was 114.2 per 100,000, but the mortality
rate was 38.2 per 100,000.

   Minnard said although white women's incidence rate is higher than that of
African-American women, "the mortality rate in black women is higher because
they wait too long to have a mammogram."

   Minnard outlines what he calls a "three-pronged approach to cancer."

   First is prevention. "Don't smoke and do eat right," he said. Next, early
detection is critical, as "lesions detected by mammograms can be easily
treated."

   Third, money for research is needed to find a cure, most likely through gene
therapy, he said. "All cancer is genetic; if we can correct the five or so
aberrations in the genes by replacing the defective genes, we can eliminate
cancer."

   Until a cure is found, Minnard stresses the gospel of early detection. "We
have the technology, but we need to give up our laissez-faire attitude toward
health and prevention" in Louisiana, he said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY LISA HOLLIS Karen Thomas Stall, chief executive officer and
president of Triton Diving Services Inc., had a diagnosis of stage-3 cancer
after detecting a lump in April 2001. Thanks to the support of her friends and
family and a series of treatments and procedures, she's been cancer-free for 2
1/2 years. Karen Thomas Stall: chief executive officer and president of Triton
Diving Services Inc., had a diagnosis of stage-3 cancer after detecting a lump
in April 2001

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2004


                             490 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                         March 7, 2004, Sunday , METRO

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. 9J

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: Plot thickens when science, ethics collide ; Picoult's latest novel
explores some basic questions faced by modern medicine.

BYLINE: Susan Yerkes


BODY: My Sister's Keeper

    By Jodi Picoult

    Atria Books, $25



    In today's world, when scientific breakthroughs in medical research make
headlines every day, it's tempting to forget that each leap forward involves
some cost. From the horrors produced by the "miracle drug" thalidomide in the
'40s and '50s to today's hot buttons, such as stem cell research and gene
therapy, the road to Wellville is often pitted with deadly minefields.

    "My Sister's Keeper," Jodi Picoult's 11th and latest novel, frames some of
the most basic questions faced by modern medicine within the context of a
soul-searing family drama. The Long Island native has a reading and signing
Thursday at Barnes & Noble San Pedro Crossing.

    Start with Brian and Sara Fitzgerald: good, responsible parents plunged
smack into medical hell when their toddler, Kate, is diagnosed with acute
promyelocytic leukemia, a rare and ravaging cancer.

    When neither Brian, Sara nor their young son Jesse matches Kate's genotype
well enough to donate the particular blood, cells and marrow their daughter
needs to live, the couple conceives another child. But this one is engineered to
be an allogenic donor - a perfect sibling match.

    Within minutes of Anna's birth, her precious umbilical cord blood is
harvested to save Kate's life.

    In a perfect world, that would be the end of the story.

    But in this world, cancer has a way of coming back. And a child's struggle
for life can subtly twist the pattern of relationships, no matter how loving,
into a web of pain. "My Sister's Keeper" begins when Anna, now 13, is about to
take a terrifying step away from the family she loves, into maturity. Kate, now
15, needs a kidney to survive her latest medical crisis. And this time, Anna
rebels.

    Not that she doesn't love her sister. She does. But this time it's too much.
In Anna's words - "my own blood seeping into my sister's veins; the nurses
holding me down to stick me for white cells Kate might borrow; the doctor saying
they didn't get enough the first time ... the bruises and deep bone ache after I
gave up my marrow; the shots that sparked more stem cells in me, so that there'd
be extra for my sister ... the fact that the only reason I was born was as a
harvest crop for Kate ... that even now, a major decision about me is being
made, and no one's bothered to ask the one person who most deserves to speak her
opinion."

    When Anna asks sardonic attorney Campbell Alexander to help her sue her
parents for the right to make her own medical decisions, tensions that have
smoldered in the family for years burst into a conflagration, eventually pitting
mother against daughter in a legal battle that threatens to consume every member
of the family.

    The story is a brilliant presentation of the kinds of dilemmas often
engendered by the very gifts of modern medicine. Dr. Abraham Verghese's
nationally acclaimed Medical Humanities and Ethics program at the University of
Texas Health Science Center San Antonio uses literature and art to illuminate
complex human issues that physicians and administrators focused on battling
disease often never have to face.

    This story would be gripping told from Anna's point of view alone.

    But Picoult chooses instead to tell it through the individual voices of all
the key players in this drama, alternating chapter by chapter, sometimes moving
back and forth in time to show how the situation gradually evolved. Fortunately,
she is a skillful navigator, steering the tale through time and viewpoint to
illuminate the painful truths each character is forced to confront along the
way.

    And as the deadline for Kate's life-saving transplant looms, father, mother,
sisters and brother each must question his or her dearest assumptions and
deepest-held beliefs. Somehow, Picoult manages to bring the whole thing off
without preaching or resorting to schmaltz.

    The clear, true voices of her characters offer just the right mix, allowing
moments of comfort, love and humor to lighten the heavy emotions brought into
play when there is no single "right" answer to a question of life and death. And
the interplay of story elements allows for constant, compelling surprises,
leading up to the greatest surprise of all as the book ends.

    Do not expect a miracle. Do expect a powerfully poignant, page-turning read.


    Author Jodi Picoult will read from her new book and sign her works, which
include her novel "Second Glance," at 7 p.m. Thursday at Barnes & Noble San
Pedro Crossing, Loop 410 at San Pedro Avenue.

    syerkes@express-news.net

    Susan Yerkes has a twice-weekly column in S.A. Life.


LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2004


                             491 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                              March 1, 2004 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Editorial Pages Desk; Part B; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: Commentary;
Lackadaisical FDA Needs a Dose of Vitality From a New Chief;
The outgoing commissioner did little to address the agency's problems.

BYLINE: Henry I. Miller, Henry I. Miller, a fellow at the Hoover Institution, is
the author of "To America's Health: A Proposal to Reform the FDA" (2000, Hoover
Institution Press). From 1979 to 1994, he was an official at the FDA.

BODY:

   FDA Commissioner Mark McClellan is leaving his position after only 16 months
in office, far less time than it took for the search committee to find him.
Although few would question that McClellan is engaging and smart, he leaves with
mediocre accomplishments and with the agency little better off than he found it.

   McClellan did little to reform the culture of risk-aversion and the fear of
innovation that pervades the FDA. The subtext of regulatory agencies -- not just
the FDA -- is that career bureaucrats generally care more about staying out of
trouble than about public health. That biases them against timely approvals of
innovative products. Yet McClellan removed not a single senior career
bureaucrat.

   Despite increasingly more powerful and precise technologies for drug
discovery, purification and production, development costs have soared. One
reason is that the highly risk-averse FDA keeps raising the bar for approval,
especially for innovative, high-tech products. Human gene therapy and other
treatments tailored to individual patients have been hit especially hard.
Americans are literally dying for reform.

   On McClellan's watch, the FDA continued to throw rigid, one-size-fits-all
solutions at non-problems. An example is the agency's decision to deny any drug
company the ability to obtain multiple trademarks for the same drug -- for
example, Sarafem/Prozac and Propecia/Proscar -- even if they are different
formulations for different ailments.

   McClellan also failed to modernize the FDA's bureaucratic approach to
regulating old drugs that have been on the market for decades without
significant concerns about safety or efficacy but still lack FDA approval.

   The FDA has said that if the manufacturer of one of these drugs expends the
effort and expense to obtain an approval, all of its competitors will be forced
off the market until they also obtain approvals. This recently occurred with
extended-release guaifenesin, a well-known cough suppressant. The FDA justified
forcing competitors off the market as necessary to "protect the integrity of the
drug approval process," but the outcome has been exactly the opposite: With no
incremental protection of public health, the approved product now sells for 700%
of the price of comparable products prior to the FDA's action.

   There were other failures of policy and decision-making during McClellan's
tenure. One is the FDA's record on the regulation of biotech foods. At the same
time that U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick and other senior officials
in the Bush administration were working for more science-based treatment of
biotech foods (that is, those produced from gene-spliced organisms)
internationally, they were outflanked by European and American bureaucrats at
the deliberations of the food standards agencies of the United Nations. The U.S.
delegation to these negotiations was led by a senior FDA food regulator, Robert
Lake, whom McClellan repeatedly refused to rein in.

   Another abject failure was the FDA's unexpected decision -- contrary to the
advice of an advisory committee -- to leave in place severe restrictions on
silicone breast implants imposed more than a decade ago because of safety
concerns. Those concerns were unfounded, virtually destroyed an industry and
needlessly terrified tens of thousands of American women.

   Still another was the agency's unwillingness to permit the Plan B
morning-after contraceptive to be sold over the counter, a decision that reeks
of politics.

   These are not the actions of an FDA head who believes in science-driven
public policy, data as the basis for regulatory decisions, the right of patients
and physicians to assume a modicum of responsibility for the risk of medical
interventions, and banning politics from regulation. But that is what we need in
McClellan's successor.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2004


                             492 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                     February 29, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1789 words

HEADLINE: Docs for jocks;
Physicians on the cutting edge work together to get athletes back in the game

BYLINE: BY PHIL RICHARDS PHIL.RICHARDS@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Rock music plays softly on the radio. The mood is light, the chatter amiable,
but the manner is businesslike, efficient, focused. Surgery is a team sport, and
orthopedic surgeon Tom Klootwyk, the anesthesiologist and four nurses move with
the coordination of a dance troupe. They work as one.

   Kylee Anderson is on the table. She has torn the anterior cruciate ligament
in her left knee playing basketball for Terre Haute South High School. Klootwyk
and his team are reconstructing the knee, removing the old ligament, tunneling
through bone, harvesting, shaping and sizing a section of the patella tendon,
then installing it in place of the ligament.

   "When will the rehab begin?" an observer asks.

   Klootwyk turns to consult the clock in the operating room in Methodist Sports
Medicine Center's Northside facility.

   "It's 3:25 now," he said. "Probably about 5:30."

   Sports medicine is different things to different people, but it almost always
is this: fast. The priority is delivering a remedy and restoring the athlete to
normal activity as safely and quickly as possible, whether he or she is a
professional or a weekend warrior.

   "We'll see how the therapy goes, but I want to be back playing softball by
the end of April (about two months after the surgery)," said Anderson, a
sophomore who plays third base on the school's softball team.

   Who's betting against her? Anderson tore the ACL, the medial collateral
ligament and the meniscus in her right knee last summer. She had surgery July 16
and was back with the basketball team in October.

   Thirty years ago, a torn ACL was a career-ending injury. Twenty years ago, it
was career threatening. It still can be, but it no longer means eight weeks in a
cast and a year in rehabilitation, and Methodist Sports Medicine's had something
to do with that.

   Orthopedic surgeons Donald Shelbourne, Arthur Rettig and John McCarroll and
physical therapist Mark DeCarlo were among the first to advocate delayed surgery
for ACL patients: Permit the swelling to recede. Reduce the inflammation.
Restore movement. Build strength. Then do the surgery. The approach has
contributed to vastly improved results.

   "The complication rate was 30 percent during the 1980s. Now it's less than 1
percent, and athletes come back much faster," DeCarlo said.

   "It's as important to the average individual to get back to his or her daily
routine as it is for (Pacers All-Star) Jermaine O'Neal," said Marje Albohm,
director of sports medicine and orthopedic research at Orthopedics Indianapolis.
"The same expertise and skills available to the elite athlete are now available
to everyone."

   Hotbed of activity

   Sports medicine is big business. America has an obesity problem, but it also
has a Baby Boomer and Generation X subset that is extraordinarily active. The
advent of women's sports has nearly doubled the field. Ralph Reiff, program
director at St. Vincent Sports Medicine, estimates Central Indiana's active
athletic population at 3.1 million, from ages 10 to 80.

   Indianapolis has the full range of professional sports, three of the world's
premier auto races, a multitude of amateur events and the NCAA's headquarters.
As such, it is the site of an array of national and international competitions
and championships. It is also home to the American College of Sports Medicine
and the National Institute for Fitness and Sport. Indiana colleges produce more
athletic trainers than any other state.

   The ACSM will hold its 51st annual meeting here in June. The 15th FINA World
Sports Medicine Congress will be held in Indianapolis in October. The National
Athletic Trainers Association will convene its annual convention here in 2005.

   Central Indiana is a sports medicine hub, and that's good for everyone.
Delayed ACL reconstruction isn't the only innovation developed here in the
course of sports medicine application and research that has benefited general
medicine and the wider populace.

   All the athletic activity, all the pounding, and all the injuries and
arthritis and degenerative joint disease it will produce are expected to result
in a booming market for total joint replacements in the years ahead. Knees and
hips wear out, become crippling and painful.

   Jack Farr, an orthopedic surgeon with OrthoIndy, believes there is a better
way. Only two physicians worldwide perform more Carticel procedures than Farr.
He harvests a small amount of a patient's knee cartilage, cultures it, then
re-implants the enormously multiplied cartilage to repair and resurface areas of
cartilage loss or damage. It's cutting-edge stuff.

   "There are exciting things happening in cell manipulation, growth factors and
gene therapy," said Farr, who played football at Rose-Hulman before graduating
from Indiana University's Schools of Medicine, another Indianapolis institution.
"We're learning how we can less invasively restore knee surfaces and cartilage
and ligaments."

   Henry Feuer of Indianapolis Neurosurgical Group has been working the IU
football sidelines since the early 1970s and the Colts' since the mid-'80s. He
has served on the NFL's Committee on Mild Traumatic Brain Injury (concussions)
since it was formed in 1996.

   Concussions traditionally have been treated based on guidelines rooted in
expert opinion and anecdotal evidence. But since IU School of Medicine graduate
Joe Maroon developed a pioneering neuropsychological test, then condensed it to
20 minutes, new doors have begun to open.

   The NFL requires each of its players to take the test and establish his
individual baseline or "normal" reading during the preseason, then uses it as a
diagnostic tool in the event of a brain injury. The committee has documented the
results. It is learning more about the brain and the lingering and potentially
critical effects of concussions each season. It has published several papers on
the subject.

   "The NFL study is opening eyes," said Feuer, a neurosurgeon. "We're getting
hard data. We think we're going to come up with guidelines based on hard
scientific data."

   Those guidelines won't benefit only running backs and defensive tackles. The
test, and the data derived from it, can be applied in the event of brain injury
to a CEO whose decisions affect hundreds of employees, to a truck driver
maneuvering an 18-wheeler at high speeds in heavy traffic, to a housewife caring
for an infant.

   Collaborative effort

   Sports medicine is far more than orthopedic surgeons and surgery. It's
exercise, strength training, nutrition, fluid replacement, equipment,
flexibility. It's primary care physicians and internists. It's physical
therapists and athletic trainers. And it's teamwork among them all.

   None of the directors of Methodist's, St. Vincent's and OrthoIndy's sports
medicine operations are physicians. DeCarlo, Methodist Sports Medicine's chief
operating officer, is a physical therapist. OrthoIndy's Albohm is a certified
athletic trainer. So is St. Vincent's Reiff.

   Sports medicine enables its practitioners to specialize, even sub-specialize.
Methodist's Gary Misamore is an orthopedic surgeon -- certainly an upper
extremities specialist, but a "shoulder man" in point of practice.

   "I do more rotator cuff repairs in a year than the average (orthopedic
surgeon) does in a lifetime," said Misamore, who puts the number at about 75
annually.

   Terry Trammell specializes in the lower extremities and is recognized
worldwide. He is at least consulted in the case of many serious auto racing
accidents, where the feet and legs absorb an inordinate share of the punishment.

   Those kinds of experts and the therapists and trainers with whom they work
have helped make Indianapolis the sports center it has become. The sports
medicine component is a vital part of the bid packages that bring events like
the NCAA Final Four and the gymnastics, basketball and swimming world
championships to Indianapolis.

   "We have had leadership that has disregarded affiliations to provide the best
people and therefore the best services to athletes," said Dale Neuburger,
president of the Indiana Sports Corp. "In many communities the turf war between
medical organizations won't allow the collaborative effort we've had."

   That is crucial. It's one of the reasons the World Swimming Championships
will bring competitors, officials and fans from 120 nations to Indianapolis in
October, said Chuck Wielgus, executive director of Colorado Springs, Colo.-based
USA Swimming.

   "No one does it better than Indianapolis," Wielgus said. "The people in the
sports medicine field there have a lot of experience not only with the top-level
athlete, but in organizing the top-level events."

   In a competitive marketplace, the principals frequently engage in the same
kind of teamwork that characterizes Klootwyk's surgical team. Albohm refers
patients to Chris Carr, Methodist's sports psychologist; OrthoIndy doesn't have
one. Methodist's Shelbourne and McCarroll call Albohm to pick her brain about
how to better utilize the skills of athletic trainers. Patients from both
centers wind up at St. Vincent's Performance Center.

   And hospitals from across the area, as well as groups like the Center for
Orthopaedic Surgery & Sports Medicine, IU Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine and
the Indiana Orthopaedic Center do their parts when the big events come to town.

   "It's a combination of competition and cooperation," said Steve Ahlfeld, an
orthopedic surgeon affiliated with St. Vincent. "I think both of those things
stimulate a higher-quality product for the injured athlete. That's been a major
factor in Indianapolis becoming one of the highest-regarded places in the
country for great sports medicine."

   Call Star reporter Phil Richards at (317) 444-6408.

   ____________________________________

   How Carticel surgery works

   One common procedure in the booming sports medicine business is

   Carticel surgery for articular cartilage damage. In this

   operation, healthy cartilage cells grown in a lab are implanted

   to replace damaged cartilage.

   The biopsy

   A small sample of healthy cartilage is removed from patient.

   The sample is sent to the lab, where the cells are

   multiplied until there are enough to repair the injury. This

   usually takes about five weeks.

   These cells are sent back to the patients surgeon.

   The surgery

   An incision is made to expose the injury. The damaged

   cartilage is removed.

   A watertight patch is sewn over the injury.

   The cultured cells are injected under the patch into the

   injury, where they continue to multiply and over time

   integrate with the surrounding cartilage.

   Rehabilitation

   Process can take up to 11-18 months while the new cells develop

   into strong cartilage.

   Emphasis on not rushing the healing process.

   Source: ww

   w.genzymebiosurgery.com

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2004


                             493 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 29, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 8; Column 1; Sports Desk; Pg. 10; BackTalk

LENGTH: 962 words

HEADLINE: What the N.F.L. Is Doing to Stamp Out Steroid Abuse

BYLINE: By PAUL TAGLIABUE.

   Paul Tagliabue has been the commissioner of the National Football League
since 1989.

BODY:

   President Bush delivered a powerful message in his State of the Union address
on the responsibility of professional sports to eliminate the use of dangerous
performance-enhancing substances by athletes.

    The recent federal indictments in the Balco case also sent a strong message
about the use of criminal sanctions to shape public policy on this important
issue.

    The National Football League applauds these actions. The president's
statements and the indictments support the many steps we have taken with the
N.F.L. Players Association since implementing a comprehensive program of steroid
testing, discipline and education.

    Beginning in the late 1980's, the N.F.L. and its players have been at the
forefront of sports on this issue. We initiated testing of our players for
steroids in 1987; started suspending violators in 1989 upon their first positive
steroid test; and instituted in 1990 a year-round, random testing program backed
by immediate suspensions for any violations. The program has strong features to
deter evasion and has been expanded numerous times, including three years ago to
include ephedra, a dangerous legal supplement that the federal government is in
the process of banning as we have urged.

    Winning this battle against steroids requires more than words. It takes the
investment of significant resources. We spend $10 million a year on our steroid
and drug programs, including the funding of research to identify new substances
and improve testing. To date, we have invested close to $100 million on this
initiative. It is fully supported by the Players Association and our players,
who have consistently told their union leadership that they want these
performance-enhancing drugs out of our game.

    Why has this issue been among the highest priorities of the N.F.L. and its
players?

    First, these substances threaten the fairness and the integrity of the game
on the field. To allow the use of steroids and banned stimulants would not only
condone cheating, but also compel others to use them to remain competitive.

    Second, we have a responsibility to protect our players from the
demonstrated adverse health effects of steroids and other banned substances.
Medical literature is replete with research linking the use of these substances
to a wide range of serious health problems.

    Third, we take seriously our role in educating and leading young people. As
President Bush said, the use of performance-enhancing drugs is dangerous and
sends the wrong message that there are shortcuts to success and that performance
at any price is more important than integrity.

    The key provisions of our policy are:

    *An annual test for all players plus unannounced random testing in and out
of season. We test players on all teams each week of the season, conducting more
than 8,000 tests a year for steroids and related substances.

    *A list of more than 70 prohibited substances, including anabolic steroids,
steroid precursors, growth hormone, stimulants and masking agents. This list is
continually revised and expanded.

    *A mandatory four-game suspension (25 percent of the regular season) without
pay upon a first violation. A second violation would result in a six-game
suspension and a third would ban a player for a minimum of one year. Players
cannot return to the field until they test clean and are cleared for play.

    *Strict liability for players who test positive. Violations are not excused
because a player says he was unaware that a product contained a banned
substance.

    *Education of players and teams about the program through literature,
videos, a toll-free hotline and mandatory meetings.

    The consistent application of these core tenets has resulted in the
recognition of the N.F.L.'s policy as the most effective in professional sports.
The overwhelming majority of our players get the message. Over the past five
seasons, less than 1 percent of our players (a total of 25) have violated our
steroid program and been suspended.

    When our steroid testing lab -- the U.C.L.A. Olympic Analytical Laboratory
-- informed us last year of the new designer steroid called THG, we immediately
added it to our banned substance list and started officially testing for it on a
uniform basis on Oct. 6. Since then, we have randomly tested more than 3,000
player urine samples and there have been no THG positives.

    We have taken our concerns about steroids and dangerous supplements to
public officials. Stronger government measures are needed to address these
challenges both in and out of professional sports, including for millions of
young people and families for whom illicit substances are an issue.

    Through our participation with other athletic and health organizations under
the auspices of the Coalition for Anabolic Steroid Precursor and Ephedrine
Regulation, we support Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and other members
of Congress who have introduced legislation that would stem the access and
availability of steroids and other substances. We have presented our concerns to
the Food and Drug Administration, the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and
the New York State Assembly and Senate advocating the regulation or ban of
high-risk dietary supplements such as ephedra.

    Even now, as the federal government is focusing on steroids and other
substances that have been around for decades, new challenges are being presented
by the improper use of human growth hormone and the continuing advance of gene
therapy and genetic manipulation.

    Both the government and private sectors must aggressively address these
challenges. If not, the secret designers of new illicit substances will slog on,
and the future will bring more high-profile grand jury investigations, health
risks to young people and dishonor to sports.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2004


                             494 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 29, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2254 words

HEADLINE: Is Biotechnology Losing Its Nerve?

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   AS a founder of four biotechnology companies, Dennis A. Carson can
practically write an encyclopedia entry on risk. After all, his first start-up,
a gene therapy and vaccine company called Vical, still does not have a product
on the market after 16 years and more than $100 million spent.

    But now Dr. Carson, who is also the director of the cancer center at the
University of California at San Diego, is playing it safe, or at least safer.
Rather than develop radical new technology or invent new medicines, his latest
venture, Salmedix, plans to sell drugs licensed from other companies -- drugs
that are already on the market or that have at least gone through some clinical
trials.

     ''We sat back and said, 'We're not going to be successful starting another
company if it's going to take 15 to 18 years,''' said David S. Kabakoff, the
chief executive of Salmedix. ''The only way to do it in half the time is you
have to start somewhere in the middle.''

    Many other biotechnology companies also appear to be taking fewer chances
lately -- to the point that the industry seems to have lost its nerve, some
experts say. The worry, of course, is that their increasingly chary approach to
innovation will mean fewer breakthrough drugs.

    Biotechnology companies were once known for going boldly where the big
pharmaceutical companies would not, developing genetically engineered medicines
like Avastin, the Genentech drug, approved on Thursday, that attacks cancer by a
new method and prolongs the lives of patients. Biotech ventures also plunged
into experimental areas, like gene therapy and stem cell research, that have not
yet paid off and perhaps never will.

    But more and more start-ups now seem focused on scrounging around for
existing drugs to license, often castoffs from big pharmaceutical companies. In
doing so, fledgling biotech companies avoid the toil and risk of trying to
discover a new cause of disease or a new compound. Some of the newer biotech
companies do not even have laboratories.

    ''I don't know of a venture capitalist today who is willing to put
significant percentages of his fund's money into de novo discovery companies,''
said Roger Longman, co-publisher of the medical business magazines In Vivo and
Start-Up. ''Instead, the real model is, 'How can I get to a product quickly,
without doing all of that early biology and chemistry?'''

    Most drug development companies that are planning initial public offerings
fit that mold. Of the 23 companies that filed late last year to go public, for
instance, 14 licensed their lead product after it had been put into clinical
trials by another company, and two licensed products already on the market, said
Arthur J. Klausner, a general partner at Domain Associates, a venture capital
fund for health care enterprises that is based in Princeton, N.J.

    What is behind the shift? Mr. Klausner and others point to a change in the
investment climate. It was once possible to raise money from public investors
years before products were on the market, thus providing an early return to
venture capitalists. But after biotech stocks peaked in 2000 and then receded,
taking such early-stage companies public has been tough.

    So venture capitalists, not wanting to wait 10 or more years for a return on
their investments, are backing companies that can move products to market
faster. That often means developing a drug neglected by another company or
finding a new use for or a new way of delivering an existing drug. The industry
buzzwords are no longer ''monoclonal antibodies'' and ''genomics'' but
''reformulate'' and ''repurpose.''

    ''It's very hard to do a soup-to-nuts company anymore, or what we call
molecule-to-market,'' Mr. Klausner said.

    A decade ago, for instance, his firm helped finance Trimeris, the company
that tapped university research to develop Fuzeon, the first of a new class of
AIDS drugs. Today, a more typical start-up backed by his firm is Somaxon
Pharmaceuticals, a venture based in San Diego that hopes to market a sleeping
pill that contains a low dose of an existing drug that has drowsiness as a side
effect. ''I hope we do something as exciting as Trimeris today,'' Mr. Klausner
said, ''but we do it on an exception basis.''

    NO one disputes that licensing can save time and money. Drugs that have
already gone through clinical trials have at least been shown to be basically
safe, so the preliminary stages of formulating a drug or testing it in animals
can be skipped.

    Consider Dr. Carson's company, Salmedix. Based in San Diego, it is less than
three years old and has raised only $22 million, but it already has three drugs
in clinical trials. One is a cancer drug, sold by a company in Germany, that
must be tested before entering the United States market. Another, also a cancer
drug, failed when tested by others -- but Salmedix has a diagnostic test that
its executives say will pinpoint which patients the drug will benefit. The third
is derived from an existing anti-inflammatory drug that company scientists
discovered serendipitously had an effect against cancer.

    ''Studies of older drugs in patients can give you information you can't get
from studies in the mouse,'' Dr. Carson said.

    But while retooling older drugs can result in useful products, some experts
say the practice is not likely to produce home runs and could slow innovation.
''We're really doing therapeutics around the edges'' rather than attacking head
on, said one venture capitalist, who spoke on condition he not be identified
because he did not want to discourage entrepreneurs from approaching his firm.

    ''We're doing things like niche indications, new uses for old drugs,
out-licensing of products,'' he said. ''There's a fair question: Where's all the
new stuff going on?''

    Indeed, university officials say it is becoming harder to license their
discoveries to young companies, or for professors to get backing to start new
companies. Stanford and the University of California campuses in San Francisco
and San Diego -- which together gave birth to much of the state's biotechnology
industry -- have teamed up with SRI International, a research institute, to do
early drug testing themselves, a move that would remove some risk from
companies.

    Mark G. Edwards, managing director of Recombinant Capital, a company that
tracks drug licensing deals, said that biotech companies had licensed some 500
products from big pharmaceutical companies but that ''none of the top 30 selling
drugs of the biotech industry have come from that route.''

    The recycling trend could also hamper pharmaceutical giants. To fill their
depleted product pipelines, large companies have increasingly turned to smaller
ventures for drugs and research techniques. Now they often find themselves in
competition with biotech companies, which are themselves looking for products to
license from rivals. And the suppliers of research techniques have also shifted
to developing drugs.

    ''All of these heretofore distinct needs can't be met anymore because
everyone's chasing the same products,'' said Ginny E. Llobell, vice president of
Defined Health, a pharmaceutical consulting company in Millburn, N.J. ''The
whole complex of everyone running to the same side of the boat is not
sustainable.''

    With thousands of biotech companies out there, no one is suggesting the end
of innovation. For instance, several companies were formed recently to pursue
RNA interference, a promising new method of treating diseases by turning off
genes.

    Mr. Longman, the magazine publisher, said that many of the companies working
with existing drugs were innovating, though not in the traditional sense of
finding a molecule in the body that could serve as a target for a drug, or
designing a drug to hit that target. ''It's expanding the definition of
innovation to what it should be,'' he said, ''not limiting yourself to the
belief that innovation is merely a new target, new compound, new medicine.''

    Consider Hypnion, whose innovation is a new way to test whether a drug is
good at inducing sleep. But rather than screening new compounds, the company is
testing existing drugs that it can tweak. ''Take a drug that has a sleep side
effect and is used for some other disease,'' said Dale M. Edgar, chief scientist
and co-founder. ''That's your starting point.'' Hypnion, based in Worcester,
Mass., put a drug into a clinical trial in 18 months, rather than the usual
three or four years.

    THEN there is CombinatoRx, a start-up in Boston. The company is pursuing the
possibility that existing drugs, used in combination, are effective in a way
that the single drugs are not. It has set up a robotic system that
systematically tests all 2,000 existing chemical drugs in combinations of two.
The company, now four years old, has already started clinical trials of three
combinations. It found, for instance, that a sedative and an antibiotic -- both
of which have been around since the end of World War II -- showed, in
combination, some effectiveness against cancer.

    ''Those things have been around for two generations, but no one's ever used
them together to treat cancer,'' said Alexis Borisy, co-founder and chief
executive. ''How is that not innovation?''

    Specialty pharmaceutical companies, like Forest Laboratories and King
Pharmaceuticals, have long licensed drugs from pharmaceutical giants that had
decided not to develop them. Such companies were largely considered separate
from the biotechnology industry, but now the distinction is blurring as venture
capitalists who back biotech companies invest in this licensing approach. ''I
see one or two business plans a week'' from companies seeking to license someone
else's drug, said Brian G. Atwood, a managing director at Versant Ventures in
Menlo Park, Calif.

    Several factors are pushing the trend. As big pharmaceutical companies have
become even larger, they have concentrated on drugs with blockbuster potential
rather than devote time to drugs with smaller markets. But for a small company,
a crumb from a pharmaceutical giant can look like a feast.

    Moreover, as big companies have merged, overlapping projects have been cut.
Some companies have decided it is better to get a return on these redundant or
minor drugs by letting someone else sell them in exchange for a payment or
royalties.

    Also fueling the recycling trend are the problems of companies involved in
genomics, the technology that prompted an investor frenzy four years ago.
Genomics companies were formed to find disease-related genes or to provide
services and technology to drug companies.

    But investors did not buy in as expected, and major pharmaceutical companies
have found the payoff from genomics to be slow. ''There was a clear message from
Big Pharma that they did not want to buy research assets anymore,'' said Charles
M. Hartman, general partner of CW Ventures in New York.

    As a result, virtually every service and tool company is shifting to
developing or licensing drugs. Millennium Pharmaceuticals, a leader in genomics,
has no drugs in clinical trials resulting from its own gene hunting. Neither do
big drug companies like Bayer and Abbott Laboratories, which paid hundreds of
millions of dollars to tap into Millennium's expertise. A payoff may still come,
but in the meantime Millennium is using the money from the deals to buy a
pipeline of products. Its two drugs on the market, and all the ones in clinical
trials, have come through acquisitions or licensing.

    Even companies trying to discover new drugs have felt pressure to license
products that are already on the market, or close to it. While those products
generate revenue, the company can go about the longer process of developing
novel products. For instance, Exelixis provided some of its genomics expertise
to Bristol-Myers Squibb and, in return, got a cancer drug already in clinical
trials. That drug has become its lead product.

    Other companies have successfully licensed and then resurrected drugs that
other companies passed up. Sales of Angiomax, a cardiovascular drug, are
increasing at the Medicines Company, which picked up the product after it was
dropped by Biogen and then passed over by many other companies.

    INDEED, some drugs initially dropped by one big pharmaceutical company can
end up at another after going through a smaller company. Indiplon, a sleeping
pill that is now in the final stages of clinical trials, was licensed by the
company now known as Wyeth to Dov Pharmaceutical, which then sublicensed it to
Neurocrine Biosciences. Neurocrine in turn sold the marketing rights to Pfizer
for $100 million up front, and possibly much more later.

    Some analysts and executives, however, say the specialty pharmaceutical
business has limits. For Big Pharma, licensing a neglected drug to a smaller
company may produce only modest royalties. And biotech companies that find new
uses for old drugs may have trouble protecting themselves from competition,
particularly from generic versions. Moreover, the specialty pharmaceutical
business is becoming mighty crowded. Some experts say that there are just not
enough compounds to go around.

    For that reason, some venture capitalists say investment in companies that
recycle drugs will eventually wane. In a sense, it has to. Unless new drugs are
invented, there won't be any to recycle.

    As Drew Senyei, general partner of Enterprise Partners in San Diego, said,
''At some point you are going to run out of late-stage companies, and the
question is, who will fund the discovery companies?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dale M. Edgar, co-founder, in the lab at Hypnion, a start-up
company that is developing a sleeping pill from an existing compound. (Photo by
Rick Friedman for The New York Times)(pg. 1)
 Dennis A. Carson, a cancer researcher, founded four biotech companies. (Photo
by Jeffreybrown.com for The New York Times)(pg. 8)Chart: ''License to
Cure''Biotechnology companies have increasingly been licensing products from
other  companies.Data includes specialty pharmaceutical companies.Graph tracks
licensing deals from 1990 to 2003.(Source by Recombinant Capital)(pg. 9)

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2004


                             495 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1166 words

HEADLINE: Cell Protein Gives Monkeys Innate Immunity to H.I.V., Researchers
Discover

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Scientists have discovered that monkey cells have innate protection against
infection with the human AIDS virus, a clue that may help explain why some
people are susceptible to certain viral infections while others are not.

    The finding, reported in today's issue of the journal Nature, offers one of
the first concrete examples of what researchers call an intracellular system of
innate immunity and may open the door to the development of new antiviral
therapies, the scientists said.

     The monkeys were protected from the virus by a mechanism that resides
within cells and that is independent of the antibodies and white blood cells of
the immune system. The mechanism appears to have evolved to protect animals from
specific viruses.

    In the case of AIDS, the researchers found, the monkeys blocked the human
immunodeficiency virus, or H.I.V., as soon as it slipped into cells, using a
protein that prevented the virus from shedding the hard casing around its genes.
The protein, called TRIM5-alpha, apparently floats inside the monkey cells,
looking for H.I.V.

    ''This is really telling us about a system of natural immunity to viruses,''
said Dr. Joseph Sodroski, a professor of pathology at Harvard's Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute who was the lead author of the study. He described the
protective mechanism used by the cells as ''very specific, very potent and very
targeted to particular viruses.''

    Dr. Nathaniel R. Landau, an AIDS researcher at the Salk Institute in San
Diego, called the study ''excellent,'' and predicted, ''I think it's going to
open up a new avenue of research.''

    Dr. Sodroski and other researchers said innate immunity might help explain
why some people were more prone to getting H.I.V. or other viruses, or why the
same types of infections were mild in some people and severe in others. The clue
may lie in slight individual differences in cellular proteins conferring this
immunity, they said.

    The finding will not immediately lead to new AIDS drugs, the scientists
said, but they said that any time a new way of intervening in a virus's life
cycle is discovered, it can generate ideas for antiviral therapies.

    ''Once you know there is something that is important for a virus to do you
can figure out a way to stop it,'' said Dr. John Coffin, a professor of
molecular biology and microbiology at Tufts University.

    In the new study, the researchers began with a well-known observation, that
some species of Old World primates, including rhesus monkeys, macaques,
mangabeys, baboons and African green monkeys, seem impervious to H.I.V.,
although they are susceptible to a similar virus, simian immunodeficiency virus,
or S.I.V.

    Dr. Sodroski and others who wanted to study human AIDS in animals began
looking for a way to infect monkey cells with the human virus. A method that
seemed to work, they found, was to make viruses that were part H.I.V. and part
S.I.V.

    Using such hybrids, Dr. Sodroski said, ''we could infect monkeys and cause
AIDS.''

    Then the researchers asked themselves what made the difference between a
virus that could infect monkeys and one that could not. They focused on the
capsid, the candy-corn shaped casing that surrounds the virus's genes when it
enters a cell.

    The hybrid viruses had the capsids of monkey viruses but the genes inside
were from the human virus. What would happen, the researchers wondered, if they
made viruses with capsids that were mixtures of humans and monkey?

    Such viruses, the researchers found, could no longer infect monkey cells.

    ''As soon as you put the capsid from H.I.V. into the viruses, they suddenly
were blocked in monkey cells,'' Dr. Sodroski said.

    Seeking to understand why this was so, the researchers discovered that it
was the monkey's TRIM5-alpha protein that, in a way not yet understood,
prevented the infection.

    If the scientists put the TRIM5-alpha gene into human cells, the human cells
made the monkey protein and were protected from H.I.V. infection. If, however,
the researchers blocked the gene in monkey cells, preventing the cells from
making TRIM5-alpha, the cells became susceptible to H.I.V.

    TRIM5-alpha, Dr. Sodroski said, is not just a peculiar monkey protein that
happens to block H.I.V. It appears to be part of an elaborate collection of
poorly understood proteins that cluster together, drifting through cells and
apparently stopping viruses when they enter.

    Dr. Sodroski said that proteins like TRIM were found only in vertebrates and
that the proteins were not essential for life. Humans make a protein that is
nearly identical to the monkey TRIM5-alpha, he added, but it is only half as
effective in blocking H.I.V.

    On the other hand, Dr. Sodroski said, the monkey TRIM5-alpha protein is only
about 50 percent effective in blocking S.I.V., the monkey virus: its big effect
is in blocking the human virus when it gets into monkey cells.

    The idea of an innate intracellular immunity to viruses first emerged
several decades ago but scientists have only recently begun to understand it.
Researchers had noticed that some strains of mice were less susceptible to a
mouse leukemia virus than others, and they found that whatever was protecting
the mice was inside cells.

    Nearly a decade ago, scientists learned that other mammals, including
humans, also had an innate immunity to mouse leukemia viruses. A few years ago,
they discovered why: cells that resist the mouse leukemia viruses make a protein
that has an effect similar to that of TRIM5's on the AIDS virus. Its target is
the capsid, and it prevents the early stages of infection.

    But innate immunity may also stop viruses at other steps in the infection,
Dr. Landau and his colleagues reported last summer. They found a protein that
prevents the monkey AIDS virus from taking hold in human cells by mutating the
viral genes, making the genes so aberrant that the viral DNA is destroyed by
scavenger enzymes in cells. The protein does not protect against the human AIDS
virus, the researchers found, because H.I.V. has evolved a viral protein that
interferes with the mutation process.

    Researchers say they are just beginning to understand innate immunity.

    ''There's an exploding number of these genes that so far as we know have
these antiviral activities,'' said Dr. Stephen P. Goff, a professor of
biochemistry and biophysics and a Howard Hughes investigator at Columbia
University. ''Presumably they evolved for that reason.''

    For now, Dr. Sodroski said, there are many more questions than answers.

    Could differences in TRIM5-alpha explain the differences in people's
responses to H.I.V.?

    Dr. Sodroski described it as ''a great question we're actively looking at
it.''

    He said more research was needed to find out how TRIM5 worked and whether
drugs or gene therapy might increase its levels so that even the less effective
human form successfully blocked H.I.V.

    ''It's a fundamental discovery and I can see a lot of creative ways people
might think about using it,'' Dr. Sodroski said. ''We've just scratched the
surface.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                             496 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 26, 2004 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: JIM LITKE SAYS FORGET THE WAR ON DRUGS, THE BAD GUYS HAVE ALREADY WON

BODY:

   The war against performance-enhancing drugs in sports isn't just being lost,
it's about over.

    The bad guys won, mostly because everybody else wearied of playing
hide-and-seek. There are a few notable holdouts, but they don't have a chance.
Even if by some miracle they caught up with the chemists -- and remember, the
"designer" steroid THG wasn't even known to scientists until a track coach
tipped them to its existence -- you won't believe what's over the horizon.

    Last month, a New York Times magazine story by Michael Sokolove began with a
visit to see the "mighty mice" in a lab at the University of Pennsylvania.
There, researchers are using gene therapy to produce increased levels of IGF-1,
or insulinlike growth factor-1, a protein that promotes muscle growth and
repair. The impetus for their research, begun in 1988, was to stop people from
getting weaker as they aged. But Sokolove knew he was glimpsing the future of
sport.

    "The mice show greater-than-normal muscle size and strength and do not lose
it as they age," he wrote. "Rats altered in the same fashion and then put into
physical training -- they climb little ladders with weights strapped to their
backs -- have experienced a 35 percent strength gain in the targeted muscles and
have not lost any of it 'detraining,' as a human being will when he quits going
to the gym."

    Not long after H. Lee Sweeney, chairman of Penn's department of physiology,
presented the findings at a meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology, he
received a wave of e-mails. Some were from weightlifters and bodybuilders. One
was from a high school football coach in Western Pennsylvania who asked if
Sweeney would treat his whole team.

    Few of them worried about whether it was safe, only whether it worked. None
of it surprised Dr. Gary Wadler, who as the U.S. representative to the World
Anti-Doping Agency, is one of those notable holdouts.

    "As soon as it gets into any legitimate publication, bango, these people get
a hold of it," Wadler said, referring to the subculture of athletes, coaches and
chemists always chasing the next thing, "and want to know how they can abuse
it."

    When asked whether someone could be using gene therapy right now, this was
Sweeney's answer: "I don't know that it's not happening."

    The good news, added Sweeney, who consults for WADA, is that a test to
detect IGF-1 might be possible, given enough resources. The bad news is that
it's a holding action at best.

    "There will come a day when they just have to give up," he said, referring
to anti-doping officials. "It's maybe 20 years away, but it's coming."

    The holdouts won one battle, when British sprinter Dwain Chambers, the
European 100-meter champion and a potential gold medalist at Athens, was
suspended for two years and banned for life from the Olympics because he tested
positive for THG.

    Chambers plans to appeal the finding, but just in case, he has begun
exploring other career options. After a recent private tryout in London, he's
scheduled to fly to Miami this week for an NFL Europe training camp.

    Chambers wants to be a wide receiver. Whether he can catch a football in
traffic, even with 9.87 speed, remains to be seen. But at least he won't be
foiled by the same routine, out-of-competition drug-testing that goes on in
track.

    When the scandal over THG began making a splash last fall, U.S. sprinter Jon
Drummond pointed out that athletes in his sport were tested more often for more
substances than the athletes in any other sport, and that their samples were
analyzed in state-of-the-art labs by the best scientists money can buy.

    He didn't mention, but could have, that even the richest among them doesn't
make one-quarter of what a big-league slugger or big-time running back makes. So
not only is there presumably less incentive to cheat, but they also have less to
spend on chemists, trainers and even lawyers.

    But he tried to look on the bright side.

    "I hope the good that comes from this, besides cleaning up our sport even
more, will be other professional sports will begin taking anti-doping as
seriously as track and field," he said.

    Not going to happen.

    Competitors looking for an edge, fair or otherwise, have been around since
the beginning of sport. Today, more and more of them are willing to turn a blind
eye to the consequences. Now that the rewards and the entertainment value are so
high, fewer and fewer of those looking on care about stopping them.


NOTES:
Jim Litke is a columnist for The Associated Press.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                             497 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 154 words

HEADLINE: Metro Briefing  New York: Manhattan: Mount Sinai Gets $25 Million Gift

BYLINE: By Richard Perez-Pena (NYT); Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

BODY:

   Carl C. Icahn, the Wall Street financier, has pledged $25 million for
advanced medical research to Mount Sinai Medical Center, the third-largest gift
in its history, hospital officials said yesterday. Mount Sinai will name its
main medical school and research building, at Madison Avenue and East 98th
Street, after Mr. Icahn. Most research grants are directed at particular
diseases, but Mr. Icahn, a Mount Sinai trustee, put no limits on his gift, which
will be made over five years. That means it can support basic research that will
lead to other projects and grants, Peter W. May, Mount Sinai's chairman, and
Kenneth Davis, president and dean of the medical school, said. ''It's equity
money that can be used to seed projects that are not yet ready for formal
funding,'' Mr. May said. They said the money would go toward, among other
things, research on vaccines, gene therapies and stem cells.   Richard
Perez-Pena (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004


                             498 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      February 23, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 1025 words

HEADLINE: Mapping out a plan for Down syndrome;
Researchers confident they can conquer extra chromosome

BYLINE: CAREY GOLDBERG Boston Globe

BODY:

   A decade ago, any researcher who dared to suggest that Down syndrome could
one day be "cured" was heading straight for the scientific fringe. Mainstream
consensus went: Down syndrome, the leading genetic cause of mental retardation,
was too complex a problem even to approach.

   Now, although that goal remains beyond the horizon, a growing number of
reputable researchers at universities such as Stanford and Columbia say they can
foresee a time when they'll be able to break the link between Down syndrome and
retardation.

   Armed with an array of new tools -- from genome mapping and stem cells to
genetically engineered mice and a deepening understanding of Alzheimer's disease
-- they are trying to pinpoint just how the extra chromosome of Down syndrome
leads to retardation and a host of other problems.

   Once they figure that out, the thinking goes, perhaps they can someday help
people with Down syndrome gain some IQ points, or even develop normal
intelligence. There is a precedent: Certain rare genetic metabolic diseases once
meant certain retardation. Now, those babies can grow up mentally normal, thanks
to diagnosis as newborns, pills and diet restrictions.

   "The whole research scene has changed dramatically" since the extra
chromosome, Chromosome 21, was mapped in 2000, said Suzanne Armstrong,
spokeswoman for the National Down Syndrome Society.

   "We realize that any potential treatments resulting from research at the
genetic level are years away," she said, "but we're very hopeful."

   More than 350,000 Americans have Down syndrome and the moderate or mild
retardation that generally goes along with it. They are at higher risk for heart
defects, childhood leukemia and other physical problems, too. They also tend to
have a distinctive look -- short stature, small nose, a relatively flat face.

   The life expectancy for people with Down syndrome has doubled in the last two
decades or so, from 25 to 49 years; and the sweeping movement to raise children
at home instead of in institutions has greatly improved the quality of those
longer lives, parents and advocates say.

   Sheila Cannon, coordinator for the Down syndrome center at Children's
Hospital in Pittsburgh, said the progress on health and quality-of-life issues
since her daughter, Kerry, was born 17 years ago has already been stunning: Back
then, she was told, "Down syndrome is what it is."

   Prevention has future

   Now, it seems, that may not always be true. Prevention of mental retardation
"may not happen within the next few years, and it may not even be helpful to my
daughter, but it probably would be helpful to the generations that follow," she
said. "That's how I look at it."

   Getting there, advocates and researchers say, will require much more of a
financial commitment from the federal government.

   In recent years, federal funding for Down syndrome research has averaged
about $10 million a year; the National Down Syndrome Society is now pushing for
twice that sum. By comparison, Alzheimer's disease, which affects more than 4
million people, got $600 million from the National Institutes of Health alone in
2002.

   But some of that river of Alzheimer's money is trickling over to Down
syndrome research because of an intriguing connection: The brains of virtually
all middle-aged people with Down syndrome show telltale signs of Alzheimer's
disease, and one of the genes on Chromosome 21 is linked to production of
beta-amyloid, a protein that accumulates in abnormal form in Alzheimer's brains.

   The beta-amyloid connection raises an exciting prospect, said Michael
Shelanski, co-director of the Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's disease
at Columbia University:

   It could be, he said, that a child with Down syndrome becomes retarded simply
because "the child is developing with a flood of beta-amyloid, so they don't
learn very well, they don't make synapses very well."

   "We're beginning to study this in the mouse," he said, and eventually,
perhaps, drugs that will be developed to sop up extra beta-amyloid in the brains
of Alzheimer's patients could also be used to reduce retardation in children.

   Human research is beginning as well. In a 2002 article in the journal The
Lancet, researchers took two sets of postmortem fetuses, one with Down syndrome
and one without, and compared the gene activity of their neural stem cells. They
found that certain genes that help brain cells develop and communicate were
disrupted only in the Down syndrome fetuses. A Lancet commentary noted that
those genes could turn out to be targets for drug and gene therapy in humans.

   Trials test existing drugs

   But that will take years to determine. In the meantime, a few clinical trials
have begun to test existing drugs to enhance brain function in people with Down
syndrome, largely on the premise that whatever shows promise improving learning
and memory with Alzheimer's disease might work in Down syndrome as well.

   Pfizer, which makes an Alzheimer's drug called Aricept, is testing it in
dozens of people with Down syndrome around the country, checking for any
noticeable improvement in memory, attention, language and more.

   Results of previous studies of Aricept have tended to be modest, however,
said Ira Lott, director of pediatric neurology at the University of California
at Irvine. "The problem with that whole class of medication is that it's
temporary," he said. "It's like whipping a tired horse -- the horse runs faster
and then poops out."

   He and colleagues are now working on a study using high-potency anti-oxidants
-- such as vitamins E and C -- for people with Down syndrome. Already, the
vitamins have shown some promise in improving learning and memory in Alzheimer's
patients, he said.

   Researchers tend to have an easier time imagining an anti-retardation
treatment that begins at birth -- or even before -- than one given in adulthood.
But an adult treatment is not impossible, said William C. Mobley, director of a
new center for research on Down syndrome at Stanford University. The effects of
the extra chromosome "may or may not be reversible," he said. "We just don't
know."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004


                             499 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 20, 2004, Friday  THIRD EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: NEW PRODUCTS BOOST GENZYME

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:
[MULTIPLE PUBLISHED CORRECTIONS HAVE BEEN ADDED TO THIS STORY.      Genzyme
Corp. of Cambridge said fourth-quarter net income more than doubled to $66.7
million and revenue surged 34 percent to $481 million, aided by new products
from an acquisition and the inclusion of results that had previously gone to
separate divisions.

   For the full year, however, net income plunged 43 percent to $103.7 million.
Revenue rose 46 percent to $1.58 billion, or 46 cents a share, compared to
$178.5 million, or 81 cents a share, for 2002.

      And part of the revenue increases the company posted for the fourth
quarter and the year came from the elimination of Genzyme's tracking stocks in
June. When Genzyme Biosurgery and Genzyme Molecular Oncology stocks were
eliminated, those divisions' revenues were brought under the corporate banner.

   For 2004, Genzyme predicted revenues would reach $1.9 to $2 billion, and
gross margins would increase to 76 to 77 percent, compared to 74 percent in
2003. The firm estimated earnings per share would reach $1.37 to $1.47 in the
current year. In 2003, the company earned 46 cents a share.

   "Last year was a transforming year in many ways, and we begin 2004 as a more
diversified, truly global concern," said Henri Termeer, Genzyme's chief
executive, in a statement.

   "For 2004, our focus is on execution - on increasing market share for our
products and expanding their availability worldwide, capitalizing on investments
we've made in our infrastructure, managing the opportunities within our
pipeline."

   Investors were disappointed by the results, sending Genzyme shares down
$2.04, or 3.7 percent, to $53.43, on volume of 9 million shares.

   "This was kind of a ho-hum announcement," said Adam Walsh, biotech analyst
with Jefferies & Co. in San Francisco, in an interview. But he predicted
Genzyme's shares would reach $60 later this year. "If you look at the core
business, they're very much intact and growing well, and we'd expect that to
continue," he said.

   Several analysts noted Genzyme has a track record of issuing conservative
guidance and exceeding expectations. "I'm expecting 2004 to be a repeat of 2003,
where the company posted above its initial guidance," said Yaron Werber, an
analyst with S.G. Cowen.

   In the fourth quarter, the company's earnings were reduced by $2.9 million in
costs related to the company's acquisition of SangStat Medical, and by $3.1
million in fees paid as part of a collaboration agreement with Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 21, 2004, Saturday

CORRECTION:

   Because of an editing error, a story in Friday's Business section incorrectly
reported Genzyme Corp.'s revenues. In addition, the story cited the figures in a
way normally reserved for other financial results. Genzyme's 2003 revenue was
$1.58 billion, up from $1.08 billion.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2004


                             500 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                  February 18, 2004 Wednesday, 7 SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: NEW METHOD DEVISED TO REPAIR NERVES

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Researchers combined two experimental approaches to regenerate damaged optic
nerves in rats, a strategy they hope will rejuvenate efforts to develop new
treatments for ailments as diverse as glaucoma, spinal cord injuries and
multiple sclerosis.

    According to reports published today in the journal Neuroscience,
investigators at the Children's Hospital in Boston and Harvard Medical School
said that, by simultaneously knocking out proteins that block nerve growth and
supplying a growth factor that encourages it, they spurred three times more
regeneration of nerve fibers than previously achieved.

   The technique is like taking your foot off the brake while applying pressure
to a gas pedal, the authors of the study said.

   "I'm absolutely sure that we will have to use combinatorial treatments to
succeed" in regenerating central nervous system tissue, said Dietmar Fischer,
lead author of the study and a postdoctoral student in the division of
neurosurgery at the Children's Hospital.

    In the last decade, scientists have been excited about the therapeutic
potential of blocking NoGo receptors, one of the key proteins known to halt the
repair of damaged central nervous system cells. Researchers speculated that by
blocking the action of NoGo, neurons would automatically repair themselves, as
happens in some species of animals.

    However, blocking NoGo has been shown to have only limited benefits in
spurring the repair of damaged axons -- the part of a neuron that transmits
nerve impulses, Fischer said.

    So researchers wanted to find a gas pedal, not just take their foot off the
brake.

    Researchers at Children's had discovered that damage to the lenses of eyes
in rats triggers the release of a growth factor -- called macrophage-derived
factor -- that helps nerve cells repair themselves.

   Working with rats with injured optic nerves, the scientists damaged the
lenses in some animals' eyes, triggering the release of the growth factors, and
used gene therapy to disable the NoGo receptors in some rats.

   What the researchers found was that rats with both the growth factor and the
disabled NoGo receptors showed the greatest regeneration of optic nerve fibers.

   However, the regeneration wasn't enough to restore the rats' sight.

   Fischer believes that a similar combination treatment could regenerate other
types of damaged nerve cells, such as those in the spinal cord.

   New therapies to repair damaged nervous systems will have to account for the
fact that mature neurons don't appear to respond well to some growth factors,
said Ben Barres, professor of neurobiology at Stanford University.

   "There is no question that there are still multiple problems," Barres said.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004


                             501 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 17, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 959 words

HEADLINE: Cheating in sports could become genetic;
Therapy program builds bigger rats, worries

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   SEATTLE -- Some seriously pumped-up rats have set rodent records hauling
weights up little ladders in a Philadelphia lab, where genetic engineering may
be shaping the future of the National Football League.

   And that is not necessarily good news, scientists here said yesterday. At a
time when some athletes will do just about anything to make their bodies bigger,
stronger and faster, gene therapy is a whole new frontier.

   In seeking treatments for muscular dystrophy and other degenerative diseases,
scientists at the University of Pennsylvania found that the muscles of athletic
rats gained nearly twice as much strength after gene injections as untreated
rats.

   Although still unproven in humans, gene therapy could eventually find its way
into the locker room, where doping to enhance performance is a big problem.

   Last Thursday, a federal grand jury indicted two sports nutritionists, a
trainer of baseball player Barry Bonds and a world-class track coach on charges
of money laundering and giving steroids and other drugs to athletes. In his
State of the Union address last month, President Bush called for an end to
illegal drug use by athletes.

   Speaking at the national meeting here of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, Lee Sweeney, the scientist who led the Philadelphia
research, said he is already hearing from athletes and sports trainers.

   Gene therapy, unlike many designer drugs that athletes take today, would be
difficult to detect because genetic changes could be targeted to muscle tissue.
Evidence of the gene therapy disappears from the bloodstream soon after
treatment.

   "The drug problem is the devil we know . . . and here we are at the beginning
of a brave new world," said Richard Pound, president of the World Anti-Doping
Agency. It already has passed a provision prohibiting gene therapy for that
purpose.

   The prospect of gene doping carries unknown health risks, new ethical issues
and difficult policing and legal challenges, Pound said.

   At the core of the debate should be a re-examination of whether sport should
test the natural abilities of competitors, or be something entirely different,
said Pound, who was a member of Canada's Olympic swim team in 1960.

   "Gene therapy is one thing, but changing the genetic makeup of people is
another," he said.

   "I want athletes, not gladiators. I want human beings, not mutants."

   It may become easier for athletes to change their genes than one might
expect, the scientists said.

   Developing illegal designer steroid drugs requires a level of expertise that
sometimes limits their availability, but once it is figured out, gene therapy is
another matter, said UCSD professor Theodore Friedmann, who studies doping in
sports.

   "It (the synthesis of illegal drugs) is not something that can be done in a
garage laboratory or by a graduate student," Friedmann said.

   "The genetic approach to athletic enhancement is a different can of worms . .
. within the grasp of a graduate student."

   In the Philadelphia experiments, researchers injected rats with a virus
carrying the gene for insulin-like growth factor 1, or IGF-1. The specially
engineered virus was designed to carry the gene only to skeletal muscle and not
to other tissues, where it has been known to cause tumors in animals.

   What they found was extraordinary.

   The rate at which muscles grew and the size and strength of the muscles were
15 percent to 20 percent greater than normal. And this was in rats that led
sedentary lives.

   "It's sort of a couch potato's dream," Sweeney said.

   The researchers also found that when they injected the growth factor into the
muscles of middle-aged rats, those muscles didn't weaken as the rats grew older.
Rats, like humans, lose muscle mass, strength and speed as they age.

   Encouraged by the results, the scientists tested the gene therapy on young,
athletic rats.

   Over several weeks, rats injected with the IGF-1 gene were placed on a kind
of weight training program, during which they repeatedly climbed small ladders
while carrying weights tied to their tails.

   At the end of the rats' training period, the muscles that received the gene
therapy gained nearly twice as much strength as muscles in the animal that were
not injected with the gene.

   The scientists also found that after the rats stopped training, the rate at
which their muscles atrophied was much slower than normal.

   The growth factor IGF-1 furthermore appeared to prevent scar tissue from
forming within muscle tissue after injury.

   Accelerating and preserving the body's ability to build, repair and preserve
muscle mass could prove valuable to all kinds of people -- including individuals
suffering from disease, those facing decreased mobility with age and injury and
athletes, Sweeney said.

   Astronauts, who endure steady losses in muscle mass in the zero-gravity
environment of space, also could benefit from IGF-1 gene therapy.

   "Genetic enhancement is something that's going to be real," Sweeney said.

   How effective and safe such gene therapy will be for humans is something that
will be determined in coming decades, and the answers most likely will come
first from clinical trials designed to treat diseases such as muscular
dystrophy, he said.

   That athletes and trainers already are contacting Sweeney doesn't surprise
Pound of the anti-doping agency.

   "As long as there's been sport, there's been cheaters," he said. "Perhaps
that is the gene that needs to be identified."

   Super athletes

   The science: Researchers have experimented with gene therapy on rats,
improving their muscle strength.

   The fear: If such gene therapy becomes effective and safe for humans,
scientists say it may be easy for athletes to change their genes, thus enhancing
their athletic performance.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: Super athletes -- The science -- The fear (A-8)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2004


                             502 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            February 15, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: SHOW; SUNDAY; SCIENCE BOOKS IN BRIEF; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 700 words

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: Sandra G. Boodman; Gregory Mott

BODY:


   The Pursuit of Perfection: The Promise and Perils of Medical Enhancement, by
Sheila M. Rothman and David J. Rothman (Pantheon, $25). Is being short a medical
problem that warrants treatment? What about the diminished strength that
accompanies lower testosterone levels in men as they age? Is treatment for these
and similar conditions, even if it proves harmful or deadly years later,
justified if it alleviates personal unhappiness, even misery?

   These are provocative questions. The authors provide a frequently eye-opening
view of the dubious scientific evidence that resulted in the aggressive
marketing of hormone replacement therapy for women, testosterone enhancement for
men, human growth hormone for short children and liposuction for unwanted flab.
As the Rothmans document, treatments for these newly discovered problems are
often dispensed with a greater concern for profits than perils.

   Their account of the selling of growth hormone to treat short children
without a metabolic problem is a revealing example. The expensive injections had
little effect on growth. Patients should heed the authors' conclusion that these
treatments "represent ... a test of the outer limits of allowing science to set
its own agenda, of allowing happiness to drive clinical care."

   Sandra G. Boodman,

   Washington Post

   Degrees Kelvin: A Tale of Genius, Invention and Tragedy, by David Lindley
(Joseph Henry, $27.95). Lord Kelvin (born William Thomson), is a historical
footnote formerly known as the pre-eminent British scientist of the 19th
century. He propounded ideas and principles still taught, yet is almost
forgotten.

   The seeds of Thomson's undoing may have lain in his ascent. The genius son of
a professor, Thomson participated in his father's math lectures at age 8 and was
publishing in scholarly journals by his mid-teens. But even by the time he
graduated from Cambridge, it was clear that "he could not or would not look very
far forward, because he did not like to speculate where he had no solid ground
beneath him."

   Once he became the first scientist elevated to the peerage, albeit primarily
for his entrepreneurial successes in telegraphy and marine navigation systems
that enriched the empire, he became the de facto standard-bearer of the
scientific establishment. It was a role for which he was decidedly ill-suited, a
fact made plain by his public declamations against certain aspects of Darwin's
theories of evolution and other cutting-edge science of the day. In a sense, the
fact that we've all heard of Darwin explains why we know so little of Kelvin.

   Gregory Mott,

   Washington Post

   In the Name of Science: A History of Secret Programs, Medical Research and
Human Experimentation, by Andrew Goliszek (St. Martin's, $27.95). Goliszek
unleashes a tsunami of indignation in cataloging official misdoings in support
of state aims, from the catapulting of diseased bodies into medieval forts to
anticipated 21st-century advances in cloning and gene therapy.

   Goliszek, a biologist, covers a lot of ground, from U.S. government testing
of chemical, biological and nuclear agents on unwitting servicemen and
civilians, to the eugenics and genetics movements here and abroad, to CIA
mind-control research, to the Human Genome Project, which he sees as the kind of
research particularly ripe for abuse. Gene therapy, he writes, could be used to
introduce lethal viruses and genetic diseases for warfare or elimination of
undesirable traits.

   Goliszek is not out to connect the dots or to paint particular individuals as
incarnations of evil. Many researchers, he writes, saw Cold War radiation
experiments as valuable to society and humanity. "Children were fed radioactive
oatmeal so nutritionists could study how preservatives moved through the body
blocking absorption of vitamins and minerals. Patients scheduled for limb
amputation had large amounts of plutonium injected into the affected limb so
that researchers could see how the plutonium dispersed throughout the tissue. It
was believed that all of these medical and scientific studies served the
ultimate good of humanity."

   Gregory Mott,

   Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2004


                             503 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                     February 15, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1543 words

HEADLINE: Drug trial participant recruiting questioned; Suicide of woman, 19,
during drug trial puts recruiting practices under scrutiny;
Suicide of 19-year-old in Lilly study puts use of college students for tests
under scrutiny.

BYLINE: BY J.K. WALL, BARB BERGGOETZ AND JOHN TUOHY JK.WALL@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   At age 20, Evan Ennis saw a flier tacked to a bulletin board on the IUPUI
campus. It asked for volunteers to help study the effect of genetics on
osteoporosis.

   Ennis signed up, and because the study needed siblings, he persuaded his
brother Alex to join him. For three hours of trouble that included giving a
blood sample and undergoing a bone scan, they pocketed $80 each and received a
free meal.

   "I would do another," said Evan Ennis, now 23. And in fact, the same study
was posted prominently last week at Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis. "It seems like you can look at any bulletin board, and there will
be at least one of those fliers up there."

   Standing in as research subjects is commonplace for students at IUPUI and
other major research universities from Texas to Wisconsin.

   Although no one knows how many college students offer themselves as guinea
pigs, they are exposed almost daily to notices for the thousands of ongoing
research projects via e-mails, Web sites, fliers and word of mouth.

   That word even echoes to smaller schools near a research campus, beckoning
students looking for a quick way to pay for books and tuition. Such was the case
with Traci Johnson, a former student at Indiana Bible College in Indianapolis
who killed herself last weekend while participating in a clinical drug trial on
the IUPUI campus.

   The 19-year-old Pennsylvania native was one of 25 local healthy volunteers
taking higher-than-normal doses of duloxetine, a compound developed by
Indianapolis-based Eli Lilly and Co. to treat incontinence and depression. The
volunteers had no signs of depression or other illnesses.

   Johnson's suicide is focusing further scrutiny on how researchers -- and
particularly drug companies -- recruit participants for trials and how
universities regulate them. Her death also has some questioning whether college
students, often short on cash, are mature enough to fully understand the risks

   "This is a profit-making business, and (pharmaceutical companies) are
exploiting essentially poor teens," said Vera Sharav, president of the Alliance
for Human Research Protection, which argues vehemently against the dangers of
anti-depressant pills. "Kids are risk-takers anyway. They don't care about
tomorrow. They don't realize what they're doing. And we should allow that?"

   Lilly has expressed sympathy over Johnson's death and said it doesn't believe
its drug was a factor in her suicide. But it defends the use of college students
as test subjects amid groups of participants with a wide range of ages.

   "When the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approves a medicine for use in
adults, that covers anyone 18 or older. It would be irresponsible, knowing that
a medicine will be used among college students, to exclude them from clinical
trials," said Lilly spokesman Rob Smith.

   Others noted that college students are of legal age and are protected by
heavy government regulation of clinical trials.

   "They're old enough to enlist in the military," said Tom Sturgis, president
of Integrated Clinical Trial Services, a North Carolina consulting firm that
recruits test subjects. And "during clinical trials, they're getting excellent
medical care."

   College clinics

   Sturgis said it is common for pharmaceutical research companies to use
clinics in college towns for trials that require healthy volunteers.

   Covance has a large facility near the University of Wisconsin in Madison.
Pharmaceutical Product Development has a large facility near the University of
Texas in Austin. MDS Pharma Services is headquartered near the University of
Nebraska in Lincoln. The Lilly Laboratory for Clinical Research is at IUPUI,
part of the Indiana University Medical Center.

   "Typically, they locate those facilities in college towns because they get a
lot of traffic in and out of the schools," Sturgis said. "Typically, (students)
are healthier than the rest of us. And they're always looking for money."

   But rarely do either pharmaceutical companies or university researchers
specifically seek out or solicit students. Many projects are geared to specific
age groups or people with certain medical conditions. Researchers find
participants through doctors or clinics and advertisements in daily newspapers
and on radio.

   College students have been a declining block of participants in drug studies
as pharmaceutical companies have tried to get more diversity in their test
subjects, said Jerry Merritt, senior vice president of early clinical research
for MDS. At Merritt's company, students accounted for 60 percent of healthy
volunteers 15 years ago. Today, he said, the number is below 40 percent.

   "Probably college students still represent the largest block," Merritt said.
"Most of the places we locate our facilities are in college communities."

   Unlike Sharav, few students, university officials and drug researchers see
using students as exploitative.

   "All the notices I've seen posted, the chance of risk is really, really low,
if it's not zero. I can't see there's much harm in that," said IU student Daniel
Sines.

   During his first year as a medical student, when he was 22, Sines agreed to
receive alcohol intravenously -- less than half the legal limit. He stayed
overnight at University Hospital while doctors analyzed the way his liver
metabolized food after the consumption of alcohol.

   But Sines and others said they would have stayed away from the trial Johnson
took part in.

   "You've got to be careful when you're talking about putting a drug in your
body," said IUPUI senior Tony Boyd, 23. "Anytime they ask you to do something
that messes with your mind and body, you have to think twice about it."

   Research restricted

   University officials who oversee research at the state's three largest
campuses say they go to great lengths to inform students -- and anyone who
volunteers -- about those risks and the benefits and to make sure they are not
coerced.

   "We recognize students are a bit of a captive audience, so we go way
overboard to allow them not to be put in a compromising position," said Richard
Mattes, chairman of the Institutional Review Board at Purdue. Review boards at
colleges approve and monitor all human subject research.

   Campus officials say they not only want to do that, but they are required to
do so under federal regulations. Violations may result in a project being
suspended. In extreme cases, all human subject research at a university can be
banned.

   In the past five years, federal scrutiny of human subject research has
intensified, driven by several government reports saying protection was lax.
Federal agencies, including the FDA, have temporarily suspended all or some
research at about 10 universities or medical centers.

   Among them were Johns Hopkins University, where a subject died during an
asthma study, and the University of Pennsylvania, where a teenage test subject
died during a gene therapy trial.

   At IU in Bloomington, there are about 1,650 ongoing research projects. Purdue
has about 1,800. And at IUPUI, the site of the IU School of Medicine, there are
more than 3,300 active projects that can involve everything from opinion surveys
to sleep tests to trials for experimental medications.

   Clinical trials constitute anywhere from 1,500 to 2,000 of that total,
according to Shelley Bizila, IUPUI's director of research compliance. Lilly does
about 20 to 30 clinical trials a year at IUPUI, said Bizila, administrator for
the school's five Institutional Review Boards.

   Each university that sponsors research has a review board of 10 to 15
researchers and community members. Those boards have ultimate control over
approving human subject projects.

   The panels also scrutinize advertisements and notices seeking research
volunteers to make sure they're not misleading. They require research
participants to sign consent forms that explain a study's risks. And they make
sure a person is available to hear participants' complaints.

   Campus officials also impose other limitations. Faculty researchers generally
can't directly recruit test subjects from their own classrooms. Typically, IUPUI
students must sit out for two years between tests.

   "You don't want to allow people to use this as a means of income," said Mark
Brenner, IUPUI vice chancellor of research and graduate education.

   Most studies offer some payment -- designed to compensate people for their
time, the inconvenience or expenses. But federal rules don't control payment.

   At Purdue, a student may get $5 an hour for filling out surveys. A yearlong
study requiring a certain diet and blood and fecal tests may net them $1,000,
Mattes said.

   For all of the precautions, debate lingers as to whether young people are
mature enough to decide whether to participate in clinical trials that could
harm them.

   "As long as the U.S. government treats 18-year-olds as adults, why should
pharmaceuticals do any differently?" asked Ahmed Athar, a medical student and
president of the IU Medical Student Council.

   But Purdue doctoral student Amy Devitt has some doubts. If your parents have
to sign consent forms before your 18th birthday, she said, "are you that much
more mature on that day? I'm not sure."

   Call Star reporter J.K. Wall at (317) 444-6287.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004


                             504 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 15, 2004 Sunday FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY, Pg.C-5

LENGTH: 740 words

HEADLINE: DOCTOR WHO WAS MASTER OF THE HEART ROBERT BRUCE

BYLINE: CAROL SMITH, SEATTLE POST-INTELLIGENCER

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   If life was a treadmill for Dr. Robert Bruce, that was a very good thing.

    Best known as the inventor of the cardiac treadmill test that has put
millions of patients on a path to recovery from heart disease, Dr. Bruce died
Thursday of leukemia in his Seattle home at age 87.

    Dr. Bruce, who was the first director of the division of cardiology at the
University of Washington, headed the division for more than 30 years before
retiring in 1982.

    As devised by Dr. Bruce, the treadmill test was as elegant as it was
relentless. Starting slow, the treadmill increased in pace and inclination every
three minutes until no patient was left "unstressed."

    The test, now known as the Bruce protocol, became an invaluable tool for
helping diagnose heart conditions, and even more important, for giving
prognostic information, said Dr. Werner Samson, an attending cardiologist at the
University of Washington and one of Bruce's first students in 1951.

    At the time, the workings of the heart were little known, but Dr. Bruce's
passion for the field inspired Samson to pursue it. "He was dedicated to
cardiology," he said. "And he was a great teacher."

    He was also a rigorous one. Samson spent a fair amount of his own time
sweating on the treadmill at Bruce's behest in the interest of science.

    When Dr. Bruce joined the University of Washington's newly born cardiology
department in 1950, doctors had no way to obtain the sophisticated images of
blood flow through the heart that they see today.

    "Nobody did bypass surgery. Balloon angioplasty and putting stents in --
that didn't exist at that time," he said. "We still put people to bed for four
to six weeks after a heart attack because there was nothing much we could do."

    Dr. Bruce lived to see the development of artificial hearts, transplants and
the advent of gene therapy to treat heart disease. Until a week before his
death, he was still asking his colleagues, "What's new?" He had also ordered an
advanced calculus course that he was taking for entertainment.

    Dr. Bruce was born in Massachusetts. His father was a meatpacker, and his
mother ran a cafe. The grandson of Scottish immigrants, he was the first in his
family to go to college, said his son, Peter Bruce.

    He attended Boston University and received his medical degree from the
University of Rochester in New York. Known as a "smart guy," he was recruited by
University of Washington to catalyze a program that eventually made it a
national center for heart research.

    "His major contributions to diagnosis and treatment of heart disease are
recognized by all physicians in this country and around the world," said Dr.
Paul Ramsey, the university's vice president of medical affairs and the dean of
the School of Medicine.

    Indeed, a cardiologist treating a family member with Dr. Bruce in the room
once remarked, "I feel like I'm in the presence of the pope."

    "He was a household word in our field," said Dr. Richard Page, current
cardiology division chairman who holds the Robert A. Bruce chair in
cardiovascular research.

    Dr. Bruce's involvement in heart research didn't end with his retirement. He
remained active with the American College of Cardiology and advised groups on
exercise and the elderly.

    The thrice-married, twice-widowed Dr. Bruce also kept love alive into his
80s, marrying Barbara Klemka, a fellow resident of his retirement home, 1 1*2
years ago. He embraced three families as his own, said one of his stepsons,
Stuart Laughlin, whose mother married Bruce when he was 80.

    "He was really very young at heart," said Carole Brennan, his stepdaughter
by his third marriage. "They would go out every day and go for walks. He was a
good listener."

    "His children by nature and marriage were all really devoted to him," said
Page, who organized a pre-memorial service on Wednesday for about 40 family
members, friends and colleagues, a gathering that Dr. Bruce was able to attend.
He died 12 hours later.

    White-haired and handsome, Bruce was a tall and distinguished presence who
seldom wasted words and was proud of his Scottish heritage. "He realized the
benefits of companionship," Laughlin said. "And having a last chance for
happiness."

    Bruce taught many lessons to many people throughout his career, but perhaps
they are best summed up by one described by his first student.

    "After working with him," Samson said, "I realized the heart is an important
organ."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004


                             505 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22; CLONING AND STEM CELLS: THE
RESEARCH

LENGTH: 1490 words

HEADLINE: Medical and Ethical Issues Cloud Cloning for Therapy

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK; Cornelia Dean and Claudia Dreifus contributed
reporting from Seattle for this article.

BODY:

   In cloning human embryos and extracting universal stem cells, scientists in
South Korea have taken a big step toward a tantalizing goal: growing tailor-made
replacement tissues for people who are sick or injured. Imagine new cardiac
muscles to restore a heart after a heart attack, insulin-producing cells for
diabetics or neurons to stave off Parkinson's disease.

    But significant scientific barriers lie between this accomplishment and any
actual therapy, experts said. Moreover, ethical objections have put such
research off-limits to some scientists -- including the many in the United
States who rely on federal money -- and lack of investment has felled many
companies trying to develop cell-replacement therapies.

    The South Korean work is a step toward what is called ''therapeutic
cloning.'' The work so far is ''proof of concept of cloning but it's not
therapeutic yet,'' said Dr. Steven A. Goldman, chief of the division of cell and
gene therapy at the University of Rochester Medical Center.

    It is likely to be several years before tissues derived this way could even
be tested in patients, he and other experts said. The South Korean scientists
have produced only the raw material, the stem cells, which must be turned into
more specific cells like heart cells or brain cells.

    Some researchers hope that new work will galvanize support for similar
research in the United States, by showing that therapeutic cloning is not merely
a pipe dream. They argue that the fact that this work was done in South Korea
shows that the United States is in danger of falling behind other countries in
what could become a major new medical field.

    ''We will be sitting here with the best scientists in the world watching
things on television,'' said Dr. Jose B. Cibelli, professor of animal
biotechnology at Michigan State University. Dr. Cibelli collaborated with the
South Korean scientists and is an author of their paper, which is being
published by the journal Science.

    Donald Kennedy, editor in chief of Science, agreed, saying yesterday at a
news conference in Seattle, ''I think there is no question that the degree of
restriction imposed now on stem cell research in the U.S. has in fact given
other nations some significant advantages.''

    Indeed, the lead South Korean researchers, Dr. Woo Suk Hwang and Dr. Shin
Yong Moon of Seoul National University, said that Americans came to their
laboratory for training.

    ''Already many biologists not only from America but the Asian countries have
made a visit to his lab,'' Dr. Moon said of Dr. Hwang's lab at the news
conference. ''He says they call it 'fantastic,' 'unbelievable,' 'a cloning
academy.' ''

    The idea behind therapeutic cloning is to create tissues or cells that are
genetically identical to those of a patient. That way, when the cells are
implanted into a patient they will not be rejected like many transplants are.
The term ''therapeutic cloning'' is also used to distinguish it from
reproductive cloning, in which the goal is to make a baby that is identical to
the parent.

    The South Korean scientists created embryos that were genetic copies of
women who donated cells. After a few days, some of the embryos had grown to a
stage when embryonic stem cells could be extracted, and the scientists created
one culture of such stem cells. The stem cells have the ability to turn into any
other kind of cell in the body.

    Dr. Hwang and Dr. Moon said their research team and the university were
seeking to patent the techniques and the stem cells produced from the cloned
embryos. They said they would be happy to share the cells with other
researchers, but probably on condition that the patent holders would share in
any profits.

    To make those embryonic stem cells useful for therapy, scientists would then
have to turn them into particular types of cells like heart cells or neurons
that could be injected into people. Scientists have already learned how to do
that for some cells, but not all.

    But the cell populations to be implanted must be pure, said Dr. Goldman of
Rochester, who is also a professor of neurology. It is essential, he said, that
the cells contain no residual embryonic stem cells, because when implanted in
the body they tend to form tumors called teratomas that consist of a mix of
tissue types including hair, skin and teeth.

    Moreover, Dr. Goldman said, for certain applications, like treating
neurologic diseases, implanting the wrong type of nerve cell could cause side
effects like seizures.

    But the work is advancing. ''With adequate funding, there's no question we
could be in clinical trials in two or three years,'' said Robert P. Lanza,
medical director of Advanced Cell Technology Inc., a Worcester, Mass., company
that has been pursuing therapeutic cloning but now has only a handful of
scientists. ''The question is are we going to be around to be doing this work.''

    Dr. Thomas B. Okarma, president and chief executive of the Geron Corporation
of Menlo Park, Calif., a leader in embryonic stem cells, said his company hoped
to ask the Food and Drug Administration to approve a clinical trial in 2005,
using cells derived from embryonic stem cells to treat spinal cord injuries.
Such treatment has restored mobility in some paralyzed rats, he said.

    ''We've gone way beyond the academic world and where most of the pundits
think the field is,'' Dr. Okarma said.

    Geron does not do therapeutic cloning but uses human embryonic stem cells
derived from embryos left over from fertility clinics, created by the
fertilization of egg by sperm.

    Dr. Goldman, who once collaborated with the Geron Corporation, said he
doubted that a trial could begin that soon, saying it would be ''irresponsible''
to try.

    There are ethical objections to work with human embryonic stem cells,
because it involves the destruction of embryos, which some people view as human
life. Therapeutic cloning is also controversial because, critics say, it
involves creation of life solely for research or treatment. Supporters argue
that therapeutic cloning is distinct from reproductive cloning, which even many
of them find objectionable.

    The ethical question, scientists say, has slowed progress. Some scientists
stay away from such research to avoid the debate. Federal money for research on
human embryonic stem cells is limited, they say, and scientists who receive such
financing are allowed to work with only a small number of cell lines.

    Companies and venture capitalists have also been reluctant to invest in the
field, partly because of the ethics debate, but also because investors perceive
it will take a long time for such therapies to reach the market and provide a
return. Moreover, injecting cells, particularly if they are customized to each
patient, is perceived as a less attractive business proposition than
mass-producing a pill that everyone can take.

    Many companies pursuing cloning and cell replacement therapies, not all from
embryonic stem cells, have gone out of business. PPL Therapeutics, the Scottish
company that helped clone Dolly the sheep, is being dismantled. Infigen, a
pioneering cloning company in Wisconsin, recently laid off all of its employees.

    ''The landscape is just littered with dead companies,'' said Linda Powers,
managing director of the Toucan Capital Corporation, a venture capital firm in
Bethesda, Md., that, she said, is one of the few investing actively in cell
therapies.

    ''You can spend so much money so quickly and end up dead before you know
it,'' she added. ''I think that's been the story with so many companies in this
space. That's had a chilling effect on investors.''

    Even among those pursuing cell replacement treatments, many say that
therapeutic cloning would be too inefficient to be practical. The South Korean
scientists, for instance, started with 242 human eggs donated for the cloning.
They got about 20 embryos from which they tried to extract stem cells and
managed to produce only one stem cell line.

    Moreover, those scientists managed to produce embryos only when the person
to be cloned was also the donor of the egg used. They could not clone men or
women who were not egg donors. If that remained the case, it would mean that
therapeutic cloning would not be of benefit to men, or to women past menopause.

    Dr. Okarma of Geron said his company was using more generic stem cells that
could make large amounts of tissues at a lower cost. There is no need to create
tissue matched to each patient because there are other ways to fight rejection,
he said.

    Some scientists say it would be more practical to use stem cells from
adults. While some experts say these cells cannot be grown outside the body as
easily as embryonic stem cells and may not be as versatile, they are more
predictable in what kind of cells they turn into. Use of adult stem cells is not
ethically objectionable, avoiding ''all the hand-wringing and explanations and
gnashing of teeth,'' Ms. Powers of Toucan Capital said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Shin Yong Moon, left, and Dr. Woo Suk Hwang, stem cell
researchers at Seoul National University, yesterday in Seattle where they
presented their findings on cloning human embryos. (Photo by Gary Settle for The
New York Times)Chart: ''Milestones in Cloning''1928 -- Hans Spemann uses a
salamander embryo to demonstrate that the cell nucleus directs cellular
division. Ten years later, he proposes replacing the nucleus in an egg cell with
the nucleus from another cell.1952 -- Robert Briggs and Thomas J. King extract
the nucleus from the cell of an advanced frog embryo and insert it into a frog
egg, that then undergoes division.1963 -- J. B. S. Haldane coins the term
clone.1972 -- John Gurdon transplants the nuclei from frog embryo cells into
unfertilized eggs, that develop into short-lived tadpoles. He later shows that
transplanted nuclei revert to an embryonic state.1978 -- Louise Brown, the first
baby conceived via in-vitro fertilization, is born.1984 -- Steen Willadsen
produces a live lamb from early sheep embryo cells in a process known as
twinning. It is later used on other animals.1995 -- Ian Wilmut and Keith
Campbell create the world's first cloned sheep, Megan and Moran, from embryo
cells. A year later, they clone the first sheep from adult cells, Dolly. At the
age of 6, Dolly is euthanized when veterinarians discover she has progressive
lung disease. Research suggests that she may have been susceptible to premature
aging.1998 -- James Thomson and John Gearhart announce that they have
established the first cultures of human embryonic stem cells, derived from
fertilized human eggs before they could grow into specialized cells.2001 --
Scientists at Advanced Cell Technology clone a gaur, an endangered oxlike
species. The animal appears healthy when it is delivered by its surrogate
mother, a cow, but dies two days later from a bacterial infection.2002 -- The
first cloned pet, a cat named cc, short for copy cat, is produced by scientists
at Texas A&M.2003 -- Scientists finish mapping the human genome, two years ahead
of schedule.2003 -- By replacing DNA in egg cells with DNA from human body
cells, Advanced Cell Technology says, it has developed a human embryo that
progressed to 16 cells.2004 -- South Korean scientists say they have cloned a
human embryo and extracted stem cells from it.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2004


                             506 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                           February 12, 2004 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1200 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Say Human Embryos Cloned;
South Korean team's achievement is seen as a breakthrough for stem cell therapy.

BYLINE: Rosie Mestel, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   South Korean scientists say they have succeeded in creating human embryo
clones, a major breakthrough for the promising field of stem cell therapy -- and
for the far more controversial endeavor of cloning human beings.

   The scientists were able to grow the embryos for several days, extract stem
cells from one of them, and then show that the cells could turn into many types
of tissues.

   The achievement, to be published Friday in the journal Science, was praised
by many scientists because it brings closer the possibility that replacement
tissues may one day be grown to treat medical conditions such as diabetes,
spinal cord injuries and Parkinson's disease.

   But the findings also demonstrate that there is no inherent block to using
cloning technology to create babies that are genetic copies of people. Indeed,
the paper provides a partial recipe for the correct way to go about it.

   Scientists and ethicists urged that laws be enacted to ban any such attempts
while permitting research into cloning for medical therapies to continue. They
stressed that trying to make human baby clones would not only be ethically
questionable but unsafe.

   Studies on cloning in animals such as pigs and cows show that many of the
embryo and fetus clones die because they contain tiny genetic errors.

   "This study doesn't solve anything about reproductive cloning -- all the real
biological problems still remain," said Dr. Rudolf Jaenisch, a professor of
biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   Experts in stem cells and cloning who had scrutinized the study said that the
findings appeared strong, in contrast with the high-profile but unsubstantiated
reports of cloned babies that have cropped up over the last few years.

   "It's a stunning achievement, and I think it's staggering that it has been
accomplished so quickly," said Gerald Schatten, a professor and vice chairman of
the department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at the
University of Pittsburgh.

   While cloning has been achieved in many animals since Dolly the sheep was
born in 1996, there has been only one published scientific account of human
embryo cloning. It reported that the embryos only grew to about six cells before
dying.

   Some researchers have suggested that the cloning of primates, including
humans, would prove especially difficult because attempts to make monkey clones
have been unsuccessful.

   However, scientists also said they never doubted that embryo cloning would be
achieved in human beings if enough time and money were thrown at the problem.

   "Cloning is conceptually very simple," said Dr. Robert Lanza, medical
director of the Worcester, Mass.-based Advanced Cell Technology. "You just need
to fine-tune each step of the procedure in each species."

   The study was conducted by a team of scientists at the Seoul National
University, Mizmedi Hospital, Hanyang University, Gachon Medical School and
Sunchun National University.

   A U.S. researcher, Jose Cibelli of Michigan State University, was also a
coauthor.

   The scientists conducted their experiment not to create human baby clones but
to extract stem cells, which have the unique ability to become any type of
tissue. To do so, the researchers needed to grow embryos for only several days
-- up to the so-called blastocyst stage.

   Obtaining stem cells from clones is considered key because it offers the
possibility that patients could receive genetically identical tissue that would
not be rejected by their immune systems.

   In the Science study, the researchers recruited 16 healthy young women who
donated a total of 242 eggs. Of these, 176 were suitable for the cloning
experiment.

   The genetic material was slowly sucked from the eggs then replaced with DNA
from a type of body cell known as a cumulus cell. In each case, the egg and the
donated genetic material came from the same woman.

   The cells were then treated with a chemical to induce division and cultured
with nutrients.

   The scientists reported that 25% of the egg clones grew to the blastocyst
stage. Inside the blastocyst is a small group of cells known as the inner cell
mass, which is destined to become the fetus and is the source of stem cells.

   From one of the blastocysts, the scientists succeeded in generating a single
line of stem cells that could grow in a dish indefinitely.

   Under certain conditions, the cells could be induced to form tiny embryo-like
bodies that contain a mix of tissue types including skin, muscle, cartilage,
bone -- showing the cells were capable of growing into a wide range of tissue
types.

   While many scientists said the study looked convincing, some pointed out that
the experiment did not prove the creation of a clone beyond a shadow of a doubt.

   The experiment's flaw lies in the fact that the egg and donor cell were
derived from the same woman. Occasionally, eggs can spontaneously start dividing
into embryos, a process known as parthenogenesis.

   The scientists attempted to rule this out by performing genetic tests on the
stem cells they created, but could not do so absolutely.

   "One would want to see this experiment done with a genetically different
donor individual," said David Anderson, a professor of biology at Caltech.

   However, other experts said they thought it unlikely that the scientists
could have obtained so many blastocysts if parthenogenesis was the cause.

   Although producing stem cells from clones is a major milestone in the pursuit
of stem cell therapy, it is still a time-intensive process.

   In addition, researchers still do not know how to create many kinds of
tissues. They do not know whether stem cells will cure diseases or whether they
will be stable and not cause cancers.

   "We're still a ways away from the clinic," said Roger Pedersen, a professor
of regenerative medicine at the University of Cambridge in England.

   If the South Korean scientists' research holds up, it raises the possibility
that someone could use the technique and implant blastocysts into a woman's body
to create a genetic clone.

   Britain has banned human cloning for reproductive purposes. However, such a
ban is not in place in the United States.

   Even if cloning were perfectly safe, which researchers stress it is not, many
are repulsed by the idea of creating genetic replicas of human beings.

   Some bioethicists disagree. Gregory Stock, director of the program on
medicine, technology and society at UCLA, said society is comfortable with
twins, who are genetically identical and yet individuals.

   "They are similar in many ways and they are different in many ways," he said.
"I think if anything, cloning would disabuse people of the false idea that
clones would simply be a duplication of another person."

   However, Laurie Zoloth, a professor at the Feinberg School of Medicine at
Northwestern University in Chicago, said the ability to create clones could have
a profound effect on humankind's perceptions of life and death.

   "There is much to reflect on," she said. "Here is a technology that we have
spent literally years thinking about and theorizing about. I have taught it and
studied it and researched it and been in hundreds of arguments and debates about
it. Yet when the thing is actually accomplished, there is still this sense of
crossing a critical threshold."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Stem cells  CREDIT: Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004


                             507 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                 February 12, 2004 Thursday, FINAL / NORTHEAST

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: Clinic-led team finds gene that may help treat diseases

BYLINE: SARAH TREFFINGER, PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   A Cleveland Clinic-led team of researchers has identified a gene that
promotes blood-vessel growth and could lead to the development of new treatments
for cancer and heart disease.

    The six-year study establishes the gene, called VG5Q, as a "susceptibility
gene" for Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, or KTS.

    According to the National Organization for Rare Disorders, KTS is present at
birth and characterized by abnormal benign growths on the skin that consist of
masses of blood vessels, excessive growth of soft tissue and bone, and varicose
veins. The incidence is one in 20,000 to 40,000 live births.

    Qing Wang, the study's principal investigator, said he and his colleagues
found that KTS patients with mutations of VG5Q experienced an increase in
blood-vessel growth, or angiogenesis. They also found that blocking the gene
inhibits new growth.

    Dr. William Li, president and medical director of the Angiogenesis
Foundation, called the research "exciting and significant." He said it
"underscores the fact that it is often very useful to study rare diseases."

    Wang, director of the Clinic's Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, said the
discovery gives researchers "a hint" about other kinds of genes involved in KTS
and conditions with similar traits.

    Today's issue of Nature includes a paper by Wang and his colleagues, as well
as an editorial by Diether Lambrechts and Peter Carmeliet of the Center for
Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy of the Flanders Interuniversity Institute
for Biotechnology at the University of Leuven in Belgium.

    Lambrechts and Carmeliet said the researchers "demonstrate the usefulness of
genetic screening" and "show that mutations in VG5Q can disrupt angiogenesis in
humans, which points to VG5Q as having the potential, hopefully, even a
therapeutic one, to modulate angiogenesis."

    Wang and his team write that VG5Q may be a "target" for therapies that
stimulate or halt new growth of blood vessels.

    Stimulating growth could benefit people who have insufficient angiogenesis,
such as coronary artery disease and stroke patients.

    Halting growth could help people with cancer, age-related macular
degeneration and rheumatoid arthritis. Those conditions are marked by excessive
angiogenesis, in which new blood vessels destroy normal tissues and nourish
those that are diseased.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:   streffinger@plaind.com, 216-999-3906

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004


                             508 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 12, 2004 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: On the road to replacement tissue

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers in South Korea for the first time have cloned a human embryo and
then culled stem cells from it, marking an important step toward one day growing
patients' own replacement tissue to treat diseases.

   The experiment is sure to revive controversy over human cloning, both in the
United States and internationally.

   This is not cloning to make babies. Instead it's called therapeutic cloning,
in which embryos that are the genetic twins of a particular patient are grown in
a test tube to supply master stem cells that can grow into any tissue - without
being rejected by that patient's immune system.

   The technique offers the potential of breakthrough treatments for diabetes,
Parkinson's and other diseases, but any therapy is years away from being tested
in people.

    Scientists have used therapeutic cloning to partially cure laboratory mice
with an immune system disease. And they know how to cull stem cells from human
embryos left over in fertility clinics, offering the potential of cell therapy
but not patient-specific treatment.

   But attempts at cloning a human embryo in the stem-cell quest have failed
until now.

   Scientists from Seoul National University report they succeeded - thanks,
they say, to using extremely fresh eggs donated by South Korean volunteers and
finding a gentler way of handling the genetic material inside them.

   The report appears in tomorrow's edition of Science magazine.

   The work provides long-anticipated proof that the technique is possible using
human cells, said stem- cell researcher Rudolf Jaenisch of the Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass.

   "That's an important point to prove," he said.

   Still, "it's not of practical use at this point," Jaenisch said, stressing
that years of additional research are required.

   For one thing, the cloning technique still doesn't work well: The Seoul team
collected 242 eggs, from which they succeeded in cloning 30 blastocysts -
early-stage embryos containing a mere 100 cells. From those, they harvested just
one colony of stem cells.

   Still, it's likely to renew debate over whether all forms of human cloning
should be banned. In Congress, the House voted to do that last year, but the
Senate stalled over whether there should be an exception for research of this
type.

   Internationally, the United States is pushing for a United Nations ban of all
human cloning, too. The U.N. General Assembly recently postponed a decision.
There is almost universal support for a global ban of reproductive cloning, but
Britain and a number of other countries want cloning for medical experiments
left unhindered.

   Cloning aside, Jaenisch lamented that most U.S. scientists won't be able to
experiment with the Seoul researchers' new stem-cell line. Culling stem cells
from embryos kills them, and President Bush has forbidden any federally funded
research on stem cells from embryos destroyed after Aug. 9, 2001 - making the
South Koreans' recently developed line too new.

   Additional experiments by the Seoul team suggest its stem-cell colony can
indeed generate numerous different types of body cells. It began to form muscle,
bone and other tissues in test tubes and when implanted into mice.

   The team's next step, now under way, is studying how to direct which tissues
those cells form, said Woo Suk Hwang, lead author of the report.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             509 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  February 11, 2004, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 936 words

HEADLINE: 'To the leading edge';
Methodist expects huge expansion to propel hospital

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: DARRIN SCHLEGEL

BODY:

   THE Methodist Hospital will embark upon a multimillion-dollar expansion that
includes ambitious plans for clinical research and two new patient facilities.

   The project is designed to catapult Methodist into the upper echelon of the
nation's research hospitals, officials said, and will improve the way patients
receive care at the Texas Medical Center institution.

   "The whole concept is to continue to push the envelope to the leading edge of
medicine, where the very newest techniques or procedures are being identified
and translated into patient care," said Ron Girotto, chief executive of
Methodist Health Care System.

   The multi-tiered plan comes three months after Methodist's longtime partner,
Baylor College of Medicine, announced plans to strengthen its alliance with St.
Luke's Episcopal Health System amid a deepening rift with Methodist.

   Though the future of Methodist's decades-long relationship with Baylor has
yet to be decided, the hospital said it will move forward with several projects
it has planned for almost five years.

   Those include building a $ 300 million patient tower and a $ 70 million adult
outpatient clinic to consolidate services now spread over several buildings at
Methodist.

   In addition, the hospital's board recently approved $ 100 million to create a
"research institute" at Methodist to increase clinical trials and so-called
translational research.

   The 700,000-square-foot patient tower, planned on property occupied by the
Texas Woman's University and the former Institute of Religion, will include at
least 400 beds to replace those in its Main building and other locations.

   Besides beds, the facility will include an emergency department, operating
rooms and a host of other services, including cardiovascular, neurology,
endovascular and radiology.

   Methodist will likely begin construction on the facility three years from
now, after Texas Woman's University moves and the buildings that house it and
the former religion institute building are torn down.

   Methodist acquired the property from the university in a land swap. The
religion institute, which has already moved to a location on Greenbriar, said
the hospital will lease the land from it.

   Across Fannin, Methodist has plans for a 300,000-square-foot adult outpatient
clinic adjacent to Smith Tower.

   Due to be complete in late 2006 or early 2007, the 10-story clinic will
include surgical suites and cancer-patient services, among other lab and imaging
offerings.

   The total costs of those projects, which are preliminary, could be double
that amount when factoring in site preparation, equipment and parking, Methodist
officials said.

   Meanwhile, the hospital's plans to create a major research institute have
already begun with a nationwide search for a director to head it.

   The effort will focus on bringing more research and scientists to the
hospital to increase the opportunities for participating in clinical trials for
drugs and medical devices.

   That type of research, also called translational research, typically involves
direct interaction with patients and has been a priority at many universities
and hospitals in recent years.

   That's because the government has stepped up funding for clinical research in
an effort to get basic science out of the laboratories and to the bedside, said
Mary Woolley, president of Research America, an Alexandria, Va.-based nonprofit
group.

   Methodist's expansion plans are based on emphasizing its strengths, which
include cardiology, organ transplants, cancer and gene therapy.

   Exactly how Baylor fits into Methodist's plans is unclear.

   The new outpatient clinic, for example, does not jibe with Baylor's plans for
a similar center that would house its faculty only.

   Last year, Baylor said building such a clinic would strengthen it financially
and help improve patient care.

   But Methodist objected because it conflicted with its "mixed model" staffing
style, where Baylor faculty and non-faculty physicians work together.
Methodist's new clinic also proposes that model.

   The clinic impasse led to a deeper divide in November, when Baylor announced
a "strengthened alliance" with St. Luke's and Methodist said the school rejected
a renewed partnership proposal.

   Baylor officials would not comment Tuesday on where its affiliation with
Methodist stands nor its plans for a clinic, citing ongoing negotiations with
St. Luke's.

   But the college has not yet given an indication that Baylor-Methodist
programs would be shifted to St. Luke's or discontinued.

   The medical school and Methodist have had a relationship since the 1950s,
with the hospital serving as a real-life classroom for Baylor medical students
and providing support for Baylor research.

   And Girotto said the hospital fully expects that partnership to continue in
some fashion.

   The hospital's plans, he said, include input from key Baylor faculty.

   "There will always be a presence of Baylor at the Methodist Hospital,"
Girotto said. "Is it equal to, greater than or less than the current
relationship? That's what we'll have to determine."





   Methodist Hospital is planning a major expansion in the Texas Medical Center
that includes two new buildings. Although plans are still preliminary, they
include:

   An outpatient center with 10 floors and 300,000 square feet will be built
adjacent to Smith Tower as early as 2006.

   A 700,000-square-foot facility will replace hospital beds and include an
emergency department, cardiovascular, neurology and other services. This will be
on the site of Texas Woman's University and the former Institute of Religion.


GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. The Methodist Hospital's expansion will affect Texas Woman's
University and its dormitory, left, and the Institute for Religion, lower right.
The multimillion-dollar project is designed to lift the institution into the
nation's top tier of hospitals. (color); Map: 2. Location of proposed hospital
expansion and outpatient center (color); Photo: 3. Methodist Hospital complex
(color); Graph: 4. Methodist Hospital expansion (color, TEXT); 1,3 Karen Warren
/ Chronicle, 2,4 Edwin Louie / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2004


                             510 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      February 10, 2004 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 512 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY, BRAIN COOLING MAY HELP TREAT STROKES

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Cold temperatures and gene therapy may work best to protect the brain cells
of stroke victims, Stanford University researchers suggest.

   Speed is essential in the successful treatment of strokes, and cooling the
brain gives more time for doctors to prevent cellular injury.

   In work published in the current issue of the journal Stroke, the scientists
reported that the combination of cooling the brain and an experimental gene
therapy technique protected neurons of rats better than either treatment alone.

   Gene therapy treatment given to rats within 90 minutes of a simulated stroke
prevented brain cells from destroying themselves, a form of cellular suicide
common in strokes. However, there was no benefit to gene therapy received after
90 minutes.

   Scientists lowered the temperature of the brain by 4 degrees and then tried
gene therapy five hours later. Two days later, those rats had two to three times
more surviving neurons than rats who had gene therapy without brain cooling or
rats whose brains had been cooled but received no other treatment.

   The researchers speculate that cooling slows down the process of cellular
suicide.

   The Good Side Of Stress

   While severe stress can cause serious health problems, short-term stress
appears to help prime the immune system to repair wounds and fight infections,
new research suggests.

   Rats and mice who were stressed by being restrained for two hours produced a
much stronger immune response when exposed to chemical or protein antigens --
sort of molecular flags that signal the presence of a pathogen -- than animals
who had not been stressed.

   Researchers at Ohio State University reported that the stressed animals'
immune response to antigens remained stronger weeks and even months later.

   "The more robust initial immune reaction might have formed a more efficient,
or larger, pool of memory cells that ultimately gave the stressed animals'
immune systems a continued advantage months later," said Firdaus Dhabhar,
associate professor of immunology and medical genetics at Ohio State.

    Dhabhar is scheduled to give an overview of his research on stress and
immunology today at the American Academy of Dermatology meeting in Washington.

   Teens Should Sleep On It

    A good night's sleep may play a role in reducing adolescent angst, some
researchers suggest.

    Researchers from the University of Massachusetts at Boston interviewed
middle school students and found that those who got fewer hours of sleep were
more likely to get poor grades and suffer from low self-esteem and depressive
symptoms.

   The average amount of sleep children got declined throughout middle school
years, the researchers found.

   The results were published in the current issue of the journal Child
Development.

    "Elevated levels of depression and drops in self-esteem are seen as
inevitable hallmarks of adolescence," said Jean Rhodes, an author of the paper.
"Yet these results suggest that such changes are partially linked to a variable
-- sleep -- that is largely under individual, parental and even school control."


COLUMN: Medical Frontiers

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2004


                             511 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 8, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Book World; T13 , Science

LENGTH: 1589 words

HEADLINE: From the Kelvin scale to medical yaks -- all in the name of progress.

BYLINE: Science

BODY:

    In Degrees Kelvin: A Tale of Genius, Invention and Tragedy (Joseph Henry,
$27.95, forthcoming in March), David Lindley takes on the task of explaining the
rise and fall of Lord Kelvin (born William Thomson), the historical footnote
formerly known as the preeminent British scientist of the 19th century. "The
middle of the 19th century," Lindley writes, "saw the foundation of what we now
call classical physics -- the science of heat and light, of electricity and
magnetism -- and William Thomson, not yet 30 years of age, was at the heart of
it, propounding ideas and principles still taught today at the core of any
course on basic physics."

    Such was Thomson's stature at the time of his death (in 1907) that his body
rests at Westminster Abbey next to Sir Isaac Newton's; yet less than a century
after his passing, he fails to turn up alongside Newton or Darwin or Maxwell or
Faraday in any ranking of Great Britain's giants of science. Those who know his
name today, Lindley notes, know it absently from the thermodynamic scale that
bears his name or the completely unrelated Kelvinator brand of refrigeration
products.

   "Celebrity is notoriously fragile, of course, but scientific reputations do
not normally wax and wane according to the whims of one era or the next.
Milestones in science stand forever; those who erect them gain permanent
recognition," Lindley writes. "How could a man routinely described in his
lifetime as Britain's and perhaps the world's greatest scientist have become so
cruelly neglected?"

   The seeds of Thomson's undoing, Degrees Kelvin suggests, may have been sown
in his ascent. The genius son of a University of Glasgow professor, Thomson was
an active participant in his father's math lectures at age 8 and was publishing
in leading scholarly journals by his mid-teens. But even by the time he
graduated from Cambridge, already regarded as one of the empire's greatest
minds, it was clear that "he could not or would not look very far forward,
because he did not like to speculate where he had no solid ground beneath him."

   Once he became the first scientist to be elevated to the British peerage,
albeit primarily for his entrepreneurial successes in telegraphy and marine
navigation systems that enriched the empire, he became the de facto
standard-bearer of the scientific establishment. It was a role for which he was
decidedly ill-suited, a fact made plain by his public declamations against
certain aspects of Darwin's theories of evolution and other cutting-edge science
of the day. In a sense, the fact that we've all heard of Darwin explains why we
know so little of Kelvin.

    -- Gregory Mott

    Is being short a medical problem that warrants treatment? What about the
diminished strength that accompanies lower testosterone levels in men as they
age? Is treatment for these and similar conditions, even if it proves harmful or
deadly years later, justified if it alleviates personal unhappiness, even
misery? These are among the provocative questions that Sheila M. Rothman and
David J. Rothman, a married pair of eminent medical historians from Columbia
University, thoughtfully explore in their new book, The Pursuit of Perfection:
the Promise and Perils of Medical Enhancement (Pantheon, $25).

    The book wisely eschews answers to these endlessly debatable questions.
Instead the authors provide a frequently eye-opening view of the skimpy or
dubious scientific evidence that resulted in the aggressive marketing of hormone
replacement therapy for women, testosterone enhancement for men, human growth
hormone for short children and liposuction for unwanted flab.

   "What science creates, medicine rapidly dispenses," the Rothmans succinctly
note, pointing out one reason the line between cure and enhancement can be so
shaky. As they document, the treatments for these newly discovered problems are
often dispensed with a greater concern for the profits than for the potential
peril they pose.

   Their account of the selling of growth hormone to treat short children
without a metabolic problem is an especially revealing example of the way a
socially undesirable condition has been medicalized as a disease that can be
"cured" -- even though, the Rothmans write, studies have found that the hugely
expensive injections had little or no measurable effect on growth.

   The book is at its best when it sticks to the concrete and avoids the more
philosophical questions about whether enhancement is good or bad on ethical
grounds. Prospective patients would do well to heed their conclusion that these
treatments "represent . . . a test of the outer limits of allowing science to
set its own agenda, of allowing happiness to drive clinical care."

    -- Sandra G. Boodman

    "Do you know what is being done in the name of science?" asks a blurb on the
dust jacket of Andrew Goliszek's In the Name of Science: A History of Secret
Programs, Medical Research and Human Experimentation (St. Martin's, $27.95).
Even readers in a position to answer that question in the affirmative are likely
to be unprepared for the tsunami of indignation Goliszek unleashes in
cataloguing official misdoings in support of state aims, from the catapulting of
diseased bodies into medieval forts -- the earliest known form of biological
warfare -- to anticipated 21st-century advances in cloning and gene therapy.

   Goliszek, a professor of biology, human physiology and endocrinology at North
Carolina A&T University, does not break much new ground here, but he does cover
an awful lot of it, from U.S. government testing of chemical, biological and
nuclear agents on unwitting servicemen and civilians, to the eugenics and
genetics movements here and abroad, to CIA mind-control research, to the Human
Genome Project, which he sees as the kind of research particularly ripe for
abuse.

   "Rather than repairing or replacing defective genes," he writes, gene therapy
"may be used to introduce viruses that initially lie dormant and become lethal
over time, or infect the host with pathogenic genes that trigger disease.
'Designer diseases,' on the research burner as well, would afflict individuals
genetically predisposed because of certain traits or lack of resistance or would
kill by using modified animal pathogens that seek human hosts."

   In the Name of Science draws strength from its breadth, and while the overall
effect might be paranoia-inducing, Goliszek is not out to connect the dots or to
paint particular individuals as incarnations of evil. With respect to Cold War
radiation experiments, for example, he notes that "many researchers saw the
human experiments as valuable to society and humanity. At the Fernald School in
Massachusetts, for example, children were fed radioactive oatmeal so that
nutritionists could study how preservatives moved through the body blocking
absorption of vitamins and minerals. Patients scheduled for limb amputation had
large amounts of plutonium injected into the affected limb so that researchers
could see how the plutonium dispersed throughout the tissue. It was believed
that all of these medical and scientific studies served the ultimate good of
humanity."

    -- Gregory Mott

   A pop quiz for know-it-alls: How many yaks does it take to carry the medical
supplies for a team climbing Mount Everest?

   Kenneth Kamber, author of Surviving the Extremes: A Doctor's Journey to the
Limits of Human Endurance (Thomas Dunne, $24.95) knows the answer -- because he
assembled those drugs and bandages and instruments. Based on personal history
and professional training, he knows plenty about keeping an adventure from
becoming a disaster. He even knows when the best medicine is a liberal
application of duct tape.

   Kamler, a microsurgeon, decided years ago that there was more to life than
treating the hand injuries of people in New York. Drawn to explore some of the
world's most remote places, he has joined several expeditions that needed a
physician on their team.

   In the bestseller Into Thin Air, Jon Krakauer chronicled a dozen deaths on
the world's tallest mountain during a 1996 storm. Kamler appears only briefly in
that book, but he told the story of the debacle from his own viewpoint in his
first book, Doctor on Everest.

   With Surviving the Extremes, Kamler is back from the wilds again, with tales
from high above and far below ordinary existence. He doesn't admit to hoping for
calamity, but it's clear that he revels in doing what only a physician can. As a
writer, he's at his best when describing the challenges of practicing extreme
medicine or when he's literally up to his keister in Amazonian crocodiles. (To
the humans involved, this was a catch-and-release exercise; the crocs, no doubt,
would have played by different rules.) Kamler combines such firsthand accounts
with stories of people who suddenly find themselves in peril: shipwrecked, lost
in the desert, deep down in the sea without enough air to reach the surface.

   For many of these victims, there is no happy ending, and Kamler is not shy
about detailing what happens when the body is pushed beyond its limits. He also
exults in those few who escape from seemingly certain death, even if he can't
convincingly explain how they did it.

   It's disappointing that this book dwells more on others' misadventures than
on Kamler's journeys. But no reader could expect an author to push himself
repeatedly to the edge of endurance, even an author supported on his way to
Mount Everest by four yaks' worth of medical supplies.

    -- Tom Graham

   The reviewers are all science and health writers for The Washington Post.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2004


                             512 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 The Columbus Dispatch

                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                  February 6, 2004 Friday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 06F

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: Clarett Ruling;
MILSTEIN LIKES FIGHTING FOR UNDERDOGS;
Liberal background determines caseload for Clarett lawyer

BYLINE: Rob Oller, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Alan Milstein never thought it was fair that a 50-year-old quarterback could
play football on Sundays but a 20-year-old tailback could not.

   Every Sunday this fall, Milstein the attorney became Milstein the playmaker,
a weekend warrior who played touch football at a park near Philadelphia.

   "It was just guys from the neighborhood," he said. "I played quarterback. I'm
no tailback."

   But he represented one in court. And scored a legal touchdown.

   The quarterback and the 20-year-old running back -- Maurice Clarett -- scored
an historic win yesterday in their antitrust suit against the NFL that will
allow the suspended Ohio State tailback to enter the draft this year.

   Milstein took on Clarett as a client because -- as he'll tell you at every
opportunity -- he gets juiced by David v. Goliath cases.

   "I certainly prefer cases where I represent the little guy against the big
guy, someone who has been wronged and has a difficult time asserting his or her
rights," Milstein said during a phone interview from his law office outside
Philadelphia. "And what attracted me to Maurice was that he was someone willing
to stand up for what he believed was right."

   Milstein clearly looks for cases that comply with his counter-culture
conscious.

   "I'm a knee-jerk liberal, an anti-Bush guy," he said. "It's in my background.
I grew up (in Baltimore) in the anti-Vietnam period."

   While some see every lawyer as Satan in a silk suit, Milstein promotes the
legal profession as being composed of do-gooders in shining armor.

   "There is a lot of nasty talk and jokes about lawyers. I'm one of the few
people who think this is a noble profession and can be a force for positive
change," he said.

   Then, just to make sure he's not being understood, Milstein makes sure to
mention that the money he makes from pursuing his passion isn't bad, either.

   Call him a reformed rebel.

   Milstein, a former art critic for the Philadelphia Bulletin and the Topeka
Capital, left journalism so he could adequately support his wife and three
children.

   The flower child likely would still be a relative unknown among his legal
brethren, however, had he not successfully taken on some of the most respected
research institutions and medical schools in the nation.

   His big "break" came when he won a settlement on behalf of the family of
Jesse Gelsinger, a man who died after participating in a gene therapy experiment
at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "I think Milstein is a kind of liability lawyer who found himself presented,
almost by accident, with a fascinating medical case, something that was off the
rails," said bioethicist Arthur Caplan, who originally was named in the
Gelsinger suit but later dismissed from the case. "He won the case, but a
third-year law student could have won it."

   Caplan admires Milstein for helping the disenfranchised but considers him to
be style over substance.

   "If you went to the American Bar Association and said, 'Give me your top 500
lawyers,' I don't think he appears on that list," Caplan said. "But then you
don't have to be in the top 500. There's the Al Davis mentality of 'Just win,
baby.' "

   Caplan pointed to the Clarett case as a perfect example of Milstein stepping
into a situation already earmarked for victory when he came aboard.

   That said, Milstein does have a knack for performing best on "game day."

   "I think he's a persuasive arguer, has good rhetoric and knows how to deal
with judges and juries," said Caplan, who was so impressed with Milstein's
courtroom success that he invited the attorney to speak at Penn's law school.

   Milstein doesn't back away from his reputation as a schmoozer, saying that
for the last few months he has been bombarded by questions from judges and
prosecutors asking about the Clarett case.

   But he knows the criticism is out there, that he's a tough customer in the
courtroom but sometimes gets in over his head on complicated cases.

   If nothing else, the Clarett victory should end most of the jabs.

   "It's a huge win and I'm tremendously gratified by the opinion and think it's
an historic opinion and one that secures the rights of athletes like Maurice,"
Milstein said yesterday.

   Does he think more athletes will begin calling his number at Sherman,
Silverstein, Kohl, Rose and Podolsky, the Philadelphia firm where he is a
partner?

   "I've already had calls," he said. "I would think if an athlete in one of the
major sports believed he had been wronged or oppressed, or needed to make a
statement in that sport, then he might think I'm someone who could do the job
for them."

   roller@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, NEAL C. LAURON DISPATCH/, Alan Milstein, right, checks some
papers after a news conference yesterday in, New York. Part of his motivation as
a lawyer is that he sees his profession as, a vehicle for positive change.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2004


                             513 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2004 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  FEBRUARY 6, 2004 Friday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 842 words

HEADLINE: GROWTH REPORT

BODY:

   CONTRACTS

   * FCS Advertising, a Livonia-based marketing and public relations firm, will
provide research and creative services for the Washtenaw County Public Health
Department and the Livingston County Community Alliance.

   * ArvinMeritor Inc., a Troy auto supplier, announced that its Light Vehicle
Systems business group was awarded a new, annual $200-million light-vehicle
suspension systems contract for the final assembly of front- and rear-cross car
modules to begin production in October 2005. The identity of the customer, and
terms of the contract were not disclosed.

   * LogoVision, a Troy-based promotional products and incentives firm, was
awarded a licensing agreement by General Motors Corp., to help the automaker's
North American dealers market themselves.

   * Southeast Michigan McDonald's Operators Association hired Detroit-based
Avance Communications Inc. and Marx Layne & Co., Farmington Hills, as its public
relations team. Avance will be lead agency in the joint venture.

   * Auto parts maker Kolbenschmidt Pierburg, a Southfield subsidiary of
Rheinmetall AG, selected AutoCom Associates of Bloomfield Hills as its public
relations agency in North America.

   * Automotive suppliers Federal-Mogul in Southfield and Siemens VDO will
jointly develop a combustion sensor for diesel engines, to enable the combustion
to be monitored directly in the cylinder. Volume production is scheduled to
start in 2006. The agreement covers manufacturing and marketing of the new
technology.

   * The Epitec Group, a Detroit-based IT staffing and network services company,
has signed Strather & Associates, a retail, commercial and residential
development and casino investment firmas a new client.

   * The General Services Administration's Federal Citizen Information Center
has awarded Campbell-Ewald, a Detroit advertising and marketing communications
agency, its account for creating advertising for the informational Web site
FirstGov.gov.

   * Certified Cleaning Concepts, a division of Goodwill Industries of Greater
Detroit, was selected by Messiah Housing Corp. to provide janitorial services to
two of its apartment facilities in Detroit.

   EXPANSIONS

   * Siemens VDO Automotive's Powertrain Fuel Supply Systems division will spend
$2 million to transform the supplier's former machining and tooling shop in
Auburn Hills into a 5,000-square-foot, fuel-validation test center. The project
is scheduled for completion by May.

   * Motor City Electric Co., based in Detroit, has moved to a new
70,000-square-foot facility at 9440 Grinnell, Detroit. The move will allow all
the company's operating units to be housed in one place and will mean the
addition of 150 employees to corporate headquarters.

   GRANTS

   * Svend Freytag, division head of radiation oncology at Henry Ford Hospital,
was awarded a $9-million grant by the National Institutes of Health to study the
effectiveness of gene therapy as a treatment for prostate cancer.

   MOVES

   * Uncle Bucks Party Tyme Rental & Supplies has moved its retail store and
warehouse from the Atlas Shopping Plaza at the Airport Commerce Center, to 6561
Highland Road, Waterford.

   NEW NAMES

   * Spartan Stores Inc., a Grand Rapids grocery chain, will change the name of
its Ashcraft's Markets, Great Day Food Centers and Prevo's Family Markets to
Family Fare Supermarkets or Glen's Markets.

   OPENINGS

   * ComForcare Senior Services Home Care opened in Mt. Clemens. The franchise
provides in-home assistance with daily living activities for seniors and
disabled individuals in northern Macomb County, St. Clair County and surrounding
areas.

   * AVL, a Plymouth-based international engine and powertrain company, opened
an application center in Graz, Austria.

   * Best Western International opened the Best Western Southfield Inn at 26111
Telegraph Road, Southfield. The hotel has 105 guest rooms equipped with data
ports, coffeemakers, refrigerators and microwave ovens.

   * Pure Detroit will open a 1,200-square-foot store in the Renaissance
Center's Wintergarden this spring.

   * Atwell-Hicks Inc., an Ann Arbor development consulting firm, has opened an
office at 3358 Eagle Run Dr. NE, Grand Rapids.

   * Value City Furniture, based in Columbus, Ohio, has opened a store at 45350
Utica Park Boulevard, Utica.

   * Key Plastics LLC, a Novi auto supplier, has opened a sales office in Tokyo,
Japan, to support Asian customers.

   * Chudnof & Eder PLC, a law firm, has opened offices at 5820 N. Liley Road,
Suite 8, in Canton.

   THE WEB

   * Sheraton Detroit Novi has gone 100-percent wireless and made Wayport's
wi-fi wireless, high-speed Internet access available in all 238 hotel guest
rooms, as well as common and meeting areas.

   * CEI Alpha, an environmental and civil engineering firm with offices in
Brighton and Traverse City, has launched www.ceialpha.com, a Web site, to allow
customers better access to information about its services.

   * Mystic Creek Golf Club and Banquet Center in Milford has launched
www.mysticcreekgc.com , featuring complete information on the club.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2005


                             514 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 5, 2004, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: FATTY ACID COULD HELP FIGHT CYSTIC FIBROSIS STUDY SEES PROMISE IN
TREATING IMBALANCE

BYLINE: By Stephen Smith, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   The same fatty acid that turned salmon into a health-food sensation has the
potential to extend the lives of cystic fibrosis patients and ease complications
of the fatal disease, a team of Massachusetts researchers report today.

   The scientists, whose findings appear in The New England Journal of Medicine,
discovered that cystic fibrosis patients have dramatically altered levels of
fatty acids. They have too much of one acid associated with causing
inflammation, and too little of another that blocks inflammation and damage to
tissue.

      Though emphasizing that they have not found a cure, the researchers said
they are hopeful that in eight to 10 years, cystic fibrosis patients might take
doses of the good fatty acid - a member of the heralded omega-3 family - to slow
damage to the organs targeted by cystic fibrosis: the lungs, liver, and
pancreas.

   They have already begun a study to determine whether symptoms can be slowed
or even prevented in infants born with cystic fibrosis by feeding them baby
formula boosted with the fatty acid they are lacking, known in medical shorthand
as DHA.

   "Once the Massachusetts trial is finished, if they can see a big change in
patients with the DHA supplementation, this will be a very big deal for cystic
fibrosis patients," said Robert J. Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation. The foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and Genzyme Corp.
funded the research reported today.

   The disease, which affects 30,000 children and adults in the United States
and typically proves fatal before the mid-30s, has proved to be an implacable
foe, even though scientists identified its genetic cause 15 years ago.

   Dr. Brian P. O'Sullivan, who is presiding over the fatty acid research at
UMass Memorial Medical Center in Worcester, recalled the meeting in 1989 when
scientists revealed the genetic secrets of cystic fibrosis, igniting hopes that
gene therapy could be the answer to an illness that had defied other approaches.

   "There wasn't a dry eye in the house that day," O'Sullivan said. "Most of us
came home from that meeting and told families that within five years we were
going to have treatments that would cure cystic fibrosis. It turns out we were
wrong, wrong, wrong."

   In part, that's because cystic fibrosis is a remarkably complex disease,
striking different organs and affecting the way cells do their work in a variety
of ways.

   And gene therapy, which looked so promising early on, turned out not to be a
magic bullet. Researchers hoped they could use viruses - especially the cold
virus - to ferry healthy genes to cells carrying the defective cystic fibrosis
gene, swapping good for bad.

   But the human body proved too cunning, efficiently recognizing the invading
viruses and allowing only about 1 percent of them to get inside cells.

   That left scientists looking for other methods of thwarting cystic fibrosis.
In 1999, Dr. Steven D. Freedman of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center reported
that mice genetically altered to have the disease had in their cells an
excessive amount of arachidonic acid, known as AA, and too little DHA, or
docosahexaenoic acid.

   They are both fatty acids and are the building blocks of the membrane, the
outside shell of a cell. Those fatty acids help guide how cells function.

   With his discovery in mice, Freedman and researchers at UMass and
Massachusetts General Hospital wanted to know if the same phenomenon existed in
humans. So they compared tissue from 38 cystic fibrosis patients with samples
from healthy people and patients with other inflammatory conditions.

   They found that the cystic fibrosis patients had twice as much AA as healthy
people and only half as much DHA. That imbalance likely leaves cystic fibrosis
patients susceptible to the severe tissue inflammation that is a hallmark of the
condition and that causes lungs and other organs to fail.

   Studies by Freedman showed that giving mice large doses of DHA - the
equivalent of about 35 fish-oil pills a day for a human - corrected the
imbalance and reversed signs of the disease. But scientists aren't recommending
patients suddenly begin downing copious quantities of DHA because they don't
know whether it would be effective in humans, or if so, what the proper dose
should be.

   "If you're a parent of a cystic fibrosis patient, your child has a premature
death sentence and you would do anything to prolong their life," Freedman said.
"So we want to be cautious about getting people's hopes up."

   For those parents, the history of hopes dashed has left them circumspect.

   "About 10 years ago, they were much more certain about finding a cure and
then it fizzled," said Ted Cushing of Gardner, whose daughter Emily, 23, has
cystic fibrosis. "So I guess we're automatically in that mind frame that it's
not going to necessarily happen immediately."

   Stephen Smith can be reached at stsmith@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2004


                             515 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 05, 2004, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20 Health

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff, wire reports

BODY:

   Libraries get books on caring for elderly


   Copies of five books that help people deal with the challenges of providing
care to an elderly relative or friend are now available at area libraries.

   The Harris County Area Agency on Aging donated the books to 26 branches of
the Harris County Public Library, the Houston Public Library and several of its
branches, and the municipal libraries of Pasadena, Bellaire, Baytown and Deer
Park. Harris County Precinct 1 and Precinct 3 also received copies.

   The Houston library branches also received copies of 11 videos on issues such
as long-term care, coping skills, health care management, dementia, safety and
legal matters.

   For more information on services offered by the agency, call 713-794-9001.





   Latina women health conference planned


   Latina woman are invited to attend a health conference from 8 a.m to 4 p.m.
Feb. 14 to learn about making informed decisions about their health, personal
safety and well-being.

   The conference was launched by the National Speaking of Women's Health
Foundation and is hosted by the Association for Community Television.

   Breakout sessions will cover such subjects as heart disease, diabetes,
nutrition, depression, stress, parenting and self-esteem, breast cancer,
menopause and osteoporosis.

   Keynote presentations and select breakout sessions will be offered with
Spanish translations.

   The honorees at the conference are Dr. Ninfa Cavazos, Houston's first female
Hispanic doctor, and Irma Copeland, an activist for AIDS patients and AIDS
education.

   The cost is $ 25 and includes a continental breakfast, lunch, and
osteoporosis and heart screenings. It will be held at the Omni Houston Hotel at
Westside, 13210 Katy Freeway. Tickets are limited. For more information, call
713-743-8595





   Enrollment for kids' health programs set


   The Children's Defense Fund of Texas and children's health outreach
organizations in Harris County will hold the 10th citywide enrollment on
Saturday to help families applying for the Children's Health Insurance Program
and Children's Medicaid.

   Both programs provide low- or no-cost health coverage to uninsured Texas
children.

   Enrollments will be held at nine Fiesta Marts: 4711 Airline, 10401 Jensen,
1603 Spencer Highway, 6200 Bellaire, 2300 N. Shepherd, 2323 Wirt, 9420 Cullen,
800 S. Wayside and 3707 Avenue H (Rosenberg).

   To apply for children's health insurance, families should bring one of the
following proofs of income:

   One check stub from employer within past 60 days,

   A copy of the most recent federal tax form,

   Letter from an employer verifying the individual's income.

   To obtain an application, families may call 1-800-647-6558 or download an
application from the Internet at www.texcarepartnership.com.





   City prostate cancer group plans meeting


   The monthly meeting of Houston Tex US TOO, a citywide prostate cancer support
group, will take place at 7 p.m. Monday.

   Dr. Dov Kadmon, associate professor in the Scott Department of Urology at
Baylor College of Medicine, will discuss the prospects of gene therapy in
dealing with prostate cancer.

   The meeting, which is free and open to the public, will be held in the
Rotunda Room at St. Luke's United Methodist Church, 3471 Westheimer at Edloe.

   For more information, call 713-623-4772.





   Groups to raise thyroid awareness


   The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American
Thyroid Association are teaming up for a new thyroid disease awareness campaign.

   To learn more about thyroid disease, go to www.aace.com or www.thyroid.org.


NOTES: From staff and wire reports
 CONTACT US
 Mail information with a contact name and phone number to: Health Page, Houston
Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, TX 77210. Call 713-220-2550 or fax to
713-220-6806. Send electronic mail to health@chron.com, and please include your
e-mail address in your message.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2004


                             516 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            February 3, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1050 words

HEADLINE: La. left in the dust in race for venture capital;
Competitors' totals dwarf state's 3 deals

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton; Business writer

BODY:

   Venture capital investment in Louisiana trailed other states and cities in
2003, maintaining the state's status as a backwater for high-growth start-up
companies and entrepreneurial activity in high-tech sectors.

   Louisiana start-up companies attracted three venture capital deals worth
$24.9 million in 2003, according to the PricewaterhouseCoopers MoneyTree Survey
on venture capital investment, which was released last week. That compared with
154 deals valued at $1.2 billion in Texas; 70 deals worth $620.1 million in
Colorado, and 102 deals worth $706.1 million in San Diego.

   California's Silicon Valley led the nation with 761 transactions valued at
$5.9 billion.

   The numbers offer a benchmark for how far Louisiana and the city of New
Orleans must go to build one of the key elements of a vibrant entrepreneurial
community, said Tim Williamson, president and chief executive of the Idea
Village in New Orleans, a nonprofit business incubator that has pledged to make
the city "The Entrepreneurial Capital of the World."

   "I don't think we're there yet," Williamson said. "We're starting to put the
pieces in place to nurture that ecosystem."

   The Idea Village has raised money from private donors, as well as the city of
New Orleans, which granted the group $500,000 from a taxpayer-financed economic
development fund. The Idea Village is working with a spectrum of small
companies, from a kiddie music group called the Imagination Movers and the owner
of a new retail clothing store to executives who are trying to build new
companies to market medical devices and health-care services. That kind of
support, Williamson said, enhances the "ecosystem" and will pay off in the long
run.

   Furthermore, Williamson said, the Tulane University and Louisiana State
University health sciences centers are working on a number of projects,
including a joint gene therapy program and cancer research initiative, that will
generate the kinds of basic intellectual property that often attracts venture
capitalists looking for the next big thing.

   "Money is probably a secondary factor, after you build the infrastructure,"
Williamson said.

   Unlike other kinds of financiers, such as banks or mortgage lenders, venture
investors generally make high-risk equity investments in companies with high
growth potential. Venture investors led the charge to commercialize the
Internet, for example, and are now pumping money into emerging fields such as
nanotechnology.

   Despite an attempt by the Legislature to fuel venture capital investment by
steering hundreds of million of dollars of taxpayer money into privately managed
venture investment firms called CAPCOs, Louisiana continues to trail other
states and regions in venture capital deals.

   Louisiana's portion was less than 1 percent of the $18.1 billion invested in
venture deals nationwide in 2003; the state's three deals represented an equally
piddling fraction of the 2,715 national total.

   Still, the MoneyTree report did suggest Louisiana is wise to invest taxpayer
money in New Orleans' university health sciences centers, said Kirk Walden,
national director of venture capital research for PricewaterhouseCoopers in
Austin.

   Recent trends show the life sciences to be among emerging fields.

   In the third quarter of 2003, for example, venture investment in
biotechnology companies outpaced investment in computer software companies for
the first time in seven years. That momentum continued into the fourth quarter,
as the industry again outpaced software. The broader life sciences sector, which
also includes medical devices, attracted $4.89 billion in investment for the
year, or 27 percent of all the venture capital invested, the highest proportion
directed to the sector in 12 years.

   Nonetheless, Walden said, it will likely be some time before New Orleans
reaps the full benefits of the investments.

   "The good news and bad news about life sciences is that it seems to be a
longer-term proposition to develop than the latest and greatest Web site. But
once the companies do take hold, they tend to stay."

   Walden offered two reasons for the VC's bullish outlook on life sciences.

   "The obvious answer is the best, which is that we, in fact, are all getting
older," he said.

   Coupled with the aging population, and the surge in demand the baby boomers
will create, is increasing consumer awareness about drugs, medical devices and
treatment options, which drives demand.

   "The fact that some average person can now rattle off the name of a
prescription drug for arthritis is amazing, when you think about it," he said.
"Our firm is bullish on the category for the foreseeable future." So far, two
small, local life sciences firms have managed to raise early stage investment
from so-called "angel investors."

   DANA Diabecare USA, a New Orleans marketer of insulin pumps for diabetes
patients, last year raised money from an individual equity investor in Texas,
said the company's chief executive, Sue Jernigan. However, Jernigan declined to
identify the investor or the amount of the investment.

   Likewise, Jane Cooper, chief executive of Labyrinth Health Care Group Inc. of
New Orleans, has raised an undisclosed amount of equity investment from local
businessman Gary Solomon. Cooper's company, which operates under the trade name
Patient Care, helps people navigate the mazes of bureaucracy often created by
their health insurance companies. Referring to its product as "advocacy
services," the company contracts with corporations that provide the service to
employees, as well as private individuals.

   Williamson, whose organization has worked with Jernigan and Cooper, said such
examples show New Orleans has creative entrepreneurs who can attract investors,
given the right kinds of support.

   As the next investment cycle gets under way, Williamson said, the city has
more tools in place to attract capital than it did during the boom of the late
1990s. He said New Orleans should look at San Diego's investment levels as a
benchmark.

   "If we can be doing what San Diego is doing in a down cycle, that would be a
good target," he said. "If we do half of that . . . that's a nice start."

    . . . . . . .

Stewart Yerton can be reached at syerton@timespicayune.com or at (504) 826-3495.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2004


                             517 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 29, 2004, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: SCHOOL SCENE

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: CARISSA D. MIRE

BODY:

   OAK RIDGE HIGH

    Members of the school's Junior ROTC will travel to Montgomery, Ala., for the
National Drill Meet, to be held Saturday through Monday.


   THE WOODLANDS HIGH

    Seniors Rebecca Garrison, Lucas Hernandez-Mena, Matthew Ramirez and Jonathan
Afshari recently were recognized by the National Hispanic Achievement Program
for their scholarship and grades on the PSAT test.

    The Wind Ensemble recently performed at the Midwest Clinic in Chicago, an
international band and orchestra conference, held annually in that city. The
group performed a concert for more than 2,000 music educators from around the
world.


   THE WOODLANDS HIGH MCCULLOUGH CAMPUS

    Sophomore Ian Ramirez recently was named to the All-State Choir for the
second year in a row.


   ACADEMY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

    Late and move-in applications for the 2006, 2007 and 2008 Academy classes
are being accepted until May 1. Contact Academy offices at 281-292-2615 or visit
http://academy.conroe.isd.tenet.edu for more information.

    Senior Matt Woloszyn recently was named one of 13 Intel Science Talent
Search Semifinalists from Texas. Matt and the Academy were each awarded $ 1,000
for his project, "Controlling Gene Expression Through RNAi Gene Therapy." A
total of 300 semifinalists were named nationally by Intel, all of whom continue
in the Talent Search competition for finalist and possible $ 100,000
scholarship.

    BRANCH CROSSING JR. HIGH

    Today is the last day to donate to the first Ready to Learn and Ready to
Read Book Drive. The goal is to collect 400 books to donate to Interfaith of The
Woodlands.

    More than 1,200 pairs of shoes were collected as part of the Save Old Shoes
drive.

    Information for incoming eighth-grade parents about course descriptions and
procedures will be held at 6:30 p.m. today.

    Information night for parents of incoming seventh-graders will be Monday and
Tuesday from 6:30-8 p.m. The meetings will cover information about course
selection, course placement and procedures for registering for classes for the
next year. Limited parking is available, so arrive early.

    YORK JUNIOR HIGH

    Oak Ridge counselors will host a Parent Information Night for eighth-grade
parents on Monday.

    There will be a public information meeting to discuss York's Campus Report
in the LGI at 6 p.m. on Feb. 5.

    Men from the Conroe Freedom Chapter of the Sons of the American Revolution
recently visited at York. They gave an hour-long presentation to eighth-graders
on the different people and battles of the American Revolution.

    COLLINS INTERMEDIATE

    Today is the last day to donate to the first Ready to Learn and Ready to
Read Book Drive. The goal is to collect 400 books to donate to Interfaith of The
Woodlands.

    The school is hosting a technology fund-raiser on Feb. 12 from 6-8 p.m. The
rodeo-themed event is called "The Collins Country Stampede."

    VOGEL INTERMEDIATE

    There will be a student cup stacking tournament on Friday. The sixth-graders
will begin at 9:30 a.m. and the fifth-graders will follow at 1:45 p.m.

    On Feb. 12, counselors from York Junior High will meet with Vogel
sixth-graders to discuss course selection and requirements for seventh-grade at
9 a.m. and at 10:05 a.m. That evening, the counselors will meet with sixth-grade
parents at 6 p.m. in the Vogel cafeteria.


   BUCKALEW ELEMENTARY

    Friday is Bluebonnet voting day for third- and fourth-grade pupils. Each
pupil who has read five Bluebonnet books will vote for his or her favorite in a
statewide election to choose the winner of the Texas Bluebonnet Award. If all
pupils in grades three and four read five books, some third- and fourth-grade
teachers will wear blue wigs on voting day.


   GALATAS ELEMENTARY

    On Monday, author Susan Stevens Crummel will visit. She is the author of
several children's books, including The Dish Ran Away With the Spoon and My Big
Dog.

    Tuesday is "Galatas Skate Night." Pupils, friends and families will meet at
Sk8 Town at 846 Rayford Road at 6 p.m. Admission is $ 4 per person.

    Feb. 6 is Go Texans Day. Pupils will celebrate the traditions of Texas by
dressing in western wear.

    LAMAR ELEMENTARY

    Kelly Jones, author and Lamar parent, will be reading her newly published
book, The Adventure Tree, to first-graders in the Commons at 8:30 a.m. today.

    On Friday, Barbara Cargill from Wonders of The Woodlands will be at the
school to present her program to second-grade pupils in the science lab.

    On Feb. 12, there will be a meeting of the Parent Teacher Organization in
the teachers' lounge from 10-11:30 a.m.

    The following pupils represented Lamar at the Conroe ISD Western Art Show on
Jan. 10. Fourth-graders Claire Andrews, Deanna Butts, Ashley Garrison and Taylor
Jackson; third-graders Amber Cotton and Meagan Dowell; second-graders Craig
Martin and Erica Waldvogel; and first graders Brooke McDougald and Kendall Polk.



GRAPHIC: Photo: Branch Crossing Junior High pupil Dillon Reed, left, Kelsey
Speiser, Principal Chris McCord and Jon Moul sack up some of the more than 1,200
pairs of shoes the school pupils and faculty donated for a project to help the
city of Huntsville provide needy children with shoes (color); David Hopper

NOTES: Compiled by Carissa D. Mire
 To submit items to School Scene, send via e-mail to Carissa.Mire@chron.com or
to South Montgomery County ThisWeek, 574 Sawdust Road, The Woodlands, Texas
77380.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2004


                             518 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 27, 2004, Tuesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1177 words

HEADLINE: DOWN SYNDROME 'CURE' MIGHT BE WITHIN REACH OF SCIENTISTS

BYLINE: By Carey Goldberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A decade ago, any researcher who dared to suggest that Down syndrome could
one day be "cured" was heading straight for the scientific fringe. Mainstream
consensus went: Down syndrome, the leading genetic cause of mental retardation,
was too complex a problem even to approach.

   Now, although that goal remains beyond the horizon, a growing number of
reputable researchers at universities such as Stanford and Columbia say they can
foresee a time when they'll be able to break the link between Down syndrome and
retardation.

      Armed with an array of new tools - from genome mapping and stem cells to
genetically engineered mice and a deepening understanding of Alzheimer's disease
- they are trying to pinpoint just how the extra chromosome of Down syndrome
leads to retardation and a host of other problems.

   Once they figure that out, the thinking goes, perhaps they can someday help
people with Down Syndrome gain some IQ points, or even develop normal
intelligence. There is a precedent: Certain rare genetic metabolic diseases once
meant certain retardation. Now, those babies can grow up mentally normal, thanks
to diagnosis as newborns, pills and diet restrictions.

   "The whole research scene has changed dramatically" since the extra
chromosome, Chromosome 21, was mapped in 2000, said Suzanne Armstrong,
spokeswoman for the National Down Syndrome Society.

   "We realize that any potential treatments resulting from research at the
genetic level are years away," she said, "but we're very hopeful."

   More than 350,000 Americans have Down syndrome and the moderate or mild
retardation that generally goes along with it. They are at higher risk for heart
defects, childhood leukemia and other physical problems, too. They also tend to
have a distinctive look - short stature, small nose, a relatively flat face.

   The life expectancy for people with Down syndrome has doubled in the last two
decades or so, from 25 to 49 years; and the sweeping movement to raise children
at home instead of in institutions has greatly improved the quality of those
longer lives, parents and advocates say.

   Sheila Cannon, coordinator for the Down syndrome center at Children's
Hospital in Pittsburgh, said the progress on health and quality-of-life issues
since her daughter, Kerry, was born 17 years ago has already been stunning: Back
then, she was told, "Down Syndrome is what it is."

   Now, it seems, that may not always be true. Prevention of mental retardation
"may not happen within the next few years, and it may not even be helpful to my
daughter, but it probably would be helpful to the generations that follow," she
said. "That's how I look at it."

   Getting there, advocates and researchers say, will require much more of a
financial commitment from the federal government.

   In recent years, federal funding for Down syndrome research has averaged
about $10 million a year; the National Down Syndrome Society is now pushing for
twice that sum. By comparison, Alzheimer's disease, which affects more than 4
million people, got $600 million from the National Institutes of Health alone in
2002.

   But some of that river of Alzheimer's money is trickling over to Down
syndrome research because of an intriguing connection: The brains of virtually
all middle-aged people with Down syndrome show telltale signs of Alzheimer's
disease, and one of the genes on Chromosome 21 is linked to production of
beta-amyloid, a protein that accumulates in abnormal form in Alzheimer's brains.

   The beta-amyloid connection raises an exciting prospect, said Dr. Michael
Shelanski, codirector of the Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's disease
at Columbia University:

   It could be, he said, that a child with Down syndrome becomes retarded simply
because "the child is developing with a flood of beta-amyloid, so they don't
learn very well, they don't make synapses very well."

   "We're beginning to study this in the mouse," he said, and eventually,
perhaps, drugs that will be developed to sop up extra beta-amyloid in the brains
of Alzheimer's patients could also be used to reduce retardation in children.

   Human research is beginning as well. In a 2002 article in the journal The
Lancet, researchers took two sets of post-mortem fetuses, one with Down syndrome
and one without, and compared the gene activity of their neural stem cells. They
found that certain genes that help brain cells develop and communicate were
disrupted only in the Down syndrome fetuses. A Lancet commentary noted that
those genes could turn out to be targets for drug and gene therapy in humans.

   But that will take years to determine. In the meantime, a few clinical trials
have begun to test existing drugs to enhance brain function in people with Down
syndrome, largely on the premise that whatever shows promise improving learning
and memory with Alzheimer's disease might work in Down syndrome as well.

   Pfizer, which makes an Alzheimer's drug called Aricept, is testing it in
dozens of people with Down syndrome around the country, checking for any
noticeable improvement in memory, attention, language and more.

   Results of previous studies of Aricept have tended to be modest, however,
said Dr. Ira Lott, director of pediatric neurology at the University of
California at Irvine. "The problem with that whole class of medication is that
it's temporary," he said. "It's like whipping a tired horse - the horse runs
faster and then poops out."

   He and colleagues are now working on a study using high-potency antioxidants
- such as vitamins E and C - for people with Down syndrome. Already, the
vitamins have shown some promise in improving learning and memory in Alzheimer's
patients, he said.

   Researchers tend to have an easier time imagining an antiretardation
treatment that begins at birth - or even before - than one given in adulthood.
But an adult treatment is not impossible, said Dr. William C. Mobley, director
of a new center for research on Down syndrome at Stanford University. The
effects of the extra chromosome "may or may not be reversible," he said. "We
just don't know."

   Years ago, a scientist stating that the retardation of Down syndrome could be
prevented was "a voice in the wilderness," said Dr. Leonard E. Maroun, a
professor emeritus of microbiology and immunology at the Southern Illinois
University School of Medicine.

   That is changing a bit, said Maroun, who has worked for years on the role
that interferon, a virus-fighting protein used to treat some cancers, may play
in Down syndrome. He has patented the idea of anti-interferon therapy and is
developing an anti-interferon drug that he plans to sell through his
Beverly-based start-up, Meiogen Biotechnology.

   "The general public's image of Down syndrome is one of hopelessness," Maroun
said. But, "I'm virtually certain we've got something that will really help.
Maybe I'm wrong, but certainly there are ideas out there that make it plausible
that we could help these kids, and could encourage scientists to get into this
area."

   Carey Goldberg can be reached at goldberg@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. LEONARD E. MAROUN "We could help these kids"

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2004


                             519 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    January 25, 2004, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4447 words

HEADLINE: Saving Chase;
TEENAGER'S LUNG-LIVER TRANSPLANT REQUIRES FAITH, FAMILY AND SHEER WILL TO
SURVIVE

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: JEANNIE KEVER

BODY:

   THEY earned him a place in medical history, but to Chase McGowen, the events
of Jan. 5 have been both more and less than that.

   Finally he has a chance to get down to the real business of being a
13-year-old boy: going to school, riding his bike, counting the days until he
gets his driver's license.

   In some ways, though, what happened in an operating room at Texas Children's
Hospital doesn't fit into any neat box.

   How do you categorize a complicated tango of hope and loss, life and death?

   In an operation lasting nearly 12 hours, a team of surgeons sliced through
Chase's sternum, rerouted his blood supply to a heart-lung bypass machine, cut
away his deteriorating lungs and replaced them with a healthy pair taken hours
earlier from a person declared brain-dead in a West Texas hospital. As the new
lungs were connected to his pulmonary artery, pulmonary veins and main airway, a
second team of surgeons waited to remove Chase's damaged liver and replace it
with a healthy organ from the same donor.

   By the next day he was awake, aware of what had happened and "feeling kind of
weird. I sort of had the heebie jeebies."

   The lung-liver transplant was the first in Texas and the 14th in the United
States. Most of the other patients, like Chase, had cystic fibrosis.

   His new lungs and liver will remain free of cystic fibrosis, although his
other organs are still affected by the disease.

   Chase left the hospital on Tuesday,1/20 a scary step but also a milestone in
his quest to make it back to his real life as a teenager in Austin.

   "I want to go home, but I just don't think I'm ready to go today," he told
the medical team gathered in his hospital room Tuesday afternoon.

   But the doctors insisted it was time.

   "We fully understand being a little nervous about going home," said Dr. John
Goss, the lead liver transplant surgeon at Texas Children's. "But we think it
will be best to see Chase McGowen as an outpatient."

   So Chase walked out of the hospital, accompanied by his father, Tom McGowen,
and a box of 18 medications intended to keep him healthy and stop his body from
rejecting the new organs.

   He will remain in Houston for several months so doctors here can closely
monitor his recovery.

   For life after transplant, the only certainty is uncertainty.

   Chase endured the painful removal of four drainage tubes inserted into his
new lungs, the uncomfortable therapy to reduce the mucus accumulated there and
the exhausting daily exercises to regain his strength.

   His mother, Carol McGowen, came down with a cold on Jan. 16, and doctors sent
her packing, insisting she stay away from Chase until she was well.

   But there were amazing moments, too, as he came to realize that his new lungs
really work, that he really can breathe without supplemental oxygen for the
first time in almost two years.

   All in all, he's doing well, said Dr. George Mallory, a pediatric
pulmonologist who is coordinating Chase's care. "Our only real, active problem
is, he's accumulating fluid in his chest cavity," Mallory said as he released
Chase from the hospital. "We're going to beat it, but it's going to take
nutrition and exercise and time and prayer."

   After a lifetime of waiting, Chase has his second chance.

    Chase's time

    Chase waited 8 1/2 months for the transplant, but in some ways he had waited
forever.

   For his first 10 years, cystic fibrosis was a manageable if cumbersome
disease, requiring daily breathing treatments, numerous medications and periodic
hospitalizations. He was a little skinnier than most of the boys in his north
Austin neighborhood, but he could still tear around on his bicycle, and jumping
on the trampoline only helped knock the mucus loose in his clogged lungs.

   But by May 2002, several years after he was forced to leave school and enroll
in the Round Rock Independent School District's home-based program, his health
was dramatically worse. For the next year, with collapsed lungs and other
complications, he was in the hospital more than he was out.

   "Chase was literally dying in front of me," his mother said.

   Stuck in the hospital while his friends were playing football and complaining
about homework, Chase ran the gamut of emotions: "Mad. Angry. Sad. I felt just
about everything you can," he said. "I can't even put it into words.

   "I was just so scared my lungs were going to collapse again, even though I
wasn't doing anything rough."

   He felt safe in the hospital, scared to leave it. "Whenever I left the
hospital, I would cry."

   Last winter, a pediatric lung specialist pitched a packet of information
about lung transplants to McGowen as her son lay in an Austin hospital,
struggling to breathe.

   It was time, he said.

   Improved treatments for cystic fibrosis have raised the median age of death
to 33.4 years. Organ transplants carry their own risks, but without one, Chase
seemed unlikely to reach his 14th birthday.

    A family united, divided

    Chase and Carol McGowen arrived in Houston in mid-May, accompanied by
McGowen's sister, Kim Zimmermann, but leaving Chase's father, Tom, and two
sisters at home in Austin.

   The family had spent months researching logistics and financial realities,
ultimately prevailing over their insurance company's insistence that Chase be
treated in Los Angeles or St. Louis.

   Both of those programs are big, with correspondingly long waiting lists. "I
could tell by looking at my child, we don't have that long," Carol McGowen said.

   The program at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston was new, started in July
2002. Chase's lung transplant was just the 10th performed there.

   Despite the program's limited experience, the McGowens felt the shorter
waiting list and the proximity fact that it was close to home made Texas
Children's their best choice. Tom McGowen's parents, Paul and Norleen McGowen,
live in Pearland, providing a built-in support system, and Norleen McGowen's
mother's Museum District home had been empty since she entered a nursing home
six months earlier, giving the family a place to live rent-free.

   Tom McGowen and Chase's sisters visited most weekends, and friends poured in
all summer.

   Still, the separation hurt.

   "Not seeing my sisters every day is hard," Chase said. "Not seeing my dad is
the hardest thing."

   Tom McGowen, training coordinator and safety manager at Newmark Homes in
Austin, accepted it stoically. He had to work, not least because his job
provided the family's health insurance. He had also become the day-to-day parent
to Tara, a high school honors student and volleyball player, and Casey, a
fifth-grader who swims competitively and plays basketball.

   But throughout the summer, his only son grew steadily weaker.

   "Chase calls, and you can tell he misses his sisters and dad. You can hear it
in his voice," Tom McGowen said last fall, his own voice betraying his emotion.
"That's tough."

   For Carol McGowen, a stay-at-home mom since Tara was born, being with Chase
was both a luxury and a mind-numbing 24/7 responsibility, but only occasionally
did she acknowledge the difficulty.

   It didn't matter. They did this, or Chase died.

   But they didn't do it alone.

   Zimmermann, 34, turned her own life upside down and came to Houston to help.

   She and her husband, Mike, had just moved into a new custom-built home in
Georgetown, where she taught at a private Lutheran school down the hall from the
classrooms of her children. It was a comfortable life, but her sister needed
her.

   "There just wasn't a choice," she said. "I won't let my sister go through
this by herself."

   Michael, 9, and 6-year-old Shelby Zimmermann spent the summer in Georgetown
with their dad, then moved to Houston in August.

   Carol McGowen and Zimmermann had moved in together to care for their mother
in Austin before her death almost three years ago of non-Hodgkins lymphoma.

   "I thought that was going to be the hardest thing I ever dealt with," the
39-year-old McGowen said. In retrospect, those months were a final gift from
their mother, teaching them to work together for Chase.

   They came to Houston for new lungs. In July they discovered that the liver
disease that had plagued Chase since he was a baby - a complication of cystic
fibrosis - meant he also needed a new liver.

   So they waited, never straying far from the beeper that would alert them to a
potential match.

   It went off on Aug. 14.

   Tom McGowen, 42, raced to Houston with Tara and Casey. Chase danced around
the house, calling friends with the news. McGowen and Zimmermann watched in
amazement, exulting that he was so fearless.

   Several hours later, the verdict was in. Waiting families seldom learn why a
potential match didn't work out, but lungs are easily damaged and often rejected
for transplant after testing.

   False alarm No. 1.

    Waiting and worrying

    Life went on - Zimmermann's kids began school at Poe Elementary School, and
Chase's friends returned to school in Austin - but Chase's life remained on
hold.

   Anytime he left the house, and the oxygen generator to which he had been
tethered since April 2002, he toted an oxygen tank. Thanks to Houston's triad of
heat, humidity and ozone, he was unable to be outdoors for much of the summer
and fall, prompting McGowen and Zimmermann to scrounge for entertainment that
was both cheap and air-conditioned.

   By fall, Chase had gone for a test-drive in a Hummer, toured Reliant Stadium,
watched the Astros and met many of the players, and been to a Texans' game. He'd
been to museums, restaurants and movies, even the neighborhood fire station.

   But what they took to calling their "Houston adventure" wasn't really about
sports and good times. It was about beating a ticking clock.

   In a process that took many of his waking hours, Chase required three daily
breathing treatments, each time inhaling three medications to break up mucus and
fight infection. Afterward he slipped into an inflated electric vest, which
vibrated to shake the mucus loose so it could be coughed up.

   He was often on intravenous antibiotics, and he spent every night hooked to a
feeding tube in an effort to keep his weight up. He saw Mallory, who runs Texas
Children's lung-transplant program, every week.

   Starting in September, he met twice a week with a teacher from the Houston
Independent School District's homebound program to keep up with his eighth-grade
classmates back home.

   Everything revolved around Chase, even though he sometimes found it all
maddeningly boring. "I sit down and get another breathing treatment," he said,
describing a typical afternoon. "I watch TV. Michael and Shelby come home, and I
help with their homework. If I have time, I'll play Nintendo."

   If a household with two mothers provided a bit too much attention for a thin
and pale teenager who, all in all, would rather be playing video games and
listening to rap music, he also grew increasingly dependent, feeling truly safe
only if McGowen and Zimmermann were around to oversee his therapy and
medications.

   "I'm sick of it, a lot of the time," he said. "Sometimes I finally just cry."

   Not that he didn't struggle against the rules.

   Chase wanted to stay up late, while his mother insisted he be well-rested and
ready for a transplant at a moment's notice.

   "Normal kids stay up late," he argued.

   "You're not normal," McGowen answered, hating to say the words but fighting
to keep him healthy.

   Three times a week, Chase and Zimmermann headed for the fitness center at
First Presbyterian Church. Chase had received physical therapy at the hospital,
but McGowen quickly realized that was costing his insurance policy between $ 900
and $ 1,200 a week.

   By then, the $ 1 million insurance cap was looming closer.

   "It sounds like a lot, but it's not," Carol McGowen said. Years of treatment
for cystic fibrosis already had taken almost half, and the transplant would take
the rest. Costs not covered by insurance had long ago eroded their savings.

   McGowen and Zimmermann handled the IV's and feeding tube to limit home
health-care costs. When they moaned about the expense of hospital-based physical
therapy, Mallory mentioned that his church had a nice gym.

   Zimmermann, a lean and lanky distance runner, took on the workouts herself,
and First Presbyterian allowed them to use its facilities for $ 30 a month.

   By mid-September, Chase was beginning to grow stronger. One day he and
Zimmermann strolled into the gym, trailed by the portable oxygen tank. A North
Carolina Tarheels cap topped his sandy hair as he climbed onto a treadmill.

   Chase was determined to walk a mile. Zimmermann vacillated between
encouragement and worry that he would overdo it. She promised that after the
transplant they'd do a 5K race together. And she told him it was OK to stop.
"Sometimes I go out to run 10 miles, and I only run five."

   It wasn't OK with Chase, and after 21 minutes he flipped the treadmill off,
his mile finally done.

    One child dies, another lives

    Lung-liver transplants are rare. Because of that, there are no reliable
statistics on success rates, said Anne Paschke of the United Network for Organ
Sharing.

   About 80 percent of cystic fibrosis patients who have a lung transplant are
still alive one year after surgery, according to the Organ Procurement
Transplant Network. That drops to 61.3 percent after three years.

   "We would all be glad if lung transplantation was the answer, but it's so
difficult, and it's still a procedure fraught with problems," said Allison Tobin
of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   But Mallory, who coordinated three lung-liver transplants at St. Louis
Children's Hospital before coming to Houston, felt it was the best hope for
Chase.

   His only hope.

   Gene therapy may provide valuable treatment in the future; the gene that,
when defective, causes cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989, the year before
Chase was born, and research is continuing.

   Chase couldn't wait. But getting on the waiting list for a transplant was
only the beginning.

   More than 83,500 people in the United States are waiting for an organ
transplant - kidney, pancreas, liver, intestine, heart, lungs or some
combination. Slightly more than 19,000 transplants were done during the first 10
months of 2003. On average, 17 people on the waiting list die every day.

   As a mother, McGowen lived with the knowledge that another family had to lose
a child and agree to donate his or her organs in order for her own son to live.

   "We have no choice," she said. "Either he gets a lung-liver transplant or he
dies. But . . .  I look at the other family, the potential donor's family. We
can't lose sight of that."

   When Mallory met Chase last spring, the lung specialist broached the subject
other people had avoided. "Nobody is going to die for you," he told Chase. "It's
just going to happen."

   LifeGift, the organ-procurement agency that provided the lungs and liver for
Chase's transplant, works in hospitals in Houston, Fort Worth, Lubbock and
Amarillo. About 65 percent of families asked to donate organs and tissue agree
to do so, said Catherine Burch Graham, director of communications for LifeGift.

   Finding lungs suitable for transplant is especially complicated.

   They are fragile and susceptible to damage and infections, Mallory said.
Slightly more than 6,000 families agree to donate the organs of a loved one each
year, but fewer than 1,000 sets of lungs are suitable for transplant.

   There are other hurdles, too.

   About 60 pediatric lung transplants are performed in the United States every
year, at six locations: Houston, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, St.
Louis and Gainesville, Fla.

   Most people have to move.

   "That costs money. That costs emotions," Mallory said. "There are a number of
really sick kids whose families just aren't crazy enough to do this."

   The McGowens were crazy enough.

    The cost of life

    Organ transplants are about money as well as medicine.

   Lots of money.

   Clinic visits, medications and medical equipment continued to eat away at
Chase's insurance policy. Although the bills haven't yet been tallied, Carol
McGowen figures the $ 1 million policy ran out sometime during the transplant.

   So few lung-liver transplants have been done that cost estimates of the
surgery and follow-up care aren't available, but a 2002 Milliman USA report
pegged the first-year cost of a lung transplant alone at $ 343,000. Transplant
patients need expensive anti-rejection drugs and follow-up care for the rest of
their lives.

   Clearly, money was a problem.

   Chase qualified for Medicaid, a federal-state insurance program that will
cover at least some post-transplant expenses, because he lived apart from his
dad, the family's sole wage-earner. Whether he will keep the coverage when the
family reunites remains to be seen.

   They can't afford to lose Medicaid coverage, so perhaps, the McGowens say,
Tom McGowen will have to move out of the family home. Perhaps they'll have to
get a divorce.

   Everything is under consideration, they say, but there are no easy answers.

   "What we need is to win the lottery," Tom McGowen said.

   Most managed-care policies are capped, usually at $ 1 million or $ 2 million,
said Donna Poole, director of business services at Texas Children's.

   Eligibility for Medicaid and the state Children's Health Insurance Program is
based on income and assets, and families of transplant patients have to see
which programs, if any, they may qualify for if they lack health insurance or
their insurance runs out. Without coverage of some sort, or an independent
source of income to cover the cost, patients seldom make it onto the waiting
list at all.

   Poole said she knows of one case in which a young transplant patient's
parents divorced so their child would qualify for CHIP.

   Others raise money on their own.

   The McGowens tried that, too.

   They set up a Web site, www.helpingchase.com, cqand established two funds.
Information on both is available on the Web site.

   Carol McGowen and Zimmermann also hit up everyone they met for a donation.

   "It was really awkward at first," Zimmermann reported to her sister after
making one approach. "But," she shrugged, invoking the mantra they adopted
during the wait for a transplant, "it's all about Chase."

   So she pushed on.

   A veteran of eight marathons, Zimmermann had registered for last weekend's
Houston marathon just hours before Chase's transplant began.

   At first she figured that being with him at the hospital and with her own
children after school would leave her no time to sleep, much less to stay in
shape for a marathon.

   Then she decided to make the race a fund-raiser, asking people to pledge $ 1
a mile for the 26.2-mile race. By race day, she was up to $ 225 a mile, and
she's still accepting donations.

   "It's all about you, sweetie," she told Chase before the race.

   Back home, Chase's friends sold their artwork to raise money. They made
cookies, mowed grass, held a swim meet and collected donations door to door.

   Families that had watched Chase grow sicker were determined that money not be
the stumbling block.

   "The McGowens are wonderful," said Tracy Gilbert, a second-grade teacher at
the neighborhood elementary school whose sons are among Chase's best friends.
"The support system we have in our neighborhood is wonderful. It's a big family,
and we take care of each other."

   Those small fund-raisers showed Chase that his friends cared. But a lifetime
of medical bills means his family needs more money than kids can raise singing
door to door.

   On Oct. 23, friends raised more than $ 65,000 with a golf tournament in Round
Rock.

   Tom Graf, quality-assurance coordinator for the Texas Legislative Council,
knows the McGowens through his kids, 13-year-old twins Logan and Jolie, and came
up with the idea of a golf tournament last spring.

   "We've all lived through Chase's condition," Graf said. "We knew he had
cystic fibrosis. Everybody knows the sentence for that."

    Living on faith

    Money worries aside, everyone's nerves were starting to fray by fall.autumn.

   Chase's lung capacity dropped to 17 percent in mid-September, the lowest it
had ever been. Everyone focused on the good news - he wasn't on a ventilator,
wasn't in the hospital, was still working out regularly with Zimmermann.

   Still, the dropping numbers could only mean he was getting sicker.

   Mallory recognized the signs of stress.

   "This is just getting old," he said. "I tell families, 'If you've never lived
by faith before, you need to learn how to do it now.' "

   Pegg Dobmeier, lung-transplant coordinator for the hospital, silently took
note as McGowen grew teary-eyed during one visit. "With Chase, they're working
so hard to keep him healthy," she said. "That's one of the stresses. Is he going
to stay healthy enough (for a transplant)?"

   McGowen and Zimmermann had relied on Dobmeier for far more than medical
information. Where could they get a good haircut? Which restaurants should they
try? After all, people don't live by inhalers and pulmonary-function tests
alone.

   One of the more serious questions of the fall concerned Casey.

   Chase had been sick for so long that, in some ways, the natural order of
things had shifted. Chase, at 13, remained in the role of the youngest child,
while Casey, three years his junior, assumed the role of the middle child.

   She fretted about him, and he chafed at her hovering. Then she wanted to be
coddled, but Chase needed more attention.

   "It has been more difficult on Casey than we want to admit," McGowen
acknowledged.

   She had received a reminder the previous evening, when a friend relayed a
conversation between her daughter and Casey.

   "My brother isn't coming home," Casey told her friend.

   McGowen believes in positive thinking, and for the most part, that was her
line: Chase will get the transplant. He'll be healthy. But she had to be honest,
so she couldn't promise that Chase wouldn't die.

   "Help!" she e-mailed Dobmeier.

   Dobmeier alerted a hospital social worker, who appeared in the waiting room
during Chase's next clinic visit, offering a sheaf of information on kids and
stress and support groups near the family's home.

   With Mallory, McGowen launched into another worry. With school under way and
Chase's friends no longer free to visit as often, he was growing more depressed.

   Mallory climbed onto the exam table to look Chase in the eye. "I know it's
not easy," he said. "It's really about character, and you've got a great
character. God isn't finished with you yet."

   Nor was David Blanco.

   Blanco was Chase's favorite respiratory therapist at Texas Children's, a
therapist-cum-cheerleader who offered unwavering encouragement as he determined
the state of Chase's lungs.

   "Big, deep breath," he instructed as Chase clenched the test machine's
mouthpiece between his teeth. "Blow it. Blow it. Blow it. Blow it. Now push.
Push. Push. Push. Push. Push. Push. Push."

   Blanco tapped at his keyboard to log the results.

   "Everything's up," he reported. Chase's lung capacity was 19 percent, an
unexpected improvement.

   Chase brightened. "I want to do it again."

   Blanco cheered him on again, sitting upright when he read the results.

   "Whoa, man. Where did that come from? Twenty percent. You haven't seen 20
percent in a while. Very nice."

   Chase leaped from his stool, leaning over to study the paperwork Blanco
printed out. "That's awesome. That's cool," he said.

   "Can I have a copy so I can show my dad?"

    False alarms

    Weeks passed, and the usual caveat that accompanied all plans - "unless
we're at the hospital for a transplant" - began to ring hollow.

   McGowen missed her daughters and her friends. Zimmermann, energized by the
people she had met in Houston, began wondering whether she wanted to return to
teaching or try something new with her life.

   The beeper went off twice more, on Oct. 1 and Dec. 6. False alarms Nos. 2 and
3.

   Chase felt stuck.

   "Every time I think about it, it seems unreal," Chase said. "I want it to be
over, but nothing ever happens. Just go to the doctor, go home, hope it happens.

   "Everyone keeps saying, 'Oh, it's going to happen.' But they're not the one
who's sitting here."

   He was clingy, sitting in his mother's lap or slumping against her during
clinic visits, and the numbers on his weekly lung-function tests began sliding
back down.

   "You're not a machine," Blanco told him when he couldn't nudge the meter
above 18 percent. "You can't do the same thing every time."

   Chase didn't say anything.

   Mallory was quiet at that visit, too, reviewing Chase's test results and
listening to his lungs.

   "I think we're hanging," he told the family. "I'm making no predictions, but
we're ready."

    Then, a phone call

    No one wanted to seem ghoulish, but everyone knew that the holidays, when
traffic accidents usually increase, were the most likely time for a transplant.

   But by Jan. 4, it looked as if nothing was going happen. Tom McGowen had
returned to Austin with Chase's sisters after spending two weeks in Houston.
Zimmermann and her kids were back from Georgetown.

   At 11:25 that evening, the telephone rang.

   They had a donor. Eighteen hours later, Chase had new lungs and a new liver.

   His new life had begun.

    . . .

    FAMILY FUND RAISING

    The McGowen family is raising money for Chase's post-transplant care.


   The Web site, www.helpingchase.com, provides information on two funds.
Donations via the National Transplant Assistance Fund (www.transplantfund.org)
may be made to the Chase McGowen Restricted Fund for Lung Transplant Assistance
by calling 800-642-8399.

    Donations to the Chase McGowen Medical Assistance Fund, administered by the
family, may be sent to Bank of America, 13435 U.S. 183, Austin, TX 78750. Mark
donations for Account No. 0057 4500 9549.

    Chase's aunt, Kim Zimmermann, asked people to pledge $ 1 per mile - $ 26.20
- as she ran the HP Houston Marathon on Jan. 18. Checks may be sent to the Chase
McGowen Medical Assistance Fund, c/o Sherry McGowen Nelson, 4713 Highway 6
South, No. 140, Missouri City, TX 77459.

    . . .

    ABOUT THE DISEASE

    Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease affecting about 30,000 people in the
United States.

    It causes the body to produce an abnormally thick, sticky mucus, due to the
faulty transport of sodium and chloride within cells lining organs such as the
lungs and pancreas to their outer surfaces. The mucus also obstructs the
pancreas, preventing enzymes from reaching the intestines to help break down and
digest food.

    The disease develops when each parent carries the defective gene; 10 million
Americans are symptomless carriers. When two carriers conceive, there is a 25
percent chance that the child will have cystic fibrosis and a 50 percent chance
that the child will carry the gene. Source: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. In the moments before he was wheeled off for the surgery
that could transform his life, Chase McGowen shared a few moments with his
parents, Tom and Carol McGowen, left, and his aunt, Kim Zimmermann (color); 2.
In the years leading up to the transplant, Chase spent hours every day doing
breathing treatments to keep his deteriorating lungs working as well as possible
(color); 3. Chase and his aunt, Kim Zimmermann, worked out together three times
a week during the months before the transplant to build up his strength.
Zimmermann handled the workouts herself so the family could save money on
physical therapy (color, p. 6); 4. Family time became a rare and valuable
commodity during the wait for Chase's transplant. Here he jokes around with his
sisters, Casey, left, and Tara, and his mother, Carol McGowen (color, p. 6); 5.
Dr. David L.S. Morales whisked into Texas Children's carrying an ice chest
packed with the lungs that would be transplanted into Chase later that morning
(color, p. 6); 6. Dr. E. Dean McKenzie finished cutting away Chase's diseased
lungs just after the new set arrived in the operating room (color, p. 6); Graph:
7. FAMILY FUND RAISING (B/W, P. 6, TEXT); Photos: 8. Far left: Carol McGowen,
left, wipes away a tear after her son, Chase, was taken to surgery on Jan. 5.
Her husband, Tom McGowen, and sister, Kim Zimmermann, gather up the family's
belongings as they head to the waiting room (color, p. 7); 9. Left: Tom McGowen
and family friend Pam Jacks crashed in a waiting room after their mad dash from
Austin brought them to Texas Children's in time to see Chase before surgery
(color, p. 7); 10. Just three days after the transplant, Chase was out of the
intensive care unit and soaking up attention from his mother, Carol McGowen, and
other family members (color, p. 7); 11. Nervous but excited to be leaving the
hospital, Chase climbed into his dad's truck Tuesday evening for the ride to his
family's temporary home in Houston (color, p. 7); 12. Even when everything goes
well, life is complicated for transplant patients. Jaymee Scott, seated, liver
transplant coordinator for Texas Children's, went over Chase's many medications
with Chase and his dad, Tom McGowen, before Chase's release from the hospital
(color, p. 7); Graph; 13.  ABOUT THE DISEASE (b/w, p. 7, text); 1-2, 4-6, 8-12.
Steve Campbell / Chronicle, 3. John Everett / Chronicle

NOTES: Additional coverage online www.houstonchronicle.com/ features Video: See
Chase McGowen leaving the hospital.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2004


                             520 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     January 23, 2004 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 882 words

HEADLINE: Steroids technology, market a dose of sad reality for sports;
 Commentary

BYLINE: LAURA VECSEY

BODY:

   THE MINUTE President Bush stared glinty-eyed into the camera and went Clint
Eastwood on the issue of steroids, you knew we were going to spend the next few
news cycles rehashing the litany of steroid abuses/abusers going on in sports.

   Quick, what's WADA?

   What's HGH, THG, EPO, Balco?

   Who's Dick Pound, Victor Conte, Kelli White?

   To refresh my memory on this mind-numbing topic, I hit the Internet. Guess
what? Reading online about steroids, I amazingly found links to steroid sellers
on Internet sites of a least two of America's largest newspapers.

   There they were. How to buy steroids. Straightforward, no-nonsense
advertisements pulsing on my PC monitor right there at the end of stories about
how negatively steroids have affected sports.

   Elitesteroids.com.

   Check it out.

   Click.

   The president is probably onto something. So far, there's greater evidence of
steroids' pervasive infiltration into our mass culture than there is evidence of
Iraqi WMD.

   According to Dr. Gary Wadler, a New York University associate professor and a
member of the World Anti-Doping Agency, steroids are available on the "black
market. They come in from Mexico and other countries. High school kids are using
it. Boys and girls are using it. The elite athletes certainly have access. Those
who are determined to try and gain unfair athletic advantage at any cost can get
anabolic steroids."

   In a divided Congress in a tempestuous election year, there's little doubt
the president needed at least one issue to inspire both-sides-of-the-aisle
applause during his State of the Union address.

   Steroids send "the wrong message that there are shortcuts to accomplishment,
and that performance is more important than character," Bush said.

   He got a little flak from some quarters for not pressing any specific
enforcement policy, but what's the president supposed to do? Threaten to ship
steroid cheats off to Guantanamo Bay?

   Maybe that's not a bad idea. The only problem is that some reality TV
executive would roll tape for a Superstars on Steroids special, providing our
beloved sports stars further excuses for pumping up.

   This week, see the big stars compete for all the "magnesium" they can eat.

   Jason Giambi vs. Barry Bonds.

   Bill Romanowski vs. C.J. Hunter.

   Kelli White vs. Regina Jacobs.

   If Bush's mandate to professional athletes and sports leagues to clean up
steroid use was good politics, so be it. It was a legitimate use of a bully
pulpit. And who needs bullying more than cheaters?

   There's no other way to describe athletes who know they are violating the
spirit of fair competition when they chemically alter themselves for enhanced
performance.

   This is a moral issue as much as it is an administrative or legislative
issue. By necessity, shaming people into doing the right thing is all that's
left. Although, when was the last time shame worked on anyone who has already
decided to cheat?

   Even when federal laws or league rules are in place, cheaters find ways to
cheat.

   Worse, experts say that science will soon enough allow cheaters to stay so
far ahead of the law that anti-doping efforts will be a lost cause.

   That was the disturbing conclusion writer Michael Sokolove came to in
Sunday's New York Times magazine's cover story, "The Lab Animal."

   Forget blood doping, human growth hormone or designer steroids; advances in
gene therapy might provide cheaters with new and undetectable means for
enhancing their performances.

   Sokolove goes to the physiology department at the University of Pennsylvania,
where he meets up with mice for which gene therapy has allowed them to produce
increased levels of IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor), a protein that promotes
muscle growth and repair.

   "I had heard about these mice, heard them called 'mighty mice,' but I was
still shocked at the sight of them," Sokolove writes.

   "There they were in several small cages, grouped with normal mice, all of
them nibbling on mouse chow pellets. The mighty mice looked like a different
animal. They were built like cattle, with thick necks and big haunches. They
belonged in some kind of mouse rodeo," he writes.

   "Rats altered in the same fashion and then put into physical training - they
climb little ladders with weights strapped to their backs - have experienced a
35 percent strength gain in the targeted muscles and have not lost any of it
'detraining,' as a human being will when he quits going to the gym."

   It's not far-fetched to consider that soon these techniques will be available
to any athlete desperate enough to seek the ultimate edge.

   "Lee Sweeney (physiology department chair at Penn) generously consults with
(World Anti-Doping Agency) and other anti-doping officials. He's sympathetic to
their cause. He just says it's hopeless. 'There will come a day when they just
have to give up,' he says. 'It's maybe 20 years away, but it's coming,'"
Sokolove writes.

   Bonds may be approaching home run marks set by Babe Ruth and Hank Aaron on a
40-year-old body enhanced by nothing more than magnesium and zinc. That doesn't
mean we don't find our pleasure in watching home run record assaults diminished
or our suspicions raised.

   Sadly, it takes the issue of steroid abuse among pro athletes to unify
politicians. What does that say about the state of sports?

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2004


                             521 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                           January 21, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: SPORTS; THE WAY I SEE IT; Pg. 150

LENGTH: 1000 words

HEADLINE: Drugs in sports a fact of life

BYLINE: Rick Telander

HIGHLIGHT:
If athletes are not dissuaded by their conciences, the anti-doping folks are
fighting a battle of morality legislation

BODY:


   The dirty doping results keep coming in, as they have for years, not in
gushing numbers, but in spurts, trickles and drips.

   The pattern is probably most like that of a drainpipe carrying runoff from a
field. The volume ebbs and flows from week to week and month to month,
occasionally drying up entirely, but it is fairly constant over time.

   Recently, we have had female Olympic shot-put champion Yanina Korolchik of
Belarus (the anabolic steroid clenbuterol), U.S. hammer-throw champion Melissa
Price (designer steroid THG) and British sprint champion Dwain Chambers (THG)
get nailed.

   Kelli Smith, the only U.S. woman to win the 100- and 200-meter sprints at the
same outdoor world championships, failed her postrace drug test last fall in
Paris (the stimulant modafinil), and other track stars such as shot putter Kevin
Toth and middle-distance runner Regina Jacobs (both THG) recently have been
busted.

   Of course, there are NFL players such as Bill Romanowski, Dana Stubblefield
and Barret Robbins (all THG) who have been found dirty.

   But there are also less-expected dopers such as cyclist Adham Sbeih, the
first U.S. athlete to test positive for the red-blood-cell-boosting hormone EPO;
Termell Sledge, a minor-league baseball player in the Montreal Expos' system
(the steroid nandrolone); and former U.S. Open tennis runner-up Greg Rusedski
(nandrolone).

   One of the more interesting positive tests was produced by a 30-year-old
rookie in the Italian pro soccer league, Saadi Gadhafi. Performance-enhancing
steroids were the culprit, leading one to wonder whether the dope was sent via
secret agent from the player's father, Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi.

   The point here is not simply to announce the cheaters' names and say,
Tsk-tsk, bad boys and girls!"

   The world more or less has been doing that for years, and the ethics of
doping, cheating and performance-enhancing through dubious means has been
debated and worried about ad nauseam.

   And more and stricter doping controls randomly have sprung into effect, only
to lose impact as the general public grows tired of the whole cat-and-mouse game
between cheaters and those who would like to believe they somehow can create the
proverbial even playing field.

   Indeed, we have become so bored with doping tales and so unenthusiastic in
our policies of prevention and education that it seems we might have reached a
fork in the road.

   Last week, International Olympic Committee president Jacques Rogge and UNESCO
director-general Koichiro Matsuura signed an agreement in Paris aimed at a more
unified global fight against doping. And that was a nice thing.

   But short of bankrupting the economy of the sports worlds, there is only so
much agencies can put into tracking down athletes and testing them in a
foolproof fashion, while at the same time stopping the renegade chemists and/or
trainers and coaches from developing and dispensing the latest dope to elude the
latest tests.

   The fight should go on, but it more and more is one of ethics.

   Where and how to draw the cheating line is the real issue. And if athletes
are not dissuaded by their consciences, the anti-doping folks are fighting a
miserable battle of morality legislation.

   It is so hard now to prove that an athlete is cheating with drugs that, as
any expert will tell you, it is only the brazen, the naive and the foolish who
get caught.

   What are we to think of baseball sluggers who have toyed with the old power
numbers?

   Sammy Sosa, like Barry Bonds and Mark McGwire, has changed physically as much
as anyone in the sport. But he never has tested positive for
performance-enhancing drugs. Then, too, until a few months ago, Major League
Baseball didn't even have a drug-testing policy.

   Just the other day, Sosa told Cubs manager Dusty Baker how much he was
looking forward to the coming season. I'm so pumped, so hyped," Sosa said. This
is the first time I've started lifting weights in December."

   Maybe Sosa didn't know what he was implying with that statement, but I think
many people assumed Sosa had put on his 40 or so pounds of muscle from lifting
maniacally year-round.

   Moreover, designer drugs are always a step ahead of the testing regulations.
And with the genetic engineering and laboratory experimentation going on,
performance-enhancers made from animal testosterone and stimulants someday will
seem as primitive as strychnine and leeches.

   In an article titled In Pursuit of Doped Excellence" in the New York Times
Magazine last Sunday, writer Michael Sokolove checked out sports doping and also
checked up on gene-therapy experiments at the University of Pennsylvania used on
mice to make them big, strong and perpetually youthful.

   The key juice is IGF-1, or insulin growth factor-1, a protein that enhances
muscle growth and health.

   They were built like cattle," Sokolove writes of the doped lab mice, with
thick necks and big haunches. They belonged in some kind of mouse rodeo."

   Of course, the Penn scientists have good intentions for their research. The
point is not to develop saddle-wearing mice but to aid elderly humans and those
with muscle-wasting diseases.

   But the connection from the lab to sports and performance enhancement would
be a short one. We have seen how quickly jocks learn their science.

   Not coincidentally, the cover story in Newsweek this week -- Girl or Boy? Now
You Can Choose. But Should You?" -- reports how the once-unthinkable notion of
picking your child's sex is as easy as going to Dr. Jeffrey Steinberg's
Fertility Institute in Los Angeles and plunking down $18,480. Oh, and getting
pregnant.

   But science is winning this battle.

   There will come a day when they just have to give up," Penn researcher H. Lee
Sweeney, the chairman of the school's department of physiology, tells Sokolove.
Sweeney is speaking of the Olympic and world anti-doping federations, of which
he approves but feels sorry for. It may be 20 years away, but it's coming."

   If it isn't here.

GRAPHIC: Miami Herald, Sammy Sosa hasn't tested positive for
performance-enhancing drugs, but he has heard the talk.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2004


                             522 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                    January 21, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: TEMPO; Body & Mind; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: body & mind

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell, STAFF

BODY:

   Taking care of your whole self

   By Peggy O'Farrell

   HOT NEWS

   Heartbreak: Heart disease is the leading cause of hospital admissions among
HIV/AIDS patients, according to a recent study from the University of
Cincinnati.

   The study, led by Dr. Carl Fichtenbaum, director of UC's Infectious Diseases
Center, found that 8.5 percent of HIV/AIDS patients were hospitalized for heart
disease, compared to 5.8 for kidney disease, 5.6 for liver disease and 3.4
percent for opportunistic infections.

   One theory is that HIV/AIDS patients who take anti-retroviral drugs live long
enough to develop heart disease. A second is that long-term use of the
medications may spike blood lipids or damage arteries.

   But the results do suggest that HIV/AIDS patients over 40 should be
aggressively screened and treated for cardiovascular disease, Fichtenbaum said.
He recently presented the study at the ninth European AIDS Conference in Warsaw.

   RESEARCH

   Spotlight: A gene that lets cancerous cells take in iodine could one day be
used to treat a deadly form of brain tumor.

   Researchers at Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center added the
gene for a protein known as the sodium iodide symporter (NIS) into a strain of
glioma cells, then transplanted the cells into rats.

   The gene caused the cancer cells to take up radioactive iodine, used to treat
thyroid cancer.

   The rats weren't cured, but their lives were prolonged by as much as 78
percent.

   The findings suggest the NIS gene could offer "an attractive new strategy"
for treating gliomas, said lead researcher Sissy M. Jhiang.

   But scientists have to first find an efficient way to deliver the gene into
patients' tumors before the approach can be used to treat glioma.

   Attaching the NIS gene to a therapeutic gene could also give scientists a way
to monitor gene therapy, Jhiang said.

   CALENDAR

   Snooze: "Bedtime Basics" will give parents information on children's sleep
development, problems and sleep habits at 7 p.m. Jan. 29 at Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center Outpatient Mason facility. Cost: $5.
Information: 636-5714.

   Sniffle: Dr. Amal Assa'ad will give an update on allergy research projects
under way at Cincinnati Children's for FAAST members at 7 p.m. Jan. 30 at the
TriHealth Fitness and Health Pavilion, 6200 Pfeiffer Road, Blue Ash.
Registration: 588-6863 by next Wednesday.

   Stretch: St. Elizabeth Medical Center's PrimeWise will offer two series of
yoga classes. A five-week series begins at 6:30 p.m. Feb. 3. Cost: $40. A
four-week series begins at 9:30 a.m. Feb. 10. Cost: $36. Information: (859)
578-5999.

   RESOURCE

   Booklet: The National Association for Sport and Physical Education is
offering a new booklet with simple ideas for physical activity with children
ages birth to 5. Visit www.naspeinfo.

   org to download "Kids in Action."

   Contact Peggy O'Farrell by phone: 768-8510; fax: 768-8330; e-mail:
pofarrell@enquirer.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2004


                             523 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 20, 2004, Tuesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1102 words

HEADLINE: VIRUSES THAT KILL CANCER

BYLINE: By Sean McNaughton, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The first clue that viruses could fight cancer came around the turn of the
19th century, when a woman with cervical cancer was bitten by a dog.

   She was injected with live, crippled rabies virus; her cancer shrank.

      Subsequent decades brought more clues: Experiments in the 1920s confirmed
that viruses killed tumors in mice. A handful of human patients benefited from
viral injections in the 1940s. A 1956 National Cancer Institute study found
viruses caused regression in half of the cervical cancer patients without making
them ill. And in the '70s and '80s, doctors reported that patients' lymphomas
shrank after bouts of measles.

   But the clues were never definitive, the biology of viruses and cells was not
well understood, some therapies made patients sick, and radiation and
chemotherapy yielded more tangible results in the fight against cancer. So
virotherapy was abandoned - until a few years ago, when researchers armed with a
new understanding of genomics and virology decided to try again.

   Cancer virotherapy - getting viruses to target cancer cells instead of
healthy ones - "went from an idea to human clinical trials in something less
than 24 months," said Dr. David T. Curiel, part of a research team at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham that laid the groundwork for virotherapy.
"It's being used very, very aggressively, and new technologies are being
developed."

   One research team, lead by Dr. Robert L. Martuza, director of the
neuro-oncology center at Massachusetts General Hospital, re-engineered a herpes
virus to cure mice of an aggressive form of brain cancer.

   "For the first time, we can harness these disease-causing viruses and make
them into disease-curing viruses," Martuza said.

   Theoretically, viruses are an ideal way to battle cancer because they are so
good at choosing which cells to invade, getting around cell defenses, killing
the cells, and then replicating themselves. Now, rapidly advancing molecular
biology has given scientists

   pinpoint control in adding and deleting viral genes and increased the pace of
research.

   Experts caution that prescription drugs are several years away from market,
but virotherapy research by academics and by biotech firms has yielded several
phases of human trials on a broad range of cancers, from head and neck to
prostate, lung, and brain cancers.

   "Oncolytic viruses have really become very fashionable in the biological
therapeutic world," said Leonard E. Post, senior vice president for research and
development at Onyx Pharmaceuticals in Richmond, Calif. The company was showing
promise at treating advanced colorectal cancer with engineered viruses, before
it abandoned its virotherapy program last summer for business reasons.

   Viruses' ability to target and kill cells efficiently raises the possibility
that virotherapy could have fewer side effects than radiation or chemotherapy.
Even tightly focused beams of radiation kill healthy cells, and chemotherapy
will often kill six cancer cells for each healthy cell killed. Viruses, Martuza
said, can be made to kill 1,000 or more cancer cells for each healthy cell
killed.

   Conventional therapies also exact heavy tolls on bone marrow - limiting the
amount that can be administered before the treatments themselves do too much
damage to the body.

   "We've shown these viruses don't harm bone marrow," Martuza said, so they
could be added without compounding side effects. Several research projects found
that chemo- and virotherapy were more effective when combined, because they
target different cancer pathways and have have different levels of toxins.

   Virotherapy is particularly promising in cancers that remain extremely
resistant to traditional treatments, such as glioblastoma, the most common - and
most aggressive - form of brain cancer. "Despite decades of research into
chemotherapy agents, there has been no progress" in treating glioblastoma, said
Martuza. "And radiation is maxed out."

   Herpes and polio viruses engineered to be harmless have been successfully
used to target glioblastoma, shrinking or eradicating the cancer in mice.

   It's that power to discriminate among cells that makes viruses such good
tools for finding - and killing cancer cells. Viruses are also used in gene
therapy and cancer vaccines, but in virotherapy, the virus itself is the
treatment.

   "Certain viruses attack only certain specific cells," said Robert A.
Weinberg, MIT biology professor and a lead researcher at the Whitehead Institute
for Biomedical Research who discovered the first human cancer gene. "They can be
quite discriminating."

   Viruses can tailor proteins on their outsides to fit lock-and-key into
proteins that control access into healthy cells, bypassing cell defenses and
allowing viruses to take control. Many cancers have telltale proteins that don't
exist in healthy tissues, allowing scientists to engineer viruses that will
target tumor cells but not healthy cells next door.

   Researchers are also experimenting with viruses that infect cancerous and
healthy cells alike - but that remain dormant unless their host is cancerous.

   Another area of research: Gaining control over the way viruses multiply.

   "Many viruses destroy the cell in the process of replication, and they do it
very efficiently" Dr. Kenneth K. Tanabe, viral oncology researcher and deputy
director of the Mass. General cancer center, said. "Then they create progeny
that infect other neoplastic cells."

   Tanabe's team has engineered a herpes virus to target and kill diffuse,
metastatic liver cancer. They deleted the gene that makes a chemical the virus
needs to replicate. In healthy cells, the viruses get inside, but lack enough of
the chemical to reproduce; In cancerous cells, which produce the chemical
themselves, the virus is able to replicate and move on to attack other cancer
cells.

   Research has also shown that the presence of replicating viruses often primes
the body's immune system to attack the cancer itself, delivering a one-two
punch. Viruses injected into a mouse tumor attack the cancer directly - and
immune cells spread the attack to tumors in other parts of the body.

   And that is one of the key drawbacks to virotherapy: By triggering an immune
response, the viruses make themselves vulnerable to the patient's immune system.

   "It's difficult to maintain an ongoing viral infection," Weinberg said,
"because our cells tend to shut down infections in short order." SIDEBAR1:
TARGETED GERM WARFARE

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.  SIDEBAR2: THE ROLE OF VIRUSES IN
TREATING CANCER

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO   DIAGRAM, 1.  Dr. Kenneth K. Tanabe (above), deputy director of
the Mass. General cancer center, and Dr. Robert L. Martuza (below), director of
the neuro-oncology center at Mass. General, are both exploring virotherapy. /
GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS / TOM LANDERS 2. GLOBE STAFF GRAPHIC / SEAN MCNAUGHTON

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2004


                             524 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 18, 2004, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: WHO'S WHAT, WHERE

BODY:

   FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK

   ROBERT F. VERDONCK HAS BEEN NAMED CHAIRMAN OF THE FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK OF
BOSTON. VERDONCK IS PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF EAST BOSTON SAVINGS BANK;
CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT, AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF MERIDIAN FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.;
INDEPENDENT TRUSTEE OF JOHN HANCOCK VARIABLE SERIES TRUST; DIRECTOR OF SBLI
MASSACHUSETTS; AND DIRECTOR OF DEPOSITORS INSURANCE FUND. THE FEDERAL HOME LOAN
BANK OF BOSTON IS A COOPERATIVELY OWNED WHOLESALE BANK FOR HOUSING FINANCE.
MERCURY COMPUTER SYSTEMS

   MERCURY COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC. HAS NAMED CRAIG A. SALINE VICE PRESIDENT OF
ORGANIZATION DEVELOPMENT. MOST RECENTLY, SALINE WAS INTERIM VICE PRESIDENT OF
HUMAN RESOURCES FOR TUFTS NEW ENGLAND MEDICAL CENTER. MERCURY IS A
CHELMSFORD-BASED SUPPLIER OF COMPUTER SYSTEMS.

   FIDELITY INVESTMENTS

   FIDELITY INVESTMENTS, A BOSTON-BASED MUTUAL FUND COMPANY, HAS NAMED STEPHEN
DESCHENES EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AT FIDELITY INSTITUTIONAL RETIREMENT SERVICES
CO., ITS UNIT THAT PROVIDES EMPLOYER-RETIREMENT PLANS. DESCHENES FOUNDED BOW
STREET CAPITAL, A VENTURE CAPITAL FIRM, AND MPOWER, A FINANCIAL ADVICE WEBSITE.

   CITIZENS BANK

   CITIZENS BANK OF MASSACHUSETTS HAS NAMED MARY BETH HAUT SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT
AND DIRECTOR OF CITIZENS INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT SERVICES, A UNIT SPECIALIZING IN
CUSTOMIZED INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT. HAUT JOINS CITIZENS FROM FLEETBOSTON FINANCIAL
CORP., WHERE MOST RECENTLY SHE WAS A SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT IN THE PRIVATE
CLIENTS GROUP. CITIZENS BANK OF MASSACHUSETTS IS A SUBSIDIARY OF
PROVIDENCE-BASED CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP INC.VFA VF A Inc., a Boston-based
provider of software and services for facilities management and capital
planning, has named Joan Lockhart vice president of marketing. Previously,
Lockhart was director of enterprise marketing for the Americas at RSA Security.

   MICROSOFT

   Microsoft has named Thomas Monahan business marketing officer of its New
England district, which is based in Boston. Prior to joining Microsoft, Monahan
was manager of marketing information and systems and research at North American
Life.

   FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON

   The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has named Samuel O. Thier chairman and
Blenda Wilson deputy chairwoman of its board of directors. Thier is a professor
of medicine and professor of healthcare policy at Harvard Medical School. Wilson
is president and chief executive of the Nellie Mae Educational Foundation. In
addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has made the following
appointments: Peter A. Blyberg, Class A director; James R. Wood, Class A
director; Kirk P. Pond, Class B director; Lisa M. Lynch, Class B director; Orit
Gadiesh, Class B director, Lawrence Fish, Class A director; and Robert K. Kraft,
Class B director.

   TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a biopharmaceutical company in Cambridge, has
named Paul M. Martha vice president of clinical affairs. Martha joins TKT from
Interleukin Genetics, where he was chief medical and regulatory officer and vice
president for clinical research and development.<

   WEBER SHANDWICK

   Weber Shandwick's Cambridge office has made the following appointments:
Jennifer Agoado, account executive; Colleen Ryan, Brenda Chroniak, and Hilary
Blowers, account coordinators; and Julia Cantor, information services associate.
Weber Shandwick is a public relations agency.

   Send announcements to Who's What, Where, The Boston Globe, Box 2378, Boston,
MA 02107 (e-mail: who@globe.com; fax: 617-929-3183.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2004


                             525 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Column 2; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2464 words

HEADLINE: Entering a Brave New World, Warily

BYLINE:  By JEREMY PEARCE

BODY:

   IN the narrowing ground between the law and the laboratory, January has been
a confusing month.

        Two weeks ago, when Governor McGreevey signed the stem-cell research
bill into law -- only the second such law in the nation after California --
supporters celebrated what they believed would create a life-saving wave of
biotechnical innovation for New Jersey's scientists to pass on to the world.

    The case had been made that experimentation with stem cells derived from
adult tissue -- as well as from human embryos, which are destroyed in the
process -- could hold spectacular keys for treating spinal injuries, multiple
sclerosis, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and other seemingly incurable conditions.

   "This has got to be the right thing to do," said Assemblyman Rafael J.
Fraguela, a Democrat of Union City, and a former Republican who formally broke
ties with the party last month when he voted in favor of the stem-cell bill.

   "I listened to the debates, all of the debates," he said, recalling one of
his last acts in office, "and I decided to cast my vote for humanity."

   Yet New Jersey's endorsement of embryonic stem-cell research does little to
resolve the increasingly complex tangle of science and politics. Beyond the
official fanfare, even its supporters concede that it is a law without financing
that is based on a scientific projection. It also appears to be at least partly
at odds with the mainstream of federal research efforts.

   For example, the new law also bans the reproductive cloning of humans but
implicitly permits therapeutic cloning for potential medical treatment, also
known as "somatic cell nuclear transplantation," drawing the ire of
anti-abortion groups.

   "You're making people in a petrie dish and then taking them apart," said
Assemblyman Michael Patrick Carroll, a Republican of Morristown, who opposed the
stem-cell bill. "That's a moral problem."

   Across the nation, at least six other states have passed laws with some form
of ban on cloning, according to the United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops, and the Bush administration stopped federal financing for research
employing new lines of embryonic stem cells in 2001.

   Last year, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would end all
cloning, and a similar bill awaits a vote in the Senate. Mixing matters up
further, in November the United States led a coalition of 60 nations asking the
United Nations General Assembly to pass a resolution outlawing the cloning of
human embryos for any purpose, including therapeutic cloning, which genetically
tailors new tissue by combining stem cells with a patient's own cells.

   Medical ethicists are now expressing their own concerns about work with
embryos, among them that New Jersey's law implies a promise of timely cures --
in part propelled by what supporters contend will be a surge in private
investment -- that may overreach reality.

   Dr. Walter M. Robinson, associate director of the division of medical ethics
at Harvard Medical School, said that while he had observed little change in the
moral polarities within the debate, the appearance of state endorsements like
New Jersey's could have unintended consequences.

   "I am less worried about the moral arguments of using embryos than I am about
the commercialization of research," Dr. Robinson said. "Commercial interests may
exaggerate potential benefits from stem cells, and the commercial environment
changes the way we evaluate research."

   He added that some supporters of stem-cell laws have probably overemphasized
the potential for a great leap forward. "My concern is that families of patients
are having their hopes raised in a way that is not justified," he said.

   As Dr. Robinson explained, "A little knowledge of the history of science
tells us that advances are generally not planned and can't be predicted, but
come from accidents and serendipitous moments."

   Nor was Dr. Robinson alone in tamping down expectations.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the center for bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, said he had supported New Jersey's stem-cell bill, although he
doubted claims that the new law would draw an immediate rush of investment to
the state.

   "The stem-cell law is going to have an effect, but I won't say it will be
dramatic," Dr. Caplan said. He paused, and then continued: "Yes, the research
can be hyped. And I can tell you that it is so early in stem-cell studies that
it's going to take some real proof before anybody is making any serious business
plan to shape the research."

   Then he put a finer point on the issue. "The investment community has already
gone through one biotech bubble," he said, "and they're not necessarily going to
come running back for another one."

   STILL, Dr. Harold T. Shapiro, president emeritus of Princeton, found the law
to be broadly encouraging, though he was quick to note that no provision had
been made for state financing of the research.

   "It is a useful thing," observed Dr. Shapiro, who served for six years as
chairman of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission in the Clinton
administration. "But it doesn't have the impact, because the state sponsors
little research of any kind."

   For his part, Governor McGreevey said through a spokeswoman that it was "too
early to say" if state money for stem cell research would be dedicated in the
new state budget to be introduced on Feb. 24.

   Dr. Ruth L. Fischbach, director of the Center for Bioethics at Columbia
University, was also encouraged by New Jersey's step, even as she tempered her
enthusiasm. "I am concerned about the hype," Dr. Fischbach said. "People may
start to get impatient for cures -- as they did with gene therapy, which hasn't
brought the benefits we'd hoped for."

   She added: "The law makes this research legitimate because it has been
recognized by a governor and a legislature. That happens to be an important and
courageous step by Governor McGreevey. Researchers using embryonic stem cells
shouldn't feel as if they have to go undercover."

   In fact, it was legal to experiment with human embryos before Jan. 4, when
the stem-cell legislation took effect. The law amounts to a proclamation in
support of the science, and sets some ground rules for its progress, including
the establishment of an "institutional review board" to monitor research.

   After first passing through the state Senate a year ago, the stem-cell bill
was withdrawn from the Assembly when critics contended that it could be
interpreted to allow the reproductive cloning of humans. It was later amended to
outlaw the practice -- and to make such cloning "a crime of the first degree" --
but most opponents were not pacified. Some Catholics and anti-abortion groups
still reject the prospect of any experimentation involving human embryos, which
can be obtained by researchers from in-vitro fertilization clinics.

   Provoking critics further, the new law actually directs doctors to inform
couples undergoing fertility treatments about the option of donating unused
embryos for stem-cell research.

   Richard M. Doerflinger, a spokesman for the United States Conference of
Catholic Bishops, called New Jersey's bill "the most extreme law on human
cloning in the nation, and possibly the world," and said the conference and
other opponents had placed their hopes on a pending Senate bill that would
override state laws and halt research.

   "We have no problem with adult stem-cell research, as such," Mr. Doerflinger
said, referring to experiments in deriving stem cells from the blood of an
umbilical cord, placenta and other human tissue, but not from embryos. The
practice of using adult cells is specifically approved within the state's bill.

   "Our problem is that the New Jersey law says that anything short of live
birth can be a field of research," he said. "And we don't think that in-vitro
clinics should be making spare embryos in the first place."

   For many scientists, the question remains open as to whether experiments with
embryos or adult cells hold the greater promise. Most researchers have contended
that work on both methods should go forward simultaneously to determine which is
the speedier path or the more effective cure.

   "It is not by any means a settled question," said Dr. Robinson of Harvard.
"Like most things in science, the answer tends to be, 'It depends."'

   Dr. Ira B. Black, chairman of the neurosciences and cell biology department
of the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, at the University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, described the potential of all stem-cell research as
threefold. He said the expectation in the laboratory was for such cells to
revive damaged and dead cells; to act as vehicle cells in introducing gene
therapy; and, finally, to rally and harness the human body's own existing stem
cells.

   The end goal would be to replace brain cells lost to Alzheimer's, repair
injured nerve cells causing paralysis and treat cancers, malfunctioning organs
and other now-irreparable conditions.

   To Dr. Black, the use of embryonic cells "fundamentally constitutes the gold
standard" in medical research because of their purity and versatility. But he
cautioned: "This is a very young field. Our areas of ignorance are far greater
than our areas of knowledge."

   Even so, it is not clear if any laboratory in New Jersey -- at universities
or in the private sector -- has been conducting embryonic research. Debbie Hart,
president of the Biotechnology Council of New Jersey, a trade organization based
in Trenton, said that she was unaware of any private ventures to date, or of any
company that had such immediate plans. The council, which represents 124
companies, was in the forefront of lobbying for the new law. She also refuted
the notion that the law would "commercialize" stem-cell research.

   "I don't see the down side of this bill," Ms. Hart said.

   She added: "It does not encourage reproductive cloning. It does not encourage
abortion. It does not violate federal law. All research is dictated by strict
protocols -- it has to be repeated and validated."

   On the other hand, Ms. Hart did confirm that a handful of companies were
working on adult stem cells, including the Celgene Corporation, a
biopharmaceutical company based in Warren. A Celgene subsidiary, Anthrogenesis
of Cedar Knolls, is focused on deriving stem cells from placental tissue
obtained in hospitals after childbirth.

   So far, the company said, there are indications that the cells are as
"plastic" -- or versatile in applications throughout the body -- as cells
derived from embryos.

   "If you think it through, you can get a lot of stem cells from the more than
four million live births that take place in the United States every year," said
John W. Jackson, chairman and chief executive of Celgene.

   Mr. Jackson said that he thought state legislators should consider
strengthening the effect of the law through state financing of research.
Supporters of the New Jersey law point out that California's law, which passed
in 2002, authorizedthe use of state money, which may have spurred significant
private investment. For instance, an anonymous donor has since given $12 million
to Stanford University to build a stem-cell research center there. In another
gift to researchers, Andrew S. Grove, the chairman of Intel, donated $5 million
to establish a stem-cell center at the University of California at San
Francisco.

   In New Jersey, federal dollars are paying for studies of adult stem cells at
the Coriell Institute for Medical Research in Camden.

   Dr. David P. Beck, president of Coriell, said that about 60 percent of
financing comes from federal sources, and that experiments were under way with
stem cells originating in blood and body fat, as well as tissue from the
pancreas, muscles and cartilage. The institute, which is affiliated with the
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, has no plans to pursue
research using embryos, he added.

   "It's not for any political or philosophical reason," said Dr. Beck, who is a
geneticist. "We made a decision to focus our labs because everything that we
need to do can be done with adult stem cells."

   Then he referred to the larger conflict: "The more important thing to the
debate is that we do both kinds of research. Until we do, we won't know its
value."

   IN their scrutiny of New Jersey's law, however, opponents still say the
clause intended to outlaw reproductive cloning falls short of its mark,
presenting a loophole. The law defines human cloning as "the replication of a
human individual by cultivating a cell with genetic material through the egg,
embryo, fetal and newborn stages into a new human individual." In their
interpretation, they say the wording would allow labs to "grow" fetuses to a
stage just short of birth to possibly harvest tissue and organs.

   "That language is troubling, and we passed this law very quickly," said
Assemblywoman Alison Littell McHose, a Republican of Sparta, who voted against
the stem-cell bill and was the first legislator in the Assembly debate to speak
against it. "It is not a sufficient protection against cloning, and I didn't get
a satisfactory answer from the bill's supporters."

   Ms. McHose added, "We now seem to be playing God with embryos."

   For their part, the medical ethicists said that a reproductive cloning clause
might finally prove to be unnecessary insurance. Dr. Caplan of the University of
Pennsylvania noted science's failure to yet clone even a primate, much less a
human being. Instead, he said, he sensed that protest about the anti-cloning
clause was more likely "a stalking horse" in which anti-abortion groups might
seek to re-emphasize the sanctity of life, even at the cellular level.

   Dr. Fischbach of Columbia noted that embryonic research of any stripe
appeared to affect most people viscerally. "You're either going to be for it
very strongly or against it, and nothing else is going to change your mind," she
said.

   All three ethicists, along with Dr. Shapiro of Princeton, expressed a
deep-seated opposition to the idea of reproductive cloning.

   "Why would anyone ever choose it?" Dr. Shapiro said. "It is demonstrably
unsafe. And there are much more pleasant ways of bringing babies into the
world."

   Reflecting the division, the law's primary sponsor, Assemblyman Neil M.
Cohen, a Democrat of Union, appeared to be jubilant at the bill's signing. It
was an event that drew the actor Christopher Reeve, who was paralyzed in an
equestrian accident in 1995, to the Kessler Institute of Rehabilitation in West
Orange.

   Assemblyman Cohen, a lawyer, said that his vigorous support of the bill came
after reading "1,000 articles about research in the United Kingdom, Australia
and Israel."

   "This means hope for those who are going to be born, who won't have to
suffer," he said. "The worst thing that can happen is that it fails, and that
scientific research shows it can't happen."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In New Jersey, federal dollars are paying for studies of adult
stem cells, in test tubes at right, at the Coriell Institute for Medical
Research in Camden. (Photographs by Annie McCormick for The New York Times)(pg.
1); Dr. David P. Beck, top photo, president of the Coriell Institute, says he
has no plans to pursue research using embryos. "It's not for any political or
philosophical reason," he says. "We made a decision to focus our labs because
everything that we need to do can be done with adult stem cells." Earlier this
month, Governor McGreevey, bottom left, accompanied by the actor Christopher
Reeve and his wife, Dana, traveled to the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation
in West Orange, where he signed the stem-cell legislation. (Photographs by Annie
McCormick for The New York Times); (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. 8)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2004


                             526 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 7443 words

HEADLINE: IN PURSUIT OF DOPED EXCELLENCE;
The Lab Animal

BYLINE:  By Michael Sokolove; Michael Sokolove, a contributing writer for the
magazine, is the author of "The Ticket Out: Darryl Strawberry and the Boys of
Crenshaw," to be published in April.

BODY:

   On a brisk day last month, I was led through a warren of red brick buildings
on the campus of the University of Pennsylvania in West Philadelphia and then up
to a fifth-floor molecular physiology laboratory. I had come to visit some mice
-- and to get a peek at the future of sport.

        I had heard about these mice, heard them called "mighty mice," but I was
still shocked at the sight of them. There they were in several small cages,
grouped with normal mice, all of them nibbling on mouse chow pellets. The mighty
mice looked like a different animal. They were built like cattle, with thick
necks and big haunches. They belonged in some kind of mouse rodeo.

    The Penn researchers have used gene therapy on these mice to produce
increased levels of IGF-1, or insulinlike growth factor-1, a protein that
promotes muscle growth and repair. They have done this with mice before birth
and with mice at four weeks of age. A result has been a sort of rodent fountain
of youth. The mice show greater than normal muscle size and strength and do not
lose it as they age. Rats altered in the same fashion and then put into physical
training -- they climb little ladders with weights strapped to their backs --
have experienced a 35 percent strength gain in the targeted muscles and have not
lost any of it "detraining," as a human being will when he quits going to the
gym.

   To the scientists, H. Lee Sweeney, chairman of Penn's department of
physiology, and Elisabeth Barton, an assistant professor, the bizarre
musculature of their lab specimens is exciting. This research could eventually
be of immense benefit to the elderly and those with various "muscle wasting"
diseases.

   "Our impetus, going back to 1988, was to develop a therapy to stop people
from getting weak when they get old," Sweeney, 50, explained. "They fall and
injure themselves. We wanted to do something about that."

   Barton, 39, has the broad shoulders and athletic build of the competitve
cyclist and triathlete she once was. "You see children with muscular dystrophy,
and their parents are just so broken up because it's so sad," she said. "You see
grandparents who can't get out of bed. These are the people this is for."

   But the Penn team has become acutely aware of a population impatient to see
its research put into practice -- the already strong, seeking to get stronger
still. Sweeney gets their e-mail messages. One came from a high-school football
coach in western Pennsylvania not long after Sweeney first presented his
findings at a meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology. "This coach
wanted me to treat his whole team," he said. "I told him it was not available
for humans, and it may not be safe, and if I helped him we would all go to jail.
I can only assume he didn't understand how investigational this is. Or maybe he
wasn't winning, and his job was on the line."

   Other calls and e-mail messages have come from weight lifters and
bodybuilders. This kind of thing happens often after researchers publish in even
the most arcane medical and scientific journals. A whole subculture of athletes
and the coaches and chemists who are in the business of improving their
performances is eager for the latest medical advances.

   Sweeney knows that what he is doing works. The remaining question, the one
that will require years of further research to answer, is how safe his methods
are. But many athletes don't care about that. They want an edge now. They want
money and acclaim. They want a payoff for their years of sweat and sacrifice, at
whatever the cost.

   "This was serious science, not sports science," Dr. Gary Wadler, a United
States representative to the World Anti-Doping Agency, said when I spoke to him
about the Penn experiments. "As soon as it gets into any legitimate publication,
bango, these people get ahold of it and want to know how they can abuse it."

   Sweeney's research will probably be appropriated before it is ever put to its
intended medical purpose. Someone will use it to build a better sprinter or
shot-putter.

   There is a murky, "Casablanca"-like quality to sport at the moment. We are in
a time of flux. No one is entirely clean. No one is entirely dirty. The rules
are ambiguous. Everyone, and everything, is a little suspect.

   Months before the great slugger Barry Bonds was summoned before a grand jury
in December to answer questions about his association with the Bay Area
Laboratory Co-Operative, known as Balco, which has been at the center of a
spreading drug scandal after the discovery of a new "designer steroid,"
tetrahydrogestrinone (THG), a veteran American sprinter named Kelli White ran
the track meet of her dreams at the World Championships in Paris. She captured
the gold medal in the 100-meter and 200-meter races, the first American woman
ever to win those sprints in tandem at an outdoor world championship. In both
events, the 5-foot-4, 135-pound White, a tightly coiled ball of power and speed,
exploded to career-best times.

   On a celebratory shopping trip on the Champs-Elysees, White, 26, glimpsed her
name in a newspaper headline and asked a Parisian to translate. She learned that
she had flunked a postrace drug test and that her medals and $120,000 in prize
money were in jeopardy. Later, she acknowledged that she had taken the stimulant
modafinil, claiming that she needed it to treat narcolepsy but had failed to
list it on a disclosure form. What she added after that was revealing, perhaps
more so than she intended. "After a competition," she told reporters in Europe,
"it's kind of hard to remember everything that you take during the day."

   The THG scandal and the attention focused on Balco, which has advised dozens
of top athletes (including Kelli White) on the use of dietary supplements, has
opened the curtain on a seamy side of sport and on the fascinating cat-and-mouse
game played between rogue chemists and the laboratory sleuths who try to police
them.

   But White's statement exposed another, deeper truth: elite athletes in many
different sports routinely consume cocktails of vitamins, extracts and
supplements, dozens of pills a day -- the only people who routinely ingest more
pills are AIDS patients -- in the hope that their mixes of accepted drugs will
replicate the effects of the banned substances taken by the cheaters. The
cheaters and the noncheaters alike are science projects. They are the sum total
of their innate athletic abilities and their dedication -- and all the compounds
and powders they ingest and inject.

   A narrow tunnel leads to success at the very top levels of sport. This is
especially so in Olympic nonteam events. An athlete who has devoted his life to
sprinting, for example, must qualify for one of a handful of slots on his
Olympic team. And to become widely known and make real money, he probably has to
win one of the gold medals that is available every four years.

   The temptation to cheat is human. In the realm of elite international sport,
it can be irresistible.

   After Kelli White failed her drug test, the United States Olympic Committee
revealed that five other American athletes in track and field had tested
positive this summer for modafinil. Did they all suffer from narcolepsy? That
would be hard to believe. More likely, word of modafinil and its supposed
performance-enhancing qualities (perhaps along with the erroneous information
that it was not detectable) went out on the circuit. It became the substance du
jour.

   For athletes, performance-enhancing drugs and techniques raise issues of
health, fair play and, in some cases, legality. For sports audiences, the fans,
the issues are largely philosophical and aesthetic.

   On the most basic level, what are we watching, and why? If we equate
achievement with determination and character, and that, after all, has always
been part of our attachment to sport -- to celebrate the physical expression of
the human spirit -- how do we recalibrate our thinking about sport when
laboratories are partners in athletic success?

   Major League Baseball, which came late to drug testing and then instituted a
lenient program, seems to have decided that the power generated by bulked-up
players is good for the game in the entertainment marketplace. The
record-breaking sluggers Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa have been virtual folk
heroes and huge draws at the gate. Their runs at the record books became the
dominant narratives of individual seasons. (Barry Bonds has been less popular
only because of a sour public persona.) But the sport is much changed. Muscle
Baseball is the near opposite of what I and many other fans over 30 were raised
on, a game that involved strategy, bunting, stolen bases, the hit-and-run play
-- what is called Little Ball.

   Professional basketball is not generally suspected of being drenched in
steroids and other performance enhancers. But anyone who has seen even a few
minutes of old games on the ESPN Classic network from, say, 20 years ago, is
immediately struck by the evolution of players' physiques. Regardless of how it
happened, today's N.B.A. players are heavier and markedly more muscled, and the
game is tailored to their strengths. It is played according to a steroid
aesthetic. What was once a sport of grace and geometry -- athletes moving to
open spaces on the floor, thinking in terms of passing angles -- is now one
primarily of power and aggression: players gravitate to the same space and try
to go over or through one another.

   But it is sports that have fixed standards and cherished records that present
fans with the greatest conundrum. If what's exciting is to see someone pole
vault to a new, unimaginable height -- or become the "world's fastest human" or
the first big-leaguer since Ted Williams to hit .400 -- how do we respond when
our historical frame of reference is knocked askew by the suspicion, or known
fact, that an athlete is powered by a banned substance?

   in elite sport, the associations of competitors who have never been
sanctioned for drug use or known to fail a drug test can still raise questions.
Marion Jones, the breathtaking sprinterand featured American performer of the
2000 Sydney Olympics, was married to the shot-putter C.J. Hunter -- who was
banned from those games after testing positive for the steroid nandralone. Jones
later divorced Hunter, but then trained (briefly) with Charlie Francis, the
disgraced ex-coach of Ben Johnson, the disgraced Canadian sprinter who was
stripped of an Olympic gold medal. Carl Lewis, the greatest U.S. Olympian in
history and a longtime crusader against performance-enhancing drugs -- it was
Lewis who was outsprinted by the steroid-fueled Ben Johnson at the 1988 Games in
Seoul -- has been accused of flunking a drug test of his own before the 1988
U.S. Olympic Trials. Lance Armstrong, brave cancer survivor, fierce and
inspiring competitor, has kept up a long association with an Italian doctor in
the thick of a sprawling drug scandal in Europe, although Armstrong himself has
never come up positive on a drug test.

   Even the substances themselves are murky. Because the $18-billion-a-year
dietary-supplement industry is (at best) loosely regulated, some of the potions
in the vitamin store at your local mall could well be tainted by steroids or
growth hormones. The Food and Drug Administration just got around to banning the
sale of ephedra last month, long after the herbal stimulant was blamed for
numerous serious health problems, along with the sudden death last year of Steve
Bechler, a Baltimore Orioles pitcher.

   The whole situation cries out for a dose of clarity, but the closer you look,
the fuzzier the picture. Start with the line between what's legal and illegal
when it comes to enhancing performance. The line, already blurry, is likely over
time to disappear entirely.

   I visited a U.S. swimmer last September as technicians sealed up his bedroom,
after which they installed equipment that reduced the amount of oxygen in his
room and turned it into a high-altitude chamber. This is a common and legal
training method that Ed Moses, America's best male breaststroker, said he hoped
would increase his count of oxygen-carrying red blood cells. A whole team of
long-distance runners sponsored by Nike lives in a much more elaborate simulated
high-altitude dwelling in Portland, Ore. The desired effect of the so-called
"live high, train low" method -- sleep at altitude, train at sea level -- is the
same as you would get from taking erythropoietin, or EPO, which increases
red-blood-cell production and is banned in sports.

   Two other U.S. swimmers, in the lead-up to the Olympic Games in Sydney, were
on a regimen of 25 pills a day, including minerals, proteins, amino acids and
the nutritional supplement creatine, an effective but not necessarily safe
builder of muscle mass. Much of the mix may well have been useless, but athletes
tend to take what's put in front of them for fear of passing up the one magic
pill.

   "I like to think we're on the cutting edge of what can be done nutritionally
and with supplements," the swimmers' coach, Richard Quick, said then as his
athletes prepared for the 2000 games. "If you work hard consistently, with a
high level of commitment, you can do steroidlike performances." One of his
swimmers, Dara Torres, who increased her bench press from 105 pounds to 205
pounds and swam career-best times at the age of 33, said at the time that her
goal was to "keep up with the people who are cheating without cheating."

   And who are the cheaters? Everyone else. One primary motivation to cheat is
the conviction that everyone else is cheating.

   To draw the often arbitrary lines between performance enhancing and
performance neutral, between health endangering and dicey but take it at your
own risk -- to ensure that sport remains "pure" -- a vast worldwide bureaucracy
has been enlisted.

   At the lowest level are those who knock on the doors of athletes in their
homes and apartments in the United States and Europe and in the mountain
villages of Kenya and at the training sites in China and demand "out of
competition" urine samples. Higher up on the pyramid are the laboratories around
the world chosen to scan the urine (and blood) of elite athletes for the
molecular signatures of any of hundreds of banned substances. At the top of the
drug-fighting pyramid are the titans of international sport -- the same people
who cannot see to it that a figure skating competition is fairly judged.

   The titans created the World Anti-Doping Agency, which works with governments
and designated national organizations, including the United States Anti-Doping
Agency. In combination with the urine-sample collectors, the various couriers in
the chain of custody and the laboratories, W.A.D.A. is charged with making sure
that the world's premier athletes are clean -- and additionally that they have
not concealed drug use through the use of various "masking agents." (The latest
U.S.A.D.A. list specifically prohibits the following brand names: Defend, Test
Free, Test Clean, UrinAid and Jamaica Me Clean.)

   It is all an immensely complicated endeavor, one that requires W.A.D.A. to
keep up with the onrushing science, to disseminate information to thousands of
athletes, to navigate in different legal systems so that accused competitors get
due process and, lastly, to manage the worldwide trafficking of urine samples.
And it is all, in the end, quite possibly pointless.

   Despite the hundreds of people and tens of millions of dollars devoted to the
effort, international and national sports organizations may just lack the will
to catch and sanction cheaters. The United States, specifically, has been
singled out as negligent in its oversight. "The real issue is that USA Track and
Field has become a complete and utter scofflaw," the W.A.D.A. president, Richard
Pound, a Canadian, told me. "They have gone to extraordinary lengths to hide
identities and data and to exonerate athletes who have tested positive."

   Can you really have a serious antidoping effort without the full cooperation
of the world's most powerful nation -- and most powerful sports nation? It's
hard to see how.

   The tougher question is whether it will be scientifically possible to stay
ahead of the cheaters. The rogue scientists and coach-gurus have been winning
for years, and they have ever more tools available to them. THG, which set off
the Balco inquiry, is only a slightly more clever version of an old thing: an
anabolic steroid -- the kind of blunt builder of muscle mass and strength
prevalent in sports since the 1950's. But its discovery required an insider tip,
and THG is child's play compared with what's coming in the near future (if, in
fact, it is not here already): genetic manipulation in order to improve athletic
performance.

   Ultimately, the debate over athletic doping extends beyond sport. "The
current doping agony," says John Hoberman, a University of Texas at Austin
professor who has written extensively on performance drugs, "is a kind of very
confused referendum on the future of human enhancement."

   Pete Rose was the prototypical "self-made" athlete, which is code for a sort
of seeming nonathlete who makes the most of his meager abilities. But fans
overlooked important genetic traits that made him baseball's all-time hits
leader -- chiefly, uncommon durability that allowed him to play 24 seasons
virtually injury free. And what did Rose do to attain that? Nothing, really. As
the son of a semipro athlete who played sandlot baseball and football into his
early 40's, he came by that blocky, unbreakable body by way of genetic
inheritance. In the off-season, Rose maintained himself by playing casual
basketball a couple of times a week and eating greasy food and heaping bowls of
potato chips.

   When it comes to elite sport, there is no such thing as self-made. No amount
of dedication can turn someone of average ability into a world-class sprinter,
an N.B.A. player or a champion marathoner. You can't be an Olympic pistol
shooter without some innate steadiness of hand or a Tour de France cyclist
without a far-above-average efficiency at moving oxygen to muscles. Even a
humdrum, physically unimpressive player on a major-league baseball team has
something -- usually extraordinary hand-eye coordination -- that is not apparent
to those who regard athletic gifts only in terms of great size, speed, endurance
or power.

   The former Olympic track coach Brooks Johnson once told me that sport at its
highest level should be viewed as a competition waged among "genetic freaks." He
mentioned Carl Lewis and Michael Jordan. But anyone who reaches the top echelon
of Olympic competition or draws a paycheck for playing sports professionally
should be considered in the same category. You cannot will yourself into an
elite athlete, or get there through punishing workouts, without starting out way
ahead of the rest of the human race.

   You may, through pure dedication, be able to jump one level -- from a
middle-of-the-pack Olympic sprinter to the final heat, from a marginal N.F.L.
prospect to a midround draft pick. Chemical enhancement can produce more
significant improvements, but the principle is the same. You've got to start out
as a member of the athletic elite.

   At the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, a middling Irish swimmer named
Michelle Smith de Bruin raised suspicions when she won three gold medals. She
later flunked drug tests. But before the presumed cheating, she was already a
competitor on the international swim scene, not a lap swimmer at the Dublin Y.

   The use and abuse of performance-enhancing drugs in elite sport, or doping,
as it has been called since around 1900, is a mutant form of an exclusive
competition. It is an effort by individuals who are already part of a thin slice
of humanity -- the genetic freaks -- to gain an edge against one another, to
exceed their physiological limits in a way that they could not through pure
training. (The word itself is believed to derive from the Dutch word dop, an
alcoholic beverage consumed by Zulu warriors before battle.)

   While systematic doping -- with the collaboration of chemists, doctors,
coaches and trainers -- is a modern phenomenon, scientific interest in athletes
is not new. The medical establishment once viewed athletes with curiosity and
occasionally with alarm. The act of training and pushing yourself to physical
limits was considered dangerous or even a form of sickness. Sports science was
observational, an opportunity to study the body in motion by looking at
individuals at the extremes of human capacity.

   The British physiologist A.V. Hill, a Nobel laureate in 1922, went to Cornell
to study sprinters because, as he wrote, "matters of very great scientific
interest can be found in the performances of that extraordinary machine, the
human athlete." John Hoberman, the historian of sports doping, has written that
scientists and doctors viewed the high-performance athlete as "a wonder of
nature -- a marvelous phenomenon that did not require improvement."

   Certainly, athletes have long sought their own chemical and nutritional means
to enhance performance. The ancient Greeks ran and wrestled in the nude because
nothing, not even fabric, was supposed to interfere with the purity of sport,
yet they ate mushrooms, sesame seeds, dried figs and herbs that were believed to
give a precompetition energy boost. Marathoners and cyclists as recently as a
century ago competed under the influence of strychnine, which is both a
stimulant and a poison. Cyclists also used caffeine, cocaine, alcohol and even
heroin.

   What changed everything -- what transformed performance-enhancing efforts
from the realm of superstition into a true science -- was the isolation of the
male hormone testosterone in 1935. That led to the development by the late 30's
of synthesized testosterone variants, or anabolic steroids. The difference
between steroids and all previous performance enhancers was that steroids
demonstrably worked -- and they worked really well.

   Nearly every drug used by athletes to boost performance started out as a
therapeutic miracle.

   Steroids are still prescribed for men with serious testosterone deficiencies.
AIDS patients and others with muscle-wasting conditions are dosed with steroids.

   Until the mid-80's, people suffering from severe anemia, as a result of
chronic renal failure or other causes, had to undergo frequent blood
transfusions. The development of recombinant human erythropoietin was a godsend.
Instead of transfusions, anemics could get injections to boost their
red-blood-cell count.

   But what would the effect of EPO be on a person with a normal or better than
normal red blood count? What could it do for an already genetically gifted,
highly trained endurance athlete? Just what you would expect: make a
superendurance athlete.

   EPO swept the professional cycling circuit in Europe like a plague, nearly
wrecking the sport. There were police raids, huge stockpiles of EPO confiscated
from cyclists' hotel rooms, arrests, trials, wholesale suspensions of
competitors. "Each racer had his little suitcase with dopes and syringes," a
former doctor for European professional cycling teams told a British newspaper.
"They did their own injections."

   EPO migrated to other endurance sports, including cross-country skiing,
marathoning and orienteering. Inevitably, it showed its fatal flip side.

   "In simplest terms, EPO turns on the bone marrow to make more red blood
cells," says Gary Wadler, the American delegate to W.A.D.A. "But there's a very
delicate balance. You can have too much EPO. The body is a finely tuned
instrument. It has feedback mechanisms to keep it in balance. What these
athletes are often trying to do is get around the feedback, to trick their own
bodies."

   Between 1989 and 1992, seven Swedish competitors in orienteering -- a mix of
running and hiking that is sometimes called "cross country with brains" -- died,
apparently from heart attacks. Nearly all were in their 20's. As many as 18
Dutch and Belgian cyclists died under similarly mysterious circumstances between
1987 and 1990.

   "At first they said it was some kind of virus, a respiratory virus," Wadler
says. "But what kind of virus only knocks off the most fit individuals in their
country? The autopsies were private. All the deaths were not definitively
linked. But it was EPO. That was obvious to a lot of people."

   For weight lifters and competitors in the "throwing" sports of shot-put,
javelin, discus and hammer, the performance enhancer of choice has long been
steroids. Anabolic steroids (anabolic means tissue building) increase muscle
mass and enhance the explosiveness needed for a wide range of other athletic
endeavors: sprinting, jumping, swimming, serving a tennis ball, swinging a
baseball bat, delivering a hit on the football field. They afford an additional
benefit in a violent sport like football because one of their side effects is
aggressiveness or, in extreme cases, so-called roid rage.

   Their use is starkly high risk, high reward. Other side effects include liver
tumors, impotence, breast enlargement and shrunken testicles in men and male
sexual characteristics in women. (Some of the side effects for women include
enlargement of the clitoris, deepening of the voice, facial hair and
male-pattern baldness.)

   If you want a peek at the future of performance-enhanced sport -- at what
drug-laced athletes can accomplish -- look back to the mid-80's, the apex of
East Germany's shameful and ruthlessly effective doping program. The East
Germans were not the only practitioners of extreme pharmacological sport, only
the most flagrant and well organized. (East Germany is the only nation known to
have systematically doped athletes, often minors, without their knowledge.)

   "Things really got out of hand in the 1970's, 80's and 90's," Richard Pound
of the W.A.D.A. says. Even as the science of detection improved, the
International Olympic Committee and other global sports bodies were constrained,
he says, by a "hesitancy to offend" either side while the world was still
divided between East and West. "We looked away, and it snowballed."

   Steroid usage works particularly well for women athletes, because they
naturally make only a fraction of the testosterone that men produce. John
Hoberman says: "In the 80's, what we saw was this new breed of monster athletes,
particularly on the female side."

   Certain records from this heyday of unpoliced steroid abuse -- particularly
in sports in which raw strength is a primary requirement -- suggest that
performances were achieved then that are unlikely to be matched by a clean
competitor. The top 14 men's hammer throws in history occurred between 1984 and
1988. In the women's shot-put, you must go all the way down to the 35th farthest
throw in history to find one that occurred after 1988.

   Until last April, the top 10 men's shot-put throws in history occurred
between 1975 and 1990. Then, at a competition in Kansas, the American
shot-putter Kevin Toth finally broke into that elite group. His distance, 22.67
meters, was the farthest that anyone had put the shot in 13 years. Six months
later, Toth's name was among the first to surface in the Balco scandal.
Published reports said he had tested positive for THG, the new designer steroid.

   In women's sprinting in the 80's, the star -- and still the world-record
holder in the 100- and 200-meter dashes -- was Florence Griffith Joyner, FloJo.
Americans loved her style, her body-hugging track suits, her long and fabulously
decorated nails, her ebullience. Elsewhere in the world, and even in the United
States among those with a knowledge of track and field, FloJo's exploits were
viewed with more skepticism.

   After Joyner died in 1998, at 38 (the cause was related to a seizure), a
strange hybrid of a column appeared in the New York Times sports section.
Written by Pat Connolly, who had coached Evelyn Ashford, the woman whose
100-meter record Joyner smashed, it was partly a tribute and partly a posthumous
indictment. "Then, almost overnight, Florence's face changed -- hardened along
with her muscles that now bulged as if she had been born with a barbell in her
crib," Connolly wrote. "It was difficult not to wonder if she had found herself
an East German coach and was taking some kind of performance-enhancing drugs."

   FloJo had been a very good, but never a champion, world-class sprinter. Her
1988 performance in Seoul was -- in the damning parlance of international sport
-- anomalous.

   We don't normally think of baseball in the context of hammer throwing,
shot-putting or women's sprinting. But in terms of anomalous performance,
baseball is East Germany in the 1980's: a frontier.

   Just as in the steroid-drenched days of Olympic sport, a deep suspicion has
attached itself to some of the latest records in baseball. This accompanies the
grotesqueness of the appearance of some of the players. Curt Schilling, the
All-Star pitcher, memorably told Sports Illustrated in 2002, "Guys out there
look like Mr. Potato Head, with a head and arms and six or seven body parts that
just don't look right."

   I'm not sure whom, exactly, Schilling had in mind, but for me, his comment
recalls a particular photograph taken in the 2002 season. The subjects are the
home-run kings Barry Bonds and Sammy Sosa, sitting together, both of them with
thick necks and bloated-looking faces. They look, well, freakish -- as well as
starkly different from their appearance as young players. Bonds entered baseball
lean and wiry strong, much like his late father, the All-Star outfielder Bobby
Bonds. Sosa, early in his career, was not particularly big and showed little
power at the plate.

   The question of how many home runs it is possible to hit in one season is
more open-ended than, say, the fastest possible time a person can achieve in the
100-meter dash. Factors like the size of the ballpark, liveliness of the ball
and skill of opposing pitchers affect the outcome. Nevertheless, a century's
worth of experience amounted to a pretty persuasive case that around 60 home
runs, for whatever combination of reasons, was about the limit.

   In 1927, Babe Ruth slugged 60, which remained the record until 1961, when
Roger Maris (in a slightly longer season) hit 61. But in 1998 Mark McGwire of
the St. Louis Cardinals obliterated Maris's record by hitting 70 home runs.

   Late in that season, a reporter snooping around McGwire's locker spotted a
bottle of androstenedione, or andro, a substance usually described as a steroid
"precursor" that provides a steroidlike effect (and that is still unregulated in
the major leagues). McGwire was forced to acknowledge that his strength was
neither entirely "God given" nor acquired solely in the weight room. But at
least McGwire entered baseball already big and as a prodigious home-run hitter;
he hit 49 in his first big-league season, a record for rookies. Contrast that
with the career arcs of Bonds and Sosa, which are unlike any in the game's long
history.

   Bonds had never hit more than 46 home runs until the 2000 season, and in most
years his total was in the 30's. But at age 35, when players normally are on the
downside of their production, he hit 49 home runs. The following season he
turned into superman, breaking McGwire's record by hitting 73.

   Bonds's totals in the next two seasons, 46 and 45, were artificially low
because pitchers walked him a staggering 346 times. His new capabilities had
thrown the balance between pitcher and hitter completely out of whack: the new
Barry Bonds was too good for the game. He needed a league all his own.

   Sosa's progression was even more unusual. In his first eight major-league
seasons he averaged 22 home runs, although his totals did steadily increase and
he hit 40 in 1996, then a career high. He was selected an All-Star exactly once.
Unlike Bonds, he was not considered among baseball's elite players.

   Then in 1998, McGwire's record-breaking year, Sammy Sosa hit 66 home runs --
6 more than the great Babe Ruth had hit in his best season. Sosa wasn't done.
The following year he hit 63, followed by seasons of 50, 64 and 49 -- the best
five-year total in baseball history.

   That there is rampant steroid use in baseball, at all levels, is undeniable.
Ken Caminiti, the 1996 National League M.V.P., admitted his own use in a Sports
Illustrated article in 2002 and estimated that at least half the players in the
big leagues built strength with steroids. The former slugger Jose Canseco has
acknowledged steroid use. In a 2002 USA Today survey of 556 big-league players,
44 percent said they felt pressure to take steroids.

   Last year, The Washington Post published a sad series of stories revealing
that teenage prospects in the baseball-rich Dominican Republic, the source of
nearly one-fourth of all players signed to U.S. pro contracts, are taking
veterinary steroids to try to get strong enough to attract the interest of
scouts.

   Whether Sosa and Bonds have built home-run power chemically cannot be known
definitively. Nobody has presented evidence that they have, and both vehemently
deny it. Sosa's name has not surfaced in the Balco case, and he has not
testified before the grand jury.

   Bonds did testify in December. The home of his personal trainer and boyhood
friend, Greg Anderson, has been searched by federal agents. Bonds has
acknowledged patronizing Balco, which under Victor Conte, its founder, has
specialized in testing athletes' blood to determine the levels of elements like
copper, chromium and magnesium and then recommending supplements. Experts I
talked to say they consider Conte's theories medical mumbo jumbo, but he
consulted with dozens of top athletes, including Marion Jones; Amy Van Dyken, an
Olympic champion swimmer; and Bill Romanowski, a linebacker in the N.F.L. Jason
Giambi of the Yankees was also a client and also testified before the grand
jury.

   In an article that appeared last June, Bonds told Muscle and Fitness
magazine: "I visit Balco every three to six months. They check my blood to make
sure my levels are where they should be. Maybe I need to eat more broccoli than
I normally do. Maybe my zinc and magnesium intakes need to increase."

   Bob Ryan, a veteran Boston Globe sports columnist, is among the baseball
devotees who want to believe all Bonds is taking is broccoli and vitamins. But
with both Bonds and Sosa, the presumption of innocence he would like to grant
them clashes with the accumulation of circumstantial evidence and his own common
sense.

   "I knew every baseball benchmark from the time I was 10 or 11 years old,"
Ryan says. "I knew 60, and I knew 61. I knew 714 (the former career home-run
mark held by Babe Ruth). Stats frame who a player is. They're part of the
romance of the game, the enjoyment."

   Bonds, with 658 career home runs, could surpass Hank Aaron's all-time total
of 755 in just two or three more seasons. If he does, what will it mean? Will it
carry the romance of other cherished baseball records? "Bonds was a leadoff man
who could run early in his career, and now he is this hulking slugger," Ryan
says. "Sammy, same thing. You want to believe it's all due to weight training
and nutrition, but you have these guys hitting 40 home runs, maximum, and then
well into their careers, they're in the 60's and 70's. It doesn't happen."

   But Ryan is not seeking much new information on this subject. "I'm afraid of
what you're going to tell me next," he says at one point in our conversation.
"I'm living in some sort of denial. I'm afraid to look under the rock."

   The world Anti-Doping Agency, imperfect as it may be, is generally considered
an improvement over the patchwork approach to drug enforcement that preceded it.
Created in 1999 at the World Conference on Doping in Sport in Lausanne,
Switzerland, the agency was intended to bring coherence to antidoping
regulations and "harmonization" among all the different nations and sports
bodies expected to enforce them. In theory, it is the ultimate authority on
matters of drugs and sport -- looming over national Olympic committees and the
national and international federations of all the individual sports and making
it more difficult for those parochial interests to protect athletes caught
doping.

   W.A.D.A.'s medical committee devoted several years to compiling an
impressively voluminous list of banned substances. But the role of W.A.D.A. and
its president, Richard Pound, is mainly bureaucratic and political. W.A.D.A.
can't slow science down -- or influence a culture that hungrily pursues human
enhancements of all kinds.

   "All of these issues are going to be moot in 20 or 30 years," says Paul Root
Wolpe, a professor of psychiatry at Penn and the chief of bioethics at NASA. "We
already are seeing a blurring of the line between foods and drugs, so-called
nutraceuticals. In the future, it will be more common, accepted. We'll eat
certain engineered foods to be sharp for a business meeting, to increase
confidence, to enhance endurance before a race or competition."

   Currently, in determining whether to put something on its banned list,
W.A.D.A. considers whether a substance is performance enhancing, contrary to the
spirit of sport or potentially dangerous to health. "If it meets two of the
three criteria, we are likely to put it on the list," Pound says.

   But the first two criteria are ambiguous. Steroids and EPO are clearly
performance enhancing. But so might Gatorade be, if you believe its advertising
and all the data on the "science of hydration" disseminated by the Gatorade
Sports Science Institute. And plenty of sports drinks claim to do more than
Gatorade. "You identify a line and draw it somewhere," Pound says. "Why is it
the 100-meter dash and not the 97-meter dash? It just is."

   Between Gatorade and anabolic steroids lie all those powders and pills and
injectibles that elite athletes put into their bodies, in quantities and
combinations that may enhance performance or may prove innocuous. In most cases,
no one is quite sure.

   Less open to interpretation is "potentially dangerous to health." Any medical
or pseudo-medical activity that takes place underground or in the black market
is, by definition, dangerous. Nearly everyone, regardless of how they feel about
abortion, will agree that it's more dangerous when it occurs in a back alley.
Steroid use, dicey in most situations, is certainly more so when it takes place
in the dark.

   So issues of health are the strongest rationale for W.A.D.A. and the whole
antidoping effort: to protect athletes from their own worst instincts. (Though
the sports world is selective about its concerns for athletes' health. Offensive
lineman in the N.F.L. just keep on getting fatter. The typical career of a
major-league pitcher usually involves the gradual deterioration of shoulder and
elbow.) But safety is going to become less of an issue.

   "Right now we have a crude way of enhancing muscle mass," Wolpe says. "Years
from now we'll look back on it, and it will seem low tech. When it's all on the
dining-room table, there will not be the same kind of health issues we are
seeing now with the unregulated and illicit supplements and drugs."

   What I learned during my visit to Lee Sweeney's lab at the University of
Pennsylvania is that lifting his research for purposes of athletic enhancement
is not from some sci-fi future. It's possible -- now.

   Sweeney and his team know for sure they can build muscle mass and strength.
Their next step as they try to determine if their methods are safe for humans
will be to experiment on larger animals, most likely dogs with muscular
dystrophy.

   I asked Elisabeth Barton what would happen if some rogue nation or outlaw
conglomerate of athletes asked her to disregard scientific prudence and create a
human version of the mighty mice. Could she do it?

   "Could I?" she answered. "Oh, yeah, it's easy. It's doable. It's a routine
method that's published. Anyone who can clone a gene and work with cells could
do it. It's not a mystery."

   Behind her, Sweeney nodded his head in agreement. "It's not like growing a
third arm or something," he said. "You could get there if you worked at it."

   Sweeney said that once someone decided to use gene therapy to enhance
performance, "you would not be limited to what I'm doing. You could change the
endurance of the muscle or modulate the speed -- all the performance
characteristics. All the biology is there. If someone said, 'Here's $10 million
-- I want you to do everything you can think of in terms of sports,' you could
get pretty imaginative."

   To strengthen leg muscles for a sprinter, Sweeney said, he would "put the
whole leg on bypass. I would isolate the leg and put in the virus through the
blood. It would be more efficient than injections, which you would need a lot of
because you're dealing with large muscles. But this is nothing a vascular
surgeon couldn't do."

   Could one already be doing it? "I don't know that it's not happening."

   IGF-1 is already available on the Internet in ingestible form. It is
advertised as a component of various powders and pills, and in this form it
falls somewhere in that vast, murky area of legal, quasi-legal, black-market and
plainly illegal substances for sale in the semiregulated supplement industry.

   But Sweeney says that any nongenetic transfer of the protein would be
ineffective -- it would not circulate in the blood in levels high enough to
build muscle -- and unsafe, because to the extent that it does circulate, it
would target nonskeletal muscle, including the heart. (The mighty mice have
shown no signs of enlarged hearts or other organs and no sign at all that the
IGF-1 is circulating in their bloodstreams.)

   For the elite athlete, that would be one of the benefits of genetic IGF-1. It
wouldn't circulate in the blood. It would be detectable only through a muscle
biopsy. It took a long time for the world's athletes to agree to submit to blood
tests; it's difficult to imagine them consenting to having investigatory needles
stuck in their muscles.

   W.A.D.A. invited geneticists and others involved in the latest medical
research to a conference in 2002 on Long Island. The antidoping officials were
(and still are) focused on the IGF-1 research at Penn, so Lee Sweeney was there.
He listened as Richard Pound tried a very tough sell.

   The W.A.D.A. president told the scientists that he certainly appreciated the
work they were doing, knew that they approached it with single-minded dedication
and understood full well that nothing was more important than seeking cures for
dread diseases. He then talked about another "humanistic activity" that he said
was already threatened by science of a certain kind -- the current science of
performance enhancement -- and could be ruined by the misuse of their research.
As they moved forward, Pound asked, could they somewhere keep in mind the
interests of sport?

   As Pound recalls, the initial responses he got were somewhat dismissive:
"They said we work at the gene level. You can't really tell what was altered
from what was there naturally."

   Pound, a lawyer, then asked rhetorically: "What if I could assure the Nobel
Prize in Medicine would be awarded to the person in this room who figured out
how to make a test to determine if a competitor had been genetically enhanced?
You could do it, right?"

   Pound got an acknowledgment that detection might be possible with enough
resources devoted to it.

   Lee Sweeney generously consults with W.A.D.A. and other antidoping officials.
He's sympathetic to their cause. He just says it's hopeless. "There will come a
day when they just have to give up," he says. "It's maybe 20 years away, but
it's coming."

   There is a parallel from the past for the entire issue of
performance-enhancing drugs, one tied to what was once another unwelcome
substance in sports: money. Some casual followers of the Olympic movement may
still not fully realize that nearly all of the participants are now paid
professionals. There never was any big announcement that the cherished concept
of amateurism -- athletes competing for the pure love of sport -- had been
discarded. But over time, the changed reality has been accepted. Top athletes
profiting from under-the-table payments? The public didn't care, and the ideal
of amateurism expired, outdated and unenforceable.

   One of the last things Pound said to me indicated that he knows, too, that
W.A.D.A.'s mission has an expiration date pending. Maybe genetic enhancements
really won't work for athletes, he speculated. "If you strengthen the muscle to
three times its normal strength, what happens when you break out of the starting
blocks? Do you rip the muscle right off the bone?"

   Pound seemed to like the thought of this gruesome image. He paused, then
extended the thought. "That would be nice if that happened," he said. "It would
be self-regulating."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawings (Drawings by Anita Kunz)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2004


                             527 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 18, 2004, Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1026 words

HEADLINE: Institute embraces cardiac challenge; SDSU researchers focus on
reversing heart failure

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In Mark Sussman's lab at San Diego State University, a machine showing what
looks like a sonogram that obstetricians use to image unborn babies in the womb
instead shows the tiny heart of a mouse.

   What is visible is actually a cross section of the heart that looks like a
doughnut.  The hollow center is the heart's chamber, the circle of tissue around
it the walls of the animal's heart.

   The heart is not in good shape.  Lab technicians had tied the ascending aorta
in the animal, akin to bending a kink in a hose, so that pressure built inside
the heart.

   The heart's response?  It worked harder to pump blood through that kink,
remodeling itself and eventually self-destructing.

   Sussman and his colleagues had created a model for heart failure to see how
the organ changes in the face of a cardiac infarction -- a heart attack.

   Helping to understand how the heart fails, and how to turn it around before
it is too late, is the goal of Sussman's lab and that of his colleagues at
SDSU's Heart Institute, one of several research enterprises at the university.

   "Heart disease is the biggest killer in the United States ... but we now
understand that unlike the dogma that was taught to us when we were going
through school, that these aging processes are not insurmountable," Sussman
said.

   "There are ways of actually trying to get around it, and we may have finally
hit upon the fountain of youth that everyone is looking for."

   The challenges are enormous, but success could prove to be one of the most
significant medical advances ever.

   More than 930,000 people, men and women alike, died of cardiovascular disease
in the United States in 2001 -- nearly twice the number of Americans who died of
cancer, the American Heart Association reported this month.

   The ailment takes its toll on the economy.  The cost of heart disease and
stroke is projected to be $351 billion for 2003, according to the Centers For
Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

   Sussman, who moved to SDSU last summer from Cincinnati's Children's Hospital
and Research Foundation, is collaborating with heart researcher Piero Anversa at
New York Medical College as part of a five-year, $10 million effort funded by
the National Institutes of Health to explore how the heart ages and how to slow
and even reverse that process.

   The SDSU Heart Institute boasts several other prominent researchers.

   Roger Sabbadini discovered molecules called sphingolipids that play an early
role in the cascade of events that lead to rapid cell death during a heart
attack.

   The molecules can be detected in blood, so Sabbadini's group is developing a
test that could provide an early warning of a heart attack.  The diagnostic test
could be available in two years, he said.

   "That would be very important in an emergency room, for example, to
distinguish people with heartburn from someone suffering from acute ischemia" --
a loss of blood flow to the heart, Sabbadini said.

   Roger Davis, besides studying the genetic basis for liver function, also
studies how gene therapies can help prevent atherosclerosis -- the accumulation
of fatty deposits on the inside walls of arteries.

   Sanford Bernstein, using fruit flies as models for human disease, explores
cellular proteins called myosin heavy chain that drive the contraction of heart
cells.  Defects in these proteins can lead to abnormal heartbeats experienced by
people with cardiovascular disease.

   Sussman has shown in mouse studies that an enzyme called Akt boosts the
activity of cardiac stem cells -- the reserves of replacement cells that reside
within the heart.  By genetically engineering heart stem cells in mice to
activate, or express, the Akt protein at higher levels than normal, he found
that those stem cells helped protect the mice from heart failure.

   "What we found was this mouse has an anti-aging phenotype, that is, the
stem-cell population is expanded," Sussman said.

   "Stem cells could potentially be the holy grail for . . . regenerating
damaged cardiac tissue in the face of heart attack or heart failure."

   Heart disease is partly caused by the aging of heart cells.  While cardiac
stem cells are believed to replenish the low level of heart cells that die
throughout life, their ability to do that is believed to decline as people age.

   "If we could . . . find a way to keep the heart cells perpetually going, it
would allow you to get around that normal aging process that leads to heart
failure and death," Sussman said.

   At a time when the California State University system faces severe budget
cuts, it might not appear to be the time for SDSU to invest in expensive
projects.  But SDSU administrators say research always has been a part of
university life, despite CSU's tradition as a teaching institution.

   "If faculty were standing on the sidelines, watching science play out and
describing it as a third hand to the whole process, the teaching of science
would be impoverished for our students," said Tom Scott, dean of SDSU's College
of Sciences.

   By summer, the university plans to break ground for a $13 million BioScience
Center to house heart and other researchers.  The center, scheduled to open
sometime in 2006, is being funded with startup money by the San Diego State
University Foundation.

   The nonprofit group, whose budget for the 2003 fiscal year is $187.7 million,
is designed in part to help manage research grants and invest in science
research on campus.  It also raises money to help recruit faculty members who
cannot be supported with state funds.

   "The board of directors has approved spending hundreds of thousands of
dollars to recruit top biology research faculty," said Frea Sladek, the
foundation's chief executive officer.

   Clinical trials using cardiac stem cells in human heart patients could be
less than three years away, Sussman said.

   "Wouldn't it be great if instead of taking drugs for the rest of your life,
they could take your cells and regenerate your heart and in six to nine months
you'd be on your way?" Sussman said.

   "That's hopefully where things are headed."

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Sean M. Haffey / Union-Tribune; Mark Sussman uses a Acuson
Sequoia echocardiography machine to study mice hearts for his research at SDSU's
Heart Institute. Sussman is part of a $10 million study funded by the National
Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2004


                             528 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            January 18, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2575 words

HEADLINE: 30,000 JOBS; $1 BILLION; 5 YEARS;
Local leaders on a mission to create jobs have gone where no one else has
before;
 they're setting specific numeric goals to measure progress by.  Tired of
watching Louisiana lag the nation in job growth, local leaders set out to create
30,000 high-paying jobs.

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton; Business writer

BODY:

   As New Orleans business leaders raise the new Greater New Orleans Inc. from
the ruins of the now-defunct New Orleans Regional Chamber of Commerce this week,
they're embarking on a two-fold mission: to bolster declining key industries and
to nurture growing industries that provide well-paying jobs.

   The new organization has vowed to create 30,000 jobs and $1 billion in new
payroll in five years.

   In some ways the goal isn't as ambitious as it might seem; in a recent
five-year span, the New Orleans region's economy produced more than 44,000 new
jobs. Furthermore, inflation alone would boost the current wage and salary base
by $1 billion every few years, even if no jobs were created.

   Still, in a time when public officials utter the call to create jobs like a
war chant, Greater New Orleans Inc.'s leaders have done something no one else --
not Gov. Kathleen Blanco, not New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin -- has dared: They
have quantified the number of jobs they plan to help create and have set a
payroll goal that cannot be met by low-wage service sector jobs. Payroll
increases due to inflation won't count toward the goal.

   Finally, Greater New Orleans Inc.'s leaders are holding themselves
accountable.

   Ron Forman, chief executive of the Audubon Nature Institute and one of the
city's most prominent civic leaders, took the helm of the New Orleans Regional
Chamber of Commerce last year and almost immediately proceeded to dismantle the
organization, saying the desperate state of the city's economy called for a
dramatic change. Fault for the city's problems, Forman said in an interview last
month, lies with its civic, business and political leaders.

   "I think we have to take responsibility," Forman said. "It's no one's fault
but our own. . . . Succeed or fail, it's our responsibility."

   This week, in an inaugural luncheon, New Orleans lawyer Bill Hines will
assume the mantle as the first chairman of Greater New Orleans Inc. Although
Hines' stated goal might seem modest by some measures, an analysis of job data
from the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that he and
his new organization face a steep climb. In some cases, they will be directing
resources to cling to jobs in industries on the decline not only in New Orleans,
but in the rest of the country as well.

   Overall from 1990 through 2002, the New Orleans economy gained 52,400 new
jobs, a 9 percent increase, as total non-farm jobs rose to 613,200 from 560,800.
But as total jobs grew during the period, the New Orleans region's traditional
industries were in decline. Energy firms cut or relocated 8,500 jobs from 1990
through 2002. Shipbuilders axed 2,400 positions. Transportation and warehousing
companies eliminated 6,700 jobs.

   Meanwhile, New Orleans failed to grab much of anything from the information
industry boom, which created nearly three-quarters of a million jobs nationally
during the period.

   During the 12-year period, much of the region's job growth came from the
leisure and hospitality sector, where average annual wages and salaries are
about a third of those in the dwindling energy sector. Relying on tourism alone
is no longer enough, said Neal Benson, a senior vice president with National
Community Development Services Inc. of Atlanta, which Greater New Orleans Inc.
hired to raise money and set strategy.

   Quoting a New Orleans business executive whom he declined to identify, Benson
summed up the organization's view: "We can no longer survive in this region on a
Mardi Gras economy."

Old industries made new

   But doing otherwise would seem an uphill battle, particularly in some
industries.

   Take oil and gas. Even now, the sector remains the king of the city's
economy, paying average annual wages and salaries of $65,000 per job, said Bob
Folse, an economist for Greater New Orleans Inc. As a whole, the industry pays
more in payroll than any other, said Tommy Kurtz, Greater New Orleans Inc.'s
vice president for economic development.

   But the industry is slipping away from New Orleans, the result of
consolidations that have made Houston the nation's energy capital. Altogether
between 1991 and 2002, the city lost 8,500 jobs in the sector, including
engineers, geologists and support services positions. That was 48 percent of the
total. These jobs would amount to more than $550 million in annual payroll,
based on the industry average.

   To some extent, New Orleans' situation mirrors national trends, where the
natural resources and mining sectors are in decline across the United States.
The sector lost 158,000 jobs, a 21 percent decline, between 1991 and 2002,
according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

   Such trends raise a question: Should Greater New Orleans Inc. simply quit
fighting to keep jobs in a falling sector and shift its attention elsewhere?

   "There are people who have said that," Kurtz said.

   But Greater New Orleans Inc. has decided to keep bolstering the industry,
Kurtz said.

   "We've strategically looked at the sectors where we think there's going to be
opportunity for growth," he said. "Even though an industry may be in decline,
there are opportunities in the industry where you may have job growth in a
particular niche, and you don't have to just throw it away."

   For example, he said, as the work forces of oil and gas companies age,
opportunities will open for a new generation of workers. Greater New Orleans
Inc. plans to work on initiatives to train this new generation of workers and
thus help fulfill its goal.

   "Does our filling those jobs -- do we count that as a new job?" Kurtz said.
"I would say yes."

   Last month, ChevronTexaco Corp. announced it would move its deepwater
exploration operations to Houston as part of a nationwide consolidation but keep
its white-collar Gulf of Mexico production jobs in New Orleans. The bottom line
was the city would lose a fraction of the 900 workers ChevronTexaco employs at
its New Orleans office.

   That means continued opportunities for job growth if policy-makers opt to
open the eastern Gulf of Mexico to exploration and production, said Beth James,
director of the New Orleans Mayor's Office of Economic Development.

   "If the eastern Gulf opens up, they're poised for huge growth," James said.
"If they do, New Orleans is in a really good spot."

   Greater New Orleans Inc. also intends to focus on retaining the independent
oil companies -- firms such as Dominion, Murphy, Taylor and McMoRan Exploration
Co. -- that maintain a large presence in the region, Kurtz said.

   Other growth opportunities remain in the petrochemical industry and in the
area of liquefied natural gas importing, an industry into which major energy
firms are pumping billions of dollars to meet growing demand in the U.S.

   Energy isn't the only declining heavy industry into which Greater New Orleans
Inc. is planning to focus its energy. The shipbuilding industry is a case in
point.

   Nationwide, the ship and boat building industry lost 17,300 jobs between 1991
and 2002, an 11 percent drop, to 146,400 positions. In New Orleans, where
shipbuilding jobs offer average annual wages of $38,000, the decline was even
steeper. The region's 10,300 jobs in 1991 dropped to 7,900 in 2002, according to
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. That represented a 23 percent decline.

   Last year, MetroVision, Greater New Orleans Inc.'s predecessor economic
development organization, led a successful campaign to obtain commitments from
Northrop Grumman Ship Systems that the company would maintain thousands of
employees at its Avondale shipyard in New Orleans. Under an agreement finalized
this year, the state has agreed to pay $70 million over time to buy cranes,
equipment and a worker-training program for the shipyard.

   In return, Northrop Grumman is obligated to make similar-scale investments
and to employ a minimum of 5,200 full-time workers. As of June, the company had
5,775 full-time employees at Avondale.

   Similarly, state officials have been in talks with Bollinger Shipyards Inc.
of New Orleans on a deal that would give Bollinger millions of dollars in
taxpayer money in exchange for a pledge to expand operations in Louisiana.

   Kurtz said investments in the shipbuilding industry are a good investment,
particularly as homeland security remains a priority and military spending
remains high. Greater New Orleans Inc. will continue to target the sector, he
said.

Port's economic engines

   While two of the region's traditional industries have been losing jobs
nationally, one has been gaining them. But in this case, New Orleans has failed
to keep pace.

   Between 1991 and 2002, the nation added 743,000 jobs, a 21 percent increase,
in the transportation and warehousing sector, according to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. These included jobs providing transportation of passengers and goods
by air, rail, water, road and pipeline.

   But despite New Orleans' continuing role as a transportation hub, the region
lost jobs. Employment in the sector dropped to 25,600 in 2002 from 32,300 in
1991, a 21 percent decline. Economic development executives blame automation at
the region's ports for reducing the need for workers, steel tariffs that hurt
cargo business, and a loss of business to competing port cities, such as Houston
and Gulfport, Miss.

   In one effort to strengthen trade ties with Central America, the Mayor's
Department of Economic Development has created a program to help build small
businesses in developing countries. Kurtz said other keys to building more
maritime-related jobs will be to control costs at the Port of New Orleans and to
build industries that can add value to raw materials that come through the port,
such as facilities to process the massive quantities of rubber and coffee.

   "We need to turn our ports into economic engines rather than just have cargo
coming across the dock," he said.

High-tech opportunities

   In spring 2001, The Red Herring business technology magazine published what
appeared to be big news for the region: A New Orleans-based venture capital
firm, the magazine said, was leading a syndicate investing $240 million in a
company that had developed a way to deliver Internet data through water pipes.

   As it turned out, the article was a hoax, published in The Red Herring's
April issue after the magazine's editors decided Louisiana was the most
ridiculous locale they could think of for a high-flying venture capital firm.
Although that premise was unfair -- Louisiana is home to several venture capital
firms, including Advantage Capital Partners and Stonehenge Capital -- the piece
touched on something obvious to local technology boosters: New Orleans had
almost utterly failed to catch the wave of the technology boom.

   According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, there were 10,400 information
industry jobs in New Orleans in 1991. These include jobs in traditional media,
such as film, television and newspaper publishing, as well as growing
information-based fields, such as software publishing, wireless
telecommunications and businesses related to the Internet. In 2002, after a
roller-coaster ride in the 1990s, the information industry jobs numbered 9,600.

   Meanwhile, nationally, the sector grew by 28 percent. Even factoring in the
technology bust, the United States netted 743,000 additional information
industry jobs during the period.

   The situation has provided at least some consolation for New Orleans economic
development officials.

   "It's unfortunate that we missed the technology boom," said James of the
Mayor's Office of Economic Development. "But we also missed the technology
crash, and this positions us to do something for smart growth, whereas if we had
been on the Concorde flight of the technology boom, we'd be where the Concorde
is now: We'd be grounded."

   New Orleans has hosted the development of a small community of information
technology firms, which would seem to belie the statistics indicating a lack of
growth. Among those are software and consulting firms such as CommTech
Industries Inc., Diamond Data Systems, SEA and Resurgence Software, and Internet
companies such as Turbo Squid Inc. and IMDiversity.com.

   Furthermore, the Navy's Information Technology Center at the University of
New Orleans has created a hub of software development activity. The Department
of Defense has awarded a $281 million contract to Northrop Grumman Information
Technology to develop a massive personnel records database at the park. The
project is expected to create 200 new jobs and spin off tens of millions of
dollars to almost a dozen New Orleans area subcontractors.

   In another federal government project, the U.S. Office of Personnel
Management selected the National Finance Center in New Orleans as one of four
centers to manage payroll services for the nation's 1.8 million federal
employees. Local software executives expect the office to provide substantial
business for them.

   Mark Lewis, president of the Louisiana Technology Council, said that in the
past, he would have given the region low marks in its ability to develop
technology businesses. But successes with the Navy project and the National
Finance Center have changed that, he said.

   "If I had to give it a grade, the grade I would have to give it is a
C-minus," he said. "And I give it a C-minus because the focus wasn't there. We
were focusing on tourism and other industries.

   "I think now I would give it more of an A."

Health industry growth

   While the growth in information technology jobs may come in increments,
officials see opportunities for instant successes in the health-care industry.
With nurses and lab technicians in short supply in New Orleans and the rest of
the United States, officials said it is simply a matter of securing money to
provide training.

   Other medical sectors offer higher financial potentials, Kurtz said. The
Louisiana State University and Tulane University health sciences centers, for
example, have platoons of researchers who can help bring new money to the region
through federal research grants, which support teams of well-paid researchers
with earning power more in the realm of petroleum engineers and geologists than
hotel housekeepers and bell staff. Furthermore, research can be commercialized,
serving as the foundation not only for royalty revenue, but for full-fledged
biomedical combines.

   After decades of feuding, Tulane and LSU have joined forces on a new cancer
consortium and a gene therapy initiative. But the biomedical sector could also
take years to develop to its potential. In the meantime, there are immediate
opportunities in the more fundamental echelon of the medical industry, the one
involved with taking care of people.

   Growth of jobs in the health-care and social sciences sector not only creates
new earnings, it also enhances quality of life for local residents. Already the
sector has been one of the region's fastest-growing. The region added 12,900
health and social services jobs from 1991 to 2002, a 27 percent increase.
Officials say the sky's the limit for further growth, and that public education
officials need to make training a top priority.

   "And the state needs to fund it," Hines said.

   "That's an example where there's a need," Kurtz said. "It's not like we're
going to go out and recruit some company. That would be very low-hanging fruit."

   . . . . . . .

Stewart Yerton can be reached at syerton@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3495.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2004


                             529 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                           January 17, 2004 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 87 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
IN BRIEF;
Gene Therapy Mix May Have Caused Leukemia

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   Two children who developed leukemia after receiving gene therapy may have
been victims of a rare combination of genes, a team from the National Cancer
Institute reported in the Jan. 16 issue of Science.

   Dr. Utpal P. Dave and his colleagues discovered that IL2RG, the gene used to
treat the children, could combine with another gene called Lmo2 to cause
leukemia in mice. The children were being treated for an inherited disease.

   The team said that combination of genes would not be present in other gene
therapy experiments.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2004


                             530 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 15, 2004, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 32 Health

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Ulcerative colitis is focus of forum

    The J-Pouch and Ulcerative Colitis Support Group will hold a free,
informational lecture 7:30 p.m. Monday at the American Cancer Society Building,
6301 Richmond Ave., between Fountainview and Hillcroft.

   The lecture and discussions will center on the disease ulcerative colitis and
the alternative J-pouch surgery.

   When surgery is required to remove the colon, an internal pouch can be formed
from the small intestine. Patients will not require long-term medications.

   For more information, call 281-491-8220.

    Free eye screenings for glaucoma month

    As part of National Glaucoma Month, the University Eye Institute at the
University of Houston College of Optometry is offering free vision screening for
at-risk individuals today through Saturday at an area community center and
church.

   Glaucoma is the leading cause of both preventable and irreversible blindness
in the United States. More than 3 million have the disease, but less than half
are diagnosed.

   The screenings, which are free and open to the public, will be held:

    9 a.m. to 4 p.m.

   Thursday and Friday

   Community Family Centers, 7524 Ave. E (off I-45 South & Harrisburg, east of
campus)

    9 a.m. to noon

   Saturday

   Evangelist Temple Church of God in Christ, 11603 Martin Luther King Blvd.
(south of campus)

   No appointment is necessary.

    Panel to discuss ways to treat heart

    Cardiologist Dr. James T. Willerson will lead a panel of physicians in
discussing advances in treating vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque, 10 a.m. to
noon Saturday.

   This plaque can change abruptly and cause heart attacks.

   New research, including gene therapy, will also be discussed at the free
public forum. It will be held at the Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital in the Denton A. Cooley Building.

   Participants will also get free parking and tours. To reserve a space, call
the Heart Information Center at 800-292-2221.

    MS support group launched at center

    A new Multiple Sclerosis Self-Help Group has been launched at the Michael E.
DeBakey VA Medical Center in partnership with the Multiple Sclerosis Society.

   The group will meet the second Wednesday of each month, 2-3 p.m. in the
dining room of Nursing Unit 2A at the center. All veterans, family members, and
friends impacted by the diagnosis of MS are invited to attend. Parking at the
center is free. This self-help group will promote information, education, and a
sharing of ideas for living successfully with MS and maintaining quality of
life.

   Topics included for discussion during meetings this year include: "Getting
the Most Out of Mobility Equipment," "Nutrition and the MS Patient," "Client
Services Available through Sheltering Arms," and "Getting to Know Your Rights
through the Americans With Disabilities Act."

   For more information regarding a schedule of upcoming groups and to be placed
on the monthly mailing list, call Lisa Whipple at 713-794-7951 or Fe Funtanilla
at 713-791-1414, ext. 4559.



NOTES: CONTACT US
 Mail information with a contact name and phone number to: Education Page,
Houston Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210. Call 713-220-3399 or fax
to 713-220-6806. Send electronic mail to ed.page@chron.com and please include
your e-mail address in the message.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2004


                             531 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 14, 2004, Wednesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF / ETC.;
ETC.

BYLINE: GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. fell 24 percent to $13.04 after the
company abandoned efforts to win US approval of its Replagal treatment for Fabry
disease. The FDA told the Cambridge company it would need to conduct more
studies to show Replagal works better in treating the enzyme deficiency than
Fabrazyme, a drug made by Genzyme Corp. that won US approval last year . . .
Caliper Technologies Corp. of Hopkinton will change its name to Caliper Life
Sciences Inc. to reflect its position as a life sciences company that provides
macro- and microfluidics laboratory systems. The name change is effective Jan.
23 . . . Fidelity Investments appointed five new mutual fund managers. As of
Jan. 1, Ignatius Lee became portfolio manager of the $240.4 million Fidelity
China Region fund. Robert B. von Rekowsky was named portfolio manager of the
$444 million Fidelity Emerging Markets fund. Harlan Carere was named portfolio
manager of the $41 million Select Air Transportation Portfolio and the $35.9
million Select Transportation Portfolio. Effective Jan. 8, Ben Paton was named
co-portfolio manager of the $615.7 million Fidelity International Small Cap fund
and Fidelity Advisor International Small Cap fund. Joshua Spencer was named
portfolio manager of Fidelity Select Consumer Industries Portfolio, Advisor
Consumer Industries fund, and VIP Consumer Industries Portfolio, effective Jan.
12.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2004


                             532 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 14, 2004, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: Wary of ill earnings, sellers depress market

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK - Stock prices retreated Tuesday as investors, worried that
fourth-quarter earnings might not meet heightened expectations, decided to cash
in some of their recent profits.

   Analysts said the selling reflected concerns about whether earnings reports
would justify the market's recent surge. The anxiety overshadowed Federal
Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan's comments that the weakening U.S. dollar and
disappointing jobs data were not barriers to the economic recovery.

   The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 58.00, or 0.6 percent, at
10,427.18.

   Broader stock indicators also fell. The Standard & Poor's 500 index slipped
6.01, or 0.5 percent, to close at 1,121.22, and the Nasdaq composite index lost
15.34, or 0.7 percent, to 2,096.44.

   Trading has been uneven so far this week as the market waits for earnings
news. Analysts said investors are particularly nervous about technology stocks,
which have enjoyed some of the most significant gains, even as the number of new
jobs fell far short of expectations in December and the U.S. dollar continued to
lose ground against the euro.

   Intel's earnings report, due out today, was anxiously awaited by investors
looking for signs that the upswing in technology stocks is sustainable. The
Nasdaq composite index, which has a large technology component, has been trading
at levels not seen in two years, and not everyone is convinced the valuations
are warranted.

   "If Intel has a hiccup, it could burst this whole bubble on tech, at which
point the whole rally could fall off," said Bill Groenfeld, head trader for
vFinance Investments. "If it does well, then we can reassess where we are, and
we can take off again."

   Intel finished down 56 cents at $ 33.59 in selling that extended to other
technology stocks. Yahoo slipped 94 cents to close at $ 48.80.

   Mixed earnings reports in the banking sector heightened Wall Street's
anxiety.

   Also Tuesday, drug maker Abbott Laboratories' plan to purchase TheraSense in
a $ 1.2 billion cash deal to bolster Abbott's diabetes portfolio sent TheraSense
surging 31 percent higher, ending the session up $ 6.34 to $ 26.64. Abbott
finished up 24 cents at $ 44.43.

   Elsewhere in the sector, Transkaryotic Therapies slipped $ 4.01 to $ 13.04 on
word that it was dropping its U.S. marketing plans for a new treatment for a
genetic disorder.

   Declining issues led advancers nearly 5-to-4 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Consoliated volume was moderate at 2.06 billion shares, up from 1.97 billion in
Monday's session.

   The Russell 2000 index of smaller companies closed down 1.85, or 0.3 percent,
at 581.16.

   The price of the benchmark 10-year Treasury note rose 21/32 point, or $ 6.56
per $ 1,000 in face value. Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction,
fell to 4.01 percent compared with 4.09 percent late Monday.

   In late New York trading, the euro was quoted at $ 1.2750, down from $ 1.2755
late Monday. The dollar was quoted at 106.21 yen, down from 106.66.

   The dollar rose to 10.8730 pesos from 10.8060. The peso fell to 9.1971 cents
from 9.2541.

   Mexico's bolsa gained 12.53, or 0.1 percent, to 9,141.58.

   Japan's Nikkei stock average closed down nearly 1.1 percent, Britain's FTSE
100 closed down 0.2 percent, France's CAC-40 ended the day up 0.5 percent, and
Germany's DAX index finished flat.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004


                             533 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          January 14, 2004, Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Brain growth trigger gene found; UCSD scientist aids in discovery

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Scientists have found a gene that plays an important role in triggering changes
in the early developing brain -- a discovery that someday may provide insight
into certain types of learning disorders.

   The gene, called CREST, appears vital to the dramatic structural changes in
brain cells that occur with learning and experience after birth.

   "We've known for a long time that experience affects the development of the
brain, but it's not been clear how," said UCSD neuroscientist Anirvan Ghosh,
whose study appeared last week in the journal Science.

   In recent years, it has become clear that sensory experiences lead to the
activation, or expression, of new genes in the brain, and that those genes turn
on other sets of genes to promote new connections between brain cells.

   CREST, short for calcium-responsive transactivator, is the gene that turns on
those other genes, according to the study by Ghosh and his colleagues, then at
Johns Hopkins University in Maryland.  The CREST gene actually encodes a protein
called a transcription factor, which regulates the expression of other genes.

   One way that brain cells, or neurons, change through learning and experience
is by growing branches, called dendrites, that increase the number of
connections to other brain cells.

   Those structural changes, which are most dramatic right after birth, are
believed to occur when learning and experience sets off a chain of reactions
that begin with the flow of calcium ions into brain cells.

   The flow of ions, the researchers found, turns on genes that promote the
growth of dendrites -- but only if the CREST gene is present.

   Mice engineered without the CREST gene -- both mice and humans have it --
appeared normal at birth, but their brains did not develop normally in response
to sensory experiences.  Their neurons, the researchers found, did not grow
dendrites and instead appeared more linear, like plant shoots.

   Mice with the CREST gene, meanwhile, grew neurons that developed a complex
architecture of dendrites that fostered connections with other neurons.  The
brains of these mice grew normally, developing in response to learning and
experience.

   CREST acts as a mediator, thrown into action when calcium ions begin to flow,
and turning on other sets of genes that prompt the growth of dendrites.

   The mice engineered without the CREST gene exhibited symptoms parallel to
those seen in some human learning disorders, in which the child appears normal
initially, but by the age of 2 or 3 cannot acquire new knowledge, Ghosh said.

   The researchers confirmed their findings by showing that normal neurons kept
alive in a petri dish and stimulated with calcium ions responded by developing
highly branched dendrites.  Neurons taken from mice lacking CREST, however,
failed to branch in response to calcium.

   "CREST is the first example of a transcription factor -- a protein that turns
genes on and off -- that appears to be specifically required for the development
of brain neurons after birth," Ghosh said.

   It remains unclear whether parents who stimulate their babies with toys,
music or other types of visual and auditory stimulation are specifically
activating the CREST gene in their child's developing brain, Ghosh said.

   "There's debate about whether that is of value or not, and it's not known
whether things like that would activate CREST," he said.

   Learning to speak, however, may be another story.

   "In a case like that, I think it's much more likely that a gene like CREST
does play a role," Ghosh said.

   The researchers found that CREST activity decreases in several regions of the
brain once critical periods for development have passed.  But it continues to be
expressed at high levels in other regions, such as the olfactory bulb,
hippocampus and cerebellum, that scientists believe continue to change
throughout life.

   "This finding reinforces the idea that (CREST) plays an important role in the
process by which brain activity influences brain growth," said Michael Stryker,
a neurobiologist and professor of physiology at the University of California San
Francisco.

   Exactly where in the brain, and when, the CREST gene gets activated is still
unknown.  "That would give us a better sense of when it is important during
development," he said.

   The researchers also hope to identify the genes that CREST regulates.  "Those
are the ones that are probably directly involved in mediating the (growth of
dendrites)," he said.

   If scientists can one day identify learning disorders associated with the
absence of the CREST gene, one way to treat them might be through gene therapy,
Ghosh said.

   Ghosh, a 39-year-old graduate of the California Institute of Technology in
Pasadena and Stanford University, moved his laboratory from Johns Hopkins
University to the University of California San Diego in August.  His lab has
grown from five researchers to 10 since he arrived.

   The other researchers involved in the study were Hiroyuki Aizawa, Shu-Ching
Hu, Kathryn Bobb, Karthik Balakriashnan, Inga Gurevich and Mitra Cowan.  The
study was supported by the National Institutes of Health, the March of Dimes
Birth Defects Foundation, the Klingenstein Foundation, Merck and the Uehara
Memorial Foundation.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2004


                             534 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     January 13, 2004 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 027

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic dropping bid to win U.S. approval for Fabry drug;
Gaucher treatment boosting Genzyme's bottom line

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said yesterday it would abandon efforts to win
regulatory approval for its Fabry disease treatment, ceding the U.S. market to
competitor Genzyme Corp.

   The Cambridge companies had once been locked in a complex court battle over
their competing treatments but had reached a truce.

   Genzyme was the first to win approval for its treatment from the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration. Because it is a treatment for a rare disease, the
company also won the right to market the drug exclusively in the U.S. for seven
years.

   TKT could have challenged the exclusivity rights, but said yesterday that it
won't. FDA officials had told the company it would have had to conduct studies
to prove its treatment, Replagal, works better than Genzyme's Fabrazyme.

   "Given the limited availability of Fabry patients for clinical trials and the
large number of patients necessary to conduct a meaningful head-to-head trial,
we feel we should put our resources into expanding the existing Replagal
franchise and other important programs for desperately ill patients," said
Michael Astrue, TKT's chief executive.

   TKT will continue to sell Replagal in other countries where it has been
approved.

   The company's shares closed at $ 17.05 yesterday, but dropped as much as 12
percent, to $ 15, in after-hours trading, Bloomberg News reported.

   Astrue said the U.S. market was not "a necessary part of our business plan.
We are nonetheless disappointed that U.S. patients will not have the benefits of
Replagal."

   Separately, Genzyme said yesterday that fourth-quarter sales were up 38
percent, boosted by sales of its popular Gaucher disease treatment, Cerezymer.

   Sales rose to $ 243 million from $ 176.4 million a year ago.

   The company will report full fourth-quarter earnings next month.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2004


                             535 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 13, 2004, Tuesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F3

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: TKT ENDS BID TO SELL REPLAGAL IN US

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Abandoning an effort that has taken more than seven years and cost tens of
millions of dollars, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge yesterday said it
would end its attempt to win approval to sell Replagal, its treatment for Fabry
disease, in the United States.

   The decision came after the Food and Drug Administration told TKT it would
have to conduct a new study providing a head-to-head comparison of Replagal with
Fabrazyme, a treatment made by crosstown rival Genzyme Corp. Genzyme received
approval to sell Fabrazyme in the United States last April. Alternate study
approaches suggested by TKT in November were rejected by the agency.

      Besides the expense of a new pivotal trial pitting Replagal against
Fabrazyme, TKT would have faced a steep challenge in recruiting enough patients
afflicted with the rare disease who hadn't yet been treated with either drug.

   "There just aren't enough patients to do the type of trial that would be
required," said Michael J. Astrue, TKT president and chief executive.  "The
smarter thing to do is focus on the rest of our pipeline."

   The decision to forgo the US market is a setback for TKT, but is consistent
with Astrue's efforts to cut losses and move the company forward since he became
chief executive in February. "The saga has come to a close," said Jennifer Chao,
an analyst with RBC Capital Markets, in an interview with Bloomberg.

   TKT and Genzyme had fought for years to win approval for their drugs in the
United States, each seeking orphan drug status, which gives a drugmaker an
effective monopoly unless a competitor can show their treatment is significantly
better. In the fall of 2002, TKT revealed problems with its clinical trial. An
FDA panel later said the firm's data didn't back approval.

   Both companies compete in Europe, where they have each won approval for their
treatments. Yesterday, Genzyme said it sold $32 million of Fabrazyme in both the
United States and Europe in the fourth quarter. TKT said it sold about $15.2
million of Replagal in Europe in the fourth quarter.

   TKT's stock gained 55 cents to close at $17.05. The company disclosed the
news after markets closed.  In early after-hours trading, TKT dropped $1.65, or
about 10 percent. Last year, TKT's shares quadrupled from a low of $3.74 in
February. Genzyme's stock closed at $1.07 in after hours trading, a gain of 2.2
percent.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004


                             536 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            January 13, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: Country doctor gets La. Senate reins;
Hines defends style, disputes some labels

BYLINE: By Jan Moller; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- The new president of the state Senate has been described by
critics as a prickly populist with an independent streak that sometimes clashes
with the Senate's traditional collegiality.

   But Sen. Donald Hines, D-Bunkie, makes no apologies for his style.

   "I am a very determined individual," Hines said. "And if I believe in a
cause, I'll fight for it, and maybe being aggressive on issues I believe in
strongly is the basis for that characterization."

   As he prepares to take over the Senate leadership from Sen. John Hainkel,
R-New Orleans, and guide Gov. Blanco's agenda through the Senate, Hines insists
that many labels on him are misleading.

   "The media has kind of made me an ultraliberal for some reason," Hines said.
"I don't consider myself a liberal except when it comes to issues like the
uninsured, the unemployed, the Medicaid population, the school support workers
-- these people who have no lobbyist in Baton Rouge."

Diplomatic skills questioned

   Although Hines has never made a secret of his ambitions to become Senate
president, his anointing by Blanco came as a surprise to many, because the
70-year-old doctor does not have a reputation for the kind of consensus-building
skills often required of legislative leaders.

   "He's known as someone that is very set in his ways, in many respects, and
has not in the past been seen as a coalition builder," said Jim Brandt,
president of the nonpartisan Public Affairs Research Council. "This will be a
test of his ability to change."

   Others say Hines' ability to win Blanco's confidence and enough support from
his Senate colleagues to be elected president are proof enough that he has the
diplomatic skills to do the job.

   "I think you'll see Sen. Hines make a more concerted effort (than Hainkel) to
be sure that everyone feels like they have a place at the table," said Sen. Joe
McPherson, D-Woodworth, a Hines ally who also sought the leadership post and has
been tapped to take over the Health and Welfare Committee. "You'll see that with
his committee appointments, the way he allows everyone to have a significant and
meaningful role."

Making his mark

   A country doctor whose public service career began in 1972 when he was
elected to the Avoyelles Parish School Board, Hines is no stranger to leadership
roles. After getting elected to the Senate in a 1992 special election, he
quickly became an authority on health-care issues and rose to chairman of the
Senate Health and Welfare Committee during Gov. Foster's first term.

   But he was demoted to vice chairman for Foster's second term after he sought
the Senate presidency that ultimately went to Hainkel. It was a leadership
battle that left hard feelings between Hainkel and Hines, according to several
sources, after Hines made a campaign contribution to Hainkel's 1999 election
opponent.

   Hines has put together a substantial record of accomplishments on health-care
issues. Programs that bear his stamp include the Rural Hospital Preservation
Act, which directs federal Medicaid dollars to struggling rural hospitals, and a
gene-therapy research partnership between Louisiana State and Tulane
universities.

   Hines also sided with pharmaceutical companies against an effort by the
Department of Health and Hospitals to cut costs by restricting the drugs
available to Medicaid recipients, and campaigned successfully against a series
of bills in the 2003 session that would have curbed the growth of doctor-owned
"boutique" hospitals that specialize in high-cost medical procedures.

   His crowning legislative achievement may be the 1999 legislation creating the
children's health-insurance program known as LaCHIP, which has helped insure
300,000 children from low-income homes.

   "LaCHIP is the shining star as far as we're concerned," health department
Secretary David Hood said. It's "probably the most successful children's health
insurance program in the country."

   Hood said he even came to appreciate Hines' occasionally brusque bedside
manner. "From time to time, I'll get a call from him," Hood said. "He knows what
he wants and he'll ask for it. . . . When he's not happy with something we're
doing, he'll let us know."

   . . . . . . .

Jan Moller can be reached at jmoller@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-5207.

GRAPHIC: AP PHOTO The Honorable John Saunders, right, administers the oath of
office to Louisiana Senate President Donald Hines as Hines' wife, Jacqueline,
looks on during the Senate Inauguration Ceremony on Monday in Baton Rouge. A
country doctor whose public service career began in 1972 when he was elected to
the Avoyelles Parish School Board, Hines is no stranger to leadership roles.
[1016309]

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2004


                             537 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 11, 2004, Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: UCSD scientist helps finds brain growth trigger gene

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Scientists have found a gene that plays an important role in triggering changes
in the early developing brain -- a discovery that someday may provide insight
into certain types of learning disorders.

   The gene, called CREST, appears vital to the dramatic structural changes in
brain cells that occur with learning and experience after birth.

   "We've known for a long time that experience affects the development of the
brain, but it's not been clear how," said UCSD neuroscientist Anirvan Ghosh,
whose study appeared last week in the journal Science.

   In recent years, it has become clear that sensory experiences lead to the
activation, or expression, of new genes in the brain, and that those genes turn
on other sets of genes to promote new connections between brain cells.

   CREST, short for calcium-responsive transactivator, is the gene that turns on
those other genes, according to the study by Ghosh and his colleagues, then at
Johns Hopkins University in Maryland.  The CREST gene actually encodes a protein
called a transcription factor, which regulates the expression of other genes.

   One way that brain cells, or neurons, change through learning and experience
is by growing branches, called dendrites, that increase the number of
connections to other brain cells.

   Those structural changes, which are most dramatic right after birth, are
believed to occur when learning and experience sets off a chain of reactions
that begin with the flow of calcium ions into brain cells.

   The flow of ions, the researchers found, turns on genes that promote the
growth of dendrites -- but only if the CREST gene is present.

   Mice engineered without the CREST gene -- both mice and humans have it --
appeared normal at birth, but their brains did not develop normally in response
to sensory experiences.  Their neurons, the researchers found, did not grow
dendrites and instead appeared more linear, like plant shoots.

   Mice with the CREST gene, meanwhile, grew neurons that developed a complex
architecture of dendrites that fostered connections with other neurons.  The
brains of these mice grew normally, developing in response to learning and
experience.

   CREST acts as a mediator, thrown into action when calcium ions begin to flow,
and turning on other sets of genes that prompt the growth of dendrites.

   The mice engineered without the CREST gene exhibited symptoms parallel to
those seen in some human learning disorders, in which the child appears normal
initially, but by the age of 2 or 3 cannot acquire new knowledge, Ghosh said.

   The researchers confirmed their findings by showing that normal neurons kept
alive in a petri dish and stimulated with calcium ions responded by developing
highly branched dendrites.  Neurons taken from mice lacking CREST, however,
failed to branch in response to calcium.

   "CREST is the first example of a transcription factor -- a protein that turns
genes on and off -- that appears to be specifically required for the development
of brain neurons after birth," Ghosh said.

   It remains unclear whether parents who stimulate their babies with toys,
music or other types of visual and auditory stimulation are specifically
activating the CREST gene in their child's developing brain, Ghosh said.

   "There's debate about whether that is of value or not, and it's not known
whether things like that would activate CREST," he said.

   Learning to speak, however, may be another story.

   "In a case like that, I think it's much more likely that a gene like CREST
does play a role," Ghosh said.

   The researchers found that CREST activity decreases in several regions of the
brain once critical periods for development have passed.  But it continues to be
expressed at high levels in other regions, such as the olfactory bulb,
hippocampus and cerebellum, that scientists believe continue to change
throughout life.

   "This finding reinforces the idea that (CREST) plays an important role in the
process by which brain activity influences brain growth," said Michael Stryker,
a neurobiologist and professor of physiology at the University of California San
Francisco.

   Exactly where in the brain, and when, the CREST gene gets activated is still
unknown.  "That would give us a better sense of when it is important during
development," he said.

   The researchers also hope to identify the genes that CREST regulates.  "Those
are the ones that are probably directly involved in mediating the (growth of
dendrites)," he said.

   If scientists can one day identify learning disorders associated with the
absence of the CREST gene, one way to treat them might be through gene therapy,
Ghosh said.

   Ghosh, a 39-year-old graduate of the California Institute of Technology in
Pasadena and Stanford University, moved his laboratory from Johns Hopkins
University to the University of California San Diego in August.  His lab has
grown from five researchers to 10 since he arrived.

   The other researchers involved in the study were Hiroyuki Aizawa, Shu-Ching
Hu, Kathryn Bobb, Karthik Balakriashnan, Inga Gurevich and Mitra Cowan.  The
study was supported by the National Institutes of Health, the March of Dimes
Birth Defects Foundation, the Klingenstein Foundation, Merck and the Uehara
Memorial Foundation.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2004


                             538 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            January 11, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 179 words

HEADLINE: Funeral Notice;
FAMILANT

BODY:

   Rosalee Presser Familant, a former resident of New Orleans, died Friday,
December 26, 2003 in Virginia Beach, VA from lung cancer. She was 62 years old.
Mrs. Familant graduated from Fortier High School and received her B.S. and M.A.
in Speech Pathology from L.S.U. She was a former President of the Hampton Roads
Chapter of Hadassah and Rodef Sholom Temple, and a board member of United Jewish
Federation, Beth Shalom Seniors Home, Conservative Synagogue Sisterhoods,
National Council of Jewish Women, Brandeis, ORT, ASHA and an active member of
the Hebrew Women's Burial Society. She was the daughter of the late Julius
Presser and sister of the late Melvin Presser. Survivors include her husband,
Dr. Joseph W. Familant; two sons, Jay Familant of Washington, D.C. and Bruce
Familant of Grand Rapids, MI, plus his wife Judit and their son Jordan; her
mother, Fanny Presser and sister Marilyn (Mary Sue) Presser Katz. Donations can
be made to The Rosalee P. Familant Fund, % Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene
Therapy, Hadassah, 50 West 58th Street, N.Y., N.Y. 10019.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2004


                             539 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 10, 2004, Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-4:7; B-6:6

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Brain growth trigger gene found; UCSD scientist aids in discovery

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Scientists have found a gene that plays an important role in triggering changes
in the early developing brain -- a discovery that someday may provide insight
into certain types of learning disorders.

   The gene, called CREST, appears vital to the dramatic structural changes in
brain cells that occur with learning and experience after birth.

   "We've known for a long time that experience affects the development of the
brain, but it's not been clear how," said UCSD neuroscientist Anirvan Ghosh,
whose study appeared this week in the journal Science.

   In recent years, it has become clear that sensory experiences lead to the
activation, or expression, of new genes in the brain, and that those genes turn
on other sets of genes to promote new connections between brain cells.

   CREST, short for calcium-responsive transactivator, is the gene that turns on
those other genes, according to the study by Ghosh and his colleagues, then at
Johns Hopkins University in Maryland.  The CREST gene actually encodes a protein
called a transcription factor, which regulates the expression of other genes.

   One way that brain cells, or neurons, change through learning and experience
is by growing branches, called dendrites, that increase the number of
connections to other brain cells.

   Those structural changes, which are most dramatic right after birth, are
believed to occur when learning and experience sets off a chain of reactions
that begin with the flow of calcium ions into brain cells.

   The flow of ions, the researchers found, turns on genes that promote the
growth of dendrites -- but only if the CREST gene is present.

   Mice engineered without the CREST gene -- both mice and humans have it --
appeared normal at birth, but their brains did not develop normally in response
to sensory experiences.  Their neurons, the researchers found, did not grow
dendrites and instead appeared more linear, like plant shoots.

   Mice with the CREST gene, meanwhile, grew neurons that developed a complex
architecture of dendrites that fostered connections with other neurons.  The
brains of these mice grew normally, developing in response to learning and
experience.

   CREST acts as a mediator, thrown into action when calcium ions begin to flow,
and turning on other sets of genes that prompt the growth of dendrites.

   The mice engineered without the CREST gene exhibited symptoms parallel to
those seen in some human learning disorders, in which the child appears normal
initially, but by the age of 2 or 3 cannot acquire new knowledge, Ghosh said.

   The researchers confirmed their findings by showing that normal neurons kept
alive in a petri dish and stimulated with calcium ions responded by developing
highly branched dendrites.  Neurons taken from mice lacking CREST, however,
failed to branch in response to calcium.

   "CREST is the first example of a transcription factor -- a protein that turns
genes on and off -- that appears to be specifically required for the development
of brain neurons after birth," Ghosh said.

   It remains unclear whether parents who stimulate their babies with toys,
music or other types of visual and auditory stimulation are specifically
activating the CREST gene in their child's developing brain, Ghosh said.

   "There's debate about whether that is of value or not, and it's not known
whether things like that would activate CREST," he said.

   Learning to speak, however, may be another story.

   "In a case like that, I think it's much more likely that a gene like CREST
does play a role," Ghosh said.

   The researchers found that CREST activity decreases in several regions of the
brain once critical periods for development have passed.  But it continues to be
expressed at high levels in other regions, such as the olfactory bulb,
hippocampus and cerebellum, that scientists believe continue to change
throughout life.

   "This finding reinforces the idea that (CREST) plays an important role in the
process by which brain activity influences brain growth," said Michael Stryker,
a neurobiologist and professor of physiology at the University of California San
Francisco.

   Exactly where in the brain, and when, the CREST gene gets activated is still
unknown.  "That would give us a better sense of when it is important during
development," he said.

   The researchers also hope to identify the genes that CREST regulates.  "Those
are the ones that are probably directly involved in mediating the (growth of
dendrites)," he said.

   If scientists can one day identify learning disorders associated with the
absence of the CREST gene, one way to treat them might be through gene therapy,
Ghosh said.

   Ghosh, a 39-year-old graduate of the California Institute of Technology in
Pasadena and Stanford University, moved his laboratory from Johns Hopkins
University to the University of California San Diego in August.  His lab has
grown from five researchers to 10 since he arrived.

   The other researchers involved in the study were Hiroyuki Aizawa, Shu-Ching
Hu, Kathryn Bobb, Karthik Balakriashnan, Inga Gurevich and Mitra Cowan.  The
study was supported by the National Institutes of Health, the March of Dimes
Birth Defects Foundation, the Klingenstein Foundation, Merck and the Uehara
Memorial Foundation.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2004


                             540 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 8, 2004 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING

LENGTH: 88 words

HEADLINE: Mitchell, Helen G.

BODY:

   MITCHELL, HELEN G., January 1, 2004, beloved wife of the late Stanley
Mitchell; dear mother and mother-in-law of Stephen D. (Jane) Mitchell and the
late Linda Abernathy; dear grandmother of Julie (Richard D.) Baur and Joseph A.
Mitchell, M.D., dear great-grandmother of Andrew Henry Baur. Private family
services will be held Thursday, January 8th. Memorial contributions preferred to
the Ruwitch Gene Therapy Laboratory, Siteman Cancer Center, Campus Box 8100, 660
So. Euclid Ave., 63110-1093. BERGER MEMORIAL SERVICE.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2004


                             541 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     December 31, 2003 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief

BODY:

   Hancock shows Parmalat woes

   John Hancock Financial Services Inc. acknowledged yesterday that its exposure
to troubled Parmalat Finanzaria SpA, the Italian food company, is larger than
previously reported. The Boston-based insurer said in a statement that it holds
about $ 152 million in public and private bonds for Parmalat, which has declared
bankruptcy and whose founder was arrested in Italy over the weekend for
misappropriating hundreds of millions of dollars. Hancock said it has not yet
determined its risk in light of Parmalat's filing. - STAFF

   Gas probe asked

   U.S. Sen. Joseph Lieberman (D-Conn.) asked the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to investigate whether
market manipulation contributed to a 55 percent surge in natural gas prices. -
BLOOMBERG

   Confidence slips

   The Conference Board reported yesterday that its consumer confidence index
slipped to 91.3 in December, following a surge in November to a revised figure
of 92.5, its highest level in more than a year. - AP

   Fidelity hires a VP

   Fidelity Investments hired Stephen Deschenes as executive vice president at
Fidelity Institutional Retirement Services Co. to oversee marketing at its unit
that provides employer-retirement plans. Deschenes founded Bow Street Capital, a
venture capital firm, and mPower, a financial advice Web site. - BLOOMBERG

   NASD reveals '03 record

   The National Association of Securities Dealers suspended or barred a record
830 individuals from Wall Street and collected $ 32.6 million in disciplinary
fines in 2003, according to preliminary data released yesterday by the
regulator. - DOW JONES

   Truck driver regs shift

   Truck drivers will be able to stay on the road for up to 11 straight hours
but will have to take at least 10 hours off before they can again get behind the
wheel of their rigs, according to federal regulations taking effect Sunday. - AP

   Holiday affects markets

   Government bond markets close early today, at 2 p.m. Eastern time, while U.S.
stock markets will operate on a regular schedule. All U.S. debt and equity
markets will be closed tomorrow, New Year's Day. Stock markets resume on a
regular schedule tomorrow, while bond markets will close early again. - AP

   TKT finds partner

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said yesterday that it will partner with Orphan
Australia to market and distribute its Fabry disease treatment, Replagal, in
Australia and New Zealand. - STAFF

LOAD-DATE: January 05, 2004


                             542 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 27, 2003 Saturday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg.D-4

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: JENIFER ESTESS;
 ALS VICTIM DEVOTED LIFE TO FINDING CURE

BYLINE: MARY ROURKE, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   Jenifer Estess, a theater producer who founded Project ALS to research a cure
for Lou Gehrig's disease after she was diagnosed with the malady in 1997, died
Dec. 16 at home in New York. She was 40.

    The cause of death was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the formal name for
Lou Gehrig's disease, her sister, Valerie Estess, told the Los Angeles Times.

    The degenerative condition, which attacks the cells that control the
muscles, now afflicts more than 30,000 Americans and is usually fatal. Life
expectancy for those who have the disease is two to five years.

    Before her disease was diagnosed, Ms. Estess co-founded the Naked Angels, a
theater troupe based in New York, with actors Matthew Broderick and Marissa
Tomei among the founding members.

    She went on to help launch the Nantucket Film Festival and the New York
Women's Film Festival.

    When she became ill in 1997, "Jenifer decided to put her best foot forward,"
said Simon Halls, of PMK-HBH Public Relations, who is a member of the board of
directors for Project ALS. "She never thought of herself as having Lou Gehrig's
disease. She had one focus: to find a cure."

    She continued to give television and magazine interviews from her
wheelchair. Although she could no longer walk, she said in an interview with
People Magazine in 1999, "I can still speak. And while I can, I'll make sure no
one else has to hear that there is no hope and no cure. That's absolutely
unacceptable."

    Two of her three sisters, Meredith and Valerie, quit their jobs to help
Jenifer launch Project ALS. Their longtime friend, theater producer Julianne
Hoffenberg, joined them.

    "It was an Andy Hardy moment," Valerie Estess said Wednesday, referring to
the 1940s movies in which the Hardy brothers would proclaim, "We can do this!"

    In the five years since Project ALS was founded, it has raised $17 million
for research, largely through celebrity-studded events held in New York and Los
Angeles. Most of the money has gone to stem cell and gene therapy research that
might also be helpful in finding treatment of diseases such as Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's, Valerie Estess said.

    Actor Billy Baldwin, a board member of Project ALS, told the Times that
after he heard that Jenifer Estess had died, "I had a heartwarming feeling that
people will redouble their efforts. What the Estess women have achieved is
remarkable."

    Born in Moline, Ill., Jenifer Estess grew up in Harrison, N.Y., as one of
five children. Her parents divorced when she was 13 and she and her sisters
worked at a doughnut shop to help with expenses.

    She attended New York University and studied acting and theater arts. After
graduating in 1984, she worked as an actress for a brief time before she
co-founded Naked Angels. As an Off-Broadway producer, Ms. Estess developed a
wide range of entertainment-world contacts who rallied around her when her
disease was diagnosed.

    "She doesn't have an ounce of self-pity," said actor Ben Stiller in an
interview about Ms. Estess with People magazine in 1999. He first met her when
they were both young actors in New York. Stiller is now a major fund-raiser for
Project ALS.

    Support from the Hollywood community led to "Jenifer," a television movie
about her life that aired on CBS last year. A documentary about her and her
sisters, co-produced by Brad Pitt, among other actors, is scheduled for next
spring. Her memoir, "Tales from the Bed: On Living, Dying and Having It All," is
planned for spring 2004 publication.

    In 2002, to commemorate the 61st anniversary of Lou Gehrig's death, Ms.
Estess and Project ALS arranged for baseball stadiums around the United States
to read Gehrig's famous farewell speech to New York Yankee fans. As a Yankee, he
said, he considered himself, "the luckiest man on the face of the Earth."

    At the time, Ms. Estess said in an interview with Newsday, she hadn't
"evolved" to that state of mind, but she said she was making progress.

    "Once you conquer the fear ... of losing your life, a lot more opens up to
you," she said.

    Along with sisters Meredith and Valerie, Ms. Estess is survived by her
mother, Marilyn; a sister, Alison, and a brother, Noah.


LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2003


                             543 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                           December 26, 2003, Friday

SECTION: USA; Pg. 02

LENGTH: 972 words

HEADLINE: Why Boston covets its role as biotech hub

BYLINE: By Seth Stern Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

HIGHLIGHT:
Prediction of 100,000 new jobs in the industry spurs competition to be the next
'Silicon Valley.'

BODY:

   Inside a former furniture warehouse, scientists at a new biotech facility are
busy studying cell proteins.

   Across the street, in this neighborhood that straddles MIT and Harvard, a
former candy factory is being transformed into the research headquarters for
European biotech giant Novartis.

   And across the Charles River, Harvard University is plotting its next major
expansion: a new life-sciences research campus.

   These are just a few of the signs of how the Boston area has grabbed a lead
role in a field that many see as one of the most promising industries of the new
century: biotechnology.

   But even as new outposts of biomedical research rise here, Massachusetts
faces competition. Thousands of jobs are at stake, in an era when downsizing is
the trend in established sectors such as manufacturing.

   Recently, a North Carolina industry group took out a full page ad this month
in the Boston Globe inviting biotech firms to come down south, and the speaker
of the state's House of Representatives sent personal letters to several CEOs.

   It doesn't quite equal the shots fired at Ft. Sumter to start the Civil War,
but the stakes are huge in this economic battle between the states.

   "It's a big prize," says Mark Dibner, president of BioAbility, a biotech
consulting firm based in North Carolina's Research Triangle Park.

   With its cluster of top research universities and hospitals, the Boston area
has long enjoyed a big chunk of the biotechnology business. Only the San
Francisco Bay Area produces as many Ph.Ds, patents, and startups in the field.

   Bay State's challenges

   But for all its advantages, Massachusetts faces rival states that are touting
lower costs of living. Some are also exploiting growing anger within the
industry that Massachusetts cities are among those seeking to buy cheaper drugs
in Canada.

   The field of biotech is transitioning beyond infancy. Companies are just
beginning to mine potential commercial applications of cells. One study by the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council found future advances could produce 100,000
new jobs and billions in revenues.

   Today, there are 280 biotech companies in Massachusetts, employing more than
30,000 workers. But it is also a fragile moment, as the state's biotech firms
mature from start-ups focused on research into more expensive business of
developing and manufacturing of drugs.

   One company, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., is typical: founded by a doctor at
a Harvard-affiliated teaching hospital, TKT was 12 years old before the firm's
first drug was ready for manufacture.

   State leaders worry that maturing biotech companies may eventually go the way
of other industries that were born in Massachusetts and then slipped away.
First, textiles moved south. Then, after pioneering the field of computing and
becoming dominant in in so-called minicomputers, the state lost out to
California's Silicon Valley. "History must not repeat itself," MIT president
Charles Vest told a summit of Massachusetts life-science industry leaders in
September. "We can't miss this one as we did the silicon revolution."

   The region remains a research leader. Many of the world's largest
pharmaceutical companies have opened research facilities here. One is Novartis,
which announced that it will move its entire research division here from
Switzerland along with as many as 1,000 jobs. Harvard's plan to build a life
sciences campus in the Allston section of Boston promises to bolster that lead.

   But Massachusetts has enjoyed less success convincing firms that grew up here
to keep their manufacturing operations in the state. BioGen IDEC, for example,
still has 1,500 employees in Cambridge but built the second largest
biomanufacturing facility in the world in North Carolina's Research Triangle
Park.

   High paying biomanufacturing jobs are an alluring target in states like North
Carolina, which wants to employ former textile, tobacco, and furniture workers.
Plus, biotech factories pollute less and require less energy than other
industries.

   That explains why a recent survey of local and state economic development
agencies found 83 percent identified biotechnology as one of their top two
targets for industrial development, a Brookings Institution study noted.

   North Carolina boasts a lower cost of living, cheaper land, and a strong
research base anchored in Raleigh and Durham by Duke, North Carolina State and
University of North Carolina. The state government has long supported biotech,
opening a center to fund training and business development in 1981. More
recently, the state committed $ 60 million of tobacco-settlement money to train
workers for biotech jobs.

   By contrast, says Michael Astrue, CEO of TKT, says his firm had to import
workers trained in manufacturing quality and toxicology from other states to
staff its Cambridge manufacturing facility.

   Bad place for business?

   "It's not an easy place to do business," says Mr. Astrue, who received one of
the letters from North Carolina's House Speaker, Richard Morgan. "Governors of
other states call personally, begging us to move, and throw money at us, and
here we get treated very rudely by significant people in the political
establishment."

   Plans by Massachusetts cities to reimport drugs from Canada certainly aren't
making biotech companies feel welcome.

   "The Canadian medicine crowd would love to turn Massachusetts into a biotech
ghost town," one industry source says.

   Gov. Mitt Romney's life-science development official, Scott Sarazen, admits
the state has "historically been complacent" about biotechnology. He cites new
tax rebates and funding for emerging technologies as evidence the state is
trying to do better. "Just like the industry is dynamic and growing, we have to
always stay current with it."

   (c) Copyright 2003. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2003


                             544 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     December 26, 2003 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 99 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Vincent Pompili

BYLINE: THE PLAIN DEALER

BODY:

   Age: 41

   Title: Director of interventional cardiology.

   Organizations: University Hospitals of Cleveland, Case Western Reserve
University.

   Career highlights: Assisted in early pre-clinical studies of cardiovascular
gene therapy at Johns Hopkins and the Mayo Clinic.

   Family: Wife, Suzanne, a schoolteacher; daughters 8 and 9.

   Business leader most admired: James Scozzie, founder of the Mentor drug
development company Ricerca Biosciences LLC, who now advises startup companies
at BioEnterprise Corp.

   Goals for 2004: Get a stem cell company started, complete the first clinical
trial.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2003


                             545 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  December 24, 2003 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B11

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH TESTS LOOK GOOD ON DRUG TO HALT AGE-RELATEDBLINDNESS

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: OHSU and the Casey Eye Institute have been involved in the work on
Macugen for 'wet' macular degeneration

   A drug that could be available as soon as next year seems able to halt the
destruction caused by "wet" macular degeneration, a leading U.S. cause of
blindness.

   Macugen was first tested on patients at Oregon Health & Science University.
The final round of trials required for federal regulators to consider the drug
just ended, OHSU's Dr. Michael Klein said.

   Drug giant Pfizer and the private company Eyetech Pharmaceuticals are
cooperating to develop the drug. The U.S. Food & Drug Administration has agreed
to give Macugen an accelerated review, and Pfizer is filling out the
application, Daniel Watts, a company spokesman, said.

   If approved, Macugen probably will become the first drug widely used to
battle the "wet" form of age-related macular degeneration, or AMD.

   "It's the worst," Klein said. "Legal blindness is 80 to 90 percent due to
AMD."

   Doctors traditionally treated the disease with laser surgery, which had
limited use and could damage other tissues in the eye. In the last few years,
doctors had started treating the condition with light and a light-sensitive
chemical that killed the excess blood vessels that cause wet AMD.

   In the just-finished trial, Klein said, Macugen worked about as well as
treatments with the light-sensitive chemical. If the drug wins federal approval,
doctors may combine the two treatments, to attack the disease two ways, Klein
said.

   Unfortunately, the treatments do not restore lost vision, Klein said.
Instead, they aim to stop the disease's progress and limit further vision loss.

   "Don't think of this as some sort of miracle drug," said Klein, who directs
the Macular Degeneration Center at OHSU's Casey Eye Institute.

   According to the National Institutes of Health, AMD significantly damages the
eyesight of about 1.7 million U.S. residents, blinding 100,000. Whites, women,
smokers, obese people and people with a family history of macular degeneration
seem more vulnerable to the disease.

   Most of that blindness is due to wet AMD, which is less common but more
damaging than a related "dry" form. Wet AMD happens when too many blood vessels
grow in the center-rear of the eye. The vessels tend to leak and scar, wiping
out a person's central vision.

   Macugen interferes with the work of vegf, a protein that causes blood vessels
to grow. That protein generally does good things in the body, so doctors
treating AMD must be careful to target just the excess vegf causing problems in
the eye. The problem has plagued some previous AMD medicines, which circulate
throughout the body, Klein said.

   Doctors avoid that problem by injecting Macugen into the eye every six weeks
for a year, Klein said. That may sound painful, but patients say they feel
"really very little discomfort" from the shots, he said. The injections' main
drawback is a small risk of infection, Klein said, a less than 1-in-1,000 shot.

   Klein said Casey doctors have worked with Macugen since 1998, when it was
first tested in people. Doctors at Casey are also testing a gene therapy for
AMD, which works the opposite way from Macugen. The gene therapy should increase
the eye's production of a protein called petf, which limits new blood vessel
growth, Klein said.

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2003


                             546 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                           December 23, 2003 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: Obituaries;
Jenifer Estess, 40; Theater Producer Founded Group to Research Gehrig's Disease

BYLINE: Mary Rourke, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Jenifer Estess, a theater producer who founded Project ALS to research a cure
for Lou Gehrig's disease after she was diagnosed as having the malady in 1997,
has died. She was 40.

   Estess died Dec. 16 at home in New York City. The cause of her death was
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the formal name for Lou Gehrig's disease, her
sister, Valerie Estess, told The Times.

   The degenerative condition, which attacks the cells that control the muscles,
afflicts as many as 30,000 Americans at any given time, according Jeff Snyder,
national spokesman for the ALS Assn. Life expectancy for those diagnosed with
the disease is two to five years.

   Before she was diagnosed, Estess co-founded the Naked Angels, a theater
troupe based in New York City, with actors Matthew Broderick and Marisa Tomei
among the founding members. She went on to help launch the Nantucket Film
Festival and the New York Women's Film Festival.

   When she became ill in 1997, "Jenifer decided to put her best foot forward,"
said Simon Halls of PMK-HBH Public Relations, a member of the board of directors
for Project ALS. "She never thought of herself as having Lou Gehrig's disease.
She had one focus, to find a cure."

   She continued to give television and magazine interviews after she was
confined to a wheelchair. Although she could no longer walk, she said in an
interview with People magazine in 1999, "I can still speak. And while I can I'll
make sure no one else has to hear that there is no hope and no cure. That's
absolutely unacceptable."

   Two of her three sisters, Meredith and Valerie, quit their jobs to help
Jenifer launch Project ALS. Their longtime friend, theater producer Julianne
Hoffenberg, joined them.

   "It was an Andy Hardy moment," Valerie Estess said Wednesday, referring to
the 1940s movies in which the Hardy brothers would proclaim, "We can do this!"

   In the five years since Project ALS was founded, it has raised $17 million
for research, largely through celebrity-studded events in New York and Los
Angeles. Most of the money has gone to stem cell and gene therapy research that
might also be helpful in treating diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's,
Valerie Estess said.

   Actor William Baldwin, a board member of Project ALS, told The Times that
after he heard that Jenifer Estess had died, "I had a heartwarming feeling that
people will redouble their efforts."

   Born in Moline, Ill., Jenifer Estess grew up in Harrison, N.Y., as one of
five children. Her parents divorced when she was 13 and she and her sisters
worked at a doughnut shop to help with expenses.

   She attended New York University, where she studied acting and theater arts.
After graduating in 1984, she worked as an actress for a brief time before she
co-founded Naked Angels in New York City.

   As an off-Broadway producer, Estess developed a wide range of entertainment
industry contacts who rallied around her when she was diagnosed with ALS.

   "She doesn't have an ounce of self-pity," said actor Ben Stiller in an
interview about Estess with People magazine in 1999. He first met her when they
were both young actors in New York. Stiller is now a major fundraiser for
Project ALS.

   Support from the Hollywood community led to "Jenifer," a television movie
about Estess' life that aired on CBS last year. A documentary about her and her
sisters, co-produced by Brad Pitt, is scheduled for next spring. Her memoir,
"Tales from the Bed: On Living, Dying and Having It All," is also planned for
spring 2004 publication.

   In 2002, to commemorate the 61st anniversary of Lou Gehrig's death, Estess
and Project ALS arranged for baseball stadiums around the country to read
Gehrig's famous farewell speech to New York Yankee fans. As a Yankee, he said,
he considered himself, "the luckiest man on the face of the Earth."

   At the time, Estess said in an interview with Newsday, she hadn't "evolved"
to that state of mind, but she said she was making progress.

   "Once you conquer the fear ... of losing your life, a lot more opens up to
you," she said.

   Along with sisters Meredith and Valerie, Estess is survived by her mother,
Marilyn; sister Alison; and a brother, Noah.

CORRECTION-DATE: December 24, 2003

CORRECTION:

   Jenifer Estess obituary -- A photograph of Jenifer Estess provided by Getty
Images that appeared with an obituary of Estess in Tuesday's California section
is in fact a photo of her sister Valerie. A picture of Jenifer Estess, a theater
producer who founded project ALS to research a cure for Lou Gehrig's disease
after she was diagnosed as having the malady in 1997, appears above.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: JENIFER ESTESS A TV movie on her life, "Jenifer," aired on CBS
last year.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Getty Images

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2003


                             547 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 22, 2003, Monday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1367 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS & INNOVATION SCOTT KIRSNER @LARGE LIFE SCIENCES: BIOTECH;
Scott Kirsner is a contributing editor at Fast Company. He can be reached at
skirsner@verizon.net.;
ENDEAVORING BEYOND BIOLOGICS GENZYME TRIES A HYBRID STRATEGY

BYLINE: BY SCOTT KIRSNER

BODY:

   One of the tools of Jill Gregory's trade is called a 96 well microtiter
plate. It's a plastic tray about the size of an index card, with 96 little
divots, or wells, in which Gregory conducts her experiments.

   Gregory is a senior scientist at Genzyme, and in 1997 she performed an
experiment that could eventually change the very nature of the Cambridge-based
firm, causing it to morph from a pure biotech into a unique hybrid of biotech
and pharmaceutical company.

      Gregory's experiment involved putting living mouse cells into each of the
96 wells on a microtiter plate. Also added to the wells was tumor necrosis
factor, a substance that occurs naturally in the body as part of an immune
system response. Ordinarily, the tumor necrosis factor would cause the mouse
cells in Gregory's microtiter plate to croak.

   But Gregory was hunting for chemical compounds - drugs, in their crudest form
- that would prevent the tumor necrosis factor from killing the cells. The test
was designed to find drugs that might be able to combat diseases where the
body's immune system goes haywire and attacks perfectly good systems, such as
inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis.

   Gregory was working with Genzyme's library of 1.5 million different chemical
compounds, trying them in different mixtures to see if any of them could save
the mouse cells in her wells. To an outsider, it sounds phenomenally random,
almost like showing up at work every day to systematically pick Mass Millions
numbers for your employer.

   Gregory describes it as a kind of treasure hunt: "My job is like walking
along the beach, looking for a piece of gold," she says. "The likelihood that
you are going to find it might be low, but you can't stop looking for it."

   The final stage of Gregory's experiments involved adding a special dye to the
wells on her microtiter plate. If the mouse cells were still alive, they would
turn a brilliant shade of purple.

   "When a well hits, that's exciting," she says. One day in February 1997, one
of Gregory's wells turned purple.

   The product of Gregory's experiments is a compound that has been dubbed GENZ
29155. It was one of those million-and-a-half compounds from the Genzyme
library, and in animal tests, it has shown evidence of slowing the progress of
multiple sclerosis, a debilitating disease of the nervous system that today has
few treatment options. (One option is the drug Avonex, produced by Biogen, which
must be injected weekly.) Initial testing in humans began this month.

   GENZ 29155 will be a big deal if it can improve the lives of the estimated 2
million people worldwide who suffer from multiple sclerosis.

   It's already a big deal for Genzyme. It's the first "small molecule drug"
(most consumers think of these as "pills") that the company is trying to bring
to market.

   And it represents the first real fruit of a corporate strategy to come up
with drugs that battle what the company calls "Genzyme-like diseases" (these are
diseases with few or no treatment options, which affect a relatively small
portion of the population), regardless of whether they are drugs produced by
genetically-modified living cells, the typical output of a pure biotech company,
or drugs produced through chemical sleight-of-hand, as was the case with GENZ
29155.

   In industry parlance, it means that Genzyme wants its portfolio of products
to include "large molecule drugs" that must be injected, and "small molecule
drugs" like GENZ 29155 that are downed with a simple glass of water.

   But in the past, small molecule drugs were considered the exclusive domain of
pharma companies like Pfizer and GlaxoSmithKline, and large molecule biological
drugs were Amgen's and Biogen's and Genzyme's turf.

   So Genzyme's announcement this month that GENZ 29155 was entering the first
phase of clinical trials is somewhat akin to General Motors one day announcing
that it will start building airplanes. It takes the company one step closer to
being a hybrid biotech/pharma company.

   "If you look at the Physician's Desk Reference, you find that 95 percent or
more of the drugs that doctors prescribe from that are still small molecule
drugs," says Fredric Vinick, the senior vice president for drug discovery at
Genzyme. Vinick came to Genzyme in 1994 from Pfizer's R&D group to lead
Genzyme's small molecule development work, of which there was very little at the
time.

   When Vinick first arrived at Genzyme, all of the company's products were big
molecule drugs - biologics.

   "If we weren't scorned and ridiculed, we were definitely outsiders," he says.
Vinick had a tiny group of 40 employees and a tight budget. "The risk was low,
and the probability of success was low," he says.

   Genzyme CEO Henri Termeer told Vinick to give small molecule drugs a try, as
long as he could keep the spending to a reasonable level.

   Initially, Vinick asked his team to conduct experiments that would identify
chemical compounds with the potential to fight cancer and immune system
disorders.

   After the mouse cells turned purple in Jill Gregory's well, it would be
another six years before GENZ 29155 made it to human trials. Vinick's drug
discovery group suffered a setback when they hired an outside contractor to
produce a batch of GENZ 29155. The drug that came back was much less effective
than the drug that had been produced in-house.

   The group spent months trying to figure out what had happened, wondering if
the contractor had filtered out some small impurity that was what had made the
chemical compound work in the first place.

   "That sort of knocked us off track for almost a year," Vinick says.

   But Vinick's group got back on track and won support from Termeer to move
ahead to clinical trials. The first phase, which involves healthy volunteers and
is designed to test for toxicity and appropriate dosage, will run through next
year. The second phase, which would test the drug in patients who actually have
multiple sclerosis, could begin in 2005 if all goes well.

   If GENZ 29155 eventually wins approval from the Food and Drug Administration,
the drug could compete with a similar oral drug for multiple sclerosis being
developed by Serono, a Swiss company with US headquarters in Rockland.

   As it happens, Vinick's wife, Carol, was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis 16
years ago, well before work began on GENZ 29155.

   "I've inadvertently become a human interest story," he says. While Vinick is
hopeful that the drug may help others enjoy an active life for a longer period,
he says his wife is not a candidate to participate in the trials: "MS is best
treated if you can get patients at an early stage, and she is far too disabled,"
he says.

   Vinick's drug discovery group at Genzyme now employs 190 people - a tiny
portion of the company's 5,300 total employees. But they're still walking the
beach, looking for those infrequent flashes of gold. Vinick says that other
"coming attractions" from the group include small molecule drugs that could
prove potent in battling a type of kidney disease and a whole array of enzyme
deficiencies called lysosomal storage disorders.

   Vinick says that Genzyme is becoming more "agnostic" about the methods by
which it develops new products, whether it is cultivation of therapeutic
proteins, gene therapy, or good old-fashioned chemistry of the sort that led to
GENZ 29155.

   "You're limited what you can do, if you're only seeking to discover
antibodies or therapeutic proteins," he says.

   Termeer makes a similar point during an interview in his glass-walled office,
atop Genzyme's new Kendall Square headquarters.

   "There's a general philosophy we have, which is that you can't rely on a
single platform to get to something that will work," he says. "You have to stay
very broad and very nimble, and make no assumptions that something you already
have will create a breakthrough."

   Genzyme may well be one of the first companies to morph into a true
biotech-pharma hybrid organically, rather than through acquisition or
partnership. At a hybrid company, the guiding philosophy won't be "We develop
biologics" or "We make pills," but rather, "We solve the problem of disease, by
any means necessary."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Genzyme's GENZ 29155 is the company's first "small molecule
drug."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2003


                             548 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            December 21, 2003 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1112 words

HEADLINE: Programs put Jersey high-tech on map

BYLINE: BETH FITZGERALD, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Epigenesis of Cranbury is investing millions of dollars and years of research
to create a better treatment for asthma. Seven years ago, a $200,000 state grant
provided early help, and recently, the company has raised millions from venture
capitalists, including a couple based in New Jersey.

   "New Jersey has a large body of highly trained citizens who can work in
biotechnology and a wonderful university system where a lot of academic research
is being done," Epigenesis Chief Executive Dan Soland said.

   His 15-employee firm has lined up a $23 million venture capital round led by
Princeton-based Care Capital, a health-care venture capital firm. Another
investor is the New Jersey Technology Council Venture Fund. The state has thus
proven a good venue for Epigenesis, which relocated here from North Carolina.

    During recent months, New Jersey has rolled out additional, revamped and
revived state initiatives to finance technology companies during the very early
stages of development, before the concept is convincing enough to win serious
cash from the venture capitalists who trade their money for an equity stake.

   The state is on track to spend more than $100 million a year supporting
early-stage enterprises, with an eye to creating high-paid jobs and persuading
research scientists to set up shop here. Experts say the Garden State has moved
to the middle of the pack and is holding its own in competition with neighboring
states.

   "Never have there been so many concrete programs that we can point to that
will help high tech, and especially biotech," said Debbie Hart, president of the
Biotechnology Council of New Jersey.

   The state's technology-finance tools includes the once-dormant Springboard
program, which ran out of money and shut down for a couple of years, but has
just been revived with a $10 million annual war chest that could fund as many as
100 ventures a year.

   A state biotechnology venture fund is being formed with $10 million in public
money, which is expected to leverage additional private capital. The state's job
creation tax incentive program has been revamped to help small start-ups qualify
for state income tax rebates that reward job creation. Instead of the old hurdle
of 75 jobs, a firm can create only 25 jobs - or as few as 10 if the jobs are
defined as high tech. New Jersey is funding $50 million in tax rebates this
year.

   Then there is the very popular tax-loss-sale program. Development-stage,
high-tech firms get to sell their tax losses to profitable companies, which use
them to lower their taxes; the developing firm gets the cash and the state gives
up $40 million in state income taxes each year to pay for it.

   These programs have impressed the state's high-tech community, and more are
on the way. The state is selling $50 million in bonds to fund economic
development, with Springboard and the biotech venture fund accounting for a
total of $20 million. Another $30 million in programs are coming, with the next
announcement likely to come early next year.

   Experts say these efforts are putting New Jersey on the map as a serious
contender to lure cutting-edge technology ventures.

   Jim Gunton is general partner of the New Jersey Technology Council Venture
Fund, which itself received seed capital from New Jersey. He called the state's
programs "critical to New Jersey remaining a viable place to start technology
companies."

   He said the tech-stock collapse three years ago ushered in "the worst
environment for venture capital of the last 25 years. But the environment is now
more encouraging for young companies, and you are starting to see, believe it or
not, competition among investors for hot companies."

   "I'm tired of entrepreneurs telling me Pennsylvania has this program and that
program," said Randy Harmon, who runs a program funded by the state Commission
on Science and Technology that helps firms win federal research grants.
"Springboard is as good as anything any other state is offering."

   Pennsylvania takes a slightly different approach; the Ben Franklin Technology
Partners fund "invests directly in young firms that need to get to the next
stage to create technology, products and processes," said Rose Ann Rosenthal,
chief executive. Similar to New Jersey, "our goal is to make sure the company is
in our state, growing and creating jobs and wealth," she said.

   Harmon is with the Newark-based Small Business Development Centers and his
program helps entrepreneurs qualify for Small Business Innovation Research
grants, which are awarded by federal agencies that need technology. By applying
for all available state and federal programs at various points in their life
cycles, entrepreneurial firms can keep operating until they are ready for
venture capital and the commercial marketplace.

   Harmon estimates between 500 and 1,000 New Jersey ventures are staying afloat
on the rafts of one or more government high-tech funds.

   "I've done it all," said Harris Goldberg, founder of InMat in Hillsborough,
where high-tech chemistry keeps air from leaking out of tennis balls and is
being re-engineered to provide protective gloves for the Army.

   Founded during 1999, InMat's early days were funded by two state programs,
Springboard and the Seed Capital loan program. The company has since landed SBIR
grants and venture capital and booked revenue from product sales to
sporting-goods manufacturers.

   "We've always found a way to survive, and government programs were critical
in the early stages," Goldberg said. The average Springboard grant is $250,000,
"and it would help if the grants were larger: $500,000 is a better number for
companies that look promising."

   InMat has eight employees and plans to be cash-flow positive by the end of
next year.

   "It's a long haul because a materials business takes longer to develop than
software. But the state is being paid back through job creation. Without those
programs, all of us probably would have relocated to somewhere else," Goldberg
said.

   Ewa Herbst has been waiting to jump into Springboard ever since the program
was frozen for lack of funds two years ago. Her Edgewater company Herbst Reset
assembled more than 20 employees, university scientists and contract engineers
to develop a microprocessor-based platform technology to power biomedical
applications, such as cardiac devices to gene therapy. She launched another
company, Herbst Technologies, to start commercializing the technology next year.

   National Institutes of Health grants totaling $2.7 million funded the work so
far, "but we can't use NIH money for commercialization, only for research and
development. We need additional resources to take that step, and that is where
Springboard comes in," Herbst said.

CORRECTION-DATE: December 23, 2003

CORRECTION:

    An article in the Business section Sunday about small-business finance
misstated the name of a company in Edgewater. It is Herbst Research, not Herbst
Reset.

GRAPHIC: LIST:

 Funding high-tech

Springboard: Makes grants of $50,000 to $250,000 to early-stage high-tech firms.
$10 million a year is available from the state Economic Development Authority
(njeda.com).

New Jersey Biotechnology Venture Capital Fund: Will make investment in New
Jersey biotechnology firms, and the size of individual investments hasn't been
decided. The fund will receive an initial investment of $10 million from New
Jersey and plans to use that money to leverage additional private sector
investments. The fund will be run by a venture capital firm that hasn't been
selected.

The Business Employment Incentive Program: Companies that create jobs can
receive rebates of as much as 80 percent of the state income taxes paid by their
employees. The program was revamped to widen eligibility; companies can receive
tax credits for creating 25 jobs, or as few as 10 jobs in high-tech industries.
The state is making grants of more than $50 million a year, and the program is
run by the state Economic Development Authority.

Technology Tax Certificate Transfer Program: Development-stage companies can
sell their tax losses or unused research tax credits to profitable firms to
raise working capital. The state provides $40 million a year for this program,
run by the state Economic Development Authority.

Seed Capital Loans: Low-interest state loans, ranging from $25,000 to $500,000
for early-stage firms to commercialize technology. During recent years, a total
of $5.5 million has been loaned to 20 firms. Run by the state Economic
Development Authority.

Small Business Innovation Research Grants: Research grants of up to $850,000 are
awarded by federal agencies to small firms to perform targeted research and
development. New Jersey firms received a total of $46 million in 2002. The
research proposals are issued by federal agencies, including the Department of
Defense, the National Institutes of Health and NASA(sba.gov/sbir).

 - Beth Fitzgerald, THE STAR-LEDGER

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             549 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     December 19, 2003 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 6B Deaths Elsewhere

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: Deaths Elsewhere

BODY:

   Jenifer Estess, 40, a theater producer who set up a foundation for research
into Lou Gehrig's disease after she learned she had it, died of the illness
Tuesday at her New York City apartment. She had become completely paralyzed and
lost the ability to breathe.

   Her disease, a degenerative disorder of the nerve cells that control muscle
movement, was diagnosed in 1997. Technically known as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, it affects 30,000 Americans and is usually fatal in two to five
years. Joined by three sisters and calling on her experience as a producer, she
raised more than $17 million and brought together scientists from different
laboratories to cooperate in the search for a cure. The foundation paid for
investigations into genetics, stem cells, gene therapy, accelerated drug testing
and disease pathways.

   Miss Estess, the subject of a Sun profile in 2001, chose the ALS laboratory
at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine to be a chief recipient of funds.
Project A.L.S. has staged benefits involving show business celebrities in New
York and Los Angeles, and last year it arranged for Project A.L.S. Day at 14
Major League Baseball stadiums. At each event, a celebrity read Gehrig's famous
farewell speech, in which he declared to Yankee fans that he considered himself
"the luckiest man on the face of the Earth."

   Miss Estess helped found the Nantucket Film Festival and New York Women's
Film Festival, and helped start a New York theater company, Naked Angels. In
2001, she produced a movie for CBS television called Jenifer that told her
story, and was named Glamour magazine's woman of the year.

   Elizabeth Bates, 56, a leading expert on the way infants develop language and
an outspoken critic of the theory that humans are endowed at birth with a
language module, died of pancreatic cancer Sunday at her home in San Diego.

   Dr. Bates was a professor of cognitive science and director of the Center for
Research in Language at the University of California, San Diego, and was known
for her very public stance in the debate on nature vs. nurture -- that is, how
much of human behavior is genetic and how much is learned from the environment.

   She thought that all development, including the acquisition of language,
rested on a foundation of general mental abilities. For example, humans drive
cars not because their brains contain car-driving modules but by using various
visual, motor and focusing skills, which are parts of the brain's wider
repertoire.

   Language is special and unique, Dr. Bates said, but its specialness is
derived from the interaction of bits and pieces in the brain that get recruited
for many purposes. Defining language as "a new machine built out of old parts,"
she spent her career working out the details of that concept.

   In putting forth her ideas, she criticized the theories of linguist Noam
Chomsky of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and his colleague Steven
Pinker, the psychology professor, now at Harvard. They contend that infants have
a high degree of early knowledge and that development is more a matter of
unfolding inborn traits.

   John A. Mulheren Jr., 54, a charismatic Wall Street trader during the 1980s
and chief executive of one of the New York Stock Exchange's largest specialist
firms, died Monday at his home in Rumson, N.J. The cause was seizures that
resulted in a heart attack, a family spokesman said.

   During the mergers and acquisitions boom of the 1980s, Mr. Mulheren was part
of a small circle of highly successful traders, including Robert E. Rubin of
Goldman, Sachs, that made big bets on the shares of companies in takeover
battles.

   Mr. Mulheren became one of the most proficient arbitrage traders on Wall
Street, making as much as $25 million in 1986, according to published reports.

   Two years later, however, his fortunes changed as he was implicated in an
insider trading scandal. He had been linked to the trading activities of Ivan F.
Boesky, the speculator who would be convicted on insider trading charges. Mr.
Mulheren was found guilty of securities fraud, but the case was later
overturned.

   He switched from trading to management in the early 1990s, presiding over the
growth of Bear Wagner Specialists, which today represents 16 percent of trading
activity on the New York exchange, ranking fourth among specialist firms.

   In 2001, because of his charitable work related to the Sept. 11 attacks,
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who as U.S. attorney for New York in the 1980s had
prosecuted Mr. Mulheren, named him an honorary police commissioner.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2003


                             550 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 19, 2003, Friday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-5

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: JENIFER ESTESS; Theatrical producer; 40

BYLINE: Douglas Martin; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 Jenifer Estess, a theatrical producer who set up a foundation for research into
Lou Gehrig's disease after she learned she had it, died Tuesday at her apartment
in Manhattan.  She was 40.

   The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, as Lou Gehrig's disease
is formally known, her sister Valerie Estess said.

   Her disease, a degenerative disorder of the nerve cells that control muscular
movement, was diagnosed in 1997. It affects 30,000 Americans and is usually
fatal in two to five years.

   With friends and family members, Miss Estess set up Project A.L.S., and,
calling on her experience as a producer, she raised more than $17 million and
brought together scientists from laboratories to cooperate in the search for a
cure.

   The foundation paid for investigations into genetics, stem cells, gene
therapy, accelerated drug testing and disease pathways.  Some new approaches may
help those with related conditions, like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, as well as
brain and spinal cord injury, her sister said.

   Jenifer Greer Estess was born Feb. 17, 1963, in Moline, Ill., and grew up in
Harrison, N.Y. After graduating from New York University with a major in drama,
she worked as an actress.  She helped found the Naked Angels, a Manhattan
theater company, and was its producing director.

   She then worked in public relations and helped found the Nantucket Film
Festival and the New York Women's Film Festival.

   Project A.L.S. has staged benefits involving show business celebrities in New
York and Los Angeles, and in 2002 it arranged for Project A.L.S. Day at 14 Major
League Baseball stadiums.  At each event, a celebrity read Gehrig's famous
farewell speech, in which he declared to Yankee fans that he considered himself
"the luckiest man on the face of the Earth."

   In 2001, Miss Estess produced a movie for CBS television called "Jenifer"
that told her own story.  That year, she was named Glamour magazine's Woman of
the Year.

   HBO is planning to show a documentary about her in May.

   The publication of her memoir, "Tales From the Bed: On Living, Dying and
Having It All," is also scheduled for May.

   Project A.L.S. will continue, Valerie Estess said.

   In addition to her sister Valerie, who lives in Manhattan, Miss Estess is
survived by her mother, Marilyn R. Estess, of Rye, N.Y.; her other sisters,
Alison Estess of Manhattan and Meredith Hulbert of Harrison; and her brother,
Noah, of San Diego.


LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2003


                             551 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          December 17, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Jenifer Estess, 40; Fought Lou Gehrig's Disease

BYLINE:  By DOUGLAS MARTIN

BODY:

   Jenifer Estess, a theatrical producer who set up a foundation for research
into Lou Gehrig's disease after she learned she had it, died yesterday at her
apartment in Manhattan. She was 40.

        The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or A.L.S., as Lou Gehrig's
disease is formally known, her sister Valerie Estess said.

    Ms. Estess was told in 1997 that she had the condition, a degenerative
disease of the nerve cells that control muscular movement. It affects 30,000
Americans and is usually fatal within two to five years.

   With friends and family members, Ms. Estess set up Project A.L.S., and,
calling on her experience as a producer, she raised more than $17 million and
brought together scientists from different laboratories to cooperate in the
search for a cure.

   The foundation paid for investigations into genetics, stem cells, gene
therapy, accelerated drug testing and disease pathways. Some new approaches may
help those with related conditions, like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, as well as
brain and spinal cord injury, her sister said.

   Jenifer Greer Estess was born on Feb. 17, 1963, in Moline, Ill., and grew up
in Harrison, N.Y. After graduating from New York University with a major in
drama, she worked as an actor. She helped found and was producing director of
Naked Angels, a Manhattan theater company.

   She then worked in public relations and helped found the Nantucket Film
Festival and the New York Women's Film Festival.

   Project A.L.S. has staged benefits involving show business celebrities in New
York and Los Angeles, and in 2002 it arranged for Project A.L.S. Day at 14
major-league baseball stadiums. At each event, a celebrity read Gehrig's famous
farewell speech, in which he declared to Yankee fans that he considered himself
"the luckiest man on the face of the earth."

   In 2001, Ms. Estess produced a movie for CBS television called "Jenifer" that
told her own story. That year, she was named Glamour magazine's Woman of the
Year.

   Next May, HBO is planning to show a documentary about her.

   The publication of her memoir, "Tales From the Bed: On Living, Dying and
Having It All," is scheduled for May.

   Project A.L.S. will continue, Valerie Estess said.

   In addition to her sister Valerie, who lives in Manhattan, Ms. Estess is
survived by her mother, Marilyn R. Estess, of Rye, N.Y.; her other sisters,
Alison Estess of Manhattan and Meredith Hulbert of Harrison; and her brother,
Noah, of San Diego.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jenifer Estess (Photo by Reed Rudy, 1998)

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2003


                             552 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 15, 2003, Monday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. D-2

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: Improved hair transplants look good to new customers

BYLINE: Daniela Lamas; KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 The Vietnam vet drove from West Virginia to Miami so that Dr. Jeffrey Epstein
could remove a strip of his scalp, separate the hair and replant it into 2,200
skin-deep incisions in his bald, anesthetized pate.

   That's how much the 57-year old, who goes by Ace, wanted hair.  He'd covered
up with baseball caps for years, but retirement had given him time to indulge
and pay closer attention to the man in the mirror.

   "This was a perfect opportunity," said Ace, who decided on the $7,000
procedure after seeing a friend with a natural-looking hair transplant.

   Recent surgical advances mean Ace, and millions of American men like him, can
expect more attractive results than ever before.  But the best technologies are
labor-intensive, expensive and -- if done poorly -- can leave patients still
desperate for hair and dissatisfied with results.

   Today's hair transplantation was born in the 1960s, when doctors found that
hair kept growing when they moved chunks of skin and hair from one part of the
scalp to another.  The results were mixed, creating a telltale pattern often
compared to doll's hair or toothbrush bristles.

   The years brought more bizarre surgeries.  The tissue-expansion method in the
1980s required doctors to implant inflatable, saline-filled bags underneath the
scalp.  The skin -- both bald and hair-producing -- would stretch, so that when
doctors removed the bags, they'd be able to cover the skull with the newly
expanded hair.

   Epstein, a plastic surgeon who is president of Miami's Foundation for Hair
Restoration, started performing hair transplantation in 1993, with
mini-grafting.  This meant transplanting small pieces of skin and hair.  He
changed four years ago to follicular unit grafts, a tedious procedure grafting
each root separately to give the most natural result.  Ace's would be a 2,200
follicle, four-hour transplant.  Doctors can't create follicles, so they aim for
an illusion of more hair, using what's there.

   Epstein is experimenting with transplanting hair from other areas, like the
beard.  Laboratory researchers hold out promise for gene therapy, and ways to
make the follicle start growing hair again.

   On the day of Ace's recent surgery, Miami resident Lance Sappington, 31,
returned to Epstein's office to have his hair washed.

   An administrator at the University of Miami School of Medicine and a
part-time model, Sappington is tall, chiseled and balding.  The top of his head
was dark red and scabbed from the surgery the day before, as it would remain for
about a week.  Then, the transplanted hair would fall out and three months
later, new hair would start to grow.

   He called his decision to get a transplant "60 percent modeling and 40
percent vanity."

   Sappington, born in Idaho, said if he still lived there he would have cut his
hair short and forgotten about it.  But here in Miami, trying to make it as a
model, the hair loss that started at the end of college was making him
miserable.

   Waking up to notice a bald spot could ruin his day.  He loves the ocean, but
hated how his hair looked when wet.  He had another transplant with a different
doctor, but had continued to lose hair.

   He remained hopeful, believing that the $6,500 would make a more lasting
difference this time.  It was a huge financial drain, he said, but he considered
it an investment in his modeling career.  Besides, it was worth more to him than
a vacation.

   "I'd do this in a heartbeat before a trip to Italy," Sappington said.  "Italy
will be there and I want to take pictures with hair."


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Andrew Bosch / Knight-Ridder/Tribune; Plastic surgeon Dr.
Jeffrey Epstein works on a piece of scalp during a hair transplant.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2003


                             553 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 10, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1593 words

HEADLINE: Bioarchitect; Tissue engineer's micro-merger of sciences could change
the face of medicine

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 When Sangeeta Bhatia first arrived at UCSD from Harvard in 1999, she spent
little time in her lab.  There was too much work to do.

   A tissue engineer by training, Bhatia reached across department walls seeking
the expertise of others -- chemists, physicists, materials scientists and
electrical engineers.

   Bhatia had grand ambitions.  She wanted to find a way to grow liver tissue in
the lab -- not merely some agglomeration of cells in a petri dish but an entire
liver.

   So, Bhatia needed some help.

   Michael Sailor, a UCSD chemist, was fashioning ways to etch chips of silicon
atom by atom so precisely that the chip's surface could recognize individual
molecules.  He had developed such a chip as a chemical sensor for the Defense
Department.

   "We had developed great tools to carve out these nanostructures, but we
didn't care anything about cells or biology, or how that would even interact
with biology," he said.

   But Bhatia saw connections.  What if Sailor's silicon chips could be
engineered as platforms, even scaffolding for growing cells?  Could tiny silicon
particles be used as biological sensors to monitor the health of these cells?
Or could they travel through the bloodstream as scouts programmed to seek out
cancerous tumors?

   Bhatia's collaboration with Sailor, which has led to numerous scientific
papers and several patents, is only one of many partnerships she has cultivated
since she arrived at UCSD.

   "She continuously brings in new ways of doing these studies," said Shu Chien,
dean of UCSD's department of bioengineering who recruited her.  "She's really at
the frontier."

   Trained as a tissue engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
as a physician at Harvard Medical School, Bhatia is among a new community of
researchers who are redefining what medicine can become.

   Tissue engineers aim to grow human tissue artificially, often outside the
body, before transplanting it back inside.  It is a multidiscipline field,
demanding knowledge of fundamental biology and human physiology, engineering
principles such as fluid dynamics and materials science, surgery, immunology,
pathology, radiology and gene therapy.

   In recent years, tissue engineers have married their field with
nanotechnology, the science of engineering surfaces and machines at an atomic
scale.

   "You look at most of our work and it always has an inorganic or synthetic
component, some material that's like a semiconductor or a piece of plastic or a
piece of glass (that must interface) with live material, live cells," she said.

   "That interface is something that goes through all of our work.  How can we
make cells 'talk' to synthetic materials, to the synthetic world?  How can we
make synthetic materials 'talk' to cells?"

   Science and medicine

   Bhatia, at 35, is among the youngest tenured professors at UCSD, and among
the most accomplished anywhere.  In September, MIT's Technological Review
magazine named her among the top 100 young innovators for 2003.

   She has authored and co-authored scores of scientific papers, has co-written
two textbooks and holds several patents.

   Bhatia was raised in Lexington, Mass., where her father, an engineer by
training, worked for years as a consultant for a large accounting firm.  Her
mother earned an MBA in India and has worked as an accountant.  The couple met
in India while in graduate school and immigrated to the United States in 1965.

   As a girl, Bhatia remembers wanting to be like Marie Curie, the Nobel
Prize-winning physicist who discovered the radioactive elements polonium and
radium.

   "She was just an amazing person and a pioneer," said Bhatia.  "Even as a
girl, I just thought that she was somebody who was an accessible role model
because she was female and she had done all these neat things."

   As an undergraduate at Brown University, Bhatia was involved in the campus
Society of Woman Engineers, tutoring younger students.  Her enthusiasm for her
work, says one college friend, was infectious.

   "She's genuinely curious and excited about what she's doing, as opposed to
necessarily being -- to use a stereotype -- traditionally sort of bookish and
somewhat introverted," said Theresia Gouw Ranzetta, who met Bhatia in a freshman
engineering class.

   In graduate school at MIT -- where she met her husband, Jagesh -- Bhatia and
a classmate, Christopher Chen, decided to supplement their course work with
medical school classes at Harvard.  She completed her medical education after
arriving at UCSD and now serves as an adjunct professor in the medical school's
department of gastroenterology.

   Her friendship with Chen, now a tissue engineer at Johns Hopkins University
in Maryland, has led to a formal academic partnership in which their students
occasionally travel to one another's labs.

   "When we were in graduate school, he and I weren't allowed to collaborate
because our labs were competing," Bhatia said.  "It was frustrating . . . That
sort of experience made us realize that out there are people who are much better
at doing the kind of thing that you'd like to try.  If you can work well with
others, it's so much easier and better for everyone."

   At the Burnham Institute in La Jolla, Bhatia has linked up with Erkki
Ruoslahti to find new ways to attack cancer tumors.  "My experience," he said,
"is she likes to team up with people with complementary expertise and accomplish
something bigger than any single person in their lab would be able to do."

   Building a liver

   Bhatia's collaboration with Sailor has led to the development of silicon
platforms for growing liver tissue.  Sailor is studying how to engineer the
platforms so they reflect certain wavelengths of light in the presence of
viable, functioning cells.

   Figuring out how to grow liver tissue in the lab is a major thrust of
Bhatia's lab work.  Liver disease kills more than 30,000 Americans a year, and
health officials project that by 2010 more people will be infected with the
hepatitis C virus, which affects the liver, than HIV.

   Growing liver cells in the lab is an enormous challenge.  Within the organ
are many different types of cells that serve specific functions and they are
organized with a complex architecture.  In order to reproduce that architecture
outside the body, in an inorganic scaffolding of plastic or silicon, researchers
must first completely understand how the liver grows inside the body.

   Fundamental is understanding how cells communicate with one another as they
divide and differentiate, and how they interact with synthetic materials.

   In Bhatia's lab, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers purify and
grow samples of human and animal liver cells, and study how various hormones
prompt their growth.  Others, using techniques borrowed from the microchip
industry, work on new ways to engineer small silicon chips for growing liver
cells.  At one end of the lab is a small surgical center in which researchers
perform experiments with lab mice.

   Bhatia, Sailor and Ruoslahti are also designing nanoparticles -- each
billionths of a meter in diameter -- to ride through the bloodstream and home in
on cancer cells.

   Bhatia's lab has manufactured nanoparticles called "quantum dots" made from
cadmium selenide, which are designed as biological markers to diagnose, for
example, the size of a tumor.  Scientists also want to use them to deliver drugs
directly to cancer cells.

   Ruoslahti has been able to attach peptides -- small chains of amino acids --
to the quantum dots so that they will recognize the vasculature that feeds
cancer cells.

   "I provide the guidance systems, and they build the rest of it," he said.

   Bhatia is also studying how to make the quantum dots, outfitted with
Ruoslahti's peptides, release a payload of drugs after they've arrived at a
tumor.

   "If you really can target drugs, then you should be able to get away with
more drugs to the tumor and less drug to the healthy tissues -- which means you
could reduce the side effects of chemotherapy," Bhatia said.

   Future nanoparticles could be made of gold or silicon, which are safer than
cadmium selenide.  "We sort of felt that quantum dots were a proof of
principle," Bhatia said.  "Now that we know that we can use the peptides to
deliver stuff where we want, we can think of using other materials."

   The UCSD-Burnham collaboration is funded by a $2.2 million grant from the
National Cancer Institute and NASA.

   Why NASA? The space agency is keenly interested in finding innovative ways
for astronauts to deal with medical problems far from the expertise of doctors
and state-of-the-art hospitals.

   Finding balance

   Despite her busy schedule, Bhatia says she decided long ago to make time for
her personal life.  While in graduate school at MIT, Bhatia said she pushed
herself too hard and eventually developed an ulcer.

   "I can't do this," Bhatia remembers thinking.  "I can't work as hard as
everyone at MIT. I can't be here at 3 o'clock in the morning on Saturday.  It's
just not the way I want to live my life, and if it means that I'm not successful
then that's what it means."

   So far, success has hardly eluded the young scientist.

   She and Jagesh, a UCSD scientist who studies cancer biology and Lou Gehrig's
disease, had a baby girl, Anjali, six months ago.  She also fills her life with
family and friends, yoga, a book club and travel.

   "It's really important for me to have balance," she said.  "It's very
important that science isn't the only thing, because I don't think it
encompasses everything that I want out of life, and everything that I enjoy."


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS | 1 ILLUSTRATION; 1,3. Crissy Pascual / Union-Tribune; 1.
Sangeeta Bhatia, an associate professor of bioengineering at UCSD, seeks out
collaborations with chemists, molecular biologists, engineers and others to
advance her work in growing organs. 3. UCSD graduate student Austin Derfus works
with a sample of glowing nanoparticles, called quantum dots, in Bhatia's
laboratory. They are being engineered to help diagnose tumors and deliver drugs.
(F-4)

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2003


                             554 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 10, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1572 words

HEADLINE: Bioarchitect;
Tissue engineer's micro-merger of sciences could change the face of medicine

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   When Sangeeta Bhatia first arrived at UCSD from Harvard in 1999, she spent
little time in her lab.

   There was too much work to do. A tissue engineer by training, Bhatia reached
across department walls seeking the expertise of others -- chemists, physicists,
materials scientists and electrical engineers. Bhatia had grand ambitions.

   She wanted to find a way to grow liver tissue in the lab -- not merely some
agglomeration of cells in a petri dish but an entire liver. So, Bhatia needed
some help. Michael Sailor, a UCSD chemist, was fashioning ways to etch chips of
silicon atom by atom so precisely that the chip's surface could recognize
individual molecules.

   He had developed such a chip as a chemical sensor for the Defense Department.
"We had developed great tools to carve out these nanostructures, but we didn't
care anything about cells or biology, or how that would even interact with
biology," he said. But Bhatia saw connections.

   What if Sailor's silicon chips could be engineered as platforms, even
scaffolding for growing cells?

   Could tiny silicon particles be used as biological sensors to monitor the
health of these cells?

   Or could they travel through the bloodstream as scouts programmed to seek out
cancerous tumors? Bhatia's collaboration with Sailor, which has led to numerous
scientific papers and several patents, is only one of many partnerships she has
cultivated since she arrived at UCSD. "She continuously brings in new ways of
doing these studies," said Shu Chien, dean of UCSD's department of
bioengineering who recruited her. "She's really at the frontier." Trained as a
tissue engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and as a physician
at Harvard Medical School, Bhatia is among a new community of researchers who
are redefining what medicine can become. Tissue engineers aim to grow human
tissue artificially, often outside the body, before transplanting it back
inside.

   It is a multidiscipline field, demanding knowledge of fundamental biology and
human physiology, engineering principles such as fluid dynamics and materials
science, surgery, immunology, pathology, radiology and gene therapy. In recent
years, tissue engineers have married their field with nanotechnology, the
science of engineering surfaces and machines at an atomic scale. "You look at
most of our work and it always has an inorganic or synthetic component, some
material that's like a semiconductor or a piece of plastic or a piece of glass
(that must interface) with live material, live cells," she said. "That interface
is something that goes through all of our work.

   How can we make cells `talk' to synthetic materials, to the synthetic world?

   How can we make synthetic materials `talk' to cells?" Science and medicine
Bhatia, at 35, is among the youngest tenured professors at UCSD, and among the
most accomplished anywhere.

   In September, MIT's Technological Review magazine named her among the top 100
young innovators for 2003. She has authored and co-authored scores of scientific
papers, has co-written two textbooks and holds several patents. Bhatia was
raised in Lexington, Mass., where her father, an engineer by training, worked
for years as a consultant for a large accounting firm.

   Her mother earned an MBA in India and has worked as an accountant.

   The couple met in India while in graduate school and immigrated to the United
States in 1965. As a girl, Bhatia remembers wanting to be like Marie Curie, the
Nobel Prize-winning physicist who discovered the radioactive elements polonium
and radium. "She was just an amazing person and a pioneer," said Bhatia.

   "Even as a girl, I just thought that she was somebody who was an accessible
role model because she was female and she had done all these neat things." As an
undergraduate at Brown University, Bhatia was involved in the campus Society of
Woman Engineers, tutoring younger students.

   Her enthusiasm for her work, says one college friend, was infectious. "She's
genuinely curious and excited about what she's doing, as opposed to necessarily
being -- to use a stereotype -- traditionally sort of bookish and somewhat
introverted," said Theresia Gouw Ranzetta, who met Bhatia in a freshman
engineering class. In graduate school at MIT -- where she met her husband,
Jagesh -- Bhatia and a classmate, Christopher Chen, decided to supplement their
course work with medical school classes at Harvard.

   She completed her medical education after arriving at UCSD and now serves as
an adjunct professor in the medical school's department of gastroenterology. Her
friendship with Chen, now a tissue engineer at Johns Hopkins University in
Maryland, has led to a formal academic partnership in which their students
occasionally travel to one another's labs. "When we were in graduate school, he
and I weren't allowed to collaborate because our labs were competing," Bhatia
said.

   "It was frustrating . . . That sort of experience made us realize that out
there are people who are much better at doing the kind of thing that you'd like
to try.

   If you can work well with others, it's so much easier and better for
everyone." At the Burnham Institute in La Jolla, Bhatia has linked up with Erkki
Ruoslahti to find new ways to attack cancer tumors.

   "My experience," he said, "is she likes to team up with people with
complementary expertise and accomplish something bigger than any single person
in their lab would be able to do." Building a liver Bhatia's collaboration with
Sailor has led to the development of silicon platforms for growing liver tissue.

   Sailor is studying how to engineer the platforms so they reflect certain
wavelengths of light in the presence of viable, functioning cells. Figuring out
how to grow liver tissue in the lab is a major thrust of Bhatia's lab work.

   Liver disease kills more than 30,000 Americans a year, and health officials
project that by 2010 more people will be infected with the hepatitis C virus,
which affects the liver, than HIV. Growing liver cells in the lab is an enormous
challenge.

   Within the organ are many different types of cells that serve specific
functions and they are organized with a complex architecture.

   In order to reproduce that architecture outside the body, in an inorganic
scaffolding of plastic or silicon, researchers must first completely understand
how the liver grows inside the body. Fundamental is understanding how cells
communicate with one another as they divide and differentiate, and how they
interact with synthetic materials. In Bhatia's lab, graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers purify and grow samples of human and animal liver
cells, and study how various hormones prompt their growth.

   Others, using techniques borrowed from the microchip industry, work on new
ways to engineer small silicon chips for growing liver cells.

   At one end of the lab is a small surgical center in which researchers perform
experiments with lab mice. Bhatia, Sailor and Ruoslahti are also designing
nanoparticles -- each billionths of a meter in diameter -- to ride through the
bloodstream and home in on cancer cells. Bhatia's lab has manufactured
nanoparticles called "quantum dots" made from cadmium selenide, which are
designed as biological markers to diagnose, for example, the size of a tumor.

   Scientists also want to use them to deliver drugs directly to cancer cells.
Ruoslahti has been able to attach peptides -- small chains of amino acids -- to
the quantum dots so that they will recognize the vasculature that feeds cancer
cells. "I provide the guidance systems, and they build the rest of it," he said.
Bhatia is also studying how to make the quantum dots, outfitted with Ruoslahti's
peptides, release a payload of drugs after they've arrived at a tumor. "If you
really can target drugs, then you should be able to get away with more drugs to
the tumor and less drug to the healthy tissues -- which means you could reduce
the side effects of chemotherapy," Bhatia said. Future nanoparticles could be
made of gold or silicon, which are safer than cadmium selenide.

   "We sort of felt that quantum dots were a proof of principle," Bhatia said.

   "Now that we know that we can use the peptides to deliver stuff where we
want, we can think of using other materials." The UCSD-Burnham collaboration is
funded by a $2.2 million grant from the National Cancer Institute and NASA. Why
NASA? The space agency is keenly interested in finding innovative ways for
astronauts to deal with medical problems far from the expertise of doctors and
state-of-the-art hospitals. Finding balance Despite her busy schedule, Bhatia
says she decided long ago to make time for her personal life.

   While in graduate school at MIT, Bhatia said she pushed herself too hard and
eventually developed an ulcer. "I can't do this," Bhatia remembers thinking.

   "I can't work as hard as everyone at MIT. I can't be here at 3 o'clock in the
morning on Saturday. It's just not the way I want to live my life, and if it
means that I'm not successful then that's what it means." So far, success has
hardly eluded the young scientist. She and Jagesh, a UCSD scientist who studies
cancer biology and Lou Gehrig's disease, had a baby girl, Anjali, six months
ago.

   She also fills her life with family and friends, yoga, a book club and
travel. "It's really important for me to have balance," she said.

   "It's very important that science isn't the only thing, because I don't think
it encompasses everything that I want out of life, and everything that I enjoy."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1 ILLUSTRATION; CAPTIONS: 1. Sangeeta Bhatia, an associate
professor of bioengineering at UCSD, seeks out collaborations with chemists,
molecular biologists, engineers and others to advance her work in growing
organs. 3. UCSD graduate student Austin Derfus works with a sample of glowing
nanoparticles, called quantum dots, in Bhatia's laboratory. They are being
engineered to help diagnose tumors and deliver drugs. (F-4); PHOTOBY: 1,3.
Crissy Pascual / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             555 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 7, 2003, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2447 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS IN HUB PRACTICE CAUTION

BYLINE: By Scott Allen, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Maureen Imbrescia recalls that her obstetrician in Boston was openly
skeptical about the Florida doctor who said he could correct a potentially fatal
circulatory problem in her unborn twins. Though Dr. Ruben Quintero had done 250
of the laser surgeries, no long-term studies proved his approach worked and
Boston doctors had never done it.

   Imbrescia flew to Tampa for treatment anyway, and, three years after the
operation, little Sophia and Sydney Imbrescia are free of the "twin to twin
transfusion syndrome."

      Boston gets more federal money for medical research than any other city,
but when it comes to actually using new drugs, devices, and techniques on
patients, many doctors in this region retain a strong conservative streak.
Boston has lagged behind other cities in adopting new technologies and
treatments from disposable contact lenses to gene therapy to a less painful
method of tonsillectomy, sometimes forcing Boston patients to go to other cities
for their medical care.

   "New England is the bastion of old guard medicine," said Dr. Matthew Budoff,
a cardiologist at the UCLA School of Medicine in Torrance, Calif., who is
writing national guidelines expected to boost a high-tech test for early heart
disease that Boston has been slow to embrace. "It's not bad at all, but they
want to be the most evidence-based group that exists."

   Of course, in a city with six hospitals that consistently rank among the
best, there are many areas where Boston leads the nation, from improving the
survival chances of heart attack victims to repairing damaged vocal cords.

   But numerous Boston doctors say their caution is both real and justified,
sparing patients from treatments that either have not been perfected or carry
unforeseen consequences. For instance, Boston surgeons did not perform heart
transplants until 16 years after the first such operation in the US in 1968
because so many patients were dying when their bodies rejected the new organs.

   "Those that have waited [before adopting innovations] have served their
patients well," said Dr. David Acker, chief of obstetrics and gynecology at
Brigham & Women's Hospital, where the Imbrescia twins were born. "Most of us
know what's going on around the country . . . and we are not telling our
patients that they have to stay in Boston and never get the benefit of Florida
medicine or Texas medicine."

   However, the conservative medical culture has frustrated some would-be
innovators, including current US Senate majority leader Bill Frist, a former
heart surgeon, who said he left Boston in 1985 because hospitals were reluctant
to perform the heart transplants he dreamed of doing.

   When researchers in suburban Danvers created the first artificial heart that
doesn't have to be hooked to machines, they naturally hoped Boston doctors would
test it on their sickest heart patients. But, 2 1/2 years after the first
patient received an Abiomed artificial heart, hospitals in Kentucky and Texas
have done nine of the 11 operations. The Boston surgical team trained in the
procedure has yet to implant a single heart in part because they can't find the
right patient.

   "Any other area is easier to get a new procedure established than Boston,"
said Dr. Melvin Clouse, vice chair of radiology at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, a Harvard teaching hospital. "My standard joke is that if it isn't
invented in Boston and by Harvard - and I am at Harvard - it's not good."

   In fact, many observers say the city's conservative streak begins at Harvard
Medical School, the dominant force in Boston medicine for generations and
arguably the nation's best medical school. The 13 major Harvard-affiliated
hospitals, research centers, and other institutions collectively get more
federal research funding for medicine than all but a handful of states, but the
Harvard review panels that approve the use of new treatments on people have a
reputation for being extremely cautious about exposing patients to risk.

   For example, Harvard's microbiolologic safety committee, a joint panel of the
medical school and its teaching hospitals, repeatedly rejected gene therapy
experiments until 1997 - seven years after the first federally-approved test of
the treatment. Andrew Onderdonk, longtime chairman of the committee, said the
panel was concerned about the way researchers got the genes inside cells,
encasing them in viruses whose safety was untested. The death of a healthy
patient in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999
underscores the concern, he said.

   "Boston scientists tend to want good factual informaton to support going
forward with some new technology, and gene therapy was no different. The early
stuff, let's face it, was witchcraft in terms of what science was available,"
said Onderdonk, director of the microbiology lab at Brigham & Women's.

   Harvard also has one of the most restrictive policies on researchers'
financial stake in their work. That reduces the risk that doctors could put
profit ahead of patients' well-being in testing new treatments, but critics say
it also reduces the incentive to produce commercially valuable results such as
life-saving medicines. Some faculty members have been pressing for fewer
restrictions, and Harvard Medical School Dean Joseph B. Martin is expected to
announce a revised conflict of interest policy soon.

   Taken together, the medical schools at Harvard, Tufts, and Boston
universities give Boston one of the most academically-oriented medical
communities in the country, where the leading hospitals are full of doctors who
are also professors. Drug and medical device industry sales people say they
often tailor their marketing campaign to Boston's more exacting approach,
soliciting more top specialists to test the product and focusing on favorable
medical journal articles.

   "You almost have to pretend you are a nonprofit and you're only interested in
the science," said Sherri Lazear, a former national account manager at Johnson &
Johnson who was involved in the market launch of Acuvue disposable contact
lenses in the late 1980s. Sales of the lenses, which reduced the risk of
infection while improving convenience for contact wearers, trailed in Boston
through 1990, according to a former company official.

   But the bureaucracy of such a large medical community can also slow
innovation. For example, surgeons from Brigham & Women's and Mass. General
initially hoped to play a lead role in testing Abiomed's artificial heart, but
the logistics of coordinating a team from two hospitals, along with the cost of
doing animal tests in Boston, made it easier for Abiomed to work closely with
Jewish Hospital in Louisville, Ky., said Dr. Gregory S. Couper, a Brigham &
Women's heart surgeon on the Boston team.

   Today, surgeons at Jewish have implanted five artificial hearts, extending
the life of one patient by 512 days. The Boston team is still looking for a
patient who is too sick for any other treatment, but strong enough to survive
the operation. "I wish what turned out to be Louisville would have been right
here in Boston," said Couper.

   Dr. John Parrish, director of the Center for the Integration of Medicine and
Innovative Technology, spends much of his time lowering barriers that prevent
innovation from reaching Boston patients. The 5-year-old center, supported by
research centers including Mass. General and the Brigham, brings scientists and
physicians together to find technological solutions that doctors alone might not
have known about.

   For instance, Parrish's center brought together three-dimensional image
makers from the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory and doctors at Mass. General to
devise a better way to grow replacement livers, kidneys, or other organs in the
lab.

   "Medicine in general is relatively conservative as far as adopting new
innovations because the stakes are so high," said Parish. "We're trying to
change that to be less conservative, but in a safe way."

   But delay in adopting new technology carries its own risks. Washington
attorney John Sellinger, 53, is convinced he would be "pushing up daisies right
now" if he hadn't undergone a relatively new test this year that can detect
calcium deposits in coronary arteries, a key sign of heart disease.

   The $395 test, which uses an electron beam tomography scanner to make images
of the beating heart, found that he had 20 times the normal calcium level in his
left anterior descending artery, the same region where his brother had a heart
attack a few years before. As a result, when he felt strange one morning last
June, he went to the hospital where doctors found advanced heart disease that
required quadruple bypass surgery.

   "If I hadn't had the scan, I probably wouldn't have paid any attention,"
recalled Sellinger.

   But Boston doesn't have an electron beam tomography scanner, the $2.2 million
device that normally provides the calcium images. The region's leading advocate
for the test, Clouse of Beth Israel Deaconess, has adapted a conventional spiral
CT scanner. Clouse said he gets relatively few referrals from area cardiologists
for the calcium screen and he's done only about 2,000 screens over the last
three years, the most in New England, but minuscule compared to the number of
people in the region with heart disease. By contrast, one company, HeartCheck
America, has tested 75,000 people for heart disease in Illinois alone in the
last few years.

   The heart scan "was originally marketed the wrong way. It was marketed by
people seen as entrepreneurs and that turns the academic community off like a
switch," said Clouse, referring to HeartCheck's attempt to enter the Boston
market.

   The tide may turn this winter when the American Heart Association is expected
to adopt new guidelines endorsing the calcium screen for men over 35 and women
over 45 who have at least one heart disease risk factor. Budoff of UCLA, who
chaired the committee writing the guidelines, said that people who score above
100 on the test are 10 times more likely to have a heart attack or stroke.

   But Boston area doctors are unapologetic for insisting on extensive evidence
before embracing new technologies. In the case of Maureen Imbrescia's twins,
doctors were intrigued by the fetal surgery offered in Tampa to correct the
blood imbalance between the twins, but not enough to recommend it.

   After Imbrescia's delivery of two healthy girls, Acker from Brigham and
Women's visited Quintero repeatedly to learn about the laser surgery, finally
bringing a team to Florida to learn how to do it. By next year, he predicts
Brigham & Women's will begin offering the surgery in certain cases.

   "We have moved slowly, which I guess is our way, but I'm not apologizing,"
said Acker, who says the laser surgery is no longer experimental, but still
lacks the long-term studies that would make him more comfortable.

   Ultimately, Boston doctors may simply reflect the conservative sensibility of
their patients. For instance, Boston consistently had among the lowest numbers
of volunteers willing to undergo tests of vision correction surgery in the late
1980s and early '90s, recalled Dr. Roger Steinert of Harvard Medical School, who
pioneered the highly popular Lasik technique locally.

   "The patients who would come in for it had to have some willingness to take
risks and it has absolutely been my consistent impression that people in the
Northeast and Boston in particular are a little more conservative," said
Steinert. "That's not necessarily a criticism. They've probably saved themselves
a lot of grief over the years."

   Scott Allen can be reached at allen@globe.com.  SIDEBAR: A history of caution

   Though Boston boasts some of the best hospitals in the world, the city's
doctors have a reputation for caution when it comes to embracing new
technologies:

   Gene therapy became one of the hottest fields in medicine after the first
approved trial in 1990, in which a 4-year-old girl was injected with genes in
hopes of curing a genetic disease. But officials at Harvard Medical School were
so concerned about the safety of viruses used to ferry the genes into patients
that they did not approve gene therapy tests until 1997.

   Heart transplants in the United States began at Stanford University in 1968,
but, by 1970, 143 of the 166 patients who had the dramatic procedure had died,
often because the patient's body rejected the new organ. Boston surgeons did not
transplant a heart until 1984, when better antirejection drugs were available.

   Disposable contact lenses, introduced in 1988, allowed wearers to keep lenses
in all day and reduced the risk of lenses popping out. But prescriptions lagged
in Boston compared with the national market through 1990, say former Johnson &
Johnson officials, in part due to concerns about the cost and possible eye
irritation from extended wear.

   Artificial heart developers - based in Danvers - hoped that a Boston surgical
team would implant one of their unique devices in a patient. But 2 1/2 years
after the first patient at Jewish Hospital in Louisville, Ky., received the
battery-powered heart, no one has undergone the operation in Boston. Doctors
here say they have had difficulty finding a patient whose only hope is a
mechanical heart and who is strong enough to survive the operation.

   Fetal laser surgery to correct a potentially fatal circulatory disorder in
twins was pioneered in Tampa, Fla., where Dr. Ruben Quintero has performed 350
of the procedures since 1990. Boston doctors were initially skeptical of the
treatment for twin to twin transfusion syndrome, but they were impressed by
Quintero's work. Doctors at Brigham & Women's hospital, with New England's top
obstetrics ward, expect to begin offering the laser surgery next year.

   Coblation assisted tonsillectomy uses the energy from a plasma field to
remove tonsils less painfully than the conventional method, allowing quicker
recovery. But, two years after the Food and Drug Administration approved the
procedure, only about 1 percent of tonsillectomies in the Boston area use
Coblation, compared with 12 percent nationwide, according to the company that
makes the plasma wand.

   Heart scans allow cardiologists to detect signs of heart disease by looking
at calcium deposits in coronary arteries. Chicago radiologists have pioneered
heart scans, performing more than 75,000 in the past decade. Boston doesn't have
the costly electron beam tomography scanner normally used for the tests, which
some cardiologists regard as experimental. The American Heart Association is
expected to conclude that people with elevated calcium levels face a tenfold
higher risk of heart attack or stroke.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Maureen Imbrescia flew to Tampa, Fla., for fetal surgery to
correct a potentially fatal circulatory problem in her unborn twins. Boston
doctors had not done the procedure. Now 3, Sydney (left) and Sophia, are free of
the 'twin to twin transfusion syndrome.' / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / WENDY MAEDA

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2003


                             556 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 7, 2003, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. H2

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: WHO'S WHAT, WHERE

BODY:

   TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES

   LYDIA VILLA-KOMAROFF AND DENNIS LANGER HAVE JOINED THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS AT
TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES INC., A BIOPHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY IN CAMBRIDGE.
VILLA-KOMAROFF IS CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER AT THE WHITEHEAD INSTITUTE AND LANGER
IS SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF PROJECT AND PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT AT GLAXOSMITHKLINE.

      NITROMED

   NITROMED INC., A PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY IN BEDFORD, HAS NAMED DAVEY S. SCOON
TO ITS BOARD OF DIRECTORS. SCOON WILL ALSO SERVE AS CHAIRMAN OF ITS AUDIT
COMMITTEE. SCOON IS CHAIRMAN OF TUFTS HEALTH PLAN AND CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE AND
FINANCIAL OFFICER OF TOM'S OF MAINE.

   DEUTSCHE BANK

   PRIVATE WEALTH MANAGEMENT DEUTSCHE BANK PRIVATE WEALTH MANAGEMENT, WHICH
PROVIDES STRATEGIC SOLUTIONS TO HIGH-NET-WORTH INDIVIDUALS, HAS NAMED G. WEST
SALTONSTALL HEAD OF ITS BOSTON OFFICE. SALTONSTALL WILL CONTINUE IN HIS ROLE AS
A SENIOR INVESTMENT ADVISER WITH DEUTSCHE BANK PRIVATE WEALTH MANAGEMENT'S US
INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT BOUTIQUE, SCUDDER PRIVATE INVESTMENT COUNSEL, WHERE HE WAS
WORKED FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS.

   BERNSTEIN, SHUR, SAWYER & NELSON

   ANGUS S. KING JR., A FORMER TWO-TERM MAINE GOVERNOR, HAS JOINED BERNSTEIN,
SHUR, SAWYER & NELSON. KING WILL SERVE AS SPECIAL COUNSEL AT THE LAW FIRM'S
PORTLAND OFFICE. BEFORE SERVING AS GOVERNOR FROM 1994 TO 2002, KING STARTED AN
ENERGY CONSERVATION BUSINESS, NORTHEAST ENERGY MANAGEMENT INC., WHICH HE SOLD
BEFORE RUNNING FOR GOVERNOR.

   PANTERO

   PANTERO CORP., A DATA INTEGRATION COMPANY IN WALTHAM, HAS NAMED DENNIS
DOUGHTY VICE PRESIDENT OF ENGINEERING. MOST RECENTLY, DOUGHTY WAS VICE PRESIDENT
OF ENGINEERING AT LYCOS.

   UMASS MEMORIAL

   STEPHEN O. HEARD HAS BEEN NAMED CHAIRMAN OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ANESTHESIOLOGY
AT UMASS MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTER AND THE UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL
SCHOOL IN WORCESTER. HEARD, FORMERLY EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE DEPARTMENT,
HAS SERVED AS INTERIM CHAIRMAN SINCE JULY 2002.

   BRIDGEWATER STATE COLLEGE

   DARLENE COSTA HAS BEEN NAMED ASSOCIATE VICE PRESIDENT FOR FISCAL AFFAIRS AND
CONTROLLER AT BRIDGEWATER STATE COLLEGE IN BRIDGEWATER. PREVIOUSLY, SHE WAS
COMPTROLLER AT MASSASOIT COMMUNITY COLLEGE AND WAS ASSISTANT DEAN OF FISCAL
AFFAIRS AT QUINSIGAMOND COMMUNITY COLLEGE.

   FLEXCON

   FLEXCON, A MANUFACTURER OF PRESSURE-SENSITIVE FILM IN SPENCER, HAS NAMED DAVE
ROSEN MANAGING DIRECTOR OF FLEXCON EUROPE. MOST RECENTLY, HE WAS DIRECTOR OF
CORPORATE BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT. DENTAQUEST

   DentaQuest Ventures Inc., a Boston-based dental benefits company, has named
Eleanor S. McConnell manager of client business. Previously, she was customer
service manager at DentaQuest.

   ABERDEEN GROUP

   Aberdeen Group, an IT market research firm in Boston, has named Brian S.
Sommer vice president of field research services and Lloyd Bunting vice
president of sales. Previously, Sommer founded TechVentive, a technology
consultancy, and Bunting was vice president of North American sales at Giga
Information Group, an IT advisory services and consulting company.

   KABLOOM

   KaBloom, a flower store based in Woburn with retail locations in the Boston

   area, has named Randy Schenauer chief of logistics. Schenauer joins KaBloom
from Delaware Valley Wholesale Florist Inc., where he was been president since
1999.

   Send announcements to Who's What, Where, The Boston Globe, Box 2378, Boston,
MA 02107 (e-mail: who@globe.com; fax: 617-929-3183.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2003


                             557 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                     December 7, 2003 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: CITY STATE; Y-Press; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 1015 words

HEADLINE: Bipolar patients can learn to live with disorder

BYLINE: BY LISA CALLAHAN, 16 CARLY DECKER, 18 AND BRIAN REISSAUS, 17 Y-PRESS

BODY:

   Bipolar disorder has been described as a roller coaster, with manic highs and
depressive lows.

   "In a manic period, there's really no sleep involved -- like you stay up for
a long time. It can be very productive. You can get things done for a while,
then you start to lose your focus and you can't pay attention, and you just
start to kind of come apart at the seams," says Zack Lamm, 22, an ITT Tech
student who first experienced bipolar symptoms in high school.

   "A depressed period is basically the opposite," he said. "There's just like a
general apathy. You don't feel like doing anything. You don't want to hang out
with your friends."

   According to Dr. Ryan Moe, a psychiatrist and addictionologist at the
Institute of Psychiatric Research at Indiana University, Lamm's experiences are
typical for a person with bipolar disorder.

   "This disorder has two components to it -- one is the elation and one is the
depression. They kind of cycle back and forth," said Moe, who works with bipolar
patients in clinics and hospitals.

   More than 2 million Americans, or 1 percent of the population, suffer from
bipolar disorder, according to the National Institute of Mental Health. Moe said
the condition is not more likely among any one race or gender.

   The disorder comes on suddenly, usually when people are in their early 20s.
The first symptoms include acting differently for no apparent reason. For
example, during a manic period, a person might start spending money recklessly
or think God is speaking to him or her. In a depressive stage, bipolar patients
might become suicidal or experience feelings of worthlessness.

   The cycles can change unexpectedly or follow a pattern, and a lot of people
feel and act normally in between extremes.

   "It tends to be seasonal, and people can predict, 'I usually get manic in the
spring. I'm depressed in the winter,' " said registered nurse Carrie Smiley, who
coordinates the family genetics studies in bipolar disorder for Dr. John
Nurnberger Jr., director of the Institute of Psychiatric Research.

   Though the disorder is unique to every patient, there are a few differences
between children and adults. Moe said early symptoms for children might include
behavioral problems, irritability, and problems getting schoolwork done, traits
also seen in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder patients. According to the
Aug. 19, 2002, issue of Time magazine, up to 15 percent of children thought to
have ADHD actually might have bipolar disorder.

   Such was the case for 14-year-old Matt Bennett of Valatie, N.Y.:

   "I had a lot of problems with school. I used to get in a lot of fights.
That's why I got kicked out," said Matt, diagnosed with bipolar disorder a year
and a half ago. "I used to punch holes in the walls all the time."

   Bipolar disorder also might be misdiagnosed as major depression,
schizophrenia and other mental disorders.

   "Let's say somebody came to me in their adolescent years, 16 or so, and
they're really depressed, and I diagnose a major depression. I don't know yet if
they have bipolar disorder (until) they have a manic episode," Moe said.

   There are two types of cyclers, rapid and nonrapid, according to Moe. "If you
have four cycles in a year, then that means you would be considered a rapid
cycler. And if you have less than that, then you are considered a nonrapid
cycler, and approximately 85 percent of the people are nonrapid cyclers that
have bipolar disorder."

   Change in sleeping patterns, substance abuse and stress may trigger bipolar
symptoms.

   "Technically, substances are not the cause of a bipolar disorder, but they
could cause you to have manic symptoms. Other triggers are stress. If you have
lots of stress in your life, you can induce a mania, or you could induce
depression, too, just with stress," Moe said.

   To help control these cycles, patients are usually treated with medication,
group therapy, individual counseling sessions with psychiatrists, or all three.

   Matt undergoes all three forms of treatment and has tried various
medications. "The medicine really doesn't help me, but I have to take it so I
just do," he said.

   Moe said medications play an essential part of the treatment of bipolar
patients. Most patients are treated with lithium, Depakote (divalproex sodium)
or Tegretol. However, severely depressed patients also may take an
antidepressant.

   Though Moe recommends medication, he recognizes the possible side effects.
"What you have to remember is everybody's different, so everybody might have
different side effects," he said. "There are some common ones that you might see
with the lithium in children and adults . . . they might have tremors, maybe
they get thirsty. Weight gain would be another one."

   Matt has gained weight but has had no other side effect. Still, he remains
skeptical of doctors. "They think they know everything about you," he said.
"They try to get in my head, and I just don't let them."

   Researchers are investigating gene therapy, although the illness defies a
simple fix. "There's not going to be just a gene for bipolar disorder; it's
gonna be multiple genes. . . . It expresses itself differently amongst families
and individuals," Smiley said.

   Moe said studies have shown that adopted children who have a biological
parent with bipolar disorder have a higher incidence of developing the disorder
themselves. The same is true of identical twins -- if one twin has the disorder,
the chance that the other will be diagnosed is high.

   With effective treatment, bipolar patients can lead normal lives.

   "It has such a stigma, and yet bipolar disorder is similar to heart disease
and diabetes in that it's very treatable. You can take medication and stay on
medication and lead a perfectly normal life," Smiley said.

   Despite his reluctance to take medication, Matt said that since his
treatment, he has gained greater control of his life. "My life is good. I just
accept myself for who I am."

   REPORTERS: Peter DePaolo, 14; Allison Gardner, 13; Elizabeth Newkirk, 13.

   NEXT WEEK: Zack Lamm discusses his experiences with bipolar disorder.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2005


                             558 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                            December 7, 2003 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 11685 words

HEADLINE: Stealth Merger: Drug Companies and Government Medical Research;
Some of the National Institutes of Health's top scientists are also collecting
paychecks and stock options from biomedical firms. Increasingly, such deals are
kept secret.

BYLINE: David Willman, Times Staff Writer

DATELINE:  BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   "Subject No. 4" died at 1:44 a.m. on June 14, 1999, in the immense federal
research clinic of the National Institutes of Health.

   The cause of death was clear: a complication from an experimental treatment
for kidney inflammation using a drug made by a German company, Schering AG.

   Among the first to be notified was Dr. Stephen I. Katz, the senior NIH
official whose institute conducted the study.

   Unbeknown to the participants, Katz also was a paid consultant to Schering
AG.

   Katz and his institute staff could have responded to the death by stopping
the study immediately. They also could have moved swiftly to warn doctors
outside the NIH who were prescribing the drug for similar disorders. Either step
might have threatened the market potential for Schering AG's drug. They did
neither.

   Questioned later, Katz said that his consulting arrangement with Schering AG
did not influence his institute's decisions. His work with the company was
approved by NIH leaders.

   Such dual roles -- federal research leader and drug company consultant -- are
increasingly common at the NIH, an agency once known for independent scientific
inquiry on behalf of a single client: the public.

   Two decades ago, the NIH was so distinct from industry that Margaret Heckler,
secretary of Health and Human Services in the Reagan administration, could
describe it as "an island of objective and pristine research, untainted by the
influences of commercialization."

   Today, with its senior scientists collecting paychecks and stock options from
biomedical companies, the NIH is no longer an island.

   Interviews and corporate and federal records obtained by the Los Angeles
Times document hundreds of consulting payments to ranking NIH officials,
including:

   * Katz, director of the NIH's National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, who collected between $476,369 and $616,365
in company fees in the last decade, according to his yearly income-disclosure
reports. Some of his fees were reported in ranges without citing exact figures.
Schering AG paid Katz at least $170,000. Another company paid him more than
$140,000 in consulting fees. It won $1.7 million in grants from his institute
before going bankrupt last year.

   * Dr. John I. Gallin, director of the NIH's Clinical Center, the nation's
largest site of medical experiments on humans, who has received between $145,000
and $322,000 in fees and stock proceeds for his consulting from 1997 through
last year. In one case, Gallin co-wrote an article highlighting a company's
gene-transfer technology, while hiring on as a consultant to a subsidiary of
that company.

   * Dr. Richard C. Eastman, the NIH's top diabetes researcher in 1997, who
wrote to the Food and Drug Administration that year defending a product without
disclosing in his letter that he was a paid consultant to the manufacturer.
Eastman's letter said the risk of liver failure from the drug was "very
minimal." Six months later, a patient, Audrey LaRue Jones, who was taking the
drug in an NIH study that Eastman oversaw, suffered sudden liver failure and
died. Liver experts found that the drug probably caused the liver failure.

   * Dr. Ronald N. Germain, deputy director of a major laboratory at the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, who has collected more
than $1.4 million in company consulting fees in the last 11 years, plus stock
options. One of the companies collaborated with his laboratory on research. The
founder of another of the companies worked with Germain on a separate
NIH-sponsored project.

   * Jeffrey Schlom, director of the National Cancer Institute's Laboratory of
Tumor Immunology and Biology, who has taken $331,500 in company fees over 10
years. Schlom helped lead NIH-funded studies exploring wider use for a cancer
drug -- at the same time that his highest-paying client was seeking to make the
drug through genetic engineering.

   * Jeffrey M. Trent, who became scientific director of the National Human
Genome Research Institute in 1993 and, over the next three years, reported
between $50,608 and $163,000 in industry consulting fees. Trent, who accepted
nearly half of that income from a company active in genetic research, was not
required to file public financial-disclosure statements as of 1997. He left the
government last year.

   Hidden From View

   Increasingly, outside payments to NIH scientists are being hidden from public
view. Relying in part on a 1998 legal opinion, NIH officials now allow more than
94% of the agency's top-paid employees to keep their consulting income
confidential.

   As a result, the NIH is one of the most secretive agencies in the federal
government when it comes to financial disclosures. A survey by The Times of 34
other federal agencies found that all had higher percentages of eligible
employees filing reports on outside income. In several agencies, every top-paid
official submitted public reports.

   The trend toward secrecy among NIH scientists goes beyond their failure to
report outside income. Many of them also routinely sign confidentiality
agreements with their corporate employers, putting their outside work under
tight wraps.

   Gallin, Germain, Katz, Schlom and Trent each said that their consulting deals
were authorized beforehand by NIH officials and had no adverse effect on their
government work. Eastman declined to comment for this article.

   Dr. Arnold S. Relman, the former editor of the New England Journal of
Medicine, said that private consulting by government scientists posed
"legitimate cause for concern."

   "If I am a scientist working in an NIH lab and I get a lot of money in
consulting fees, then I'm going to want to make sure that the company does very
well," Relman said.

   Relman and others in the field of medical ethics said company payments raised
important questions about public health decisions made throughout the NIH:

   * Will judgment calls on the safety of individual patients be affected by
commercial interests?

   * Can study participants trust that experimental treatments are chosen on
merit and not because of officials' personal financial interests?

   * Will scientists shade their interpretations of study results to favor their
clients?

   * Will officials favor their clients over other companies that seek NIH
grants or collaborations?

   Conflict-of-interest questions also arise in the potentially lucrative
awarding of patents.

   Thomas J. Kindt, the director of in-house research at the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, accepted $63,000 in consulting fees from a
New York biotechnology company, Innovir Laboratories, and wound up an inventor
on one of its patents.

   Asked why the government received no consideration, Kindt said that he had
contributed to the "basic idea" while using vacation time.

   "No work was done on it as a government employee," said Kindt, whose annual
salary at the NIH is $191,200. His consulting with Innovir was approved by NIH
officials, Kindt said.

   Others worry that the private arrangements can undermine the public interest.

   "The fact that paid consulting is happening I find very disturbing," said Dr.
Curt D. Furberg, former head of clinical trials at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute. "It should not be done."

   Private consulting fees tempt government scientists to pursue less-deserving
research and to "put a spin on their interpretation" of study results, he said.

   "Science should be for the sake of gaining knowledge and looking for the
truth," Furberg said. "There should be no other factors involved that can
introduce bias on decision-making."

   Dr. Ruth L. Kirschstein, who as the deputy director or the acting director of
the NIH since 1993 has approved many of the top officials' consulting
arrangements, said she did not believe they had compromised the public interest.
"I think NIH scientists, NIH directors and all the staff are highly ethical
people with enormous integrity," she said. "And I think we do our business in
the most remarkable way."

   In response to The Times' findings, Kirschstein said, she would "think about"
whether administrators should learn more about a company's ties to the NIH
before approving the consulting arrangements.

   "Systems can always be tightened up," Kirschstein said on Oct. 29. "And
perhaps, based on this, we will do so."

   On Nov. 20, NIH Director Elias A. Zerhouni told agency leaders that he would
form a committee to help "determine the appropriateness" of employees'
consulting and other outside arrangements.

   "I believe we can improve our performance by subjecting ethics deliberations
to a more transparent process," Zerhouni said in a memo.

   In a brief telephone interview last week, Zerhouni said he wanted the NIH "to
manage not just the reality, but the perception of conflict of interest."

   "If there is something that could be viewed as improper, I think we need to
be able to advise our scientists not to get into these relationships," he said.
"My sense is our scientists are people of goodwill."

   Temptations Abound

   The NIH traces its beginnings to the Laboratory of Hygiene, founded in 1887
within a Navy hospital on Staten Island in New York. It became the federal
government's first research institution for confronting such epidemic diseases
as cholera, diphtheria, tuberculosis and smallpox.

   The laboratory's success convinced Congress of its value in seeking cures for
diseases.

   In 1938, the renamed National Institute of Health moved to its present,
300-acre headquarters in Bethesda, about nine miles north of the White House.

   The agency's responsibilities -- and prominence -- have grown steadily.

   In 1948, four institutes were created to support work on cardiac disease,
infectious diseases, dental disorders and experimental biology. "Institute" in
the agency's name became "Institutes."

   President Nixon turned to the NIH in 1971 to lead a war on cancer. The agency
has led the government's fight against AIDS. Two years ago, President Bush
enlisted the NIH to help counter biological terrorism.

   Republican and Democratic administrations have boosted spending for the 27
research centers and institutes that compose today's NIH. Since 1990, the annual
budget has nearly quadrupled, to $27.9 billion this fiscal year.

   Senior NIH scientists are among the highest-paid employees in the federal
government.

   With billions of dollars in product sales potentially at stake for industry,
and untold fortunes riding on biomedical stock prices, commercial temptations
abound:

   Researchers poised to make a breakthrough in their NIH labs can, the same
day, land paid consulting positions with companies eager to exploit their
insights and cachet. Many companies cite their connections to NIH scientists on
Web sites and in news releases, despite an agency rule against the practice.
Selection of a company's products for an NIH study can provide a bankable
endorsement -- attracting investors and boosting stock value. If the study
yields positive results, the benefits can be even greater.

   Conflicts of interest among university medical researchers have received wide
attention in recent years. U.S. Rep. W.J. "Billy" Tauzin (R-La.) also raised
questions recently about cash awards that several nonprofit institutions made to
a previous director of the National Cancer Institute.

   The consulting deals between drug companies and full-time, career employees
at the NIH, however, have gone all but unnoticed.

   The wide embrace of private consulting within the NIH can be traced in part
to calls from Congress for quicker "translation" of basic federal research into
improved treatments for patients.

   And for decades industry has pressed for more access to the government's
scientific discoveries.

   As the number of government-held patents soared, companies sought legislation
encouraging commercialization of federally funded inventions. The proponents
said the changes also would make U.S. firms more competitive with foreign
companies whose research and development programs were subsidized by their
governments.

   Laws enacted in the 1980s for the first time authorized formal research
collaborations between companies and scientific arms of the government,
including the NIH. Starting in late 1986, in-house researchers at the NIH were
permitted to arrange cooperative research agreements with companies. The
agreements were intended to benefit both sides while advancing scientific
discovery.

   Other changes in law permitted the government agencies, and the researchers,
to share in future patent royalties for inventions.

   The new laws said nothing about government employees being hired by the
companies.

   Yet by the end of the 1980s, more companies were putting NIH researchers on
their payrolls, albeit within limits imposed by the NIH.

   Agency leaders in the 1990s began weakening those restrictions.

   In November 1995, then-NIH Director Harold E. Varmus wrote to all institute
and center directors, rescinding "immediately" a policy that had barred them
from accepting consulting fees and payments of stock from companies.

   The changes, he wrote, would bring the NIH ethics rules more in line with
new, less stringent, executive branch standards. Loosening of restrictions on
employees' outside pursuits was occurring throughout the government. And with
biomedical companies ready to hire, few were better positioned to benefit than
employees at the NIH.

   Varmus' memo -- which until now has not been made public -- scuttled other
restraints affecting all employees, including a $25,000 annual limit on outside
income, a prohibition on accepting company stock as payment and a limit of 500
hours a year on outside activities.

   His memo also offered a narrowed definition of conflict of interest:

   Employees had been barred from consulting for any company that collaborated
with their NIH lab or branch. But Varmus said the ban would be applied only if
the researcher was personally involved in the company's collaboration with the
agency.

   Furberg, the former NIH official, said Varmus' actions invited, at minimum,
appearances of conflict of interest.

   "I'm amazed at what he did," said Furberg, a professor at Wake Forest
University. "And to do it in secrecy I find very objectionable. This is a
critical change in the NIH policy."

   In 1999, Varmus wrote a letter to the institute directors that cautioned them
to "avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest." But in an attachment
to the letter, he told them that employees "may briefly discuss or mention
current work" to outsiders, in effect giving agency scientists permission to
reveal their unpublished, confidential research.

   Varmus, now president and chief executive of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center in New York, declined to be interviewed for this article. His
spokeswoman, R. Anne Thomas, said that Varmus, who in 1989 shared a Nobel Prize
for research into the genetic basis of cancer, believed that NIH employees
should take personal responsibility for avoiding conflicts of interest,
regardless of what agency rules allow.

   Kirschstein, after taking over as Varmus' interim successor at the NIH three
years ago, said in a May 2000 speech to medical researchers that conflicts of
interest posed "a major concern."

   "While the federal government was once the dominant force for supporting
clinical research, today we share the arena with biotechnology companies,
pharmaceutical firms and many others -- all interested in the possibility of
financial gain from their research.

   "Profit raises issues of public trust," she said. "When scientific inquiry
generates findings that can make a profit for the researcher and the
institution, their images become clouded."

   Yet officials have lifted controls on consulting even as industry's stake in
NIH research has deepened. When Zerhouni, the current NIH director, appeared
before the House Subcommittee on Environment, Technology and Standards last
year, he cited 274 ongoing research and development agreements between the
federal agency and industry.

   At the same time, NIH leaders have moved to what they describe as "managing"
conflicts of interest. Employees are allowed to consult if they receive prior
clearance from an administrator at their institute or, in the case of most
institute directors, from NIH headquarters.

   An Honor System

   Potential conflicts are typically addressed by allowing employees to sign
"recusals." Under these agreements, NIH employees pledge not to participate in
decisions affecting an outside client. Agency officials, Kirschstein said, rely
on an honor system to enforce recusals and other conflict-of-interest rules.

   The Times found instances in which the recusals did not work as intended.

   In the mid-to-late 1990s, Eastman, the diabetes researcher, participated in a
series of decisions affecting the drug company employing him as a consultant,
despite having signed a recusal. Separately, Katz, the director of the arthritis
institute, signed a recusal involving his client, Schering AG, which
nevertheless supplied the NIH with the drug involved in the kidney patient's
death in 1999.

   Katz said that he did not know at the time that Schering AG was the maker of
the drug his institute was testing.

   Compliance with the recusals can, itself, undercut the interests of the NIH
and taxpayers, who support the agency. When heads of institutes and laboratories
recuse themselves, they sometimes constrain their ability to carry out their
government duties.

   Kirschstein, who for the last eight years has personally reviewed requests
from the institute directors to consult privately for pay, said she tended to
approve the deals, unless she saw "real conflict."

   "I've disapproved some -- and I've approved many," she said.

   In her view, recusals have worked "extremely well" in avoiding conflicts of
interest.

   Other present and former officials say it is difficult, if not impossible,
for researchers to keep separate their confidential government information when
they consult for companies.

   "You can't police the thing," Philip S. Chen Jr., a senior advisor in the NIH
director's office who has served as an agency scientist or administrator since
the 1950s, said in an interview last year. "The rules are there -- whether they
follow the rules is another thing."

   A former NIH director voiced surprise at the agency's loosened approach to
conflicts of interest.

   "There has been a lot of relaxation," said Dr. Bernadine P. Healy, who served
as director from 1991 to 1993. Before, Healy said in an interview, "there were
very strict ethics rules for NIH scientists. You couldn't have virtually any
connection with a company if your institute was in any way doing research
involving their products."

   At least one vestige of the old days remains.

   During last year's holiday season, workers were advised to refuse gifts from
outsiders worth more than $20.

   "Just a reminder," ethics coordinator John C. Condray wrote, introducing a
five-page memo, "that sometimes gifts and events can create the appearance of a
lack of impartiality."

   Fewer Public Filings

   While making it easier for scientists to cut consulting deals, the NIH has
made it harder for the public to find out about them.

   The Ethics in Government Act requires yearly financial-disclosure reports
from senior federal employees. This year, employees paid $102,168 or more
generally must disclose outside income by filing a "278" form, which is
available for public review. Other employees may file a "450" form -- which does
not specify the amount of money received from an outside party and is kept
confidential.

   At the NIH, 2,259 employees make more than $102,168, according to data
provided by the NIH. Those records show that 127 of the employees -- about 6% --
are filing disclosure forms available to the public.

   From 1997 through 2002, the number of NIH employees filing public reports of
their outside income dropped by about 64%, according to the agency records. Most
of those employees have switched to filing the confidential 450 form.

   At the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases -- which
researches treatments for AIDS and other life-threatening maladies -- only three
officials file public reports revealing their outside income, according to NIH
records.

   Officials at the NIH said that an advisory legal opinion from the U.S. Office
of Government Ethics gave them the discretion to bypass public disclosure.

   Issued in 1998, the opinion said that the threshold for public disclosure was
to be set, not by a federal employee's actual salary, but by the low end of his
or her pay grade. If the minimum salary in an employee's grade is beneath the
$102,168 threshold, he or she is exempt from filing a public report.

   The NIH has shifted many of its high-salaried employees into pay plans with
minimums that dip below the threshold.

   For instance, two prominent NIH laboratory leaders, Schlom and Germain, make
$180,400 and $179,900, respectively. Within roughly the last year, NIH changed
each of their pay plans, and they now are exempt from public disclosure.

   They file confidential forms, which instruct employees to not specify the
dollar amounts they receive from outside parties.

   Asked why the NIH has assigned highly paid staff to plans that eliminate
public disclosure of employees' outside income, an NIH spokesman, John Burklow,
provided a written response:

   "The primary benefit of the alternate pay plans is to attract and retain the
best scientists in a highly competitive environment."

   Said Donald Ralbovsky, another NIH spokesman: "What it really boils down [to]
is that fewer people are filing 278s because of changes in pay plans."

   The shift imparts an implicit message to employees, said George J. Galasso, a
former NIH researcher and administrator who retired in 1996:

   "If you've got something to hide, you file a 450. If you don't, you file a
278."

   Make-or-Break Grants

   As director of the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and
Skin Diseases, Katz is one of the few at the NIH who still must file public
financial-disclosure reports.

   Katz, 62, is paid $200,000 a year -- more than members of Congress, justices
on the Supreme Court and the vice president.

   His institute leads the government's research into the causes, treatment and
prevention of disorders of the joints, bones and overall muscle-skeletal system.

   With a yearly institute budget of $485.4 million, Katz's decisions are
watched closely by industry. The director's office decides how much of the
budget will be spent on grants and contracts coveted by companies.

   And Katz has been available for outside consultation: From 1993 through 2002,
Katz took between $476,369 and $616,365 in fees from seven biotech and
pharmaceutical companies, according to his annual disclosure statements. He
consulted while chief of the dermatology branch at the National Cancer Institute
and continued after becoming arthritis institute director in 1995.

   Katz said that his private consulting broke no rules and that he relied in
part on Varmus' 1995 memo while entering arrangements with companies.

   "The consultations provided my global knowledge as a dermatologist and
research scientist," Katz said in written responses to questions from The Times.
"I have always received official permission to perform these consultations and
have performed these consultations outside of my normal NIH work schedule and
according to strict government guidelines and rules."

   One of his clients was Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc.

   The struggling biotech company in San Diego hired Katz as a consultant in
1997, a year after he had announced a new NIH research initiative for bone and
connective-tissue repair.

   Advanced Tissue installed Katz on its scientific advisory board and paid him
fees between $142,500 and $212,500 from 1997 through 2002, according to his
income-disclosure reports.

   During that time, Katz's institute pledged $1.7 million in small-business
research grants to the company. The company announced nearly every grant in a
news release; Advanced Tissue's president termed the grants "an endorsement by
the government."

   In his written response, Katz said that he had signed a recusal "withdrawing
myself from any interactions between Advanced Tissue Sciences and the government
to remove any real or potential conflict of interest." The grants were awarded
following evaluations by NIH reviewers outside of Katz's institute.

   Responsibility for administering the grants to Advanced Tissue was delegated
to one of his subordinates, Katz said.

   The NIH policy manual says officials may not take fees from companies seeking
or receiving agency grants "if the employee is working on or involved in these
matters" or "supervising others who work on these matters."

   Katz said his subordinate "handled all decisions regarding these grants
without informing me."

   However, Advanced Tissue kept him apprised as NIH grants were obtained, a
company executive said.

   "He was informed," said Anthony J. Ratcliffe, the firm's vice president for
research until its collapse a year ago. "We would have made a written report to
the SAB [scientific advisory board] members twice a year. There would have been
a report to the SAB meetings on all grants, all grant activities."

   Ratcliffe said the company dealt with Katz's potential conflict of interest
by paying him in fees alone, and not stock options. Both men said Katz did not
advise the company on the NIH grants.

   His consultations, Katz said, were limited to his scientific expertise and
"never involved, directly or indirectly, the preparation or discussion of
material which could relate to any financial dealings between [Advanced Tissue]
and the NIH."

   Kirschstein, the senior NIH official who each year approved Katz's consulting
with Advanced Tissue, said she did not learn the company held grants with the
arthritis institute until The Times inquired.

   "I didn't even know there were grants," Kirschstein said.

   As it turned out, the grants would be among the few positive financial
developments for Advanced Tissue.

   By December 2001, its cumulative net operating losses were approximately
$292.7 million. Barely a year later, the company entered bankruptcy and shut its
doors, having collected about $1.5 million of the $1.7 million in small-business
research grants.

   Life-and-Death Decisions

   While Katz was consulting for Advanced Tissue, he also was on the payroll of
Schering AG, which made Fludara, a drug that his research staff was using as an
experimental treatment for autoimmune diseases.

   From the time he began consulting for Schering AG in 1996 through 2002, Katz
collected between $170,000 and $240,000 in fees from the company, his disclosure
reports show.

   In his responses to questions, Katz said that he "first became aware" that
Fludara was a Schering AG product when The Times made inquiries.

   Fludara had been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1991 to
treat leukemia, but the company wanted to expand its use to other diseases, a
goal the NIH studies could advance.

   Two people died in the studies conducted by Katz's institute.

   In one study using Fludara to treat muscular disorders, a patient suffered
what agency researchers reported in July 1998 as a "sudden death ... not thought
to be drug related."

   The second fatality, indisputably, resulted from the treatment. It involved
"Subject No. 4," who had enrolled in a separate study, designed to treat kidney
inflammation related to lupus, a disease of the immune system.

   Schering AG provided Katz's institute with a supply of Fludara and with
analyses of patients' blood samples through its U.S. affiliate, Berlex
Laboratories, records and interviews show. The company also contributed a total
of $60,000 to the institute to support the research, eliciting a July 1, 1998,
thank-you letter from Katz.

   Participants entering the study were warned of some risks. The NIH advised
them that Fludara might cause damage to their blood cells and that, as a result,
"blood transfusions may be required."

   That is what befell Jamie Ann Jackson, identified in NIH documents as
"Subject No. 4."

   Jackson, a registered nurse, lived with her husband, their two daughters and
a son in Plainville, Mass., about 37 miles southwest of Boston. She received
four transfusions between March and May of 1999, yet grew sicker.

   On June 1, trembling with chills, Jackson was admitted to the NIH Clinical
Center in Bethesda. Within days, lab results confirmed that she was in the grip
of graft-versus-host disease. The graft of outside material -- in this instance,
blood from a transfusion -- attacks and overwhelms the immune system and organs
of the new host.

   Fatal in about 90% of cases, the malady had been documented in leukemia and
other cancer patients who took Fludara. For that reason, the risk of
graft-versus-host disease was noted in the product labeling -- as was a warning
about irradiating transfusions as a prevention.

   But the NIH doctors did not specify that transfusions should be irradiated
for patients in the lupus study. In an interview, Dr. John H. Klippel, then the
institute's clinical director, said he could not recall whether he or his
colleagues took stock of the label warning.

   In Britain, authorities were more cautious, recommending that blood
transfusions for all patients taking Fludara be irradiated. The British
recommendations were described in 1996 in The Lancet, a medical journal with an
international circulation.

   Two weeks after being admitted to the NIH Clinical Center, 42-year-old Jamie
Ann Jackson died.

   "Steve Katz was notified almost immediately," Klippel said.

   Katz's subordinates warned the remaining patients and their personal doctors
about the death and, for the first time, advised them to irradiate any
transfusions. The FDA was informed.

   But the NIH office responsible for conducting an inquiry into research deaths
was not promptly notified.

   And while Katz's institute stopped enrolling recruits, the treatment of those
already in the study continued for nine months after Jackson's death.

   After five of the other 12 patients given Fludara experienced abnormal
changes in their blood, increasing their risk of infection, the experiment was
stopped, 20 months before its scheduled conclusion.

   'Absolutely No Role'

   While Fludara's use for anything other than leukemia remained experimental,
an increasing number of doctors were prescribing it "off-label" for diseases of
the immune system, including rheumatoid arthritis.

   Yet the NIH was slow in warning them about the lethal, but preventable,
problem of graft-versus-host disease.

   It was not until October 2000, 16 months after Jackson died, that doctors
from the NIH briefly summarized the death in Transfusion, the journal of the
American Assn. of Blood Banks.

   Meanwhile, three articles written by NIH doctors and published from March
2000 through May 2001 referred to the agency's work with Fludara without
mentioning the risk of graft-versus-host disease or the death in their study.

   In an article published in the May 2001 issue of the journal Pharmacotherapy,
the doctors, three from Katz's institute, wrote that Fludara "was well
tolerated" and thanked the company for providing the drug and "analytical
support."

   Not until last week -- 4 1/2 years after the event -- did the same doctors
appear as authors of a full-length article describing Jackson's death. It was
published in Transfusion.

   In his responses to The Times, Katz said that, to his knowledge, "all matters
concerning the adverse event were handled according to standard operating
procedures."

   Katz said that he had signed a recusal, pledging not to participate in
matters involving Schering AG. He said he had nothing to do with initiating the
study, "was not advised that it was ongoing and had absolutely no role in
overseeing its conduct."

   The Times documented three instances in which he discussed the study: The
July 1998 letter acknowledging the company's first half of the $60,000 donation;
the June 1999 phone call from Klippel notifying him of the death; and a meeting
in April 2000 with Kirschstein to discuss the fatality and his institute's
response to it.

   Katz confirmed all three incidents in a series of e-mail exchanges.

   He said he wrote the letter without realizing that Berlex Laboratories was
the American arm of Schering AG.

   "At that time, I was unaware of any relationship between Berlex Laboratories
and Schering AG and was, therefore, unaware that my sending the thank you letter
might present any conflict of interest."

   Katz declined to identify when he learned that Berlex was the U.S. affiliate
of Schering AG.

   The relationship between Schering AG and Berlex has not been a secret. News
articles describe Berlex as Schering AG's U.S. business unit. The Berlex and
Schering AG Web sites make clear the affiliation. In 1998 -- two years after
Katz was hired -- Berlex accounted for 17% of Schering AG's net global sales.

   Oliver Renner, a spokesman in Berlin for Schering AG, said: "Berlex
Laboratories is a fully owned subsidiary of Schering AG. We are distributing our
products under the name of Berlex in the United States. We also conduct research
and development work through our Berlex entities."

   Katz, asked about the phone call he received when Jackson died, said he did
not then realize what company made the study drug. Although the study was
ongoing, he said he did nothing in response to being notified of the death.

   "No further action was required or undertaken by me," Katz said.

   He said he remained uninformed about Schering AG's connection to the study
when he met with Kirschstein in April 2000.

   "The reason that I did not exclude myself from any contact regarding the
lupus [clinical] trial was that I was unaware, and no one on the staff brought
to my attention, that the trial had any relationship to Schering AG," Katz said.
He noted that the arthritis institute first used Fludara for lupus in 1993,
before he arrived as director.

   Representatives of Schering AG said the company did nothing out of the
ordinary in collaborating with the NIH -- and in hiring Katz.

   "The discovery and development of new pharmaceuticals often involves a
combination of government and private industry efforts," the company said in a
statement. "It is also a common practice for pharmaceutical companies to work
with many leading external experts.... In keeping with this practice, we have a
consulting agreement with a Dr. Stephen Katz from the NIH involving his
expertise in the field of dermatology."

   Schering AG is no longer pursuing development of Fludara as a treatment for
autoimmune diseases.

   Kirschstein, the NIH official who approved Katz's consulting for Schering AG,
said she had not known its drug was being tested by his institute.

   Kirschstein said she did recall being visited by Katz and his top aide in
April 2000. The NIH's human protection office had just opened an internal review
of the lupus-related study, questioning the researchers' failure to protect
against graft-versus-host disease, as well as their failure to report the death
to agency investigators in a timely fashion.

   "Dr. Katz and his scientific director came to me ... to tell me about a study
in which a drug was used and there was a death," Kirschstein said. "They did not
tell me the name of the drug, and did not tell me much about the study, but told
me that they and the [department] were looking into it."

   In a follow-up letter two years later, the internal review absolved the
institute of responsibility for Jackson's death. Her husband has filed a
wrongful-death lawsuit against the government in U.S. District Court. The
lawsuit does not refer to Katz.

   Jackson's mother, Carmella Tarte, said time had not eased her grief.

   "We all went to the hospital, but we never even got to talk to her," Tarte
said in an interview. "It's been four years and, well, Thanksgiving was just
another day, you know? She has children she didn't see graduate."

   *

   CASE STUDY | RICHARD C. EASTMAN

   A Federal Researcher Who Defended a Client's Lethal Drug

   BETHESDA, Md. -- When Dr. Richard C. Eastman talked about the controversial
diabetes drug Rezulin, doctors listened. After all, he was the top diabetes
researcher at the National Institutes of Health.

   Eastman's views were heard clearly in the fall of 1997, when the Food and
Drug Administration received reports of liver injury among patients taking the
pill.

   At the time, Eastman was supervising a $150-million NIH study exploring
whether Rezulin or another drug could prevent diabetes in adults who had
slightly elevated blood-sugar levels.

   In light of the reports of liver injury, an FDA medical officer questioned
the prudence of the NIH's nationwide study. Eastman, one of four members of the
study's executive committee, said all was well.

   "At this point in time, we consider the risk of [Rezulin] to be very
minimal," Eastman told the FDA in a Nov. 6, 1997, letter obtained by the Los
Angeles Times. "[W]e continue to think that the drug is safe," he wrote. "The
risk to benefit ratio in the trial continues to be one that we think is very
acceptable."

   Eastman signed the letter to the FDA using his government title, director of
the NIH's diabetes division. The letter did not disclose that he was also a paid
consultant to Warner-Lambert Co., the maker of Rezulin.

   The FDA allowed the use of Rezulin to continue in the study. Warner-Lambert
went on to collect $2.1 billion in sales revenue from Rezulin before it was
pulled from the U.S. market in 2000 after being cited as a suspect in 556
deaths, including 68 that involved liver failure.

   Some aspects of Eastman's dual role were reported earlier by The Times.
Hundreds of pages of newly obtained internal company and federal documents show
that Eastman took previously unreported actions regarding the drug.

   Reached by telephone last month, Eastman, 57, declined to be interviewed for
this article.

   He was hired by Warner-Lambert in October 1995, less than three weeks after
he met with a company executive on behalf of the NIH to discuss the drug's
safety, records show. As part of his consulting arrangement, Eastman spoke to
diabetes "thought leaders" assembled by the company. He also signed a contract
prohibiting him from disclosing "confidential and proprietary information"
without the company's prior, written consent.

   Eastman's consulting was approved in November 1995 by two senior officials,
including the then-director of the NIH diabetes institute.

   In March 1996, Eastman signed a federal recusal, pledging to disqualify
himself "to judge or otherwise act [as a federal official] on any matter or
matters pertaining to" Rezulin's status in the NIH study.

   However, the NIH has no procedure for verifying that officials comply with
the terms of their own recusals. And Eastman continued to participate in
decisions of the study's four-person executive committee regarding Rezulin,
according to records and interviews.

   When the inspector general of the Department of Health and Human Services
inquired years later, Eastman said he had not thought he was violating his
recusal, records show.

   Eastman and his boss also told the inspector general that they had never seen
a 1996 memo from an NIH attorney warning Eastman: "recuse yourself from all
official matters" involving Warner-Lambert. Both Eastman and his boss, then the
deputy director of the diabetes institute, stated that an office aide had filed
away the attorney's warning before they had a chance to read it.

   From 1995 through 1997, while collecting upwards of $43,000 in consulting
fees and related compensation from Warner-Lambert and its affiliates, Eastman
repeatedly defended Rezulin in his government capacity.

   On Nov. 28, 1997, Eastman wrote to the 22 physicians around the U.S. who were
carrying out the NIH's diabetes prevention study, telling them that the British
distributor of Rezulin was about to pull the drug.

   "This is apparently a marketing decision, rather than a regulatory one,"
Eastman wrote. The withdrawal was voluntary, but it was made in consultation
with officials at Britain's Medicines Control Agency, who concluded that Rezulin
was unsafe.

   An internal Warner-Lambert document circulated about that time termed Eastman
and his NIH colleagues "the strongest advocates for the safety of this drug."

   On May 17, 1998, a participant in the major NIH study that Eastman supervised
suffered sudden liver failure and died.

   The victim was Audrey LaRue Jones, a 55-year-old high school teacher from
East St. Louis, Ill. The death loomed as an indictment of Rezulin because Jones
fell into liver failure despite having her liver functions monitored monthly,
consistent with the product labeling. Some 580 other patients remained on the
drug in the NIH study.

   For nearly three weeks, Eastman and his colleagues on the executive committee
held off on informing the patients or the other doctors conducting the study
about Jones' death, the new documents show.

   On June 2, 1998, Eastman and a handful of other NIH officials met in Bethesda
with the study's six-member data monitoring board to decide whether to banish
Rezulin from the experiment.

   Experts retained by the NIH to evaluate the case had found that Rezulin
probably caused the woman's liver failure. The death certificate attributed the
"underlying cause" to the liver failure.

   Newly obtained handwritten minutes of the NIH meeting show that Eastman
called the case "unusual" and asked, "Do we want to write off [Rezulin] because
of a very bizarre death?"

   The board recommended unanimously that Rezulin be removed; the director of
the NIH's diabetes institute upheld the recommendation.

   On June 4, 1998, 18 days after Jones died, the chairman of the NIH's
executive committee informed doctors conducting the study about her death.

   "It is possible that you may be contacted by the press," the official wrote.
"Please be polite, but refer all questions to Dr. Richard Eastman."

   In May 2000, the inspector general's office found that Eastman's arrangements
"were reviewed and approved in accordance with the internal NIH regulations."

   The investigation report concluded that unspecified "administrative errors
... contributed to the appearance of a conflict of interest associated with Dr.
Eastman's outside activities with Warner-Lambert Company."

   In June 2000, after nearly a decade on the job, Eastman, whose federal salary
was $144,000, left the NIH to join a medical device company based in Redwood
City, Calif.

   Eastman was not alone in taking Warner-Lambert's money.

   At least 12 of the 22 academic researchers selected by the NIH to help
conduct the nationwide study received company fees or research grants, according
to records and interviews.

   The chairman of the study's data monitoring board, responsible for protecting
patients from unnecessary risks, also took fees from a Warner-Lambert affiliate.

   -- David Willman

   *

   CASE STUDY | JOHN I. GALLIN

   A Clinic Chief's Desire to `Learn About Industry'

   BETHESDA, Md. -- Dr. John I. Gallin is director of the NIH Clinical Center --
the nation's largest site of medical research on humans.

   Thousands of patients go there each year seeking experimental treatments
that, if successful, can pioneer new standards of care for all Americans. Drug
companies, eager to get new products to market, vie to have their medicines and
technologies tested in the NIH research.

   This places Gallin and the 600 physicians he oversees in a delicate position:
He is an intermediary between the hopes of patients and the ambitions of
industry.

   Yet Gallin, whose government salary is $225,200, has reported investments in
eight biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies. And he received between
$145,000 and $322,000 in consulting-related stock proceeds and fees from 1997
through last year, according to his government filings.

   The potential for conflicts of interest is raised by Gallin's government
positions: He is the Clinical Center director and a leader of the NIH Laboratory
of Host Defenses, where he has helped manage gene therapy experiments.

   Gallin has filed recusals, pledging not to participate in government
decisions affecting the companies in which he has disclosed a financial
interest. His outside dealings have been approved by other NIH leaders.

   "I thought the experience of working with a biomedical company would give me
an opportunity to learn about industry as well as broaden my exposure to current
research," Gallin said. "It is necessary that all entities work together to
improve the health of the nation."

   But taking industry's money, while at the same time avoiding the companies in
his NIH role, has proven a challenge, as his dealings with a company
specializing in gene therapy, Cell Genesys Inc., show:

   In June 1997, Gallin and his lab were completing work on a gene therapy study
in collaboration with industry partners. That same month, Cell Genesys acquired
one of those partners -- a company that had contributed crucial gene-transfer
technology.

   In July 1997, Cell Genesys made a "demand," according to Gallin: The company
wanted the published results of the gene therapy study to identify Cell Genesys
as the contributor of the technology -- even though it had not performed the
work.

   Gallin's top lab deputy granted the company's request; Gallin did not object.
When they submitted the article to a journal that month for publication, the
authors cited Cell Genesys as the contributor of the gene technology. On Sept.
3, 1997, Gallin became a paid consultant to a Cell Genesys subsidiary, Abgenix
Inc.

   The article appeared in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
in October 1997. Describing the results as "encouraging news," the NIH issued a
news release that credited Gallin and his lab for leading the research. At the
company's request, Gallin said, the release also cited Cell Genesys for
providing the technology.

   Gallin made between $132,700 and $319,776 from Abgenix consulting fees and
stock-option proceeds from 1997 through 2002, according to his yearly income
reports. (He reported payments in ranges, not exact amounts.)

   Cell Genesys owned Abgenix when Gallin was hired and held a majority stake in
the subsidiary until July 1998, records show. As of last month, Cell Genesys
maintained a minority position.

   Gallin also became a shareholder in Cell Genesys in 1999, but for two years
he did not disclose the holding on his annual financial reports. "It was an
error," Gallin said. He sold shares in Cell Genesys last year for $15,000 to
$50,000, according to his income report.

   In written responses to questions from the Los Angeles Times, Gallin said
that when he was hired to consult in 1997, "I was assured by Abgenix staff that
Abgenix was an independent company." He added, "I did not consult for Cell
Genesys."

   In March 2000, Gallin acknowledged the relationship between the two
companies. He filed a recusal, saying that "since Abgenix is partially owned by
Cell Genesys, I have been advised that an activity with these outside
organizations may present an actual or the appearance of a conflict of
interest."

   Regarding Cell Genesys' requests that it be cited publicly as the contributor
of the gene-transfer technology used by his NIH lab, Gallin said that he
deferred to his deputy, who was the first-named author on the article.

   "I had no involvement other than the first author informed me that this was
to be done," Gallin said.

   He said agency leaders approved his consulting and stock ownership.

   "I was very careful to solicit advice from NIH leadership as to whether or
not my accepting the position of serving on the Abgenix scientific advisory
board was a conflict that should be avoided," said Gallin, 60, who arrived at
NIH in 1971 after graduating from Cornell University Medical School.

   Gallin said nearly all of his other investments in biomedical companies were
initiated by a financial advisor "in my wife's name, without her or my
consultation."

   Gallin added, "The stock purchases were not with companies I had any
relationship with in my position at NIH. I listed them in my annual [NIH
disclosure reports]. If I thought there was a possibility of a conflict I filed
a recusal." He said nearly all of the holdings were sold by the end of last
year.

   Dr. Ruth L. Kirschstein, the NIH deputy director, at first told The Times
that she had never allowed an official to own a drug company stock if it
required filing a recusal. But Kirschstein later corrected herself,
acknowledging that she personally approved recusals that allowed Gallin to own
stock in several companies.

   For Gallin, avoiding matters involving Abgenix could grow more complicated
because of its many new research partners, including industry giants Pfizer,
Amgen and AstraZeneca.

   -- David Willman

   *

   CASE STUDY | RONALD N. GERMAIN

   A Federal Lab Leader Who Made $1.4 Million on the Side

   BETHESDA, Md. -- Dr. Ronald N. Germain has been a paid advisor to a dozen
drug-development companies, a law firm that specializes in patent litigation and
an investment fund that buys and sells biotechnology stocks.

   By his own accounting, he has collected more than $1.4 million in fees over
the last 11 years and gathered company stock options valued at $865,000.

   Germain's full-time job is deputy director of the National Institutes of
Health's Laboratory of Immunology, which explores how the immune system protects
against infections, cancer and other maladies.

   His annual government salary is $179,900 -- but his consulting income
surpassed it in one recent year and nearly matched it another year.

   He has taken fees from a company collaborating formally on research with his
laboratory. Another company's founder collaborated with Germain in his NIH
capacity. Four more of his clients had grants or research agreements with the
institute that houses his lab. He made plans last spring to begin consulting
with a new client, a venture capital firm that invests in nascent biotechnology
companies.

   In written responses to questions from the Los Angeles Times, Germain, 55,
said he had always followed NIH rules and had consulted with the approval of
agency officials. He said he had not made government decisions affecting
companies that paid him.

   "I have a well-regarded reputation both inside and outside of NIH for
adhering strictly to the rule preventing me from revealing or using specific
knowledge of my NIH research during consulting activities and for keeping all
outside activities from having any bearing on the conduct of my activities as a
[government] employee," Germain said.

   By consulting for the companies, he said, "my general insight into immunology
and related biomedical sciences can be used to help develop new drugs and
treatments for Americans." He said he provided the law firm with "expert opinion
on immunological matters." His advice to the investment fund, Germain said,
concerned "whether or not I believe that a particular technology or approach has
a strong scientific base."

   His consulting work also provides his family with "greater financial
security," he said. "This is of special importance to me because as a former
Hodgkin's lymphoma patient, it was difficult until recently to obtain adequate
life insurance coverage while being at increased risk for an early death."

   Germain, a graduate of Harvard Medical School, has been deputy director of
his laboratory, housed in the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, since 1987.

   He was warned about conflicts of interest two years ago by an NIH lawyer,
Karen Santoro.

   But the lawyer's concern focused only on Germain's investments in mutual
funds composed of biotech and health-care companies, some of which held
contracts with his NIH lab. "Each underlying company may pose a potential
conflict," Santoro told Germain in a May 11, 2001 e-mail.

   Two companies on the mutual fund list were consulting clients for Germain.
Yet Santoro's e-mail said nothing about the fees and stock options they and
other companies were paying him.

   Germain, in an e-mail to Santoro three days later, agreed to exchange his
securities for "holdings that are not concentrated in the health and biotech
areas."

   Germain told The Times, "Ms. Santoro was fully aware of all my consulting
arrangements and compensation."

   Many firms for which Germain has consulted have sought to develop products in
the same frontiers he or others at the NIH explore, including:

   * Genetics Institute, a Massachusetts-based branch of an industry titan,
Wyeth.

   In 2001, Genetics Institute and Germain's lab entered a formal collaboration
called a cooperative research and development agreement, or CRADA, to study the
effect that genes have on the immune system. That same year, Genetics Institute
paid Germain $37,500 in fees. Germain accepted $25,000 last year.

   From 1992 through 2002, the company paid him a total of $322,749, according
to Germain's annual income-disclosure reports.

   Officials at the NIH have continued to approve Germain's consulting with
Genetics Institute despite a provision in the agency's policy manual forbidding
employees from taking fees paid by a company that is collaborating with their
labs. While the policy remains on the books, a 1995 memo from the NIH director
said it would be enforced only if the researcher was directly involved in the
collaboration.

   Germain said that he was not informed in advance that Genetics Institute and
his NIH lab had taken steps to formally collaborate. When he did learn this,
Germain said, he approached his institute's ethics office.

   "The decision was that my consulting arrangement, having predated the
[collaborative agreement], did not need to be terminated," Germain said.

   * Mojave Therapeutics Inc., a biotech company developing treatments for
cancer and viral diseases.

   From 1998 through 2002, the New York firm paid Germain $93,929, plus stock
and stock options worth up to $15,000. Germain has been a member of Mojave's
scientific advisory board.

   Mojave calls itself a leader in developing "heat-shock" proteins as potential
therapeutic agents.

   While consulting for Mojave, Germain, in his capacity as an NIH scientist,
co-wrote a June 2000 journal article describing the role of heat-shock proteins.
His co-authors included two scientists affiliated with Mojave, which posted the
study on the company Web site.

   Germain said he did not consider the study a collaboration with Mojave
researchers and did not know the article appeared on the Web site.

   The 2000 article, he said, reflected work done in his NIH lab in "an academic
collaboration" with researchers at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Germain said the project "did not involve Mojave."

   However, one of his co-authors, James E. Rothman, was a founder of Mojave and
served, with Germain, on its scientific advisory board. Rothman also is an
executive at Sloan-Kettering. The other co-author accepted a position at Mojave
during the study.

   Asked about these circumstances, Germain said that he had known about his
collaborators' ties to Mojave, but he considered the work to be only with
Sloan-Kettering.

   Germain said he had told Rothman "that I would continue the research with
Sloan-Kettering only if it were kept separate from the activities of the
company," adding:

   "I was not a party to the company's posting of this published paper on their
Web site and was in fact unaware of this.... Given that Dr. Rothman is an author
on the paper, I had no right to demand that the company not display the work on
its Web site after it was published."

   Rothman declined through an aide to be interviewed.

   Germain said that while the research was being done, "I informed my immediate
supervisor at NIH of the situation." He noted that his lab's work with
heat-shock proteins predated the collaboration.

   * Alexion Pharmaceuticals Inc., a Connecticut company developing
antibody-based drugs for cardiovascular and autoimmune disorders and cancer.

   Alexion collaborated with Germain's lab from 1993 to 1997 under a CRADA.

   In 1994, Alexion announced the NIH had signed an agreement giving the company
"worldwide exclusive rights to U.S. and foreign patent filings" for discoveries
that might result from the collaboration. When the company reported financial
results in 1996, it said the NIH collaboration and funding had helped to reduce
losses.

   Germain became a paid consultant to Alexion in 1998, about a year after his
lab finished collaborating with the company. Over the next five years, he
accepted $51,000 in fees, plus vested stock options worth up to $100,000.

   Germain joined Alexion's scientific advisory board, he said, at the behest of
an executive who used to work at the NIH with him.

   "He was interested in my acting as a consultant for a long time, both
preceding and during the period of the CRADA," Germain said. "I agreed to take
the position only after the CRADA ended."

   Alexion's head of research, Stephen P. Squinto, said the company relied on
Germain and the other scientific board members to review its programs "and
potentially introduce us to some newer things, newer technologies or drug
targets."

   * Cell Genesys Inc., a developer of therapeutic cancer vaccines and gene
therapies for AIDS and other life-threatening illnesses.

   The company has had a long affiliation with Germain and the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, which houses his lab.

   In financial reports, the company has cited its reliance on a "collaborative
relationship" with the institute and its affiliation with Germain, who sits on
its scientific advisory board.

   The South San Francisco company from 1992 through 2002 paid Germain $352,000
and provided stock options that he has listed as worth up to $250,000. During
this period, Cell Genesys collaborated on research with the institute, although
not directly with Germain's lab.

   Germain said he has "reviewed and provided advice" regarding Cell Genesys'
overall research programs.

   * MedImmune Corp., a Maryland biotech company that makes treatments for viral
diseases and other maladies. MedImmune over the last 11 years has paid Germain
$163,350 in fees -- plus up to $500,000 in vested stock options.

   MedImmune's top-selling product, an antibody for preventing a respiratory
infection in infants, was developed jointly throughout the 1990s with the
allergy and infectious disease institute. Germain's lab was not involved.

   * Hybridon Inc., a Massachusetts pharmaceutical company that develops
medicines and diagnostics based on synthetic DNA.

   In October 2001, Hybridon's chairman, Dr. James B. Wyngaarden, a former NIH
director, announced the hiring of Germain, saying his "expertise and experience
in the area of immunology will be extremely helpful."

   Hybridon paid Germain $30,000 last year.

   In October 2002, Hybridon said it and the NIH had clashed over three
agency-held patents, triggered by Hybridon's application for its own patent. The
matter, related to synthetic DNA, is pending before the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office.

   Both Germain and the chief executive of Hybridon, Stephen E. Seiler, said
that Germain's consulting had not involved the patents.

   "The only point of contact between us and the NIH is we share Ron's time,"
Seiler said.

   As of last month, Germain no longer must publicly disclose his outside
income. He instead will file reports that are kept confidential. Germain said he
did not request the change, which was made by the NIH.

   -- David Willman

   *

   CASE STUDY | JEFFREY M. TRENT

   A Government Accolade From a Paid Consultant

   BETHESDA, Md. -- Until late last year, Jeffrey M. Trent was the scientific
director of the National Human Genome Research Institute.

   He led efforts to find applications for discoveries from the Human Genome
Project, the historic mapping of the genetic code that his federal institute
completed on the government's behalf.

   At the same time, Trent was a paid consultant to RHeoGene Inc., which billed
itself as a cutting-edge player in gene therapy technology. For nearly two
years, RHeoGene posted on its Web site this accolade from Trent, while
identifying him by his government title:

   "[W]e need to focus on how nature regulates itself, which begins with genes.
RHeoGene has technology to address key questions in these areas."

   Trent's endorsement, which the company included in a news release issued May
30, 2001, clashed with conflict-of-interest rules of the National Institutes of
Health, home of the genome institute.

   Agency employees seeking approval for consulting deals sign a form saying,
"The Outside Employer will not refer to the consultant or to an affiliation with
NIH in anything distributed for publicity or product promotion."

   The rule is intended to prevent the implication that the NIH is vouching for
a company or its products. Agency officials said they relied on employees to
police themselves in such circumstances.

   In recent interviews and in written responses to questions from the Los
Angeles Times, Trent, 51, said that he had tried to conduct himself properly.

   "I do not recall making the quote attributed to me in the RHeoGene press
release and was unaware that it was on the company's Web site until you brought
it to my attention," he said.

   The company's chief executive said any quoted statements from Trent were
handled by prior management.

   Trent had been hired by the NIH in late 1993, from the faculty of the
University of Michigan. In his new role, he began overseeing all of the genome
institute's basic laboratory research. And he was made chief of his own lab,
specializing in cancer genetics. His federal salary as of last year was
$194,300.

   Trent was a paid consultant to several drug-development companies while
employed at the NIH. From 1994 through 1996, Trent accepted between $50,608 and
$163,000 in industry consulting fees, according to his yearly public disclosure
reports.

   One of his clients during that period was Amoco Technology Co., which paid
him between $30,000 and $101,000. (Trent reported his fees in broad ranges.) He
said that Amoco, a "holdover" client from before his arrival at the NIH, had
focused on detecting genetic abnormalities and gene technology.

   After 1996, the NIH shifted Trent to confidential reports of outside income.
Corporate documents show he continued to serve on the scientific advisory boards
of biomedical companies. One of them was Ilex Oncology Inc. of Texas. Another
was RHeoGene; the Pennsylvania company paid Trent $10,000 from spring 2001 to
last year, he said.

   His consulting deals, he said, were approved by NIH officials.

   Most of his private consulting while at the NIH, Trent said, was "based on my
general scientific expertise, as somebody that's knowledgeable in the area of
cancer genomics and cancer genetics."

   Trent declined to discuss what he did for each company. But he said that he
viewed all of his paid consulting as part of the NIH's obligation to "translate"
basic research for the benefit of patients.

   "If we can help [the companies] more effectively do what they do, then I
think that furthers science, helps people," Trent said. "That's the right thing
to do."

   Asked how an NIH scientist avoids using unpublished, confidential government
information while advising paying clients, Trent said that he did not present
companies with details of his ongoing NIH research.

   "I'm not saying that in your mind isn't information that has broadened your
understanding as a scientist," he said. "And some of that came from your work in
the government."

   Since leaving the NIH in October 2002, Trent has been president and
scientific director of the Translational Genomics Research Institute, a
nonprofit center in Phoenix.

   -- David Willman

   *

   CASE STUDY | JEFFREY SCHLOM

   A Cancer Expert Who Aided Studies Using a Drug Wanted by a Client

   BETHESDA, Md. -- While managing one of the National Cancer Institute's major
laboratories, Jeffrey Schlom has built a busy outside career as a consultant.

   Within a decade, he has accepted fees totaling $331,500 from 20 biomedical
companies, his yearly income-disclosure reports show.

   The company that paid him the most -- $127,000 -- was Cytoclonal
Pharmaceutics Inc. of Dallas. While Cytoclonal worked on a more efficient way to
produce the popular cancer drug Taxol, Schlom helped lead two NIH-funded studies
in which Taxol played a crucial part.

   Schlom was a co-author of two medical journal articles that reported positive
results from that research, conducted at the University of Alabama and published
in August 2001 and September 2002.

   Taxol was used to enhance the effectiveness of a second cancer drug,
developed by Schlom at the NIH.

   Schlom's twin roles -- as Cytoclonal consultant and NIH leader -- posed a
potential conflict of interest because the study results could help create more
demand for Taxol.

   Schlom, in written comments to the Los Angeles Times, said all of his
consulting work was done properly, in compliance with NIH rules.

   He said he had advised companies "based on my general knowledge and expertise
in immunology."

   Schlom joined Cytoclonal's scientific advisory board in 1992.

   "At our request, the scientific advisors review and evaluate our research
programs and advise us with respect to technical matters in fields in which we
are involved," Cytoclonal said in various public financial reports, starting in
July 1996.

   The company repeatedly touted its development of Taxol in news releases.

   The company sought to produce Taxol through genetic engineering and
fermentation, instead of deriving the drug's active ingredient from the bark of
the rare Pacific yew tree.

   In June 1998, Cytoclonal entered a licensing and research agreement with
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., the pharmaceutical giant that markets Taxol.
Cytoclonal announced that its deal with Bristol-Myers was potentially worth "up
to $50 million."

   As recently as August 2001, the company, renamed as eXegenics, said that its
development of Taxol was one of two projects "with the greatest potential for
rapid commercial success."

   The company has recently laid off most of its employees and abandoned all
research, including the Taxol project.

   "We're not seeking to develop it," said David E. Riggs, the company's new
chief financial officer.

   Schlom, 61, whose government salary is $180,400, has led the National Cancer
Institute's Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology since 1982. He supervises
nine research groups seeking new ways to treat and prevent cancer.

   According to its Web site, the laboratory investigates potential
cancer-fighting vaccines. It examines substances, called antigens, that
stimulate the body's production of antibodies. And lab researchers design and
develop certain "monoclonal" antibodies that show promise in recognizing and
targeting cancer cells.

   During his decade of consulting for Cytoclonal, Schlom said he "was never
involved in any conversations or provided any advice concerning Taxol."

   Schlom said he saw no conflict of interest in his role with the NIH-funded
studies that reported positive results using Taxol. His involvement related only
to the studies' use of a monoclonal antibody developed at his lab, not Taxol,
Schlom said.

   Yet the studies used both drugs together to treat patients with ovarian
cancer.

   The antibody developed by Schlom, with a radioactive element attached to it,
was given to patients who two days earlier took Taxol.

   The researchers had hoped Taxol would make the cancer cells more vulnerable
to being damaged or killed by the radiation. The positive results were
consistent with other studies that suggested Taxol's value as a sensitizer to
radiation.

   "I provided expertise only involving the use of the antibody," Schlom said.
"Therefore, there was no need for a recusal." Under recusals, NIH employees
pledge not to participate in decisions affecting outside clients.

   In addition to Cytoclonal, several other companies that have paid fees to
Schlom have conducted cancer research:

   * Jenner Biotherapies Inc. of San Ramon, Calif., a developer of vaccines for
colorectal and prostate cancer, paid Schlom $71,000 from 1993 through 1998.

   * AltaRex Corp. of Canada, a developer of antibody treatments for ovarian and
other cancers, paid Schlom $17,800 from 1999 through 2001.

   * Titan Pharmaceuticals Inc., based in South San Francisco, has tried to
develop two monoclonal antibody agents for treating colorectal cancer. Both are
being tested in an NIH-funded study. Titan paid Schlom $27,000 from 1996 through
1999.

   * Biomira Inc., a Canadian company, is developing an experimental vaccine for
lymphoma under a cooperative agreement with another lab at the National Cancer
Institute. In May of 2001, Schlom collected a $9,000 consulting fee from
Biomira. A spokesman for the company said in November that Schlom was no longer
under contract.

   Schlom said that he had not, in his NIH capacity, discussed or "promoted any
of the studies done by the organizations for which I have been a consultant."

   Until last fall, Schlom's ongoing payments from industry were disclosed in
annual financial reports open to public review. He now files confidential
reports.

   -- David Willman

   *

   About This Report

   In late 1998, the Los Angeles Times began examining payments from drug
companies to employees of the National Institutes of Health and the agency's
research collaborations with industry. This report is based on records from the
federal government and from companies, as well as scores of interviews.

   In early 1999, the newspaper first sought income-disclosure reports for all
eligible employees of the 27 research institutes and centers of the NIH. The
newspaper, as of this month, had filed 36 requests with the NIH for documents
under the Freedom of Information Act.

   According to NIH staff, the agency has provided documents totaling 13,784
pages, including annual financial-disclosure reports, memos and internal
e-mails.

   A significant number of NIH employees had by this year stopped filing yearly
income reports that are open to public inspection. To assess the relative extent
of public financial disclosure at the NIH, The Times in July queried dozens of
other federal agencies under the Freedom of Information Act.

   Other documentation, describing products and hundreds of research
collaborations between the NIH and industry, was retrieved from company and NIH
Web sites, from filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and from
lawsuits filed in federal and state courts. Other related documents were
obtained from the Food and Drug Administration under the Freedom of Information
Act.

   *

   Contributors

   Times researcher Janet Lundblad in Los Angeles assisted in this report.
Researchers Robert Patrick and Christopher Chandler in Washington also
contributed.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: A federal partner  CREDIT: Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC: Where
secrecy reigns  CREDIT: Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC: Opening the door  GRAPHIC:
National Institutes of Health  CREDIT: Rebecca Perry Los Angeles Times PHOTO: IN
DEMAND: From 1993 through 2002, Dr. Stephen I. Katz, director of the NIH's
arthritis institute, took between $476,369 and $616,365 in fees from seven
biotech and pharmaceutical companies, according to his annual disclosure
statements.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Joanne Carole For The Times PHOTO: PATIENT: Audrey
LaRue Jones died after sudden liver failure in 1998 while in an NIH study that
Dr. Richard C. Eastman supervised. Outside experts found that the drug Rezulin
probably caused her liver failure. Eastman had defended the drug while receiving
consulting fees from its maker.  PHOTOGRAPHER: David Kennedy For The Times
PHOTO: A PRESCRIPTION FOR CONFLICTS: The wide embrace of private consulting
within the National Institutes of Health can be traced in part to calls from
Congress for quicker "translation" of federal research into improved treatments
for patients. Industry also has pressed for more access to the government's
scientific discoveries.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Tyrone Turner For The Times PHOTO:
'SUBJECT NO. 4': Jamie Ann Jackson  PHOTO: Dr. Richard C. Eastman  PHOTO: Dr.
John I. Gallin  PHOTO: Dr. Ronald N. Germain  PHOTO: Jeffrey M. Trent  PHOTO:
Jeffrey Schlom

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2003


                             559 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                 December 6, 2003 Saturday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: OSU LANDS TOP NEUROSURGEON ;
Harvard doctor hired to lead department, guide research efforts

BYLINE: Misti Crane, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   After a couple of years of courting, a prominent brain-cancer researcher and
neurosurgeon will leave Harvard University to direct Ohio State's new
Neurosurgery Department, created in large part to lure him here.

   Ohio State University trustees yesterday approved the hiring of Dr. E.
Antonio "Nino" Chiocca, who will start in March with an annual salary of
$500,000.

   The OSU Medical Center could not provide a list of its other top salaries
this week, a spokesman said, but hospital leaders said Chiocca's compensation is
in line with other surgical-department directors.

   "In order to be a top-tier organization, we're going to have to make
substantial investments in these areas where we think it can help us meet our
goals," said Dr. Christopher Ellison, chairman of the Department of Surgery and
associate vice president and vice dean for clinical affairs.

   And the Columbus community will benefit from having "an internationally
recognized authority in brain cancer that can bring to bear novel therapies,
including gene therapy for these tumors," Ellison said.

   "It's something that Columbus, Ohio, certainly doesn't have now, and it's
something most medical centers don't have."

   The creation of a department to lure a hotshot researcher and doctor was an
unusual but important move for Ohio State -- one that will boost neurological
research and patient care, officials said.

   The current Division of Neurology includes three neurosurgeons -- two who
practice. Under Chiocca, the department will include eight practicing surgeons
and two top-level researchers.

   He also will move his research lab here, which at Harvard includes a
14-member team.

   Chiocca, 44, is an ideal fit at a university Medical Center with a cancer
hospital, said Dr. Fred Sanfilippo, senior vice president for health sciences
and dean of the Ohio State Medical School.

   Besides directing the new department, Chiocca will hold the Dardinger Family
Endowed Chair in Oncological Neurologic Surgery.

   Sanfilippo said leaders at the medical center were impressed with the
neurosurgeon and strongly supported his hiring.

   "Whether it was surgery, neurology, the James . . . he scored a home run with
every one of these types of folks," Sanfilippo said.

   When he first began talks with Ohio State, Chiocca said the absence of a
neurosurgery department was an obstacle.

   "Most major medical centers have departments of neurosurgery; it was
hampering the growth of neurosurgery," Chiocca said.

   The discipline has "made tremendous leaps and bounds, particularly in the
last 10, 15 years," he said.

   mcrane@dispatch.com

   Box Story:Credentials
Dr. E. Antonio Chiocca has been named director of Ohio State University Medical
Center's new Neurosurgery Department.
 * Birthplace: Padua, Italy
 * Starting salary: $500,000
 * Education: University of Texas Medical School at Houston; Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston
 * Most-recent appointment: associate professor, neurosurgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dr. E. Antonio "Nino" Chiocca will begin his new job at Ohio
State, University in March.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2003


                             560 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                 December 4, 2003 Thursday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: VENTURING A GUESS ON THE FUTURE; INVESTORS CAREFULLY TEST WATER FOR
NEXT BIG THING

BYLINE: By Jane Larson, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Venture-capital investing may be no stronger than it was in 1996, but fund
managers are looking at several sectors that promise to lift the industry out of
its doldrums in the next few years.

   That was the cautiously optimistic outlook from Wednesday's opening session
of the annual Arizona Venture Capital Conference, held at Marriott's Camelback
Inn. Investors gave this rundown of where they are seeing opportunities and what
they are being wary of.

   Biotechnology

   The opportunity: Biotech is the most active sector of venture-capital
investing at the moment, said Arnold Oronsky, general partner of Interwest
Partners.

   The Bay Area firm thinks drug/device combinations, either injections or
implants, will develop as more efficient ways to treat diseases. It also likes
gene therapy and, even better, vaccines that can influence a disease before it
starts.

   The downside: Discovery-stage companies will take too long to make money.

   Medical devices

   The opportunity: Sales, the number of publicly traded firms and market
capitalizations have been growing for medical device companies, said Mark Wan of
Three Arch Partners.

   Like biotech, the industry is highly regulated, but the time to market for
its products is shorter, he said.

   The downside: Plenty of companies are working on devices to help with spinal
problems, heart disease, obesity, and neurological problems like strokes. Those
are top problems to solve, but venture capitalists should not fund too many of
the firms because not all can succeed, Wan said.

   Nanotechnology

   The opportunity: The federal government will be spending $3.7 billion over
the next four years to fund nanotechnology research, said Josh Wolfe of Lux
Capital.

   The discovery of new structures such as carbon nanotubes, the market demand
for smaller and smaller computer chips, and the accelerating pace of patent
awards also make for a favorable future for nanotech, he said.

   The downside: There is already an Internet-like hype growing over nanotech.

   Semiconductors

   The opportunity: Semiconductor start-ups that can develop products that use
low amounts of power, run at high speeds and store vast amounts of data catch
the interest of Ron Yora of Tallwood Venture Capital.

   The downside: Start-ups will have to deal with the increasing complexity of
manufacturing processes, the growth of Asia as a market and a supplier, and the
continuing combination of communications and computing, he said.

   Software

   The opportunity: If you look beyond biotechnology, medical devices,
nanotechnology and semiconductors, software will be needed to run things, said
John Hall of Horizon Ventures.

   He looks for sectors where software will be needed and used, such as in
nanotechnology, where software will bridge the gap between materials and
semiconductors.

   The downside: It's hard to tell whether a software idea is really a feature,
a product or something that will make an entire company, he said.

   /

   Venture capital

   Amity Hall, manager of research operations for research firm Venture One,
offers these current statistics on the state of venture capital:

   * About $11.9 billion has been invested in 1,357 deals nationally through the
third quarter of 2003.

   * Information-technology investments continue to fall slowly, hitting $2
billion invested in 256 deals during the third quarter.

   * Health care investing has been steady, hitting $1.3 billion invested in 99
deals during the third quarter.

   * The median time between rounds was 19.8 months in the third quarter,
compared with 11.5 months in 1996.

   * Information-technology companies got 58 percent of the initial rounds
through the third quarter of 2003, compared with 23 percent for life sciences
companies.

GRAPHIC: (none)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2006


                             561 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                  December 2, 2003 Tuesday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS - SCIENCE; Pg. 09A

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY EXPERIMENT AIMS TO SWAP GOOD GENE FOR BAD

BYLINE: Misti Crane, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Within a year, some Ohio muscular dystrophy patients will be part of an
experiment that could help reverse the muscle degeneration brought on by the
disease.

   Using a healthy gene carried into the body by a harmless virus found
naturally in human muscle tissue, researchers hope to reverse the weakness and
deterioration that put almost all boys affected in a wheelchair by age 12 and
kills most by their early 20s.

   In mice with muscular dystrophy, the process works almost all the time, said
Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of neurology at Ohio State University Medical Center
and a lead researcher in the project.

   The research will be part of a collaboration between OSU, the University of
Pittsburgh and the University of Missouri, which are sharing a $5 million,
five-year grant from the National Institutes of Health and a three-year, $1.5
million grant from the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

   Identical grants went to the University of Washington in Seattle and the
University of Rochester in New York state, also top U.S. sites for muscular
dystrophy research.

   The three teams are part of a first-of-its-kind collaboration that experts
say could speed the discovery of new treatments.

   Two years ago, President Bush signed the MD-CARE Act, pushed by parents and
philanthropic groups who wanted more emphasis on seeking treatments and cures
for the forms of muscular dystrophy, which affects about 250,000 Americans.

   "These centers will move (research) more quickly and really help us get to
the finish line," said Sharon Hesterlee, director of research development with
the Muscular Dystrophy Association, which has its headquarters in Arizona.

   OSU's work will target Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which strikes one in
2,000 to 5,000 boys and is the most common and devastating of the neuromuscular
diseases.

   The genetic deficiency linked to muscular dystrophy is in the dystrophin
gene.

   Scientists conducting the new research want to replace it with a healthy copy
of the gene. They'll do that by putting the gene into a virus that goes into the
muscle naturally but doesn't hurt the body. If the test works as it has in mice,
the gene will reverse damage inflicted by muscular dystrophy.

   Scientists at the University of Pittsburgh have been instrumental in
shrinking dystrophin so that it fits into the virus, creating a potentially
powerful vehicle for genetic therapy, said Joseph C. Glorioso III, director of
the university's Molecular Medicine Institute and chairman of its molecular
genetics and biochemistry departments.

   The design of human studies still has to be worked out and approved by the
Food and Drug Administration.

   But Mendell is optimistic the first human trial could start here next fall,
with injections into the muscles of up to a dozen children and teens, he said.
If that study is a success, a broader group will be tested, potentially with
injections into the bloodstream, which could have healing effects on larger
muscle groups.

   "It's been my passion to try to help this disease," said Mendell, who has
been working on neuromuscular diseases at Ohio State for more than three
decades.

   "We'd love to get rid of it, believe me."

   mcrane@dispatch.com

   Box Story:Understanding MD
Muscular dystrophy, which affects boys almost exclusively, is a genetic disorder
characterized by progressive muscle deterioration and weakness. Here are the two
most common types:
 DUCHENNE
 * Description: Boys begin to show signs of muscle weakness as soon as age 3.
The disease gradually weakens skeletal muscles in the arms, legs and trunk. By
the early teens or earlier, the boy's heart and respiratory muscles might be
affected.
 * Symptoms and prognosis: The first symptoms are difficulty walking and
climbing stairs and frequent falling. Starting between ages 3 and 7, the child's
gait becomes waddling and he has difficulty rising from a sitting position.
Weakness in the shoulder muscles follows. In most cases, the heart muscle
enlarges and weakens.
 Eventually, an abnormally curved spine develops and -- by age 10 or 12 -- most
children are confined to a wheelchair. Increasing weakness makes patients
susceptible to pneumonia and other illnesses. Most die by age 20.
 BECKER
 * Description: Onset of this much milder version is usually in the teens or
early adulthood and the course of the disease is slower and less predictable.
 * Symptoms and prognosis: Weakness is less severe than in Duchenne and appears
later, at about age 12. Few adolescents become confined to a wheelchair, and the
average age of death is 42.
 Sources: Muscular Dystrophy Association, Merck Manual of Medical Information

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2003


                             562 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            December 2, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Science Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1092 words

HEADLINE: ESSAY;
When Fish Fluoresce, Can Teenagers Be Far Behind?

BYLINE:  By JAMES GORMAN

BODY:

   Sometime in the future, when the distinction between cosmetologist and
molecular biologist has faded and gene shops dot the seedier urban streets like
tattoo parlors, the philosophers, moralists and historians of science will try
to pin down the moment when the new age began.

        Science historians will probably say it started with the discovery of
DNA, or the mapping of the human genome. Others will claim it started when Dolly
was cloned and it became clear that the tools of biotechnology had moved out of
the high church of pure research and into the unpredictable hands of people who
bred sheep for profit.

    I think the moment is now. And the creature that embodies the escape of
biotechnology into the world at large -- a movement that will never be reversed
-- is an aquarium fish that glows in the dark.

   Genetically modified GloFish, developed by injecting genes from sea coral
into zebrafish eggs, will go on sale Jan. 5 in this country, according to
Yorktown Technologies LP in Texas. The GloFish are red in regular light and glow
fluorescent red under ultraviolet light. Similar fish, but with different genes
for luminescence have been sold for several months in Taiwan.

   This is the tipping point, when the world irrevocably turns toward the
science-fiction fantasies of writers like Philip K. Dick and William Gibson, who
envision biomedical technology permeating every corner of the marketplace, from
global corporations on down to small-time illegal operations like stolen-car
chop shops.

   Imagining futures, much less predicting them, is a risky business, but
there's a nugget of truth in these fantasies, and that is that once technology
reaches the marketplace, it is transformed for mundane and apparently frivolous
purposes and spreads everywhere, legally or not.

   Many groups and government agencies stand poised to confront abuses in
medicine, to protect the food supply and the environment from big agriculture.
Meanwhile, who is watching the pet stores? Or the beauty parlors?

   The science involved in creating the fish is not new. Genes for
bioluminescence were introduced into tobacco plants and carrots in the 1980's.
Mice have been made to glow. No doubt humans could be made to glow if parents
with foresight knew that one day they would be desperately trying to find their
middle school child at a dark and crowded school dance.

   The fish were first developed to be indicators of polluted water. Scientists
set up the genes for the proteins that produced light to be turned on by the
presence of toxins.

   The original fish were hobbled genetically to prevent their spread in the
wild. And there is not much worry about the new pets creating a new crisis of
global glowing. Zebrafish have long been sold without establishing themselves in
the wild.

   But biotechnology itself cannot be successfully hobbled, despite the best
intentions of governments or the self-appointed guardians of our health and food
supply. The Center for Food Safety, a private consumer group that has been
keeping an eye on genetically modified fish for use as food, has urged the Food
and Drug Administration to regulate genetic adventurism like the GloFish
project. But it is far from clear that bioengineered pets count as food or
drugs.

   There is no doubt about the human appetite for modifying the bodies of their
plants, their pets and themselves. Witness dogs, cats, parakeets and canaries,
pigeons, tulips, roses and plastic surgery.

   "I think this is just an expansion of what's always been done with ornamental
plants and flowers," said Dr. Lee Silver, a professor at Princeton in molecular
biology and at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs.
"It may introduce a lot of people very quickly to the power and wonders of
biotechnology."

   It may also suggest further advances, or outrages, depending on your point of
view. What we do with our own bodies is pretty open territory. Plastic surgery
is often, as they say, elective. So, imagine if you will, that you could pay to
have genes for glowing in the dark inserted into your own body. How many glowing
teenagers would there be? And who would stop them, once they reached age 18?
After all, one's own body is one's own business.

   "I think there's a distinction between what you do to yourself and what you
do to the larger environment," Dr. Silver said. Society looks askance at any
attempt to change human evolution or tweak human nature in a way that will be
passed on to posterity. But if you could engineer only yourself, there would be
few limits.

   The technical problems are serious because this is different from using
genetic engineering to create new strains of mice and other creatures. To create
these strains of mice, scientists start at the beginning, with an egg cell. The
difficulty comes in sending genes into the body once it is fully grown to try to
get the body's cells to express them. Dr. Silver said this had been tried for
medical uses but with little success. "Somatic cell gene therapy is extremely
inefficient," he said. It's hard to get the cells to take up genes and express
them. Researchers have, however, succeeded in getting mice to take up and
express luminescent genes in lung cells.

   That's a beginning. And there's going to be big money in cosmetic genetic
enhancements once scientists do find a good way to send genes into a human being
and get skin, and other cells to express them. Skin may glow, of course. Or
people could choose a skin color they like. Baldness could disappear. Fur may
make a comeback -- one's own fur. Certainly any genes that make one more
sexually attractive will find a market no matter what regulations applied.

   Athletes, who seem willing to indulge in self-experiment with relatively
little concern for their long-term health, would push biotech in another
direction. The Olympic Committee would have to look for genetic enhancements
for, say oxygen metabolism, buried in the genome. And pets. The pets will be
beyond belief. Just find a picture of the hairless sphynx cat to see what we've
perpetrated without stirring the genome with our fingers. Then let your
imagination run riot.

   I'm not suggesting that this is a good thing. But like it or not, the fish
has left the barn. This is not going to stop no matter what anyone thinks.

   There will, of course, be holdouts -- people who cling to the old ways.
They'll insist on living with the bodies they were born with, carrying around
cairn terriers in little baskets like Dorothy in "The Wizard of Oz." But even if
they stay in Kansas, they won't be in Kansas anymore.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Hadi Farahani)

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2003


                             563 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           November 30, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: HIGH PROFILE; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: CITIZEN OF THE YEAR : Honoring May helps March of Dimes

BYLINE: - Scott A. Johnson

BODY:

   All eyes were on Tommy May of Pine Bluff at the Arkansas chapter of the March
of Dimes 2003 Citizen of the Year banquet.
Approximately 540 people filled the Wally Allen Ballroom of the Statehouse
Convention Center on Nov. 20 for the event honoring May. The evening raised more
than $ 115,000 to support March of Dimes programming.
Anne Jansen of the KTHV-TV news team acted as master of ceremonies for the
evening, which included a performance of selections from the Arkansas Repertory
Theatre's forthcoming holiday musical, Cinderella. After an invocation by the
Rev. Rex Horne, the program began with comments from Les Baledge of
Fayetteville, who sits on the national March of Dimes board of trustees.
After giving a brief history of the March of Dimes, Baledge outlined the
organization's current research and public education campaigns and touched on
future goals, which include research on gene therapy and tissue and organ
regeneration as well as a search for the "biological triggers for prematurity."
"The one thing that I can tell you is that your children or your children's
children will benefit from our efforts here tonight," Baledge said, concluding
his remarks.
Bill Clark, chairman of the dinner committee, then introduced his longtime
friend, May, summing him up as the "best of the best" in Arkansas.
Chairman, president and chief executive officer of Simmons First National Corp.
and president and chief executive officer of Simmons First National Bank, May
was honored for his many contributions to Arkansas' economy and his
philanthropic and civic involvements. May is well known for having served as
chairman of the University of Arkansas board of trustees. His commitments also
have included volunteer efforts on behalf of the United Way, Habitat for
Humanity and Special Olympics. He has also served on boards ranging from the
Economic Development Alliance and the Arkansas Bankers Association to the UA's
Campaign for the 21 st Century and Pine Bluff Downtown Development Inc.
May was presented a plaque after which a short video was shown including
testimonials for leaders from across the state. The man of the hour then
addressed the audience voicing his appreciation for the honor.
"I would like to thank all of you once again for investing in the future of our
children," May said.
Joining the honoree at the event were his wife, Kathryn, and two of their four
children, sons Chris and Chad.
Dinner, catered by the Peabody Little Rock hotel, began with marinated shrimp
served on a bed of fall greens and with golden beefsteak tomatoes with a drizzle
of truffle oil and balsamic vinegar. Main course was rotisserie free-range
chicken with Jamaican jerk spicing, which was dressed with an herb butter sauce
and served with garlic roasted potatoes, orange sweet potatoes, acorn squash and
butternut squash. Dessert was a triple layer chocolate cake topped with candied
orange peel, espresso frosting and vanilla creme Anglaise, all sprinkled with
fresh berries.
Joining Clark on the dinner committee were John Flake, Barnett Grace, Robert
Dill, Russ Harrington, Bob Shoptaw and Anne Smithey. Martha Perry is state
director for the March of Dimes Arkansas chapter.
This story was originally published on Sunday, November 30, 2003.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2003


                             564 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              November 28, 2003 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2000 words

SERIES: DNA : THE COMMON THREAD/One in a series of stories marking the 50th
anniversary of thediscovery of the structure of DNA.

HEADLINE: GENE MAPS OF CAT, DOG COULD TELL US MORE ABOUT HUMAN DISEASE/ DNA
TEAMS ARE STUDYING SIMILARITIES, DIFFERENCES OF AN ARKFUL OF ANIMALS

BYLINE: Tina Hesman/ Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Shadow the poodle, Tasha the boxer and a host of other dogs and cats could
help improve human medicine, teach people more about evolution, and help us take
care of our furry companions.

   The canines and felines are guiding research into epilepsy, diabetes, heart
disease and other complex diseases.

   While mice are still doing their part, dogs and cats will give scientists an
even better understanding of human genetics and could tell us more about human
disease, experts say.

   Earlier this year, researchers completed the Human Genome Project, which gave
them a set of instructions for mapping out genes and other pieces of DNA that
build a human body. But they still need help deciphering that information.

   That's where the dogs and cats come in. A rough draft of the mouse genome has
helped scientists recognize genes and the elements that regulate genes. But
researchers hope that comparing human DNA to that of several species of animals
will help them learn more about how genes contribute to disease. A menagerie is
already on the list of organisms scientists hope to sequence: chimpanzees,
chickens, opossums, flat worms and round worms, sea urchins and sea squirts,
pufferfish, cows, pigs, rats, honeybees and fruit flies, rhesus monkeys, various
single-celled organisms and perhaps even elephants, platypuses and armadillos.

   Dogs deserve to be at the head of the list if for no other reason than
gratitude for their love and loyalty, said Gregory A. Petsko, a biologist at
Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass.

   "There are very few highs in life like being greeted by your dog, even when
you've only been gone for an hour. Remember that old TV show 'Queen for a Day?'
Well, this makes you feel like king for a minute," Petsko said.

   Common diseases, well-known family trees

   But cats and dogs have some arguably more important reasons for being on the
list.

   Researchers have identified at least 451 canine genetic diseases and 263
genetic diseases in cats, most with counterparts in people. The genes that cause
the diseases are often easier to track down in animals than in people,
especially in purebreds, because their family trees are well-known.

   What solidified the dog's place on the list was its incredible diversity,
said Ewen F. Kirkness, leader of the team that sequenced DNA from Shadow the
poodle at The Institute for Genomic Research (known as TIGR) in Rockville, Md.
Dogs come in more shapes and sizes than any other species of mammal, Kirkness
said.

   The American Kennel Club registers 156 breeds and recognizes 48 rare breeds,
each with its own distinguishing characteristics. Those breeds range in size
from the diminutive Chihuahua to the giant Great Dane, have a wide variety of
hair types and colors, and inbred behaviors, such as herding or love of water.
Those qualities made the dog particularly attractive to geneticists who hope to
learn how genes influence appearance and behavior, Kirkness said.

   The TIGR (pronounced like tiger) researchers constructed a quick and dirty
sketch of Shadow's DNA, representing about 78 percent of the genetic material
contained in the dog's genome. Scientists studied the 9-year-old male black
standard poodle to see if they could glean useful information from low-level
sequencing projects, Kirkness said.

   Already the outline of Shadow's DNA has revealed that dogs and humans are
more similar to each other than either is to mice. While dogs come from a
different branch of mammals than humans and mice do, dogs and humans tend to
mutate more slowly than mice. That means mice have accumulated more changes in
their DNA over time than the other species. The result could mean that dogs
could tell us more about human disease processes than mice can.

   More similar to cats

   Cats have a genome structure even more similar to humans than dogs do, said
Stephen J. O'Brien, director of the Laboratory of Genomic Diversity at the
National Cancer Institute. Only 10 snips of a molecular scissors would be needed
to rearrange the cat genome to mirror that of humans, he said. Dogs have many
more chromosomes than humans or cats (39 pairs to 23 pairs in humans and 19
pairs in cats.) It would take about 40 rearrangements to make the dog genome
look like that of a human, he said.

   Whether dogs or cats are better gauges for understanding human biology
remains to be seen. For now, cats are still on the sequencing waiting list, but
dogs are already contributing to the genome effort.

   Shadow helped scientists sniff out some mysterious stretches of DNA between
genes that have no known function but are conserved between dogs and humans.
Some of the sequences could control how genes are switched on and off - a
phenomenon scientists refer to as "gene expression," Kirkness said. But most of
the similar sequences are in regions that some researchers used to call "junk
DNA."

   The fact that evolution has preserved these pieces of DNA probably means that
they have important functions, even though scientists don't yet know what those
functions are, Kirkness said.

   Much of the dog genome consists of repetitive elements that can hop from one
part of the genome to another. Such mobile elements are more prevalent in
complex organisms, Petsko said. He thinks this former junk co uld actually be
"the clay of evolution." That is, in moving about the genome, these elements
could alter gene expression or create new combinations of genes that would shape
the way organisms look and act, he said.

   "The evidence for that is circumstantial," Petsko admits, "but I like it."

   Deciphering the dog genome

   A more comprehensive effort to decipher the dog genome is under way at the
Center for Genome Research at MIT (soon to be the Broad Institute). Scientists
involved in the project picked Tasha, a 7-year-old boxer, from a panel of 130
dogs representing 60 breeds. The researchers' interest in the dog was purely
scientific, said Kerstin Lindblad-Toh, co-director of sequence and analysis at
the center.

   Boxers bred in small populations for a long time, Lindblad-Toh said. The
result is that most boxers are highly inbred. Tasha, in particular, has few
differences between the chromosomes she inherited from her mother and those she
got from her father. That means researchers should have an easier time
assembling a 95 percent-complete picture of Tasha's genome, Lindblad-Toh said.

   The researchers plan to finish sequencing Tasha's DNA by Christmas, but
analyzing the data could take several months, Lindblad-Toh said. Tasha's genetic
makeup should be on show by June, she said. The study of Shadow's genome
appeared in the Sept. 26 issue of Science.

   The completed genome will be a boon to researchers looking for disease genes
and genes involved in behavior, scientists say. In order to get the full value
of dog diversity, the researchers will sequence chunks of DNA from 10 other
breeds - six from the University of Missouri at Columbia - looking for single
chemical changes in the DNA that could serve as markers for the location of
disease genes.

   The Missouri researchers contributed DNA samples from an Alaskan malamute, a
Bedlington terrier, a beagle, an English shepherd, an Italian greyhound and a
Labrador retriever, said Gary Johnson, a veterinary geneticist. The researchers
have amassed a collection of 12,000 DNA samples from 134 breeds of dog.

   Johnson and his colleagues hope to use the doggie gene bank to assemble what
they call the dog phenome. The project would trace small variations in DNA to
their effect on gene expression or the activity of proteins to the ultimate
effect on the dog's appearance or behavior.

   The project will allow the scientists to "completely describe the dog as a
species," including identifying the cause of variations between breeds and the
reason that dogs of the same breed look and act differently. The project will
take enormous amounts of data analysis and cooperation with other researchers,
he said.

   "It's almost embarrassingly ambitious," Johnson says of his plans.

   Breeding strategies

   The dog genome will provide benefits long before those big dreams are
realized. The project will speed up the search for disease genes, Johnson
predicted. Finding genes involved in diseases such as epilepsy could benefit
people as well as their canine companions.

   Epilepsy, diabetes, heart disease and other complex diseases usually involve
several genes, said Dennis O'Brien, a veterinary neurologist at the University
of Missouri. O'Brien has tracked epilepsy and other neurolo gical diseases in
several families of dogs.

   Even without the genome sequence, the geneticists can sometimes help dogs
with genetic diseases.

   Breeding strategies can eliminate disease in dogs, but for humans the problem
is more difficult, said Kristina Narfstrom, a veterinarian at the University of
Missouri. Narfstrom discovered a family of Briard dogs with a severe form of
night blindness. She traced the source of the dogs' disease to a gene called
RPE-65, the same gene that is mutated in children with Leber's congenital
amaurosis, a disorder that allows the children to see only in very bright light.

   Narfstrom's research with Briards is helping explain exactly what goes wrong
when the RPE-65 stops functioning, but she's most excited about a gene therapy
she's developed to restore sight to the dogs.

   The gene therapy inserts a good copy of the RPE-65 gene in the dog's retina.
Their sight is restored within four to six weeks after treatment, Narfstrom
said. She hopes to begin testing a similar therapy in people soon.

   The genome projects also could be a boon for animal-lovers who want to help
their pets live longer, healthier lives. Pet-food manufacturer Nestle Purina was
an early supporter of the dog and cat genome projects for just that reason, said
Steve Hannah, the head of Purina's Molecular Biology group.

   "We've all observed the advances coming from the genetics and genomics and
other '-omics' fields, and we started getting interested in what it was going to
mean for nutrition," Hannah said.

   The company met with groups of scientists who were working on individual
genetic projects involving cats and dogs. In 1996, Purina hosted a meeting to
bring the groups together and coordinate efforts.

   One of the first projects on the agenda was to establish a reference family -
a family of closely related animals that researchers use for mapping genes. The
geneticists chose a family of 170 dogs, all cross-breeds between greyhounds and
Labrador retrievers. The dogs are all deceased now, but samples of their DNA
reside in freezers at Purina, the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in
Seattle, and at Cornell University where the animals were bred.

   Purina employs cats and dogs to test pet foods, Hannah said. After
retirement, the animals go to live with families, often in the homes of their
human colleagues. Many of the animals also participate in the company's genetic
research efforts. Purina's cat colony and a family of Abyssinian cats Narfstrom
brought with her from Sweden are among the cats that are giving their DNA to
science.

   Cats could contribute more to the understanding of certain human medical
problems than dogs, said Stephen O'Brien. Scientists have studied vision and
reproduction in cats for decades. Research on the Feline Leukemia Virus led
scientists to discover many cancer-related genes in humans. And feline immune
systems work similarly to human immune systems, he said.

   Domestic cats can catch a relative of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Immune
systems in cats fail in exactly the same way as in humans with the disease. Big
cats, such as lions and tigers, also get infected with their own versions of
immunodeficiency viruses, but those cats don't get sick, O'Brien said.
Understanding how the big cats stop the virus and deal with other diseases could
lead to better therapies in humans.

   "These species have hard-wired solutions to many of the genetic diseases that
afflict humans and fill our hospitals," said O'Brien.

NOTES:
FOCUS ON HEALTH & SCIENCE/ DNA : THE COMMON THREAD/ Reporter Tina Hesman/
E-mail: thesman@post-dispatch.com/ Phone: 314-340-8325

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC(11) Graphic / Chart by the POST-DISPATCH - DNA zoo/
Genome scientists are already looking beyond our closest companions to a
menagerie of animals that could yield insight into human biology and disease.
Each organism has unique qualities that promise to lend clues about different
aspects of biology. And scientists say that by comparing the genetic makeup of a
variety of species, we can learn more about evolution, explore how genes are
built and controlled, and perhaps clear up the mysteries of "junk DNA." Here's a
guide to the animals waiting to board the genome ark at Washington Univerity's
Genome Sequencing Center./ / CHIMPANZEES/ Chimps are our closest relatives and
are the next primates in line for a portrait of their genome. Chimps are too
close to humans for useful analysis of our similarities, many researchers say.
With chimpanzees, it's the differences that may be most telling. Chimps get
diseases that don't strike humans, but seem immune to other scourges that plague
people. That may be due to small variations in the genetic composition of the
two primate species. Scientists here and at MIT expect to finish a draft of the
chimp genome soon./ / PLANARIA/ The flatworms have long been a staple of high
school and college biology classes. The worms can regenerate missing parts when
cut in half. Planaria are full of stem cells, so studying their genome could
shed light on how to find and program human stem cells. The center at Washington
University has already begun deciphering the worm's genetic code./ / CHICKEN/
The birds are a favorite organism for developmental biology research.
Researchers at Washington University determined the sequence of chemical bases
in the final bits of chicken DNA last month, said Richard K. Wilson, director of
the center. Now the scientists must figure out how all the pieces of the genome
fit together and analyze the data. Once the analysis is complete, the chicken
could serve as a Rosetta stone to help scientists find evolutionarily important
pieces of DNA, Wilson said./ / GRAY SHORT-TAILED OPOSSUM/ The tiny, pointy-nosed
marsupial is known to researchers by its scientific name: Monodelphis domestica.
The creatures have ancient forms of the X and Y chromosomes - otherwise known as
sex chromosomes - and may help genome scientists understand the evolution of
reproduction. The Washington University center will begin work on the opossum
genome soon./ / More animal genomes/ Researchers at the Human Genome Sequencing
Center at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston are building their own genetic
zoo./ RHESUS MACAQUE, HONEYBEE, COW, SEA URCHIN, RAT/ / / Sources: The
Associated Press, New Hampshire Zoo, Post-Dispatch ; Photos - DNA zoo/ (1) Photo
- CHIMPANZEES/ (2) Photo - PLANARIA/ (3) Photo - CHICKEN/ (4) Photo - GRAY
SHORT-TAILED OPOSSUM/ (5) Photo - RHESUS MACAQUE/ (6) Photo - HONEYBEE/ (7)
Photo - COW/ (8) Photo - SEA URCHIN/ (9) Photo - RAT/ (10) Photo by KEVIN
MANNING / POST-DISPATCH - Pluto, a Briard dog going progressively blind from a
genetic condition, has his eyes examined by Dr. Kristina Narfstrom at the
University of Missouri Veterinary School in Columbia, Mo. Narfstrom implants a
small section of retina, and is then attempting to use gene therapy to make that
grow. Holding Pluto is veterinary technician Lani Castaner.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2003


                             565 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 27, 2003, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: Going Blind ; Despite the hereditary eye disease that's robbing her of
her sight, a San Antonio woman is determined to stay independent by continuing
to work and raise her daughter.

BYLINE: Vincent T. Davis


BODY: As the scope of her vision narrows, she's committing sights to memory she
never stopped to soak up before her diagnosis. Lizards crawling on a brown,
weathered fence. The light glistening from her daughter's blue eyes. Green grass
sprouting in spring.

    For more than 10 years, Kim Van Hooser reluctantly has prepared for a world
of darkness.

    The pleasures of reading to her 6-year-old daughter and seeing a friend's
smile are fading to cherished memories. And after a lifetime of coming and going
wherever and whenever she pleases, she soon will be dependent on friends and
family for transportation.

    But even as her world grows smaller, she gives thanks for every day of sight
left to her, however limited.

    Van Hooser has retinitis pigmentosa, a hereditary eye disease that causes a
slow deterioration of the retina. Her grandmother had it, her mother had it, her
aunts had it - she didn't find out she had it until she was 24.

    "I have to try and have a good perspective," she said about adjusting her
life after receiving the diagnosis in 1991.

    Van Hooser's vision has been reduced to 10 degrees of central sight, which
is likened to looking at life through a cocktail straw.

    Science has provided myriad aids and supplements to help Van Hooser, who's
among 1 million Americans who must grapple with accepting their diagnoses. For
many, their main hope is to stay as close as they can to a normal life - keeping
a job, earning an income and raising a family.

    For Van Hooser, her disorder was an obstacle she was determined to overcome
to achieve her lifelong goals, such as starting her own business, before she
became completely blind.

    After she first heard her diagnosis, a tidal wave of emotions washed over
her. Questions - "Why me?" and "Why do I have to go blind?" - plagued her daily.
Her former worries of traffic jams, paying bills and raising a child paled in
comparison with her fear of a future without sight.

    She worried about surrendering her license and being homebound, shut away in
the darkness.

    To cope, Van Hooser joined a 500-member low-vision club where she met 50
others afflicted with her disease. She learned about aids available to the
visually impaired, such as guide dogs, mobility trainers and Braille. She was
motivated by her desire to accomplish everything she could before her sight
faded.

    Two years ago, the 35-year-old single mother started her own cleaning
service, with her working side by side with her employees. As her vision
decreased, she adjusted her work habits, using a technique she learned from her
mobility trainer.

    She scans each room, creating a visual plane, cleaning areas directly in
front of her. She starts by scouring the bottom of an 8-by-10-foot patch, moving
from corner to corner. Her employees give the room a final inspection before
moving to other rooms.

    According to the National Eye Institute, about one in 3,500 Americans has
retinitis pigmentosa. Van Hooser is among at least 100,000 people across the
country affected by the disorder.

    The disease comes in more than 90 forms, said Tom Hoglund, a science writer
for the National Eye Institute.

    "This is a debilitating disease, yet there is hope," Hoglund said.

    Because of past investments into identifying the genes that cause the
disease, many patients eventually may reap the benefits from vision research.

    The National Eye Institute has made progress in restoring vision in dogs
with gene therapy. Dogs are born blind with a form of retinitis pigmentosa that
strikes infants. Researchers are moving carefully with human clinical trials,
Hoglund said.

    A fiercely independent person, Van Hooser not only didn't let the disease
stop her from achieving her professional goal, she also pursued personal goals.



    A lover of the outdoors, Van Hooser has relied on family and friends to
accompany her on whitewater rafting trips in Colorado and rock climbing
excursions.

    But when she's alone, she feels her independence slipping away. She said
that when the sun sets, that's when she feels cut off from the little light
available to her.

    "I'm not really accustomed to it," Van Hooser said. "To accept it means to
own it."

    So she resists using a cane, though her knees are black and blue from
tripping and bumping into objects outside her field of vision. She said she's
putting off the use of aids because of the way people stare at blind people.

    When "the day comes that I can't see the stares, I'll use the cane," Van
Hooser said.

    Van Hooser has hope that those sights won't be lost forever. She said she
feels there will be a cure in her lifetime.

    She has applied to participate in two experimental trials for eye
restoration.

    In October, she received a screening letter on a study at the National Eye
Institute in Bethesda, Md. The procedure features an implant of encapsulated
human cells inside the sclera, the white part of the eye, just outside the iris.
Recently, she received word that she hadn't been accepted for the study.

    She was accepted into a research study in Boston, which could prolong her
current vision for 17 more years. One half of the participants would receive the
medical supplement, the others a placebo. Van Hooser plans to fly to Boston to
take part in the study Jan. 13.

    "My goal is to be independent," she said. "I don't want to be dependent for
the rest of my life." vtdavis@express-news.net

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: PHOTOS BY KIN MAN HUI/STAFF : ABOVE: Kim Van Hooser jumps on a
trampoline with her daughter, Victoria. Van Hooser has lost nearly 90 percent of
her vision due to a hereditary eye disease. TOP: This image of Van Hooser
demonstrates the way she sees the world around her. ; This is the world through
Kim Van Hooser's eyes ; Kim Van Hooser's eyesight is slowly deteriorating due to
retinitis pigmentosa. Van Hooser, who owns a cleaning service, scans each room,
creating a visual plane, and then cleans areas directly in front of her.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2003


                             566 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 26, 2003 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 037

LENGTH: 484 words

HEADLINE: Lab leases raise hopes

BYLINE: By Scott Van Voorhis

BODY:

   A flurry of recent lab deals may signal that the hard-hit drug development
and biotech real estate sector may have hit bottom after two years of
bloodletting, a new report suggests.

   A trio of lab deals in Cambridge and Lexington have soaked up 120,000 square
feet in a market awash with half-empty biotech and drug research centers, Hub
commercial real estate firm Richards Barry Joyce & Partners reports.

   Meanwhile, an array of similarly sized deals for lab space in Cambridge and
the suburbs is pending, notes Bob Richards, president of Richards Barry. The
upturn breaks a long drought in lab space deals that has sent vacancy rates
spiraling in the once-hot field.

   Yet the biotech and drug lab market isn't out of the woods, with more
cutbacks - and space reductions - by major biotech and pharma players offsetting
recent lease deals. But industry observers say the vacancy rate for labs appears
to have stabilized at about 18 percent.

   "For the first time in a year you can point to three sizable commitments in
the life-sciences market," Richards said. "We would imagine there would be two
to three significant additional deals in the next three months."

   The numbers tell the story.

   Growth in biotech and drug companies drove the lab vacancy rate to the low
single-digits by late 2001.

   But over the past two years, the amount of vacant lab space soared more than
40 percent. The lab vacancy rate in Cambridge leaped to 18.3 percent by Sept.
30, up from 2.1 percent in the summer of 2001.

   Lab rents, in turn, have plunged more than 20 percent from their 2001 peak of
close to $ 60 a square foot, Richards Barry reports.

   But that may be as bad as it gets, with the lab market stabilizing over the
next year, the firm suggests.

   Idenix Pharmaceuticals Inc., which leased 40,000 square feet at 60 Hampshire
St., and Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc., which is moving into another 40,000
square feet at 300 Third St., gave a boost to the beleaguered Cambridge lab
market, Richards Barry's study reports. Meanwhile, in Lexington, Critical
Therapeutics Inc. took another 40,000 square at 60 Westview St., helping put a
dent in a suburban lab vacancy rate of 18.4 percent.

   But major industry players such as Millennium, Vertex and Transkaryotic
Therapies have dumped big blocks of space onto the market in recent months,
offsetting those leases.

   Graphic: Ready for rebound?

   A new report by a Boston commercial real estate firm said the market for lab
space in the region is showing signs of picking up. In one recent deals, Idenix
Pharmaceuticals Inc. has leased 40,000 square feet at 60 Hampshire St., shown
here.

   Lab space vacancies

   Cambridge (third quarter vacancies)

   2001: 2.1 percent

   2002: 4 percent

   2003: 18.3 percent

   Suburbs (third-quarter vacancies)

   2001: 3.1 percent

   2002: 7.6 percent

   2003: 18.4 percent

   Source: Richards Barry Joyce & Partners. Staff graphic by Jeff Walsh.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2003


                             567 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 182 words

HEADLINE: ImClone Drug Gets Fast Track in Canada

BYLINE:  By Dow Jones/AP

BODY:

   A Canadian regulatory body will speed up the review of ImClone Systems Inc.'s
application to use its Erbitux cancer drug in combination with irinotechan, a
chemotherapy drug, to treat colon cancer, ImClone said yesterday.

        The priority designation by the regulatory agency, the Biologics and
Genetics Therapies Directorate of Canada, is intended to expedite the regulatory
process for drugs that aim to treat serious or life-threatening diseases for
which no treatment is available, similar to fast-track status in the United
States.

    Bristol-Myers Squibb is ImClone's partner in the drug's development.

   Last month, the Food and Drug Administration approved the Erbitux combination
treatment. ImClone's first application was rejected in December 2001, and a
scandal involving accusations of insider trading followed.

   ImClone's chief executive, Samuel D. Waksal, was sentenced to seven years in
prison, and Martha Stewart, chief executive of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia,
was indicted for securities fraud and obstruction of justice.

   Shares of ImClone rose $2.22, or 6.3 percent, to $37.49.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2003


                             568 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     November 24, 2003 Monday FINAL Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 1146 words

HEADLINE: HDL developments good news for heart;
 Therapies: Researchers are creating ways to boost "good cholesterol," which, if
successful, could drastically cut heart disease.;
 MEDICINE & SCIENCE

BYLINE: David Kohn

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   For hearts and blood vessels, HDLs are knights in shining armor.

   Better known as "good" cholesterol, these high-density lipoproteins clear the
plaque stuck to artery walls by low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), the "bad"
cholesterol.

   Since the 1970s, doctors have known that the battle between these
biomolecular adversaries can determine life or death. But while researchers have
come up with powerful medicines to lower LDL, they have had little luck with
drugs to increase HDL.

   Now, after more than a decade of work, scientists are unraveling HDL's
secrets and developing a variety of HDL-boosting drugs and therapies. If they
are successful, these advances could drastically cut heart disease, which kills
half a million Americans each year.

   Of almost 13 million people in the United States with heart ailments, more
than half don't have enough HDL, according to University of Pennsylvania
cardiologist Dr. Daniel Rader. He called low HDL a key untreated risk.

   "HDL is the next frontier for heart disease," said Dr. P.K. Shah, director of
cardiology research at Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles. Since 1992, Shah
has been experimenting with a type of HDL that seems to be particularly good at
removing cholesterol from artery walls.

   Doctors discovered this HDL variant two decades ago in the blood of an
Italian villager. Although the man had very low levels of HDL, he also had no
sign of cardiovascular disease. It turned out that his HDL particles were larger
than normal, an attribute that seemed to improve their ability to cart off
cholesterol.

   Eventually, Shah succeeded in creating a synthetic version of this jumbo HDL
and began testing it on animals. Known as ETC-216, the compound reduced arterial
plaque in mice and rabbits.

   Last year, Esperion Therapeutics, a small Michigan biotech company, funded a
study of ETC-216. Researchers tried it on a group of 47 people who had recently
suffered heart attacks. After five injections over five weeks, the drug reduced
their plaque by 4 percent.

   "It doesn't sound like a lot, but that's several years worth of plaque," said
the study's lead author, Dr. Steven Nissen, a cardiologist at the Cleveland
Clinic. "We were pretty astonished at how much plaque had been removed."

   Not everyone is so gung-ho about the results. "It's a small study, and it has
to be duplicated," said Dr. Roger Blumenthal, director of the Johns Hopkins
University Preventative Cardiology Center. He called the 4 percent plaque
decrease "modest."

   Esperion, is planning a larger, longer trial with ETC-216. If all goes well,
Nissen says, the drug could be on the market by 2007.

   But that's not Shah's only HDL project. He is also working with the gene that
produces the jumbo HDL molecule. He has successfully inserted this variant DNA
into mice, whose bodies then produced a continuous flow of powerhouse HDL. In
these mice, the extra HDL rapidly reduced plaque, he said.

   The advantage of this approach is convenience: A single injection of the gene
could increase the body's plaque-fighting capacity for a lifetime. Shah plans to
talk with the Food and Drug Administration and other agencies about testing HDL
gene therapy on humans, and hopes to begin clinical trials within three years.

   If safe and effective, these HDL boosters could offer key advantages over
current drugs. Today, doctors generally treat cholesterol problems with statins,
a class of drugs that work by decreasing LDL levels. Although they stop plaque
buildup, they usually don't get rid of existing deposits. HDL therapies seem
more effective at removing plaque.

   "Statins have been the best thing that we've ever had in cardiovascular
disease. They've reduced mortality by a third. That's fantastic, but it still
means that two-thirds of mortality remains," said UCLA cardiologist Dr. Alan
Fogelman, who along with several colleagues has developed a synthetic version of
HDL.

   Unlike natural HDL, their invention, D4F, isn't destroyed by digestive
enzymes, which means it can be taken orally.

   In tests on mice, D4F lowered plaque by 75 percent in six weeks. Fogelman,
who calls the results "dramatic," hopes to begin human trials next summer.
"We're a long way from mice to humans," he said. "But if you're a mouse, we can
prevent your atherosclerosis."

   Major drug companies also are developing HDL boosters. Pfizer, for example,
is working on a drug that inhibits production of cholesterol ester transfer
protein (CETP), a chemical that breaks down HDL particles. The company has
started a large human trial of the compound, known as torcetrapib. It plans to
combine the drug with a statin, creating a one-two punch that simultaneously
raises HDL and lowers LDL.

   Others are also experimenting with CETP blockers. A Massachusetts company,
Avant Immunotherapeutics, recently finished a small human trial on a vaccine
that triggers an anti-CETP immune reaction.

   The study found that four injections over six months produced an 8 percent
rise in HDL - cutting heart attack risk by almost 25 percent. Una Ryan, the
company's CEO, said she hopes to get the drug onto the market by 2007.

   While no one disputes the importance of HDL research, some critics lament the
emphasis on potential blockbusters that are years from market. Blumenthal notes
that there are proven ways to raise HDL.

   High doses of vitamin B6 increase levels (but with side effects that often
include serious flushing, itching and nausea). Exercise, weight loss and
moderate alcohol consumption can also boost HDL.

   But these measures are often not enough. "Lifestyle changes are useful, but
they often have a very modest effect in raising HDL," said Penn's Rader, who is
also experimenting with CETP inhibitors. He thinks HDL drugs will eventually
save millions of lives. "This is real. It's going to be one of the next big
advances in heart disease," he said.

   Recent research has underscored the particle's importance. A study published
last month in the Journal of the American Medical Association found a connection
between long life and robust HDL.

   Scientists looked at 213 long-lived people - the minimum age was 95 - as well
as their children, most of whom were in their 70s. The researchers found that
this group tended to have higher levels of HDL than control groups did, as well
as larger particles of the lipoprotein.

   Nir Barzilai, one of the lead authors, thinks HDL plays a key role in aging.
"We know that HDL goes down with age. Maybe when it goes down too low, you die,"
he said. "Maybe the reason the 100-year-olds are still alive is they still have
normal HDL levels."

   A gerontologist at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, Barzilai
has also found that elderly people with high HDL scored higher on cognitive
tests than those with lower levels.

   "Everywhere we look," he said, "we find evidence that HDL has effects, all
over the body."

CORRECTION-DATE: November 24, 2003

CORRECTION:

   An article in Monday's editions of The Sun on new cholesterol drugs
incorrectly stated that high doses of vitamin B6 can increase the body's levels
of high-density lipoproteins (HDL). Large doses of B6 do not increase HDL and
can cause nerve damage. High doses of vitamin B3 can boost HDL levels.

   The Sun regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION(S), Cholesterol confusion; KNIOGHT RIDDER/TRIBUNE

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2003


                             569 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 19, 2003 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Study finds tumor growth keeps time with body clock

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Tumor cell growth appears to be linked to the body's internal clock,
according to a study presented yesterday at a medical conference in Boston,
suggesting that the timing of cancer surgery or chemotherapy treatment could
affect their effectiveness.

   "Tumors don't grow randomly," said Dr. Patricia Wood of the Veterans Affairs
Medical Center and University of South Carolina. "The rate of growth is higher
during the (body's) activity phase."

   As a result, the timing of surgery or drug therapy may influence how well
they work and, in the case of chemotherapy, the level of toxicity.

   Her study, presented at the American Association for Cancer Research
International Conference on Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics, found
breast cancer tumors in mice grew fastest during the daylight hours.

   DNA division and rate of cell growth appear to be tied to the body's
gene-controlled circadian clock, she said. While tumors are on circadian time,
she said, they at some point develop their own internal clocks.

   "If you can disturb the clock, you can disturb tumor growth," she said.

   The finding has implications for the development of drugs or gene therapy to
interfere with those clocks, inhibiting tumor growth.

   But until then, studies should look at the timing of cancer interventions so
they can be most effective, experts said.

   "It has long been known there is an association between the timing of surgery
and outcome as well as the timing of chemotherapy delivery and outcome," said
Dr. Karen Altman of Columbia University.

   Wood said there is evidence that breast cancer surgery is more effective if
done soon after ovulation, but said few surgeons pay attention to the data.

   She also said the chemo drug 5FU works best if given late in the day or
evening.

   The area of study also suggests a role for the hormone melatonin, often taken
as a sleep aid. Studies have shown higher rates of breast and colorectal cancer
among night-shift workers, possibly because of melatonin deficiencies.

   Melatonin is produced in the brain at night and appears to protect against
cancer. But bright lights on at night may cut the production of the hormone.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2003


                             570 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 18, 2003, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 5C; Commentary

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: Sports should put their weight behind stopping steroid use

BYLINE: Ian O'Connor

BODY:
This is our moment in time, our once-in-a-lifetime chance to take back sports
from the chemically engineered cheats and frauds.

   The burglars have broken into the Watergate Hotel. We either treat them as
petty crooks or see them as the means to finally destroy a power structure built
on greed and deceit.

   At last, we have busted through the door of the grim steroid subculture that
had carjacked our games and sped away at record speed. We have to go the
distance now. In 40 years, steroids will be seen as the equivalent of Flintstone
vitamins. Smarter drugs will build even bigger bodies. Gene doping will be the
order of the day.


   "The absolute worst thing we can do now is turn our backs and walk away with
another sound-bite event, as if nothing happened," said Gary Wadler, member of
the World Anti-Doping Agency. "We're about to enter the era of gene therapy, so
we ain't seen nothing yet.

   "The potential for cheating in the future is a daunting thought."

   The BALCO investigation.

   The disclosure that 5%-7% of big-league ballplayers tested positive for
steroids.

   The report that four Oakland Raiders tested positive for the designer steroid
known as THG.

   "We can't let these seminal events just pass by," Wadler said.

   No, we can't. Nothing much changed from Ben Johnson's shame to baseball's
dismissal of Jose Canseco, Ken Caminiti and their claims of rampant steroid
abuse across the pastime as some silly Hans-and-Franz skit. Now the comic relief
is provided by a baseball penal system so laughably forgiving for first-time
offenders it actually sends a steroid abuser into "treatment." For what, acne?

   At least baseball offers no sanctuary for the two-time losers and beyond.
Although the agreement between the commissioner and the players union calls for
suspensions or fines for multiple offenders, and allows for fined, non-suspended
players to snake away under the cover of anonymity, that's just contract
language. You can bet Bud Selig's people will suspend and name the culprits, and
thank heavens for that.

   "Our program will be aggressively enforced by the commissioner" is all
Selig's drug lieutenant, Rob Manfred, cared to say.

   Public humiliation is the only true deterrent, for it trashes everything a
cheating heart ever achieved. Athletes will always risk thousands in fines to
make millions in wages and winnings with their comic-book arms and legs; they'll
usually risk their health, too.

   "So you need penalties so severe that the athletes won't do it," Wadler said.
"You get a two-year suspension in the Olympics on the first offense and a
lifetime ban on the second. Apply those standards to baseball and see what
happens. As it is, baseball's system is woefully inadequate. It's like Swiss
cheese. It's more an IQ test than a drug test."

   Only the dummies got caught this year, a most frightening truth. If 5%-7% of
baseball's players were nailed despite advance warning, who's to say what the
figures might have been had every major leaguer been hit with a sneak-attack
test in the middle of the night? "I wouldn't be surprised if you told me
10%-12%," Wadler said.

   I wouldn't be surprised if you told me 20%-30%.

   "Baseball doesn't even have out-of-competition testing," Wadler said, "and
the positive tests already represent at least the equivalent of the entire
Yankees and Mets teams."

   Only drastic, full-disclosure measures will eradicate the
performance-enhancing plague. Steroids can be found everywhere from traditional
Thanksgiving Day high school rivalries to the Super Bowl, and sometimes inside
the most unlikely lockers.

   Consider Barret Robbins, among the Raiders named in the CBS Sportsline.com
report. Robbins went on a drinking binge and missed Super Bowl XXXVII in January
before being diagnosed as an alcoholic with bipolar disorder. He made a stirring
comeback and is scheduled to be honored tonight with a courage and sportsmanship
award. Would he really betray those virtues to cycle on THG?

   We only know that drug cheats have been tarnishing sports since Roman
gladiators were using stimulants in the Circus Maximus.

   "And that cheating strikes at the heart of the value system in the sports
structure," Wadler said. "If you don't have that, I don't know what you have.
Sports is supposed to be a contest of character. When it becomes a contest of
chemistry and pharmacology, that's a tragedy."

   This is not war. This is not death and dying on the battlefield. "But sports
is a fundamental part of the fabric of our society," Wadler said. "It's as much
the soul of our country as anything else."

   That soul has been sold to the drug devil, and it's high time to get it back.
Sports leagues must hammer away at the unions for tougher agreements, deals that
suspend and identify first-time offenders. The clean athletes who lose jobs,
money and records to the frauds should whisper their names to league officials
and friendly neighborhood beat writers.

   This doesn't have to be a fair fight, not with the stakes this high.

   Those Watergate burglars aren't petty crooks. Their base of operations must
be destroyed for good.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2003


                             571 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                            November 17, 2003 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: Roche Steps Up Competition in Anemia Drugs;
The Swiss company plans to start final tests needed for approval of a treatment
that would rival Amgen's Aranesp.

BYLINE: Denise Gellene, Times Staff Writer

DATELINE:  SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   What is now a contest between Amgen Inc. and Johnson & Johnson over the
lucrative anemia drug business could soon become a three-way race.

   At a medical meeting here this weekend, Swiss drug maker Roche said it was
ready to begin the final round of human tests needed for government approval of
Cera, its investigational anemia drug. Cera appears to be able to last at least
three times as long as Amgen's Aranesp, according to Roche -- an improvement
that would mean fewer shots and office visits for patients.

   "This is an exciting drug," said Dr. Steven Fishbane, a kidney specialist at
Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y., and an investigator for Roche.
"It is what we have been looking for."

   Roche is testing Cera in patients on kidney dialysis and patients with
chronic kidney disease, two important markets for Thousand Oaks-based Amgen.
Patients with impaired kidneys cannot produce erythropoietin, a hormone that
spurs red blood cell production. The anemia drugs are synthetic versions of the
hormone, also called EPO.

   The stakes are high for Amgen, which discovered the erythropoietin gene and
this year will generate $4 billion in revenue from anemia drugs. The company
sells Epogen to kidney dialysis patients in the U.S. and has a monopoly in that
segment. Amgen sells Aranesp, its long-acting version of Epogen, to other kidney
disease patients and to cancer patients with anemia from chemotherapy
treatments.

   Roche on Saturday presented data to a standing-room-only crowd of physicians
that showed Cera worked in anemic patients who received a shot every three
weeks. In the company's upcoming clinical trial, patients would receive Cera
once a month. That compares with twice-monthly shots for Aranesp.

   Physicians said the difference was significant because kidney disease
patients not yet on dialysis see their doctors monthly. Many patients avoid
anemia treatments because they do not want to make additional office visits,
Fishbane said.

   "These patients are pretty sick and are already taking heart medications and
are being treated for diabetes and see multiple doctors," Fishbane said. "It's a
terrible lifestyle for them."

   If Roche's clinical trial succeeds, Cera "could be a formidable threat to
Aranesp," said Dr. Geoffrey Porges, senior biotechnology analyst for Sanford C.
Bernstein & Co. According to Porges, the drug could receive approval in the U.S.
and Europe by 2006. Roche said it expected a 2007 launch.

   If all goes as planned, Roche could have close to $1 billion in worldwide
Cera sales by the end of the drug's second year in circulation, in 2008,
according to a Sanford C. Bernstein research report.

   Amgen representatives attending the American Society of Nephrology meeting
last weekend wouldn't comment on the Roche drug. Nonetheless, it was clear Amgen
had no intention of ceding its business to Roche.

   "We're very confident of the benefits of Aranesp," said Dr. Robert Brenner,
director of global development for Aranesp in kidney disease.

   On Sunday, Amgen presented research showing that patients improved on a
monthly shot of Aranesp that contained twice the regular dose. Amgen said a
larger clinical trial was planned to confirm the result.

   "I think the feeling among physicians is that Aranesp is stretching to get to
four weeks and Cera can do that comfortably," Porges said.

   Amgen launched Aranesp in 2001 to compete with Procrit, an anemia drug
marketed by Johnson & Johnson under a license from Amgen. Aranesp has allowed
Amgen to narrow J&J's once formidable lead in the worldwide anemia drug
business.

   Roche markets a drug similar to Epogen in Europe, but Amgen's strong patents
on erythropoietin have kept Roche and other rivals from the U.S. market. Amgen
Chief Executive Kevin Sharer has said the company would defend its patents, and
analysts expect Amgen to sue Roche. However, some Wall Street analysts think
Amgen's patents don't apply to Cera.

   Porges said Roche had obtained patents on Cera in the U.S. and Europe, a sign
Cera might not infringe on Amgen's intellectual property. No patents on Aranesp
have been issued in the U.S. or in Europe, where Roche and Amgen already are in
a patent fight over Aranesp.

   "We're confident Cera does not infringe Amgen's U.S. patents for
erythropoietin," Roche spokeswoman Shelly Rosenstock said.

   Also at the medical meeting Saturday, Medgenics Corp., an Israeli company
backed by Silicon Valley venture funds, reported on an experimental gene therapy
treatment that would make shots unnecessary.

   UCLA professor of medicine Dr. Allen R. Nissenson, a consultant to Medgenics,
said the treatment allowed pieces of the patient's skin to function as small
drug factories. First, a 1-inch-square piece of the patient's skin is removed
and then a virus is used to insert the erythropoietin gene into the skin cells.
After about a week, with the virus fully removed, the skin is grafted to the
patient's arm or leg, where it should pump out the hormone for several months,
until the grafted skin cells die.

   Nissenson said a clinical trial of less than a dozen patients is underway in
Israel and should be completed in three months. If successful, Medgenics would
launch large human tests and seek Food and Drug Administration approval in 2006.

   Medgenics plans to market the therapy to kidney doctors as an economic
alternative to current anemia drugs, Nissenson said. "They are trying to
position this as something that will save a lot of money. Medicare already
spends $1 billion on EPO. The pricing on this will be cost effective."

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2003


                             572 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 10, 2003 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 029

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: CAPITAL FOCUS; One last time: Price controls are no fix for U.S. drug
woes

BYLINE: By Ted Bunker

BODY:

   Price controls and rationing could sound the death knell for health care
innovators.

   Don't believe it? Name a life-saving drug or medical device invented in
Canada, where care is rationed and prices are controlled.

   In this final Capital Focus column, let's take the case of importing drugs
from Canada as a way to restrain health care costs. While tempting, it's plainly
a back-door method of imposing price controls on drug makers - and that could
threaten one of the few growth spots in the Massachusetts economy.

   But, as state Attorney General Tom Reilly said on Friday, who can blame
Springfield for trying to rein in drug spending?

   As Reilly told a Harvard Business School health care conference, "Costs are
really spiraling out of control." Medicaid now accounts for a quarter of all
state spending.

   Cities such as Springfield confront mushrooming health care costs even as
state and federal aid shrinks. Reilly noted that Springfield has cut 190
teaching jobs and 75 police positions, among others, to balance its budget.

   Springfield Mayor Michael Albano, a Democrat, latched onto the idea of buying
drugs from Canada for city workers and dependents. "Who is to blame them?" asked
Reilly, also a Democrat. "They expect to save $ 4 million to $ 9 million."

   But the federal Food and Drug Administration says bringing prescription drugs
across the border and selling them to Americans is illegal. Last week, it won a
federal court order to stop one of two drug companies from doing that, and
warned the other - Springfield's supplier - that it could be next.

   As FDA Commissioner Dr. Mark McClellan explained earlier Friday, imported
drugs pose health safety risks for consumers and big potential liability
problems for those who distribute them. He said Congress should act to expand
Medicare drug benefits, while steps are taken to develop "fairer drug prices"
worldwide.

   Reilly says the FDA could regulate imported drugs, to ensure their safety and
efficacy. And he's asked the agency to do that.

   McClellan didn't respond to that request Friday. But the FDA's past track
record casts doubt on whether its regulation would not add significantly to
import costs and erase potential savings.

   Drug makers - whose fees support the FDA - fault the agency's thicket of
regulation and bureaucratic methods for piling on to the already staggering
costs of developing drugs.

   At Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge, to take just one example, Michael
Astrue, chief executive, said the company spent as much as $ 10 million to
convert one drug development application into electronic form - after it trucked
the application's 2 million pages to the agency. Astrue also highlighted
gargantuan R&D costs, noting that Transkaryotic plans to spend $ 300 million on
research this year, but doesn't expect to have a resulting drug on the market
until 2010.

   There's also staggering risk involved in drug development. Tufts University
experts have examined drug research and found that the average cost of bringing
a drug from initial idea to pharmacy shelves has nearly tripled, to $ 897
million, including a 99.6 percent failure rate. And it takes 15 years.

   American drug makers are expected to spend about $ 32 billion on research and
development this year. Yet their labs are producing fewer new drugs even as R&D
spending climbs. McClellan noted that FDA applications for new drugs fell to
just 17 last year from 53 in 1996.

   Generic drug development may account for a lot of R&D spending. But venture
investors appear to souring on the prospects of biotech, warned Francis Lunger,
Millipore Corp.'s chief executive.

   Threats of government price controls have scared off biotech investors
before, and the current drug price debate may be doing that again.

   Whether applied directly or indirectly, by Medicare fiat or through import
programs, drug price controls threaten the capital structure that has made the
United States the world leader in creating life-saving drugs. If developers
can't hope for blockbuster rewards, why should they and their investors take on
such high risks? And no one should expect government or universities to pick up
the ball - neither have the money.

   As government leaders struggle to provide drugs to people who need them at
affordable costs, they need to be mindful of the economic realities that
confront the industry. And here in Massachusetts, that industry is growing
increasingly important to our economic well-being. Price controls aren't the
answer.

   Each week since early 1996, I have used this space to entertain and, I hope,
enlighten. In about 400 columns, I've sought to dissect the struggles between
regulators and innovators, to explore market forces and delve into the
implications of new technologies.

   Above all, I've sought to spotlight the essential benefits of market
capitalism and free choice. I've sought out local and national leaders to inform
what I presented here. But this space has advocated my views, not theirs.

   I traveled a long road through many different jobs and places to reach my
perspective. My education comes from presidents and paupers, from Harvard
educators and high-school dropouts, from financial wizards and bankrupts - and
lots of people in between. To them all, I say thanks.

   My perspective still will shape the Herald's business pages each day. That
won't change.

   But my Capital Focus efforts end here. I hope you've taken something from
this space each week, even if we haven't always agreed. I've learned plenty from
you, friend and foe alike.

   So until we meet again, thanks for traveling with me.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2003


                             573 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                    November 5, 2003 Wednesday Home Edition

SECTION: Metro News; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: Emory-Tech brain researchers aim to launch new movement

BYLINE: DAVID WAHLBERG

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   The nerve cells of sea slugs are connected by the computer of Georgia Tech
researcher Steve DeWeerth to a foot-tall robot named Timmy.

   DeWeerth isn't living out a childhood fantasy of torturing simple life forms.
In a new research building on the Tech campus, he's trying to find ways to use
nerve cells to help restore movement in people with spinal-cord injuries.

   Applying biology and technology to medicine is the goal of the new $23
million Whitaker Biomedical Engineering Building, dedicated Tuesday. The
five-story building is the first permanent home of a biomedical engineering
department shared by Tech and Emory University.

   Instead of electronically stimulating the muscles of people with nerve
damage, as doctors do with some patients, DeWeerth wants to hook up the
patients' remaining healthy cells to an implant that could allow them to move
more naturally.

   To study the idea, he's turning to sea slugs known as aplysia, whose nerve
cells harbor circuits that can make Timmy's aluminum legs strut.

   "The same kinds of cellular dynamics are in all animals that have rhythmic
movement," said DeWeerth. "In the lowly slug, we see a direct application to
humans with spinal-cord injury."

   The Tech-Emory program, started in 1997, was the nation's first such
partnership between public and private universities. Virginia Tech and Wake
Forest University in North Carolina are developing a similar program.

   In the competitive and sometimes lucrative world of biotechnology, such
cooperation can be rare.

   But "there is no limit to what you can do if you don't care who gets the
credit," said Don Giddens, dean of Tech's College of Engineering, during the
dedication ceremony.

   The two schools, in addition to sharing dozens of scientists and about 300
undergraduate and graduate students, also have a biotech business incubator.
Located between the two campuses on Briarcliff Road, EmTech Bio is home to six
burgeoning companies developing HIV vaccines, gene therapy techniques and new
ways to design drugs.

   Backers of Georgia's biotech industry --- ranked ninth in the nation in an
analysis by Ernst & Young --- hope the new research building will lead to more
spinoff companies from academic discoveries.

   DeWeerth hopes so, too. He said the new building allows him and six
colleagues to interact much better than when they worked in separate quarters.

   That cooperation could lead not only to new therapies for spinal-cord injury,
but also to better prosthetic arms and legs, implants to suppress epileptic
seizures and improved methods of tracking Parkinson's disease, he said.

   "We're all trying to create more robust, natural movement."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve DeWeerth, professor and director of the Lab for
Neuroengineering at the new Georgia Tech-Emory University research facility,
watches a robot that is helping to reveal how brain cells control movement. /
RICH ADDICKS / Staff; Photo: The brain imitators
Brain researcher Steve DeWeerth watches a robot at the Lab for Neuroengineering
at the Georgia Tech-Emory University research facility. B3 / RICH ADDICKS /
Staff (TEASER)

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2003


                             574 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 November 2, 2003 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: BRINGING STARTUPS TO LIFE

BYLINE: Rachel Melcer Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   * Pat Snider, the new CEO of BioGenerator, will wear many hats in helping
entrepreneurs launch their biotech and life science firms.

   Pat Snider sees her role as president and chief executive of the new
BioGenerator in many ways: "Facilitator. Catalyst. Broker. . . . Adviser.
Mentor. Monitor."

   She wants to be a lot of things to a select group of people -- the scientists
and entrepreneurs who are trying to get biotech and life sciences companies off
the ground.

   Her job, which began last month, is to take raw material from the region's
research centers and create companies that could one day gird the economy. Her
tools are a network of consultants and business contacts, plus about $1 million
a year contributed by local philanthropies and corporations.

   "BioGenerator is like a startup itself. So, like any startup, it's going to
have challenges," she said, taking a break from unpacking files and settling in
to her primary office at the Nidus Center for Scientific Enterprise in Creve
Coeur.

   "But I think these are going to be fun challenges, not teeth-grinding
challenges," she said.

   BioGenerator is the brain child of the Coalition for Plant and Life Sciences,
an initiative to create a viable biotech industry that was formed by Civic
Progress and the St. Louis Regional Chamber and Growth Association. The
coalition is funded by the Danforth Foundation, which also supports
BioGenerator.

   It is the latest piece of the puzzle that includes two incubators, research
centers, venture capital funds and commercial districts.

   It is meant to fill a gap in the progression of creating a company, from
research to revenue -- a space that has been "a no-man's land," said Michael
Douglas, who leads technology transfer efforts at Washington University.

   Douglas and his counterparts at St. Louis University, Joe Zahner and Robert
Webster, help researchers patent and license their discoveries. The y advise on
whether the technology seems to have commercial potential. But they lack time
and resources to test the commercial waters, find business managers, incorporate
companies and solicit investors.

   That's where Snider will come in.

   "We've never had, in the community, someone who could help pick up the ball
and run with it. ... Pat gives us a hand-off resource," Douglas said. "I'm very
excited about this development for the community and the university. It's
absolutely ideally what we are looking for."

   Snider came to St. Louis from Cincinnati, where she had run a biotech
incubator and worked to raise venture capital funds. In between, she spent two
years with the Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium. She also has worked
with startups in San Diego and was an entrepreneur as CEO of Miragen Inc.

   "She understands the issues," said Bob Calcaterra, president of the Nidus
Center, who was on the committee that hired Snider from a pool of more than 40
applicants. He had served on the board of Snider's Cincinnati incubator,
Bio/Start, and she is an adviser to Nidus.

   Over the course of her career, Snider said, "I really found that I loved
entrepreneurship."

   In this job, "the focus is on starting companies. To me, that's the fun thing
- because you're creating something from nothing."

   So, how will she do it?

   Snider will work closely with the universities' technology transfer offices,
to identify company concepts with the most potential. She'll bring the best to
the BioGenerator board for endorsement, then provide funding for such things as
proof-of-concept tests, market research and management consultants. Those that
pan out likely will apply for space at one of the incubators.

   BioGenerator's goal, Snider said, is to review about 20 concepts in the next
year, with five getting funding and two resulting in startups. In the second
year, those numbers should be 30 ideas, eight funded and five companies formed;
and 40 ideas, 12 funded and eight companies formed in year three.

   "St. Louis has not measured up in creating the number of companies
commensurate with the magnitude and the quality of top-notch research that takes
place in our town. (So) we can deduce that there have been missed opportunities
for years," said Donn Rubin, executive director of the Coalition for Plant and
Life Sciences.

   "We know that not every company is going to thrive. ... But many new
companies will ultimately be created."

   Snider said she has seen a lot of cities try to become big biotech players,
but few succeed. She likes St. Louis' chances.

   "St. Louis has its act together. (The community) is slowly but surely
building all the pieces," she said. "... If we can't do it here, I don't think
it will work anyplace."

   The overall effort is orchestrated by the coalition; at its heart is Dr.
William Danforth, chancellor emeritus of Washington University. BioGenerator is
being funded by the Danforth Foundation, a McDonnell family foundation, the
Monsanto Fund and agribusiness Bunge North America (though their money will pass
through Cortex, an entity set up to develop a biotech business corridor in
midtown St. Louis).

   "One of the things that is really coming together here ... is an
understanding by the different parts of the community that they have a role to
play in forming a life sciences industry," said Marcia Mellitz, president of the
Center for Emerging Technologies.

   BioGenerator involves the universities, industry, public sector,
philanthropies and civic leaders. Snider will be carrying the ball, but she
won't be alone.

   "She's one of the hardest working people I've encountered in my life,"
Mellitz said. "So I think she'll really throw herself into it."

   = = = =

   Pat Snider

   Title: President and chief executive, BioGenerator

   Age: 57

   Mission: Creating and assisting new life-sciences companies

   Recent jobs: President and chief executive, Louisiana Gene Therapy Research
Consortium, 2001-2003; managing director, BioVentures Development Partners LLC,
raising venture capital in Cincinnati, 2000-2001; president, Bio/Start
life-sciences incubator in Cincinnati, 1995-2000.

   Education: Master's degree in business administration, Kellogg Graduate
School of Management, Northwestern University, 1987; master's degree, Ohio State
University, 1973; bachelor's degree, Ohio State University, 1970.

   Office: Nidus Center for Scientific Enterprise, 893 North Warson Road, Creve
Coeur. Also spends time at the Center for Emerging Technologies, 4100 Forest
Park Avenue, Washington University and St. Louis University.

   E-mail: pjsnider@biogenerator.org

   = = = =

   About the BioGenerator

   Mission: To identify promising technologies, test their commercial viability
and create new life-sciences companies.

   Board members*: Chairman John McDonnell; Vice Chairman Donn Rubin, Coalition
for Plant and Life Sciences/Danforth Foundation; Bob Calcaterra, Nidus Center
for Scientific Enterprise; Marcia Mellitz, Center for Emerging Technologies;
Michael Douglas, Washington University; Robert Webster, St. Louis University;
Bob Coy, St. Louis Regional Chamber & Growth Association

   Financial supporters: Danforth Foundation; a McDonnell family foundation;
Monsanto Fund; Bunge North America

   *Note: Board may expand to include representatives of the Monsanto Fund and
Bunge North America

NOTES:
Reporter Rachel Melcer:; E-mail: rmelcer@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8394

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photos by KAREN ELSHOUT / POST-DISPATCH; (1) Color Photo - Pat
Snider, the new CEO of BioGenerator, an initiative by several area groups to
create a viable biotech industry, meets with Michael Douglas, who leads
technology transfer efforts at Washington University. Her job will be to help
create companies out of the biotech research and development in the region.; (2)
Photo - Pat Snider (left) meets with Thomas Hagerty (center) and Michael Douglas
at Washington University's Office of Technology Management, 660 South Euclid
Avenue, Wednesday morning. As the new head of BioGenerator, Snider will try to
create and coordinate business opportunities for research being done at local
universities. Douglas is Washington University's associate vice chancellor for
the Office of Technology Management and Hagerty is marketing and operations
manager.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2003


                             575 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     October 31, 2003 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 842 words

HEADLINE: Fatal brain disease reversed in mice;
British gene research shows potential for cures for CWD-like disorders

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER jfauber@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   By using genetic trickery, a group of British scientists has reversed a type
of fatal brain disease, a finding that has implications for a family of deadly
neurological disorders in people, cattle and deer.

   Researchers using laboratory mice say they were able to halt and actually
reverse the disease process caused by an unusual infectious agent known as a
prion, according to their paper published today in the journal Science.

   Prions are rogue proteins that attack the brain and are believed to be the
cause of a family of diseases that includes Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in people,
mad cow disease, and chronic wasting disease in deer. People also can be
infected with the human version of mad cow disease, called variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

   The approach by the British group and a few other researchers represents a
revolutionary way of curing otherwise incurable diseases: Instead of seeking out
and destroying the infectious agent, which is the conventional approach with
invading viruses and bacteria, they have targeted the target of the agent.

   "We haven't seen cures that show the potential for reversing prion disease,"
said Judd Aiken, a prion researcher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
"It's a very significant (development) for a disease that's always fatal. It
tells us that future therapeutics are certainly possible."

   Halting prion disease

   The researchers were able to halt the advance of prion disease essentially by
eliminating a normal protein in the brain that is infected by prions. Prions are
misfolded proteins that are chemically identical to a protein made in the brain
cells of most mammals, including people.

   Prion protein comes in both harmless and infectious forms. It is one of
thousands of complex proteins produced in the body's cells.

   Its actual function is not known, although it may play a role in regulating
sleep. But it does not appear to be essential to survival.

   When prions come in contact with normal prion protein, they cause it to
misfold. Eventually, a cascade of misfolding takes place, resulting in the
buildup of clumps of protein and the death of brain cells.

   The process causes so-called spongiform holes in the brain. About 90% of
people with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease die within one year.

   The researchers, from the British government's Medical Research Council Prion
Unit, were able to genetically engineer mice so that they produced only normal
prion protein until they were about 3 months old. However, before the mice
stopped making the protein, they were infected with a prion strain.

   As expected, they began showing signs of brain disease, but, suddenly, as
their brains stopped making normal prion protein, the disease stopped advancing.

   "They build up a rip-snorting infection . . . and then the production of
normal prion protein is shut down," said Byron Caughey, a prion researcher at
the Rocky Mountain Laboratories of the National Institutes of Health. "It's
harder for the abnormal prion protein to cause toxic effects on brain cells when
the normal prion protein isn't there."

   However, Caughey noted that the study followed the mice only until they were
about 1 year old. Lab mice generally live two years.

   "The animals may die yet," he said.

   However, the researchers say they actually reversed the early spongiform
changes that had begun in the mice.

   "Early pathological changes reverse, and disease progression is prevented,"
lead author Giovanna Mallucci said in an interview. "Nerve cells don't die, and
the mice survive."

   While genetically engineering people is not feasible, the early success in
targeting normal prion protein raises the hope that prion diseases someday may
be successfully treated, Mallucci said.

   "What this gives us is a therapeutic direction," Mallucci said.

   Preventing conversion

   Others, including researchers in the lab of Stanley Prusiner, the scientist
who coined the term prion more than 20 years ago and later won a Nobel Prize for
his research, are looking at other approaches that target the normal prion
protein.

   One such approach to is deliver antibodies that attach themselves to normal
prion protein in the brain and make it unable to be converted to the abnormal
form, said Giuseppe Legname, the senior scientist in Prusiner's lab at the
University of California, San Francisco.

   Another approach is to use gene therapy as a way to switch off the production
of normal prion protein, Legname said.

   The British research and the work of others now bolster the feasibility of
targeting normal prion protein, he said.

   "This is additional proof," he said.

   The research may even have implications for animal prion diseases, said Beth
Williams, the University of Wyoming pathologist who first identified chronic
wasting disease.

   In the future, it may be possible to develop an oral drug that could knock
out the production of normal prion protein in deer, she said.

   "All these bits and pieces are pretty exciting," she said. "If we could just
get it to work in the real world."

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2003


                             576 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 31, 2003 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 1157 words

HEADLINE: N.J. lawyer suited to tackle the NFL

BYLINE: KATE COSCARELLI, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   A National Football League official said he wouldn't predict if the league
would triumph in keeping players out of the draft who are less than three years
out of high school. But the Pennsauken lawyer who filed suit challenging the
rule, on behalf of suspended Ohio State University tailback Maurice Clarett, was
more confident.

   The league will lose, said Alan Milstein.

   "I think everybody knows that, even the NFL," he said.

   Swagger is Milstein's style.

   And it's a trait many say the 49-year-old attorney has earned. He has
successfully taken on some of the country's most esteemed research institutions,
universities and medical schools.

   He won a settlement on behalf of the family of a man, Jesse Gelsinger, who
died after participating in a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania. Milstein also sued the maker of an anthrax vaccine, and the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. And, earlier this year, he got a
settlement for the widow of an artificial-heart recipient from the maker of the
device, the hospital where it was implanted and the patient advocate who helped
the couple decide to go ahead with the clinical trial.

    Milstein's litigation approach is regarded by many as aggressive, because he
often names people in the suit who are not directly related to the charges.

   "Scorched earth is a pretty good adjective," said Oklahoma lawyer Robert
Seacat, who is working with Milstein on a class action over clinical trials of a
melanoma vaccine at the University of Oklahoma.

   Some say Milstein, a partner with the firm Sherman, Silverstein, Kohl, Rose &
Podolsky, is smart and savvy in the courtroom, but occasionally takes on issues
that are out of his league.

   "He's a crusader of a sort, but I think he certainly doesn't want to be a
crusader unless it's lucrative," said University of Pennsylvania bioethicist
Arthur Caplan, who was originally named in the Gelsinger suit but later
dismissed from the case. "I don't think he's the greatest of legal minds, but I
appreciate good presentation skills."

    Milstein says he doesn't take high-profile cases for the money. He recently
stopped driving a sports car because he didn't "like the way it portrayed me."
Now, he drives a Nissan Altima.

   "I could practice law a different way if it was only about the money," he
said.

   Asked if he liked the spotlight, Milstein smiled.

   "I've had my share. I like important cases. I like important issues, weighty
issues," he said.

   Milstein grew up in Baltimore, and went to the University of Maryland and
went on to get a masters degree in American studies at the University of Kansas.
There he taught courses on the counterculture, featuring the likes of Jackson
Pollock, Billie Holiday, Lenny Bruce and Charlie Parker. He also worked as an
art critic for a local paper.

   Though still a teenager at the end of the 1960s, the spirit of that time has
stayed with him. He listens to Bob Dylan "all the time, too much," quotes him in
the courtroom, and sees him in concert four or five times a year. And his hair
is still long enough to curl over his collar.

   It was only after he and his wife had the first of his three children that
Milstein headed to law school.

    "I've always been a pretty good arguer. ... Social change in the history of
this country has been accomplished in the courtroom predominantly, more than in
the streets, and I certainly lean that way," he said.

   So, he moved back East and, after graduation from law school, joined the
Pennsauken firm. He eventually became head of the litigation department, working
primarily on insurance cases.

   "There's nothing quite like trying a case. It's very much like competition,
the feeling is very similar to the feeling I used to get in the starting
blocks," said Milstein, who used to run track.

   He spoke recently during an hourlong interview in his office where every
available flat surface is covered with trinkets, a collection of bobble-head
dolls, including former Democratic presidents Bill Clinton, Jimmy Carter and
John F. Kennedy, pictures of his family and a miniature version of the Gateway
Arch in St. Louis. The only available wall space is filled with framed diplomas,
articles about him, original paintings by his uncle and grandmother, and a
seven-generation family tree.

   And, the way Milstein sees it, there is some relationship - though he
"wouldn't want to overstate the case" - between the Clarett case and the suits
he has filed against universities and medical centers conducting human clinical
trials.

   Milstein says the medical testing cases are like this case, which is "a
situation with an individual against a monolithic institution ... Mr. Clarett
has not been treated fairly and that's a situation I feel strongly about," said
Milstein, who cites Johnnie Cochran among his legal role models.

   Earlier this month, Milstein filed suit in federal court in New York City.
The suit is also seeking damages for lost wages because Clarett was excluded
from the 2003 draft. This week, lawyers in the case began the exchange of briefs
and other paperwork to move the case forward.

   The NFL's rule keeping young players out is protected by the collective
bargaining process, said league spokesman Greg Aiello.

   "We do look forward to explaining to the court the very sound reasons for
having it," Aiello said.

    At 19, Clarett has built an impressive record, the suit claims. During his
high school career he ran for 4,765 yards and 65 touchdowns. During his first
and only season with Ohio State, he rushed for more than 1,200 years and scored
18 TDs and was named the Big Ten Freshman of the Year. The Buckeyes went
undefeated and won the national championship.

   Clarett is currently suspended from playing college ball as the result of an
investigation that revealed he broke NCAA rules and lied to investigators.

   "Playing football professionally is the only means by which Clarett can
profit from his athletic ability," the lawsuit claims.

   Officials at the NFL say their rules protect young players who are not
physically and emotionally up to playing on the professional level. A player
can't be eligible for the draft unless he has been out of high school for three
years.

   "We do not believe that the lawsuit serves the best interest of Maurice
Clarett or college football players generally," Aiello said.

   This is not Milstein's first foray into the sports field.

   In 2000, he represented then Camden High School student Dajuan Wagner, who
was considered one of the country's best high school basketball players, when he
was arrested for aggravated assault. He also represented the agent of Matt
Harrington, the Colorado Rockies' No. 1 pick in the draft who sued for
negligence.

   For Milstein, part of his attraction to the Clarett case was because he is a
"diehard" football fan. His favorite team is the Oakland Raiders. And on Sundays
he often joins a pick-up game at the local high school, playing quarterback.

   "I like the cold," he said of the game. "I like the strategies."

GRAPHIC: 1. Alan Milstein, in his Pennsauken office, is a crusader of sorts. "I
like important issues, weighty issues," he says. Milstein is representing
Maurice Clarett, who is suing the NFL over his eligibility for the draft.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             577 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     October 28, 2003 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 368 words

HEADLINE: Diary

BYLINE: From staff reports, The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   BIOTECHNOLOGY

   Copernicus pitching

   at Chicago show

   Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. of Cleveland is one of 18 companies scheduled to
make presentations at the iBIO Marketplace Conference next month in Chicago. The
Nov. 12-13 conference is a production of the Illinois Biotechnology Industry
Organization. Copernicus is developing a gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.

   BioEnterprise adds

   consulting services

   BioEnterprise Corp. has added regulatory affairs and quality systems
consulting to the resources it offers. Raymond Ursick has signed on as chief
regulatory officer in residence of BioEnterprise, which helps form, recruit and
develop local bioscience companies.

   HEALTH CARE

   SourceOne signs

   radiology contract

   SourceOne Healthcare Technologies of Mentor has signed a five-year agreement
to be the sole supplier of radiology equipment to Catholic Healthcare Partners.
SourceOne, a distributor of medical imaging equipment and supplies, said the
deal is expected to mean $10 million a year in sales. Catholic Healthcare
Partners operates a hospital and health-care system in Ohio and four other
states.

   INVESTMENTS

   Riverside buys

   medical gas units

   Leveraged buyout firm Riverside Co. has acquired the U.S. and U.K. medical
gas pipeline businesses of Hillenbrand Industries Inc. for undisclosed terms.
Hillenbrand's British business is called Medaes Ltd. Riverside, which is based
in Cleveland and New York City, plans to add the businesses to its Beacon
Medical Products platform in Charlotte, N.C. Beacon Medical will change its name
to BeaconMedaes.

   IRON ORE

   Cliffs reports

   on Rouge impact

   Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. expects to continue to sell iron ore pellets to Rouge
Industries Inc. while the Dearborn, Mich., steel maker operates under bankruptcy
protection. Rouge filed for bankruptcy protection last week and agreed to sell
its assets to OAO Severstal of Russia. Cleveland-Cliffs does not know the impact
on its long-term sales contract with Rouge. The company, which sold 2.1 million
tons of pellets to Rouge so far this year, has a contract to be the sole
supplier of pellets to Rouge through 2012. In addition, Cleveland-Cliffs has an
$11.1 million secured loan to Rouge.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2003


                             578 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                  October 27, 2003 Monday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: SCOTTSDALE REPUBLIC NORTH; POP QUIZ; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1845 words

HEADLINE: A BIG FUTURE IN TINY CELLS

BYLINE: By Dan Nowicki, Scottsdale Republic

BODY:

   Since everybody is calling biotechnology the brave new world of the Valley's
-- and possibly Scottsdale's -- economic future, we here at Pop Quiz decided it
was about time to figure out what in tarnation biotechnology is.

   So if you don't know your Translational Genomics Research Institute from your
International Genomics Consortium, here comes a biotech briefing courtesy of Dr.
Laurence J. Miller, director of the recently established Mayo Clinic Cancer
Center, 13400 E. Shea Blvd., Scottsdale. The Mayo center is one of the Northeast
Valley's biotechnology leaders and even has a formal collaboration agreement
with TGen. Miller gets us up to speed about biotechnology and gives us a glimpse
at what lies ahead.

   To many readers, biotechnology is an exotic term that represents an unknown
world. Is there a simple or succinct way to explain the concept? In other words,
what the heck is it?

   You can take it apart into its two components, "bio" and "technology." It
uses biological processes to make useful products or solve problems. That sort
of definition goes back thousands of years, actually, in the earliest
agriculture and then probably food science, with various micro-organisms working
in cheese production and bread. When it really changed is probably 30 or 40
years ago when we began to truly understand the workings of a cell. The
definition of the new biotechnology is probably using cells, or bio-molecules in
cells, to do the same thing -- to do useful work.

   In recent years, because of the Genome Project, the whole role of DNA in the
process and understanding even an individual's gene sequence is becoming
incredibly powerful and exciting. Most of us today, when we think of
biotechnology, really think of the companies that work at the level of the
Genome Project.

   How will biotechnology affect or change life as we know it? Or will its
impact be more subtle than revolutionary over time? What is the biotech's
ultimate potential?

   If you look at its usefulness, it has gone up logarithmically over the years
as the power of our insight into cells has gone up. The exciting thing is that
as we've learned about the architecture of the cell and the components of a
cell, they are uniform throughout species. So learning how one cell works, and
how one cell is regulated, helps give us insight into any number of model
systems that can be used for useful purposes. And now the power of this
technology is absolutely extraordinary. What it has done for what we can do in
the laboratory is just astounding.

   I think it is already changing life as we know it, but the changes we have to
look forward to we can probably only dream about today. I think in terms of
medicine, the major changes that we are going to see are the opportunity for
truly individualized medicine. To be able to offer a patient the best drug for
his or her particular disease. An agent that fits them, that is least likely to
give them side effect and is most likely to treat their disease properly. We can
already begin to predict what people are at risk for developing and modify their
lifestyle and exposures to try to make them live healthier lives.

   In cancer tumor biology, the impact is just going to be huge. Already, we are
tailoring therapies to a genetic profile of that patient's own tumor. Already we
are starting experimental therapies where we are modifying the patient's own
immune cells to fight their own tumor. These are all in the experimental stages
at this point, but I think we are going to see it coming on mainstream in the
not-to-distant future.

   The trick is going to be to figure out how to pay for it, because these
technologies are very expensive.

   The Mayo Clinic recently announced that it will have a formal relationship
with TGen. What does that entail?

   We've been meeting regularly with Jeff Trent and his leadership group since
Jeff first arrived in the Valley. And it's really been one of the most exciting
interactions that I've been involved in, because there is so much complementary
between the two organizations. There are similar values in terms of trying to
utilize state of the art biotechnology to serve the patient and move advances
forward in a way that can serve the people effectively. And that's exactly what
Mayo is all about. TGen has some wonderful scientists and core facilities that
have been made accessible to us. We've had a number of collaborations already.
We've had similar discussions with other groups. Arizona State University has
wonderful complementary skills and expertise and interest to what Mayo provides.
We've had a great time meeting with them and dreaming about the power of a
complementary relationship.

   What advice would you give to Scottsdale officials who are hoping to attract
biotech investment? Does the city seem to be going about it right so far?

   I think the city is going about it in the right way. New biotech companies
are looking for an environment where there are outstanding academic activities,
and they certainly exist in the Valley here. They are looking for an attractive
place for their workforce to work in -- that certainly is here. They are looking
for a workforce that is well-trained, and I think there are a lot of educational
institutions in the Valley that are committed to helping expand the workforce.
Venture capital is key. I think that's where the city can really play a role, to
help stimulate creative funding opportunities to bring in new companies into a
fertile environment. The environment in the state, I think, is really exciting
right now. The whole Arizona biosciences road map, with the first iteration
being TGen coming in. The second iteration now is bringing together all of the
players in a way that really identifies and points out the strengths to attract
these companies. Scottsdale has a very great interest in this process.

   Should the Valley be aiming for some sort of critical mass, with the more
companies that come in attracting even more companies?

   If you look at San Diego, it is the whole cluster phenomenon that really
attracts the companies. They want to be in the same environment with other
similar companies, or complementary companies, or academic groups. We seem to be
a little bit along on the trajectory, TGen's coming is a big part of that.
Biodesign is a big part of that. I hope that Mayo will become a big part of
that. We are trying very hard to expand our scientific activity and
interactivity with all of the other groups to help contribute to the
attractiveness.

   So you would say it's realistic to believe that Valley is poised to become a
hub of bioscience?

   I do. I do. I think that there are a lot of very bright and very committed
people working to make it happen. What is exciting is to see the groups working
together.

   /

   NAME: Laurence J. Miller, M.D.

   AGE: 53.

   JOB TITLE: Director, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center.

   YEARS LIVED IN THE NORTHEAST VALLEY: I've been here a little over a year. We
arrived here last August, just before the kids started school. I came from
Mayo-Rochester, where I'd been for the previous 30 years. So I've been with Mayo
for a long, long time. The Cancer Center is brand new. I'm the first director
and that was the major reason for my moving down.

   FAVORITE THING ABOUT THE NORTHEAST VALLEY: I love the area. I think it's just
beautiful. The mountains are just beautiful. I'm learning about the vegetation
down here. It's all new to me still.

   WHAT MADE YOU GET INTO MEDICINE: It was kind of by accident. I grew up in
Philadelphia, and when I applied for colleges, my safety school was Penn State.
They had an experimental program at that time, which was a five-year,
coordinated Pre-Med program. I just checked it off on the application not even
knowing what it was. I got into medical school before I ever really thought
about being a doctor. Once I got in, though, I then started looking more
seriously into it, and it seemed exciting. What was fun was it was a very rapid
training program. I was at Penn State for one year and Jefferson Medical College
(in Philadelphia) for four. As it went on, it rapidly became more and more
exciting and I couldn't imagine doing anything else. (Also went to Yale
University.)

   PAST PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE: My practice has been largely in the area of
pancreatic disease. In Rochester, it became exclusively pancreatic, which meant
that about half the patients I saw had pancreatic cancer, which is just a
devastating form of cancer. When that happened, I became more and more
interested in working in the Cancer Center and having my basic research program
applicable to pancreatic cancer as well.

   WHAT IS YOUR BIGGEST ACCOMPLISHMENT? Until now, it was probably that I was
responsible to build the molecular medicine and gene therapy program at
Mayo-Rochester. That's a program that I am extremely proud of. They are doing
wonderful things and it's highly successful. Now I'm hoping that we will be
similarly successful with the Cancer Center.

   WHAT YEAR DID YOU START AT MAYO? I first went as a student on a rotation in
1971. I returned to Mayo in the internal medicine training program in 1974. It
was all in Rochester until last August.

   BIGGEST CHALLENGE AHEAD: There are always challenges. Right now, the economy
is offering a challenge to figure out creative ways to build a research
enterprise at the Cancer Center. The National Cancer Institute is helping us and
being part of a foundationwide Cancer Center is certainly helpful. Mayo has a
major commitment to it. But we have a long way to go. There's a lot of growth
ahead, but that's part of the excitement and the fun.

   MOST FRUSTRATING ASPECT OF WORK: There's never enough time.

   SUPERSTITIONS? In the laboratory, you keep doing the same thing, the same
way. But I'm not sure if that's good laboratory technique or superstition.
(Laughs.) If the experiment works, you don't change it.

   DO YOU HAVE A NICKNAME? It's just Larry.

   DO YOU HAVE ANY PETS? My daughter has a guinea pig.

   ARE YOU A SPORTS FAN? I like watching football and baseball. I played
baseball through school.

   BEST ADVICE YOU EVER RECEIVED: I think it was probably from my medical school
mentors who advised that I take the time to be exposed to high-quality science,
and basic science.

   WORST ADVICE YOU EVER RECEIVED: Nothing I can think of. I don't want to blame
anything on anybody else.

   WHO WAS YOUR MENTOR? I have had a number of mentors over the years. Some of
my early professors in medical school helped me catch the bug for research.
Certainly my mentor at Yale, Jim Jamieson, taught me how not to be limited by
techniques of doing research, and just the joy of doing research. Most recently,
I would call Frank Prendergast a mentor. Frank is director of the Cancer Center
in Rochester. Frank really has given me the opportunity to make my work much
more relevant to patients' needs. The research that I had been doing for 30
years in Rochester was very basic research, largely, and it was only when I got
involved with the Cancer Center that I was put into a position to influence much
more.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Laurence J. Miller

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2006


                             579 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      October 27, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 04G

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Gene tied to eye disease in seniors

BYLINE: WILLIAM MCCALL Associated Press

BODY:

   Portland, Ore. -- In what may be an important step toward preventing
blindness in old age, scientists have identified a gene believed to be
responsible for a degenerative eye disease that could strike millions of baby
boomers as they grow older.

   The gene is suspected of being the main cause of some cases of age-related
macular degeneration, or AMD, a complex disease triggered by various factors. It
typically affects people 65 and older.

   Researchers at Oregon Health & Science University were able to pinpoint the
gene by tracking it through a large extended family with a history of the
disease.

   "We were really lucky to get a single family that large with 10 affected
members," said Dennis Schultz, an Oregon Health & Science University biochemist
who led the research at the university's Casey Eye Institute.

   In age-related macular degeneration, the most sensitive area of the retina
breaks down, robbing a person of the fine vision needed to read a book or
recognize a face. In severe cases, it can lead to almost total blindness.

   About 6 million Americans suffer from AMD, a number that is predicted to
double by 2030. There are treatments for the disease, but the goal is
prevention.

   Johanna Seddon, a Harvard researcher, said more studies will have to be done
to establish whether the gene is the single source of some cases of AMD. If the
gene proves to be the source, it is possible gene therapy could be used to delay
or even prevent the disease, she said.

   "But I think that's still quite a way off," Seddon said.

   The study was published in the online version of the journal Human Molecular
Genetics and will appear in print in the December issue.

   Genes that play a role in forms of macular degeneration that affect younger
people have been identified. But this is the first solid evidence of a genetic
cause for the age-related form, researchers said.

   "I think it's really exciting," said Michael Gorin, a University of
Pittsburgh eye specialist and leading AMD researcher. "This is an important step
along the long and arduous path toward understanding the complexity of this
disease."

   But he warned that other factors that contribute to age-related macular
degeneration, including other genes, as well as environmental factors, such as
smoking.

   In a related study announced last week, a University of Kentucky researcher
said he has created for the first time genetically modified mice that have
virtually all the important features of AMD. That could advance research on the
disease.

   The study by Jayakrishna Ambati and his team will be published in the
November issue of Nature Medicine.

   ------------

   On the Net:

   Human Molecular Genetics: www.hmg.oupjournals.org Foundation for Fighting
Blindness: www.blindness.org

   EYE DISEASE

   POTENTIAL MACULAR DEGENERATION GENE ISOLATED

   A gene suspected to be the main cause of a degenerative eye disease has been
identified by researchers who hope it will be an important first step toward
preventing blindness in old age. The disease, age-related macular degeneration,
or AMD, affects the macula part of the retina that allows vision of fine details
needed for activities such as reading, sewing and driving.

   Pupil Lens Retina Optic nerve Macula: Part of the retina that allows vision
of the details

   SCENE VIEWED WITH NORMAL VISION

   SAME SCENE VIEWED BY A PERSON WITH AMD

   TWO TYPES OF AMD

   Dry +/- Light-sensitive cells in the macula slowly break down; blurring of
vision occurs over time.

   Wet +/- Fragile new blood vessels growing under the macula can leak blood or
fluid that raise the macula from its normal place causing damage to
light-sensitive cells; damage occurs rapidly.

   Source: National Eye Institute Associated Press

   (FOR COMPLETE GRAPHIC SEE MICROFILM OR BOUND FILE)

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2003


                             580 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 26, 2003, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: OUT IN THE FIELD;
GENZYME RATES HIGH WITH SCIENTISTS

BYLINE: DIANE E. LEWIS

BODY:

   Cambridge-based Genzyme Corp. has earned high grades as a top place for
scientists to work, the company announced last week.

   The kudos came after a ranking of the most reputable companies for scientists
by the journal Science and the American Association for the Advancement of
Science.

      Of the 380 biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms surveyed, Genzyme was
ranked 10th. The companies were rated on 42 attributes, including corporate
image, leadership and direction, financial prowess, workplace culture and
environment, work-life balance, and compensation and benefits.

   Genzyme spokeswoman Maria Foley said the company is known for a workplace
environment that encourages scientists to be innovative and take risks.

   "It has to do with teamwork and strong communication among the science
disciplines," she said. "There is a lot of cross communication between
scientists in cell therapy, for example, and scientists in gene therapy. Also,
we have many scientists who are on fellowships and others who come to us from
academic settings."

   According to Foley, Genzyme encourages its scientists to maintain strong ties
with top research universities in an effort to foster creativity and innovation.
At the same time, scientists who are conducting research at universities are
encouraged to work with Genzyme's team of researchers.

   The company employs more than 1,500 people in research and development, but
has 5,000 employees worldwide, Foley said.

   The study was conducted between March and April 2003. The survey results will
appear in a special supplement of the Oct. 24 issue of Science. Copies of the
ranking are available through the American Association for the Advancement of
Science by calling 202-326-6440. Interested parties can also request a copy of
the final results by e-mailing scipak@aaas.org.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2003


                             581 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 26, 2003, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1752 words

HEADLINE: 'Shaking things up' at Baylor;
Outsider sparks med center furor

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Six years ago, when Dr. Peter Traber was announced to head the largest
department at the University of Pennsylvania's medical school, a distinguished
gathering of physicians greeted their new boss in an unlikely way: They lobbed a
football at him.

   Traber, a former collegiate tight end, snatched it cleanly out of the air.
Amidst applause and laughter, he looked down, and saw it had been signed by all
of his colleagues.

   It was a warm gesture toward a man widely praised for possessing an
exceptional mix of honesty, keen intelligence and personal warmth. The
48-year-old physi-cian-scientist, named Baylor College of Medicine's new
president and chief executive officer in March, had rocketed to the top of
medicine, winning admiration and creating little, if any, controversy.

   But within his first few months in Houston, Traber has triggered the biggest
dust-up seen by the Texas Medical Center in decades.

   "There are a number of ways to do things. One is to know what to do and never
do it. I'm the other kind of person: knows what to do and can't resist doing
it," Traber said. "I have no problem shaking things up a bit."

   Traber is behind an unprecedented upheaval straining the 50-year affiliation
between the college and its teaching hospital, The Methodist Hospital. He is
proposing that Baylor, for the first time, build its own adult ambulatory
clinic, ideally in collaboration with Methodist, a plan the hospital and its
private doctors vehemently oppose.

   Traber's forthright and public approach in discussing his ambitions for
Baylor - via Webcast and open meetings - is refreshing and exciting to some, but
strikes others as aggressive and confrontational.

   "All this should not be handled in the paper, in the media, in big meetings,"
said Dr. C. Richard Stasney, a specialist in treating ear, nose and throat
problems and a co-director of the Van Lawrence Voice Institute at Baylor College
of Medicine. "It ought to be a small meeting, with the people who really count
there, hashing things out. Behind closed doors and not in open disagreement."

   When Traber was hired by Baylor, it was hard to imagine who would fill the
shoes of his predecessor, Dr. Ralph Feigin, a formidable multi-tasker who was
also chief of Baylor's pediatrics department, physician-in-chief at Texas
Children's Hospital and co-editor of an acclaimed reference book about pediatric
infectious diseases.

   Under Feigin's watch, Baylor's funding for research from the National
Institutes of Health grew from $ 89 million in 1996 to $ 262.1 million in 2002.
Today, Baylor ranks 12th in the nation among medical schools and, more
prestigiously, fifth in funding from the NIH, according to U.S. News & World
Report.

   Feigin, who retired from the Baylor presidency at age 65, embodied the
medical school's research-oriented approach to patient care and education.
Feigin followed in the footsteps of other Baylor-grown luminaries: the college's
first president, Dr. Michael E. DeBakey, who revolutionized heart surgery and is
credited with building both Baylor and Methodist from scratch; the second
president, Dr. William Butler, a gifted immunologist, guided Baylor through a
tremendous growth spurt in the 1980s.

   Traber, having built his career elsewhere, is the first outsider to lead the
institution. Eight months into the job, Traber is showing a different style than
his predecessors, demonstrating a willingness to rattle cages in the name of
improving patient care.


   "We need to have the economics right, but it's not the genesis of the idea,"
Traber said of the Baylor clinic proposal. "The care delivered in the Texas
Medical Center, in my view, is not where it ought to be for adults. A lot of
great doctors, a lot of great hospitals, but getting in, making sure it's done
the way it ought to be, is not where it ought to be."

   Traber grew up in Columbia, Md., the son of a high school teacher and a
highway engineer. He has a round, youthful-looking face and the imposing
physique of a football player. As an undergraduate at the University of
Michigan, he played on the football team until a neck injury (which still
bothers him) forced him to quit.

   His sister is a lawyer in Pasadena, Calif., and his brother is a former
Baltimore Orioles first baseman who provides color commentary for the Arizona
Diamondbacks.

   "(My) greatest recent thrill with him was that when I threw out the first
pitch for the Astro-Diamondback game earlier this year, he was the catcher,"
Traber said.

   Traber and his wife of 17 years, Bobbi, a cardiac anesthesiologist and
hospital administrator with an MBA from Wharton, have two children, a
10-year-old son and a 13-year-old daughter. They live in the Memorial area. Both
Traber and Bobbi, who is in Houston but not yet working, were raised and are
"still Catholic. We were active in Philadelphia. We're not as active as we need
to be now because of the move."

   From his mother, Traber inherited a love of Italian cooking. During the
holidays, he prepares the traditional Italian "Feast of Seven Fishes," a
Christmas Eve culinary marathon.

   "I love cooking. And eating. I'm only allowed to cook infrequently because I
leave an amazing wake," said Traber, whose specialty is a fragrant stew called
baccala, made with salt-cured cod. "I'm an artist."

   The selection of Traber for the Baylor post was surprising for a number of
reasons: his relative youth, his outsider status and the fact that his most
recent job was not in academic medicine, but with a drug company, pharmaceutical
giant GlaxoSmithKline.

   Prior to Glaxo, where he was chief medical officer and a senior vice
president, he served as interim dean of the University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine and CEO of Penn's medical system.

   He left that position after six months - raising another question mark.

   "That is certainly something we dug in on," said Baylor board chairman Corbin
Robertson. "I don't have a different story than Peter."

   At Penn, Traber was a golden boy, hired from Michigan in 1992 to run Penn's
gastroenterology department. Traber had an interest in the molecular mechanisms
at work in the intestine, and was soon winning federal grants to create what
became a well-regarded research center to study diseases of the liver and
digestive system.

   "You guys have a real jewel there," said Dr. Ed Holmes, dean of the
University of California at San Diego's medical school, who recruited Traber to
Penn. "In addition to leading by example, he's able to pull people together.
He's also . . .  a very, very nice person."

   Popular among faculty and students, known to be fair and straightforward,
Traber in 1997 was named chairman of medicine, a department that encompasses
specialties such as cardiology, opthalmology and oncology.

   Three years later, the medical school's dean was fired and Traber was
promoted to head the operation, including a health care system that spanned four
university-owned hospitals.

   "People here still talk about him and what he gave us," said Dr. Debra
Silberg, a Penn professor whom Traber mentored in his early days. "When he
starts something, it's because he has some kind of five-year, 10-year, 15-year
plan."

   Traber was put in charge during a rough time for Penn. Before he took the top
spot, the University of Pennsylvania medical system was rocked by losses of
nearly $ 200 million and the elimination of 2,800 jobs. In 1999, a gene therapy
experiment went awry, killing Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger and touching off
a nationwide reassessment of medical experiments involving humans. Faculty
members said Traber prevented a mass exodus of researchers as Penn worked to
turn itself around.

   "He is an amazing person. Thoughtful, always listened, no matter what was
going on," said Dr. Lisa Bellini, vice chair of education at Penn. "He was the
source of stability. People knew he was going to champion their cause no matter
what. They really believed him when he stood up and said, 'Things will get
better. I'll do whatever it takes.' "

   Traber surprised nearly everyone when he announced he was leaving less than a
year after his appointment. Penn's monthly magazine, the Gazetteer, ran a story
headlined, "Peter, We Hardly Knew Ye." In it, Traber said he was leaving to
pursue a "unique opportunity."


   Behind the scenes, Traber made a hard professional choice in the face of a
difficult dilemma. Still wary of more financial losses, Penn's trustees wanted
to split off the medical school from its four teaching hospitals, to protect the
school. Traber disagreed with the strategy. He feared such steps would undermine
patient care and medical education without addressing the school's underlying
problems.

   "We were losing a lot of money, but we had begun to turn it around," Traber
said. "I decided I did not want to be the person who presided over dismantling
the University of Pennsylvania Health System. So we're going to take the oldest
teaching hospital in the country and we're going to sell it? I wasn't going to
do that."

   Unable to persuade trustees, Traber left. The Penn trustees ultimately
abandoned the plan. At the coaxing of a longtime friend, Traber took a position
as a senior vice president of SmithKline Beecham, which later became
GlaxoSmithKline.

   At the end of two years, he realized he was chafing at the narrow scope of
his job.

   "In (the pharmaceutical industry) I was interested in a medication for a
disease, which might only be a part of that patient's disease, and, by the way,
I had to make sure our drug got sold more than somebody else's drug. Not the big
picture and the whole patient approach I liked," Traber said.

   "I missed the freedom of thinking that academic medicine allows.  . . .  I
missed the sense of community. I was head of a global organization, but I wasn't
a part of anything, any community."

   Now that he is in Houston, people are watching to see if Traber can sell
Methodist and its staff of private physicians on the idea of a Baylor clinic.
Baylor full-time faculty members support the idea, but Methodist and private
doctors argue the clinic would disrupt a smooth operation that has benefited
both institutions for decades.





   CAREER HIGHLIGHTS


   1981: Earned medical degree, Wayne State University

   Feb. 2000: Named interim dean, University of Pennsylvania Department of
Medicine

   Sept. 2000: Joined SmithKline Beecham (later, GlaxoSmithKline) as a senior
vice president

   March 2003: Took over as president and chief executive officer, Baylor
College of Medicine


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Dr. Peter Traber, left, Baylor College of Medicine
president, meets graduate students Bonnie Nannenga and Joe Marx recently.
Traber's Baylor clinic plan has strained ties with The Methodist Hospital
(color); 2. Dr. Steve Ludtke, right, shows some of his recent research to Dr.
Peter Traber Thursday at the Baylor College of Medicine lab. Traber, president
of Baylor College of Medicine, takes time to get out of the office, meet people
and tour facilities (b/w, p. 25); Graph: 3. CAREER HIGHLIGHTS (b/w, TEXT, p.
25); Photo: 4.  Dr. Peter Traber, left, Baylor College of Medicine president,
listens to Dr. Michael DeBakey, Baylor's first president, in this photo in
January. Traber is the first outsider to lead the institution (b/w, 2-STAR, p.
23); Mug: 5. Dr. Peter Traber (b/w, 2-STAR, p. 23); 1-2. Karl Stolleis /
Chronicle, 4. Houston Chronicle file photo

TYPE: Biography

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2003


                             582 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

             October 23, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: JEFFERSON COUNTY POST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 891 words

HEADLINE: FUN RUN PROVIDES AMMUNITION AS BOYS BATTLE RARE DISORDER

BYLINE: Tim Rowden Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   * The brothers from Herulaneum are among the first patients in the world to
begin receiving a new enzyme-replacement therapy.

   Sean and Cody Merrell are fighters. They got it from their parents.

   "It feels good to fight," their mother, Vicki Merrell, says.

   The brothers, who live in Herculaneum, share a rare disorder and a unique
status as medical pioneers. Diagnosed with Hurler-Scheie syndrome, one of a
variety of rare and often fatal genetic disorders known as MPS-1, they are among
the first patients in the world to begin receiving a new enzyme-replacement
therapy approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration in April.

   Sean, 11, began receiving the then experimental treatment 2 1/2 years ago as
part of a clinical trial

   Cody, 9, was too young to take part in the trial and began receiving his
therapy in June.

   Their sister, Amber, 6, is a carrier, but does not have MPS.

   Sean and Cody were the hosts Saturday for Sean and Cody's Fun Run, a
fund-raising event for the National MPS Society, a parents' support group for
families of children afflicted with the disorder. The organization issues grants
to help pay for research of MPS-related disorders.

   The event, a walk, 5K run, silent auction and bake sale raised $4,200
Saturday toward the national fund-raising effort. Last year's events raised
$300,000 nationally to help pay for research toward a cure.

   Vicki Merrell said she still was receiving calls this week from people who
wanted to contribute to the effort. She tried to get corporate donors to
contribute but was unsuccessful.

   "I think for a small town we did super," Merrell said.

   She and her husband, Eric, recently were elected to the National MPS
Society's board of directors.

   They have come a long way from where they were three years ago, when Sean and
Cody were first diagnosed with a form of mucopolysacchrride disorder or MPS, a
genetic disorder so rare that even their pediatrician never had heard of it.

   MPS-I refers to three broad groups of the disorder, Hurler syndrome, Scheie
syndrome and Hurler-Scheie syndrome, in which patients are missing the
alpha-L-iduronidase enzyme needed to break down waste material in the blood.
This material, if left in the body, forms a gel-like substance that stores in
cells and causes damage to the joints and vital organs. The condition is caused
by a recessive gene carried by both parents and passed on to their children.

   According to the National MPS Society, Hurler syndrome affects about one in
100,000 births; Hurler-Scheie syndrome affects about one in 115,000 births.

   In the United States, an estimated one in every 25,000 births is affected
with some form of the disorder. Those with the most severe form rarely live
beyond early childhood.

   Eric and Vicki Merrell first attributed the stiffness in their son Sean's
joints to childhood arthritis. Their physician sent them to Dr. Rick Martin,
clinical director of genetics at Children's Hospital and Washington University
in St. Louis. Martin made the diagnosis of MPS.

   Enzyme-replacement therapy can control the symptoms of MPS but is not a cure,
Martin says, and requires regular injections for life.

   Bone-marrow transplants can be more effective and permanent, he says, but
there are higher risks and it doesn't always work.

   Gene therapy could address both of those problems, Martin says, but the
research still is being done and a treatment is not yet available.

   When the Merrells learned of Sean and Cody's diagnosis they leapt at the
chance to take part in the medical trial for enzyme-replacement therapy.

   The disease attacked the boys' joints and made it difficult for them to write
their schoolwork, keep up with their classmates or raise their arms above their
heads. They had the beginnings of corneal clouding. Damage to the connective
tissue in Sean's joints permanently curved his fingers.

   Vicki Merrell said they had made a decision to fight rather than accept the
prognosis and that had made the difference.

   They have learned to treasure small victories.

   "When you have such a negative thing happen in your life, you've got two ways
to deal with it," Vicki Merrell said. "You can give up or fight against it.
We've fought and fought, and it feels good to fight. When you're hurt or upset
by something and you don't understand it, it feels good to fight back."

   The boys, now enrolled at Festus Intermediate School, had surgery in May to
give them more mobility in their fingers, but they still have trouble reaching
or walking for long periods. The damage done to their joints has been largely
unaffected by the enzyme-replacement therapy.

   Martin, the director of genetics at Children's Hospital, says that's because
damage done to the skeleton, joints and ligaments as they are growing is largely
irreversible.

   "I think once the damage is done, it's impossible to go ahead and fix it,"
Martin said. He added that researchers were studying how early treatment should
begin.

   Sean says he doesn't feel any different as a result of the enzyme-replacement
therapy, but his mother tells him that's how he's supposed to feel.

   At least, she says, "it's not getting any worse."

   To learn more about MPS or to contribute to the research effort, call Vicki
Merrell at 636-931-4447 or 636-633-1910 or visit the National MPS Society online
at www.mpssociety.org.

NOTES:
Reporter Tim Rowden:; E-mail: trowden@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 636-500-4110

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photos by DIANE L. WILSON; (1) Color Photo - ABOVE: Rams
cheerleader Angeline O'Neal of Hillsboro carries Cody Merrell, 9, in the
one-mile walk for the national MPS Society. Rams cheerleader Pamela Hubbs (left)
of Barnhart and O'Neal were helping to raise money.; (2) Color Photo - BELOW:
Sean Merrell, 11, hugs his grandmother, Reba Cooksey of Festus.; (3) Photo -
ABOVE: About 100 people participated in the National MPS Society walk and 5K run
in Festus. Vicki Merrell (center) is the mother of Sean and Cody. Holding her
hand is her daughter Amber (Merrell), 6, and Cody (Merrell) is walking on the
other side of her.; (4) Photo - RIGHT: Kraig Klenke, 11, of Edwardsville, is
pushed up the hill by his mother, Kris Klenke, and his grandfather Terry
Clayton. Walking beside him is his sister Chelsey (Klenke), 10. Kraig was
diagnosed two years ago with Type 2 MPS. His family came to Festus to help
support the National MPS Society walk and 5K run.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2003


                             583 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 22, 2003, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: Gene linked to eye disease isolated

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore.

BODY:

   PORTLAND, Ore. - In what may be an important step toward preventing blindness
in old age, scientists have identified a gene believed to be responsible for a
degenerative eye disease that could strike millions of baby boomers as they grow
older.

   The gene is suspected of being the main cause of some cases of age-related
macular degeneration, or AMD, a complex disease triggered by various factors. It
typically affects people 65 and older.

   Researchers at Oregon Health & Science University were able to pinpoint the
gene by tracking it through a large extended family with a history of the
disease.

   "We were really lucky to get a single family that large with 10 affected
members," said Dennis Schultz, an Oregon Health & Science University biochemist
who led the research at the university's Casey Eye Institute.

   In age-related macular degeneration, the most sensitive area of the retina
breaks down, robbing a person of the fine vision needed to read a book or
recognize a face. It can lead to almost total blindness.

   About 6 million Americans suffer from AMD, a number that is predicted to
double by the year 2030 as the baby boomer generation ages. There are treatments
for the disease, but the goal is prevention.

   Dr. Johanna Seddon, a Harvard researcher, said more studies will have to be
done to establish whether the gene is the single source of some cases of AMD. If
the gene proves to be the source, it is possible gene therapy could be used to
delay or even prevent the disease, she said.


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2003


                             584 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   OCTOBER 22, 2003 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: Fading sight may be genetic;
Scientists have isolated a suspect gene in some
age-related blindness. Therapy may come later.

BYLINE: William McCall ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore.

BODY:

   In what may be an important step toward preventing blindness in old age,
scientists have identified a gene believed to be responsible for a degenerative
eye disease that could strike millions of baby boomers as they grow older.

   The gene is suspected of being the main cause of some cases of age-related
macular degeneration, or AMD, a complex disease triggered by various factors. It
typically affects people 65 and older.

   Researchers at Oregon Health & Science University were able to pinpoint the
gene by tracking it through a large extended family with a history of the
disease.

   "We were really lucky to get a single family that large with 10 affected
members," said Dennis Schultz, an Oregon Health & Science University biochemist
who led the research at the university's Casey Eye Institute.

   In age-related macular degeneration, the most sensitive area of the retina
breaks down, robbing a person of the fine vision to read a book or recognize a
face. In severe cases, it can lead to almost total blindness.

   About six million Americans suffer from AMD, a number that is predicted to
double by 2030 as the baby-boom generation ages. There are treatments for the
disease, but the goal is prevention.

   Johanna Seddon, a Harvard researcher, said more studies would have to be done
to establish whether the gene was the single source of some cases of AMD. If the
gene proves to be the source, it is possible that gene therapy could be used to
delay or even prevent the disease, she said.

   "But I think that's still quite a way off," Seddon said.

   The study was published yesterday in the online version of the journal Human
Molecular Genetics and will appear in print in the December issue.

   Genes that play a role in forms of macular degeneration that affect younger
people have been identified. But this is the first solid evidence of a genetic
cause for the age-related form, researchers said.

   "I think it's really exciting," said Michael Gorin, a University of
Pittsburgh eye specialist and leading AMD researcher. "This is an important step
along the long and arduous path toward understanding the complexity of this
disease."

   He warned there were many factors contributing to age-related macular
degeneration, including other genes, as well as environmental factors, such as
smoking.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2005


                             585 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              October 22, 2003 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: FDA rethinks advice on soft cheeses

SERIES: IN BRIEF

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: WASHINGTON; PORTLAND, Ore.

BODY:

   People most likely to get food poisoning from listeria can safely eat soft
cheeses like feta, bleu or camembert as long as they are made with pasteurized
milk and stored properly, the Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday.

   The agency's previous advice to pregnant women, people with weak immune
systems and the elderly was to avoid soft cheeses altogether. FDA officials said
they made the change because new studies show soft cheese made from pasteurized
milk is not at a high risk for listeria.

   Mark McClellan, the FDA commissioner, said all consumers can protect their
health by keeping ready-to-eat goods like cheese and deli meat refrigerated.
Listeria can cause flulike symptoms and is sometimes deadly. In pregnant women,
it can cause stillbirths.

Researchers isolate gene for macular degeneration

   PORTLAND, Ore. - In what could be an important step toward preventing
blindness in old age, scientists have identified a gene believed to be
responsible for a degenerative eye disease that could strike millions of baby
boomers as they grow older.

   The gene is suspected of being the main cause of some cases of age-related
macular degeneration, or AMD. It typically affects people 65 and older.

   Dr. Johanna Seddon, a Harvard researcher, said more studies will have to be
done to establish whether the gene is the single source of some cases of AMD. If
the gene proves to be the source, gene therapy could be used to delay or even
prevent the disease, she said.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2003


                             586 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     October 21, 2003 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Watchdogs: Industry pressuring researchers;
They fear influence on universities

BYLINE: Stephen Koff, Plain Dealer Bureau Chief

BODY:

   Washington - Ohio State University and other colleges are increasingly
getting more research money from private industry, a trend that worries some
science watchdogs.

    While universities generally seek all the research dollars they can get,
private industry wants results - proof that a medicine is safe, for example, or
that a pesticide is not harmful. That can create pressure to cross ethical
lines, says Sheldon Krimsky, a Tufts University professor and author of the new
book "Science in the Private Interest."

    The boundary between research and profits has blurred since the Supreme
Court in 1980 allowed researchers to patent their developments in genetic
science, and Congress encouraged business partnerships between universities and
industry, said Krimsky, a professor of urban and environmental policy and
planning.

    He was joined at a news conference yesterday by Tyrone Hayes, a professor of
integrative biology at the University of California at Berkeley; Donald Stein, a
physiological psychologist and professor of emergency medicine at Emory
University; Rep. Henry Waxman, Democrat of California; and Paul Gelsinger, whose
son died in 1999 during a gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

    Hayes told of industry attempts to delay his release of research showing
hormonal problems in amphibians from the pesticide atrazine. He says he finally
got his data to the Environmental Protection Agency by having a meeting at a
Starbucks, after being warned by his study's financial backers that he was
forbidden to go to the EPA.

    And Gelsinger said the Penn researchers experimenting with his son's life
"were blinded" by their potential for financial gain and scientific fame.

    There were no horror stories about OSU, the fifth-ranked university
nationwide for industry-funded research, behind Duke, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Penn and the Georgia Institute of Technology. But
Krimsky included OSU's $54.7 million in industry-provided research money in 2001
- a 291 percent jump from the previous decade - as part of an illustration of
how research universities are becoming "enterprise zones."

    Still, OSU conducts so much research that industry dollars accounted for
just 14 percent of its total. Most of its money comes from traditional sources
such as the Department of Labor, the National Cancer Institute and the National
Science Foundation.

    "We have an incredibly stringent conflict of interest policy," said Earle
Holland, OSU's director of research communications. All principal investigators
or anyone else with a potential for a conflict must fill out an annual
disclosure form.

    "If there is a conflict, or a potential conflict, there must be a management
plan under way," Holland said. And the university tries to retain ownership of
the data and keep the right to publish or present its findings, though Holland
acknowledged there are exceptions.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   skoff@plaind.com, 216-999-4212

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2003


                             587 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 20, 2003, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 1284 words

HEADLINE: Formula for scientific innovation: Omit walls ;

 Design of Stanford's Clark Center fosters interdisciplinary research

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Writer

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall

BODY:
It's all about breaking down barriers at Stanford University as the sleek James
H. Clark Center for Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, home of the
innovation-minded Bio-X project for interdisciplinary biological research,
formally opens this week.

    Rooms here are defined by translucent glass. All the furniture is on wheels.
Laboratory benches are hooked up to exposed utility systems hanging from the
ceiling, easy to get to in case someone wants to push a wall or two out of the
way.

    Inside the new building, scientists have been setting up shop and struggling
to get some work done, bemused by the hullabaloo surrounding one of the most
high-profile ventures in academia. Researchers admit to an odd feeling of
kinship with their own laboratory rats.

    Bio-X is designed to foster collaborations across disciplines and in so
doing, speed up innovations in high-tech medicine. It was financed largely by a
$90 million grant from James Clark, the founder of Netscape.

    "It's an experiment in social engineering," said chemist Tom Wandless, a
refugee from what he described as "a very monastic atmosphere" of solitary
research, now suddenly thrown in a fishbowl to work elbow-to-elbow with
strange-talking biologists, computer geeks and engineers.

    Wandless designs potential new drugs -- small synthetic molecules that can
have biological effects -- collaborating with his chemist wife, Karlene
Cimprich, another Bio-X convert who is interested in the cellular checkpoints
that protect against DNA damage.

    Researchers at Bio-X work in one of seven thematic areas, such as
biocomputation, the brain and behavior, and regenerative medicine. Projects
include design of computer-simulated surgeries, tissue engineering and better
ways to display diagnostic scans so doctors can read them quickly and more
accurately.

    Specialists from many fields might need to collaborate on such tasks, but
have been physically and culturally separated until now, said Sandy Napel,
co-director of a 3-D medical imaging project.

    "We're all into using computers to solve biological problems, and before we
were scattered all over the campus," he said.

    About 270 faculty from all over the Stanford campus have signed on to
participate, whether or not they pick up and move to the Clark Center,
deliberately located in the midst of such key Stanford facilities as the medical
center and departments of chemistry, computer science and systems engineering.

    "The effort here is also to create happy collisions," said Matthew Scott, a
developmental geneticist who serves as chairman of the Bio-X scientific
leadership council. "We want to get people talking who wouldn't have even met
before, and make this more of a community center, less just another pretty
Stanford building."

    Early recruits spoke of the excitement of these chance encounters, students
overhearing discussions in one lab about a problem already solved in another,
scientists in one discipline realizing they had much in common with colleagues
across campus.

    Some of the biologists and chemists also spoke of some early frustrations.
It's not always easy, for instance, to get on the same page with someone who
plies the frontiers, say, of computer science and physics, their heads full of
complex algorithms now being scribbled all over the ubiquitous Clark Center
whiteboards.

    "If you aren't careful," Wandless said, "you spend 10 minutes talking to
these guys and you realize you don't have a clue what they're saying."

    So everyone, no matter what their background, has had to learn one
fundamental lesson right off: Communication, when it really matters, tends to be
difficult.

    And like any good experiment, nobody knows how this one will turn out.

    Campus leaders are hoping the Clark Center's open, curved design, modular
systems and portable furnishings, along with the close ties some of the
occupants bring to biotech companies and medical clinicians, will nurture
fundamental changes in how academic science gets done.

    Rather than forcing doctors to hunt down engineers capable of designing some
new device a surgeon might need, Bio-X will offer engineers basic training in
medicine. Some of the engineers are being recruited to serve as full-time
fellows in the medical center, to gain firsthand exposure to problems that need
attention.

    This "throws into question every aspect of how we do business at Stanford,"
said Beth Kane, director of Bio-X operations, noting the experiment involves
some 26 different academic departments.

    "My job -- it's crazy," she said. "Each school has a different way of doing
things, a different culture, and we're bringing them all into one building. How
do you buy supplies? How do you pay people? All this is challenged, and it's all
a matter of working things out. I'd say there's been a fair amount of productive
tension."

    She was deliberately vague when asked to predict what might come out of the
Clark Center once the opening speeches and tours are over and forgotten.

    "Something completely unexpected is going to happen," she said. "That's the
extent of the prediction. If, in fact, I were able to say today this and this
are going to happen, then the experiment will have failed."

    Few of the new building's occupants seem all that bedazzled by their
surroundings. Some of them have taken to comparing the building's odd shape, a
sinuous U wrapped around a courtyard, to that of a giant uterus, equipped with
stairs instead of fallopian tubes.

    The analogy rarely gets taken too far, but "when you're trying to give
someone directions, sometimes you're tempted to say, "take a right at the
cervix,"' said Scott Delp, co-director of a new Center for Biomedical
Computation.

    Although Stanford's facilities may be unique, the idea behind the Bio-X
venture is anything but.

    The University of California also has been trying to merge disciplines,
going in one sense a step beyond Stanford with a multi-campus project that ties
in researchers from UCSF, UC Berkeley and UC Santa Cruz. Like Bio-X, the UC
venture also goes by a catchy nickname: "QB3," shorthand for bioengineering,
biotechnology and quantitative biomedical research.

    The more centers trying to do the same thing, the better, according to
Marvin Cassman, executive director of QB3.

    "We're hoping and planning to collaborate with people involved in Bio-X as
individuals, and hopefully there can be some collaborations between the
institutions too," Cassman added.

    Some old-fashioned academic concerns, such as grading students and enforcing
standards, continue to pose a challenge in the new environment.

    Craig Milroy, a senior lecturer at Stanford's design division of mechanical
engineering, manages what's known as the "Product Realization Lab" for hatching
inventions. He led a class in the Clark Center last week on biodesign, in which
students took turns describing ways to improve on the standard stethoscope.

    There were some simple, but rather clever, innovations, including a
stethoscope designed into a teddy bear for use in pediatric offices, a
stethoscope with soft moldable earpieces, a stethoscope with a retractable cord
for easier carrying, a stethoscope for use in the outdoors. Some of them seemed
problems in search of solutions, and a few seemed to have been cooked up rather
quickly.

    "Some of you succeeded, some of you failed miserably," Milroy told the
class, reminding students that "this is a graduate level class at Stanford
University," which meant that no slouching would be tolerated.

    Grading sessions, he added, would be conducted in private. Even at Bio-X,
multidisciplinary mingling only goes so far.

   E-mail Carl Hall at chall@sfchronicle.com.

CORRECTION-DATE: October 23, 2003

CORRECTION:
A story on the Science page Monday about Stanford University's new James H.
Clark Center mistakenly attributed a comment about the building's design to
Stanford scientist Scott Delp. Another researcher, who asked not to be
identified, made the comment. (10/23/03, P. A2)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), (1) The Clark Center at Stanford brings scientists from many
disciplines together, including Zac Walls, studying gene therapy., (2)
Stanford's new Clark Center houses the Bio-X project. / Photos by Liz Hafalia /
The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2003


                             588 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              October 20, 2003 Monday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Healthy Kids Column; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1074 words

HEADLINE: RARE STORAGE DISEASES ARE GETTING;
A BOOST FROM RESEARCH HERE

BYLINE: Dr. Rick A. Martin

BODY:

   Investigators at Washington University in St. Louis and St. Louis Children's
Hospital are participating in exciting research programs aimed at new treatments
for a group of very rare conditions known as lysosomal storage diseases.

   The Food and Drug Administration has defined a rare disease as one that
occurs in fewer than 200,000 people in the United States. More than 6,000
diseases affecting 25 million people fall under this definition. Until recently,
little incentive existed for biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms to develop
or market treatments for rare diseases.

   Drugs for these conditions, while often feasible to make, offered little
prospect of recouping the enormous costs associated with getting them on the
shelf and so were labeled "orphan" drugs.

   In an effort to move drug companies to "adopt" these orphan drugs, Congress
passed the Orphan Diseases Act in 1983, which provided them incentives to move
forward with getting such drugs on the market. Although this law generated some
movement in that direction, it wasn't until almost 20 years later that companies
jumped on the bandwagon after President George W. Bush signed into law two more
bills: the Rare Diseases Act of 2002 and the Rare Diseases Orphan Product
Development Act of 2002.

   These measures provided significant funding to develop the infrastructure and
defray the cost necessary to jump-start the pharmaceutical engines. One small
group of "orphans" that has been readily adopted by several pharmaceutical
companies is the lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs).

   What is an LSD?

   A lysosome is the recycle center of the cell. Its job is to take worn-out
parts of the cell and recycle them into new pieces using various enzymes.

   Each enzyme is responsible for recycling a certain piece of the worn-out part
in an assembly-linelike fashion. Unfortunately, if one enzyme fails in the line,
there is no emergency shut-off switch and the worn out parts just keep piling up
until the lysosome is stuffed full, eventually causing the cell itself to fail.
When enough cells fail in the organ in which they live, the organ (such as the
brain or heart) starts to fail. What organs are most affected depends on which
enzyme in the assembly line isn't working. Since there are more than 40 of these
enzymes, there are more than 40 different LSDs. Each one is very rare, but as a
group, they affect about 1 in 5,000 people.

   What causes an LSD?Each enzyme has its own gene that controls its production.
If there is a genetic change or mutation in that gene, the enzyme cannot be made
properly. Most enzymes have two copies of the gene (one from each parent) so
even if one gene has a mutation, the other gene can still make the enzyme.

   It takes two mutations to shut off the enzyme. Some enzymes have their gene
on the X chromosome (such as Fabry disease and Hunter syndrome). A mutation of a
gene that sits on the X chromosome affects only boys because they have only one
X chromosome.

   What do LSDs do?

   The problems that individuals with an LSD suffer depend on which worn-out
cell part is backing up on the assembly line (called storage). Some, such as
Fabry disease, don't show many symptoms until adulthood. Most LSDs however begin
showing signs of the disease early in childhood, often in the first year or two
of life.

   Children with LSDs are often short, develop coarse facial features, have
significant restriction of joint movement, may develop mental retardation and
acquire severe lung disease. Some may present with very weak muscles and heart
disease. Others have severe limb or bone pain. Many of the LSDs are so
devastating that they cause death before the age of 10 years. Some of the more
common LSDs in children are Gaucher disease, Hurler syndrome (MPS I), Hunter
syndrome (MPS II) and Pompe disease. Adults with Fabry disease develop kidney
failure and stroke.

   Is there treatment?

   There has been limited success in treating only the symptoms of the disease,
so considerable effort has been put forth to attack the source of the problem
and replace the enzyme itself.

   One way to replace the enzyme is to put a normal gene into the body that can
make the enzyme. This approach can be accomplished by giving the affected
individual normal genes from the bone marrow or blood of an unaffected person
(called a bone marrow or stem cell transplant) or by making special cells in the
laboratory that contain a normal gene and injecting them into the affected
individual (gene therapy). Bone marrow transplantation has been successful in
several LSDs and allowed long-term survival with less severe symptoms. However,
there are significant risks to the transplant procedure; it does not always work
and the beneficial effects sometimes wear off.

   Gene therapy, which is not yet available for LSDs, may circumvent most of the
disadvantages of transplantation. If successful, gene therapy should also allow
treatment for all types of LSDs. Research at a number of laboratories across the
world, including Washington University, should result in a trial of gene therapy
for at least one of these conditions in the next few years.

   Another approach to replacing the defective enzyme is to manufacture it in a
laboratory and give it directly to the patient. This method, called enzyme
replacement therapy, is now available for several of these disorders, and its
availability is a direct result of the Orphan Disease legislation mentioned
above.

   Enzyme replacement has been available for patients with Gaucher disease for
more than 10 years and has provided enormous benefit. This year the FDA approved
enzyme replacement for Fabry disease and Hurler syndrome. Clinical trials are
under way or planned for other LSDs.

   Whom do I talk to?

   Because LSDs are so rare, it has been difficult to find health-care
professionals knowledgeable about the diagnosis, management and treatment of
LSDs. As a result, a number of institutions around the country have created
Lysosomal Treatment Centers to address these needs. The Washington University
Lysosomal Treatment Center was created last year. As part of an international
storage disease collaborative study group, Washington University has gathered
physicians, health-care professionals, and scientists from across its campus
under one roof to provide diagnostic and treatment programs for all of the
lysosomal storage diseases. Information about this program can be obtained by
calling 314-454-6093

NOTES:
Dr. Rick A. Martin, a St. Louis Children's Hospital pediatrician, is an
associate professor of pediatrics and the medical genetics director for the
Lysosomal Diseases Treatment Center at Washington University.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2003


                             589 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 17, 2003, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: Health briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Tests, warnings sought for babies' bath seats


   WASHINGTON - Federal regulators Thursday proposed mandatory testing and
warning labels for baby bath seats, which have been linked to the drowning
deaths of more than 100 infants since 1983.

   The Consumer Product Safety Commission said the seats can be dangerous when
they tip over or when children climb out or slip through leg holes and become
trapped.

   Up to 1 million of the seats are sold each year. They are designed to keep
infants in a sitting position and usually have three or four legs that attach to
bathtub bottoms with suction cups.

   Parents of victims and advocacy groups had asked the government to ban the
seats. The government decided against that two years ago, but began studying
ways to make them safer.

   The plan would require companies to use a government-designed test to ensure
the seats won't tip over and children won't slip through leg openings.





   Stomach virus sickens 120 on Mexican cruise


   NEW ORLEANS - A stomach virus outbreak sickened 120 passengers and crew
members aboard a Carnival Cruise Line excursion to Mexico that ended Thursday.

   Passengers began showing up in the cruise ship Holiday's infirmary two days
into a five-day cruise to Playa Del Carmen and Cozumel with symptoms of vomiting
and diarrhea. By Wednesday, 79 of 1,670 passengers and 41 of 660 crew members
had become ill, said cruise line spokeswoman Jennifer de la Cruz.





   Gene therapy blamed for French boys' cancer


   WASHINGTON - Gene therapy saved the lives of two French "bubble boys" but
later gave them leukemia by activating a cancer-causing gene, researchers said
Thursday.

   The experimental treatment triggered a gene that caused the boys' bone marrow
to overproduce immune system cells called T-cells, the international team of
researchers reported.

   This had been the theory about why the two boys developed cancer. Both have
been successfully treated with chemotherapy, according to the French doctors who
are caring for them.

   The boys are among a group of 10 who were treated for a rare genetic defect
called x-linked severe combined immunodeficiency or SCID-X1. Caused by a
defective gene, it affects only boys because girls have a second copy of the
x-chromosome, which can make up for the defective copy.

   Their doctors used a virus to carry in a gene to replace the defective gene
with a working copy. The boys had seemingly been cured of SCID before the
leukemia symptoms began.





   Ads will warn parents about Ecstasy drug


   WASHINGTON - Kate Patton had never heard of Ecstasy before the night of Nov.
14, 1999. That's when two police officers came to her home in suburban Chicago
to tell her that her 23-year-old daughter, Kelley, was dead. She had overdosed
on Ecstasy.

   Patton joined anti-drug advocates Thursday at a news conference announcing
new television, radio, newspaper and Internet ads aimed at encouraging parents
to talk to their children about Ecstasy - known as the "Hug Drug," "X" or "E."

   The organization released a survey in which 92 percent of parents interviewed
said they had heard about Ecstasy, and an overwhelming majority said they saw
the drug as a great risk. But despite that finding, only one in four said they
had talked a lot with their children about Ecstasy.


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2003


                             590 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                            October 17, 2003 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Gene Therapy Link to Cancer Is Traced

BYLINE: From Reuters

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapy saved the lives of two French "bubble boys" but later gave them
leukemia by activating a cancer-causing gene, researchers said Thursday.

   The experimental treatment triggered a gene that caused bone marrow in the
boys to overproduce immune system cells called T-cells, the international team
of researchers reported.

   This had been the theory about why the boys developed cancer. Both have been
successfully treated with chemotherapy, according to the French doctors who are
caring for them.

   The boys are among a group of 10 treated for a rare genetic defect called
"X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency" or SCID-X1. It is caused by a
defective gene and affects only boys because girls have a second copy of the X
chromosome, which can make up for the defective copy.

   Their doctors used a virus to carry in a gene to replace the defective gene
with a working copy. The boys had seemingly been cured of SCID before the
leukemia symptoms began. They were among nine gene therapy patients in France
who had been living virtually normal lives.

   But by the time the boys turned 3, the French researchers, led by Dr. Alain
Fischer of Necker Hospital in Paris, found that the patients were developing
symptoms of leukemia.

   Writing in the journal Science, Fischer and colleagues said they had
confirmed that the virus carrying the therapeutic genes had inserted itself into
the boys' DNA right next to a gene called LMO2, which in turn became improperly
activated.

   In February, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration limited certain
experimental gene therapy trials to only children who were otherwise certain to
die, saying such procedures risked swapping one dreaded disease for another.

   The French cases are the most serious setback to the field of gene therapy
since Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died in the U.S. in 1999 after receiving experimental
gene therapy for a liver disorder.

   The question is whether the risk of cancer outweighs the risk from gene
therapy, which is often a patient's only hope.

   Childhood leukemia is generally easy to treat, with cure rates of 90% or
more. In contrast, children with SCID who cannot get a bone-marrow transplant
almost always die within a year.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2003


                             591 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 16, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 38 Health

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may reverse Down syndrome

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

BYLINE: SHARI ROAN

BODY:

   Most people know Down syndrome is a genetic disorder that causes irreversible
mental retardation. But that description may not be true in the future.

   Scientists have pounced on the revolutionary idea that Down syndrome - the
most common genetic cause of mental retardation - can be treated. First, they
must understand the biological cause of the condition, down to the specific
genes responsible for the varied symptoms.

   Then, they hope, they'll be able to reverse or eliminate related problems
with cognitive function, memory, speech, sleep and even the neurological decline
that occurs in older adults with the disorder.

   Scientists at Stanford University Medical Center already have identified
abnormalities in the nerve cell structure of people with Down syndrome,
differences that appear to be responsible for much of the brain damage that is
the hallmark of the disorder. They're now trying to home in on the genes that
cause that particular abnormality.

   "People thought that once you're born with Down syndrome, that's it; you
can't make the brain better. But we know that is not true about brains," says
Dr. William Mobley, a pediatric neurologist at Lucile Packard Children's
Hospital at Stanford. "Brains are plastic. We may not be able to cure this
disease, but we may be able to make people's lives better."

   Several advances have paved the way for this hypothesis. Scientists
understand the brain far better than they did even 15 years ago, because
sophisticated imaging devices have allowed them to better examine its structure.
And the mapping of the human genome provided detailed information on the 21st
chromosome. Down syndrome is caused by a third, or extra, copy of this
chromosome.

   The mapping of chromosome 21 revealed that it is the smallest of the 24 human
chromosomes, containing about 225 genes. Now scientists such as Mobley, director
of the new center for Down syndrome research at Stanford, are working to
identify what those genes do.

   Experiments on Down syndrome mice have shown abnormalities in the synapses,
or circuits, between nerve cells. The abnormal structure and function of the
synapses lead to the kind of brain damage seen in Down syndrome and Alzheimer's
disease. People with Down syndrome typically develop Alzheimer's disease in
adulthood, Mobley says.

   Now researchers are trying to figure out which of the genes cause this
problem in Down syndrome. Fixing the defect may involve turning off the extra
copy of certain genes.

   "We definitely know that genes cause this," Mobley says. "If we find an
offending gene, theoretically we can make things better by turning off that
third copy."

   Treating a condition caused by an extra gene, he says, may prove easier than
treating other genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis, in which genes are
abnormal or missing.

   Drugs could be developed to turn off that extra gene and improve cognitive
ability in people with Down syndrome. Theoretically, Mobley says, the drugs
could be given at any point in the life span to improve brain function.

   Scientists caution that potential treatments resulting from this research are
at least a decade away.

   But ultimately, says Myra Madnick, executive director of the National Down
Syndrome Society, "the result is going to be an individual who is much more
independent, has a job, has an apartment, is a taxpayer. It's not only going to
enhance their lives, it's going to enhance society."


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2003


                             592 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2003 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    October 10, 2003 Friday Two dot Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1149 words

HEADLINE: Drugs offer breast cancer hope;
Michigan, worldwide studies show promise of combination therapy that prevents
disease

BYLINE: Shawn D. Lewis

BODY:

   SOUTHFIELD -- Jean Chapp is surrounded by breast cancer.

   Both of her sisters have undergone mastectomies because of the disease, and
her oldest sister's breast cancer spread to her hip 10 years after the
mastectomy.

   "I knew I was at high risk for getting the disease myself and wanted to do
whatever I could to prevent it," said Chapp, 60, a retired occupational
therapist.

   So Chapp is participating in a national clinical trial in which she and other
post-menopausal women take the drugs tamoxifen or raloxifene, both of which have
been proven to help prevent the often-fatal disease. Twenty-nine hospitals in
Michigan are part of the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR), which is
expected to include 19,000 women.

   "I'm hoping that by participating in this study, it will save me from getting
breast cancer so I can be here for my children and grandchildren," she said.

   Chapp is among the first who are enjoying a breakthrough in breast-cancer
research: the discovery of medications that can help prevent and, in the cases
of post-menopausal women who have been treated for the disease, help stop it
from recurring.

   On Thursday, a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine has
given women who have breast cancer hope that tamoxifen used with another
medication can help prevent its recurrence. Of 5,197 women with the most common
form of breast cancer, those who took tamoxifen with the estrogen-suppressor
letrozole cut by nearly 50 percent the risk of the disease coming back.

   Both this study, which was done by 18 doctors from Canadian, U.S. and
European hospitals, universities and cancer centers, and the STAR clinical trial
have the same goal: finding combinations of drugs that help prevent breast
cancer or its recurrence.

   Tamoxifen, used for more than 20 years to treat breast-cancer patients, is a
pill that slows the interaction of breast cancer cells and estrogen, a female
hormone that has been linked to the growth of cancerous cells.

   The clinical trial in which Chapp is participating stems from earlier
findings that tamoxifen and raloxifene can help prevent breast cancer in women
who are considered at high risk of contracting the disease, because of their
family histories.

   The Canadian study released Thursday found that of the 5,197 women tested,
207, or about 3.9 percent, had a recurrence of breast cancer. Of that group, 75
were on letrozole and 132 were taking a placebo. Seventeen participants who took
the placebo died, compared to nine who took letrozole.

   The study also found that women with estrogen-sensitive breast cancer who had
completed five years of tamoxifen treatment and then took letrozole were about
40 percent less likely to have the cancer return or get a new tumor in the other
breast than those who received a placebo after tamoxifen.

   The results of the study will help women who have breast cancer that grows if
their bodies produce too much estrogen, said Dr. Michael Simon, associate
professor of medicine and oncology at the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute
in Detroit. Two-thirds of all cases of breast cancer are sensitive to estrogen.

   "I think the study makes sense because both drugs (tamoxifen and letrozole)
work differently in blocking the effects of estrogen on the cancer cells," Simon
said.

   But the drugs won't help all women, he said.

   "The study results only impact post-menopausal women and will not help
younger women with breast cancer, because letrozole is only used to treat breast
cancer in post-menopausal women," Simon said.

   Dr. David Decker, chief of hematology and oncology at Beaumont Hospital in
Royal Oak, one of the 29 Michigan hospitals participating in the STAR clinical
trial, agreed.

   "There is some benefit for a minority of patients, but it won't help the
majority," said Decker, referring to the study in the New England Journal of
Medicine. "There is some benefit, but it's not a home run where everyone with
breast cancer will benefit."

   Still, researchers were so pleased with the results, they halted the study
halfway through its planned five-year span because of the surprisingly strong
and favorable results. Cutting the study short provided all its participants the
option of immediately starting letrozole treatment, the article in the medical
journal said.

   Findings promising

   The findings of the study released Thursday and the STAR clinical trial
hearten Allison Bagdonas, 32, of Allen Park. The young mother of two was
diagnosed with breast cancer in 2001 at age 29.

   "I was taking tamoxifen shortly after I was diagnosed with breast cancer, but
it was giving me really bad hot flashes," she said. "So they substituted a
similar drug, but I think these new findings are great. Anybody who has that
option should take it."

   Bagdonas, whose cancer spread to her lymph nodes and bones, is now taking
weekly chemotherapy.

   "I hope that when I finish this regimen, that my doctors put me on letrozole,
if I'm a candidate," she said.

   Drugs carry risk

   But the drugs in the study and the STAR clinical trial do carry risks.

   Letrozole blocks estrogen production.

   The side effects of doing so include increased risk of osteoporosis, hot
flashes, night sweats, fatigue, abdominal pain and pain in the bones, joints or
back.

   Tamoxifen, which also interferes with the activity of estrogen, can increase
the risk of reproductive cancers, abnormal bleeding, hot flashes, blood clots
and stroke.

   Tamoxifen's effectiveness ends after five years of use, said Dr. Paul Goss of
Princess Margaret Hospital in Toronto. Goss headed the study by 18 doctors from
Canadian, U.S. and European hospitals, universities and cancer centers.

   "We think it's because tamoxifen resistance develops," Goss said. Because
estrogen pushes dormant tumors to grow, he said, the study looked at what
happened if patients took an estrogen inhibitor such as letrozole.

   Hope for future

   Despite these side effects, Goss' study and the STAR clinical trial have
given hope to women with breast cancer or those at high risk of getting the
disease.

   "I consider myself high risk because of my family history," said Michelle
Weiszbrod, 29, of East Lansing, the daughter of Chapp, the STAR clinical trial
participant.

   "I'm hopeful that with the new research, gene therapy and new medications,
that when I get older, breast cancer is something I won't have to worry about.

   "And I'm especially hopeful that my own daughter, who is only 8 months old,
won't have to worry about it one day."

   New studies

   A study released Thursday found:

   * Post-menopausal women with breast cancer who used the drug tamoxifen with
the estrogen-suppressor letrozole cut by nearly half the risk of suffering a
recurrence of the disease.

   A national clinical trial that includes 29 Michigan hospitals has found:

   * Two drugs, tamoxifen and raloxifene, can actually prevent breast cancer in
post-menopausal women.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2005


                             593 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 10, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 159 words

HEADLINE: Technology Briefing Biotechnology: Appeals Court Rules Against Genzyme

BYLINE:  Bloomberg News

BODY:

        The Genzyme Corporation, a maker of treatments for rare hereditary
diseases, lost an appeals court decision in its legal battle with Transkaryotic
Therapies over drugs for a rare metabolic disorder. The ruling comes less than a
day after the companies said they had agreed to end the dispute.

   The Federal Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Washington upheld a
ruling that Transkaryotic did not infringe on a patent related to the enzyme
replacement therapy for the treatment of Fabry disease. Fabrazyme from Genzyme
is the only drug with federal regulatory approval to treat the disease, although
Transkaryotic sells a rival product, Replagal, in Europe. Late yesterday, the
companies said that they had agreed to end their patent litigation. Genzyme
agreed to withdraw the lawsuit over Replagal. In return, Transkaryotic agreed
that it would not sue Genzyme for patent infringement over Aldurazyme, Genzyme's
treatment for another disorder.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Graph tracks the share price of Transkaryotic Therapies since last
Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2003


                             594 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 9, 2003 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 046

LENGTH: 282 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme, TKT end Fabry suit, agree to co-sell Hunter drug

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Two Cambridge biotech powerhouses ended a long-running dispute yesterday and
launched a partnership to sell a Hunter syndrome treatment in a deal worth up to
$ 11million.

   Genzyme Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. ended litigation over their
competing Fabry disease treatments and agreed to split the Hunter syndrome
market.

   The agreement, announced after 5 p.m. yesterday, comes just months after TKT
named popular industry leader Michael J. Astrue as chief executive. He was hired
to help stabilize the company.

   "We both felt we wanted to change the paradigm we were operating under,"
Astrue said. "There was a lot of negativism, but we have a lot in common. We
worked very hard and we wanted to take the high road."

   "I think it sets us on a path to really bring an important treatment to some
patients who really need it," said Henri A. Termeer, Genzyme's chief executive.

   Under the deal reached yesterday, the companies will end Fabry litigation but
continue to compete for that market.

   "We will do that in a gentlemanly fashion, making sure that patients
benefit," Termeer said.

   TKT took a hit earlier this year when Genzyme won exclusive rights to sell
its Fabry treatment in the United States for seven years. As part of ending that
agreement, Genzyme agreed to pay TKT $ 1.5 million. Genzyme will also pay TKT $
1.5 million for the Hunter partnership and up to $ 8 million for certain
milestones.

   TKT will retain the rights for the drug in North American, Europe and Latin
America. Genzyme will sell the drug in Japan and other Asia-Pacific territories.
As part of the deal, TKT agreed to not file a law suit against Genzyme over
Aldurazyme, an MPS1 treatment.

LOAD-DATE: October 09, 2003


                             595 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 9, 2003, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME, TKT END DISPUTES ONCE-BITTER RIVALS DROP PATENT BATTLES,
FORGE DRUG-DEVELOPMENT DEAL

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   After years of battle involving patent litigation and regulatory races,
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and Genzyme Corp. decided yesterday to bury their
hatchets.

   In a sweeping settlement, the two Cambridge companies ended their patent
disputes over two drugs, Replagal and Aldurazyme, and agreed to become partners
to develop TKT's I2S, a prospective treatment for Hunter syndrome.

      Genzyme had sued TKT, alleging Replagal infringed on its patents, and TKT
had threatened to sue Genzyme over its Aldurazyme treatment for a rare disease
called MPS 1. But TKT has now backed off that possible action.

   The agreement is a radical shift for TKT, which is perhaps best known for its
January 2001 defeat in a landmark patent dispute trial with California biotech
giant Amgen Inc. While TKT had won a significant victory against Genzyme in a
separate legal battle over sales of Replagal, TKT chief executive Michael J.
Astrue said it was time to change the way it did business.

   "It's a move to a new paradigm," Astrue said yesterday. "We'll be putting a
lot less money into litigation and a lot more into the pipeline."

   The deal also represents a strong endorsement by Genzyme of TKT's I2S, a
treatment for Hunter syndrome in late-stage pivotal trials.

   "This is Genzyme validating proof of concept for TKT's approach to this
disease," said analyst Jennifer Chao of RBC Capital Markets. "They're already
enrolling patients for a phase 3 trial. From Genzyme's perspective, they've seen
enough to feel TKT has a winner."

   In a conference call, Genzyme chairman Henri A. Termeer said, "This is a
disease that's very much a Genzyme kind of disease. We're in the business of
bringing products to market for these ultra-orphan diseases."

   In the United States and Europe, regulators can grant orphan drug status to
therapies intended to help rare diseases for which there are no treatments. The
orphan drug status essentially gives the drug maker a seven-year monopoly for a
small, underserved market, unless a competitor can develop a drug that is
demonstrably better. Genzyme has developed a series of drugs for such diseases.

   TKT has been developing I2S as a treatment for Hunter syndrome, a rare
genetic disorder that leaves its victims unable to break down a type of fat.
That fat gradually accumulates in the body over time, causing tremendous pain
and disability. Many patients die before they are 20 years old.

   In countries with insurance reimbursement for expensive drugs, about 2,000
patients are believed to suffer from the condition, the companies said.

   Under the deal, Genzyme and TKT will collaborate on the development and
marketing of I2S, which has been awarded orphan drug status in both the United
States and Europe. Genzyme will sell the drug in Pacific Rim markets, including
Japan, Australia, Taiwan, and South Korea. In those markets, TKT will receive a
royalty of about one-third of revenues. TKT retains the rights to develop and
market the drug in North America, Europe, and Latin America.

   Genzyme will pay TKT $3 million immediately and $8 million when it makes
specified progress toward regulatory approval in Japan. Genzyme also gets an
option to negotiate a similar deal to develop and market a TKT drug for San
Filipo syndrome, another rare disease, in the same Pacific Rim countries.

   Until yesterday, Genzyme and TKT were bitter rivals. Each firm had sought FDA
approval to market virtually identical drugs for Fabry disease. But last fall,
TKT announced problems with its clinical data supporting its drug candidate,
Replagal. In January, an FDA review panel said TKT's data didn't support
approval. The final decision came in April when Genzyme's Fabrazyme was approved
by the agency.

   Aldurazyme treats a genetic disease that can cause dwarfism and organ
problems, affecting about 4,000 people worldwide.

   The agreement with Genzyme is the latest in a series of turnaround steps
executed since Astrue became TKT's chief in February. Astrue formerly served the
company as general counsel, and had left the firm last fall. But he was
recruited to lead the company after the board ousted founder and former chief
executive Dr. Richard Selden.

   Both companies will remain competitors in Europe, where Replagal has been
approved to treat Fabry.

   "We'll compete in the Fabry space and we'll do it in a gentlemanly manner,"
said Termeer.

   Astrue said the collaboration on TKT's I2S was structured to minimize the
chance for friction between the former rivals.

   "We've tried to minimize stress by rejecting a joint venture model," he said.
"Can Genzyme and TKT really work together? I believe we can."

   The agreement was announced after the markets closed. On the Nasdaq Stock
Market, shares of TKT fell 58 cents to $11.96, and shares of Genzyme fell 62
cents to $47.99.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2003


                             596 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   October 9, 2003, Thursday, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Researchers urged to guard biotechnology from terrorism

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:
WASHINGTON -- The prospect that rogue scientists could exploit genetic advances
to unleash deadly germs led the National Research Council to call Wednesday for
better oversight of biotech research.

   The report, "Biotechnology Research in an Age of Terrorism," aims to balance
the need for greater security with "scientific openness" and the freedom to
pursue cutting-edge medical research.

   Rather than urge legislation, the report's authors call for a voluntary
system of self-policing, coupled with supervision from the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) and education about the risks of so-called dual-use technology.


   Similar concerns prompted the nuclear industry to set up organizations such
as the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations in the USA to review security
issues independent of government regulators.

   The report's authors cite two incentives for scientists to participate: to
avoid burdensome regulations and to protect society from dangerous germs.

   "Scientists want their work used for good, not evil, so we can start there,"
says Gerald Fink of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Fink is chairman
of the council's committee on improving research standards.

   Experiments involving dangerous bugs could be "stolen or diverted for
malevolent purposes" and the creation of deadlier germs, the report says.

   NIH committees must approve federally funded research. Under the new
proposal, NIH could deny permission for potentially risky experiments no matter
where the funding comes from.

   "We're not targeting terrorists here," says biowarfare expert and research
committee member Ronald Atlas of the University of Kentucky. "We're interested
in working with legitimate scientists doing legitimate research."

   Each proposed experiment would first be weighed by a research institution's
scientific review board. If it passed muster, it would then go to the NIH
Recombinant DNA advisory committee, which reviews government and private
gene-therapy projects.

   The report also calls for the Department of Health and Human Services to
create a National Science Advisory Board for Biodefense to oversee the effort.
Scientists and journal editors would weigh national security before publishing
research findings.

   HHS spokesman Campbell Gardette says his agency has reviewed the report. "We
think it's a good product," he says. "We'll be looking at the recommendations."

   The National Research Council is part of the quasi-public National Academy of
Sciences. The report was funded by the non-profit Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and
the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI).

   Sam Nunn of NTI says a bioterrorist attack could be as devastating as a
nuclear explosion. "The two are very similar," he says. "A nuclear attack
happens quicker. It would be catastrophic. A biological attack would take
longer, but it might be worse."

CORRECTION-DATE: October 16, 2003, Thursday

CORRECTION:
 A story Oct. 9 about efforts to prevent biotechnology research from being used
by terrorists misstated the university affliation of Ronald Atlas, biowarfare
expert and member of the National Research Council, who works at the University
of Louisville.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2003


                             597 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            October 9, 2003 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A09

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: Terror Risk Screening of Bioresearch Is Urged;
Panel Also Recommends Better Cooperation Between Scientists and National
Security Community

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Researchers conducting biotechnology experiments in the United States should
submit their plans in advance to specially trained panels of scientists and
national security experts who would decide whether the research's benefits are
outweighed by the potential for misuse by bioterrorists, an independent panel
recommended yesterday.

   In a widely anticipated report, the National Research Council, an arm of the
National Academy of Sciences, also called for the creation of a high-level
federal board to facilitate a new degree of cooperation between biologists and
the national security community.

   If implemented, the recommendations could substantially revamp the way
biotechnology research is overseen in this country by urging -- though not
legally requiring -- drug and biotechnology companies and privately funded
research institutions to submit to a level of federal review that until now has
been mostly applied to publicly funded scientists.

   Although physicists and the Department of Defense forged such a relationship
decades ago to keep nuclear technology out of enemy hands, biology researchers
have traditionally had, at best, an arm's length relationship with military and
intelligence agencies. Even after the anthrax attacks of 2001, which raised
concerns about access to dangerous biotechnologies, many biologists resisted
calls for tighter controls, warning that a regulatory overreaction could stymie
research that could someday prove crucial to defending against future attacks.

   "The crux of the dilemma is that the technology that protects us can also be
used to cause harm," said Gerald R. Fink, a geneticist at the Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., and chairman of the NRC
committee.

   The report notes that the recent rapid growth in funding of biodefense
research has increased the amount of information that could be used by
terrorists, making it more important that the nation start integrating security
controls into biotechnology research.

   For the most part, however, the report opposes new government restrictions on
scientific research or on the dissemination of scientific information. Instead,
it favors solutions in which scientists and scientific societies would take the
lead in preventing misuse of their work.

   Weighing in on one of the more contentious issues that divide many scientists
and security experts, the report strongly recommends against government
censorship of scientific publications once research has been completed. The
panel argued that by then it is generally too late to keep dangerous findings
under wraps.

   The report, "Biotechnology Research in an Age of Terrorism," also offers a
sobering reminder that efforts in this country will be for naught if other
countries fail to enact similar protections.

   "The techniques, reagents and information that could be used for offensive
purposes are readily available and accessible," the report notes. "Without
international consensus . . . limitations on certain types of research in the
United States would only impede the progress of biomedical research here and
undermine our own national interests."

    The 110-page report reflects 18 months of analysis by experts in science,
law, national security and private industry. It focuses not so much on how to
keep dangerous microbes out of terrorists' hands (several recent acts of
Congress have addressed this) but on how to minimize the misuse of biotechnology
knowledge without slowing the development of new medicines, vaccines, microbe
detection systems or agricultural advances.

   The panel avoided solutions that would require big new bureaucratic responses
and instead came up with a plan that builds on existing mechanisms for reviewing
research proposals involving genetically altered microbes.

   Under the plan, which panelists said could be implemented without new
legislation, researchers would first show their proposals to committees of
experts at their own institutions, which would decide whether the work posed
worrisome risks. The report highlights seven types of work that would trigger
alarms, including research that would make vaccines ineffective or make microbes
more virulent, more contagious or harder to detect.

   Experiments that trigger such alarms would be sent for further review by a
newly expanded recombinant DNA advisory committee of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), which today primarily assesses the safety of gene therapy
experiments.

   Participation would be voluntary and the relevant committees would lack the
legal power to prevent research from going forward. Some private research firms
in the past have balked at aspects of voluntary NIH review because such
proceedings are generally public, making it difficult to keep proprietary
information secret.

   But a combination of patriotism and peer pressure from fellow professionals
would ensure a high degree of compliance, panelists predicted.

   A spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, which would be
responsible for implementing most of the proposed changes, characterized the
report as "a good job on an important issue" and said its details are under
review.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2003


                             598 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 8, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: FOR THE RECORD

BODY:
 o The name of Richard Hooper, a gene therapy patient, was misspelled "Hopper"
in a photo caption Friday with a story about gene therapy.

   The Union-Tribune regrets the error.

   It is the policy of the Union-Tribune to correct all errors.  To discuss
accuracy or fairness in the news, please write:

   Gina Lubrano, readers representative

   P.O. Box 120191

   San Diego, CA 92112-0191

   Telephone: (619) 293-1525, or e-mail: readers.rep@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2003


                             599 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                      October 3, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: SUN CITIES/SURPRISE COMMUNITY; ASK THE EXPERTS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 484 words

HEADLINE: GENOMICS WILL CREATE NEW ADVANCES IN HEALTH CARE

BYLINE: By Joseph Rogers, Special for The Republic

BODY:

   QUESTION: I keep reading about this new field of genomics and that it is
going to be lending itself to health care. What can we expect to see and benefit
from as this research continues?

   ANSWER: This brave new world of genomics is very exciting to me and a lot of
other researchers because of the vast benefits that it will bring to enhance
people's health. Unraveling the mystery of the genes, which contain the
sub-cellular instructions for synthesizing the molecules that make up all
people, holds the key to preventing and fighting diseases. And, as these genes
give up their secrets, scientists, including myself, will be helping us to live
longer, healthier lives.

   "Genomics," coined in 1986 by Thomas Roderick, refers to the new scientific
discipline of mapping, sequencing and analyzing the genetic makeup of organisms,
including humans. This exciting new world is expected to bring forth an array of
health care advancements.

   Breakthroughs are expected to be sooner rather than later.

   What will this mean for you? Glimpse through an electron microscope focused
on the near future and these startling revelations come into view:

   * Detection of genetic causes of various diseases will lead to new therapies
and cures. Recent discovery of cancer-causing genes, for example, is now leading
to better, more specific treatments.

   * Genotyping will make it possible to predict which people might be at risk
for certain conditions so they can be diagnosed and treated earlier. It also
will help physicians to select the most potent drugs with the least side effects
for each particular patient.

   * Gene therapy, in which a patient may be given a "good" gene to replace a
defective one, will give new hope to victims of hereditary disorders.

   * New products and approaches to predict, detect, treat and cure disease not
only will be easier to develop but also faster to develop and get to market.

   Across the state and nation, wide collaborations of world-class, independent
scientific research centers such as the Sun Health Research Institute with
Arizona's Translational Genomics Research Institute, known as TGen, and
International Genomics Consortium, or IGC, are reaching critical mass. This is
why SHRI is presenting a public talk Nov. 4 by Dr. Michael Berens, senior
investigator of TGen and CEO of IGC, on how genomics is affecting health care
and the leading role local research institutions are playing.

   And these new discoveries will span a whole host of disorders -- from those
such as Tay-Sachs disease that affects infants to those affecting the elderly,
such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

   By those of us in the local scientific community sharing our expertise and
resources, it will move science forward faster in ways that one couldn't imagine
even five years ago.

   /

   Joseph Rogers, Ph.D., is president and senior scientist of the Sun Health
Research Institute.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2006


                             600 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 3, 2003, Friday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1192 words

HEADLINE: Success may still lurk in the genes

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In the battalion of new treatments to fight life-threatening diseases, gene
therapy is conspicuously missing in action.

   The drug industry has been intrigued by the technology since 1972, when
University of California San Diego gene therapy pioneer Dr. Theodore Friedmann
published a landmark paper describing the potential of gene therapy.  But the
field has yet to produce a product or a profit.

   Instead, the deceptively simple scientific notion -- using DNA as a drug by
replacing missing or defective genes with healthy ones -- has spawned scores of
unsuccessful companies and scientific setbacks.

   In September 1999, the death of Jesse Gelsinger, a teenager who died in a
gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, marked a low point in
gene therapy research that threatened to bury the technology.

   Yet despite the problems and challenges that haunt the field, gene therapy is
beginning to make a cautious comeback.

   Within the next 12 months, results from a few late-stage clinical trials for
gene therapies to treat cancer and heart disease -- including one devised in San
Diego -- are expected to be made public.  And the field continues to make
strides in creating better and safer vehicles for delivering therapeutic genes
to sick patients.

   Even the latest gene therapy setback, the confirmation in January that a
treatment inadvertently caused leukemia in two French children, is tinged with
promise, according to Friedmann, director of the Human Gene Therapy program at
UCSD.

   "It was a big surprise and shock, and we all thought 'here we go again,
another disaster in the making,' " Friedmann said.  "But while a tragedy for the
families of the two children, scientifically the clinical trials proved to be an
epochal step in gene therapy research."

   In the French study, nine of 11 children with X-SCID, a rare genetic disorder
that leaves the victim without a functioning immune system, were cured through a
gene therapy that allowed them to lead relatively normal lives.

   Yet there was a tragic hitch.  The therapeutic DNA apparently activated a
cancer-related gene in two of the youngest children, causing them to develop
leukemia.  Both children are undergoing treatment for the cancer.

   "It worked, at great cost, but it worked," Friedmann said.  "With the French
studies, the concept of genetic cure is no longer an 'if' -- the proof is
available."

   For many gene therapy companies, including a sizable cluster in San Diego,
the checkered success of the French trials provides cold comfort.  Though gene
therapy continues to make steady scientific strides, the commercial and the
financial sides are suffering.

   Bob Abbott, chief executive of Selective Genetics, has had to trim his San
Diego company's work force from 55 to 15 to conserve cash.  He is about to close
on "just-in-time" financing that will allow the company to continue testing a
gene therapy to promote wound healing.

   "I think a lot of gene therapy companies are working on as fine an edge as we
are, or aren't far off," said Abbott, whose gene therapy product is in the first
stage of testing, known as Phase 1.  "Until a gene therapy product shows
compelling efficacy in a Phase 2 or Phase 3 study, I don't think people will
swarm back as investors."

   So far, the biggest hurdle for the gene therapy field has been in developing
effective vectors, the vehicles used to deliver corrective genes to problem
cells.  Getting the right amount of gene in the right cell, and keeping it
active at the right level, remains elusive.

   Vectors used by researchers include a weakened form of the common cold virus,
which is designed to invade a cell and deposit the therapeutic genetic material.
But the vector isn't foolproof -- the virus can reactivate, creating serious
health complications, or be destroyed by the body's immune system and rendered
useless.

   In recent years, researchers have devised improved vectors by engineering or
removing the cold virus' genes, or finding new viral vectors.  Others have
bypassed viruses altogether by enclosing genetic material in a fatty casing, a
technique called "naked" DNA.

   Today, a handful of companies have products in Phase 3 or Phase 2 clinical
trials, and the results could renew wary investor interest -- or further reduce
it.

   Among the most closely watched clinical trials is a Phase 3 study of a gene
therapy to treat patients suffering from angina.  The treatment was developed by
San Diego's Collateral Therapeutics, which was acquired last year by German drug
developer Schering AG.

   Another Phase 3 study by a small Texas biotech, Introgen Therapeutics, is
also expected to yield data soon.  Last month, the Food and Drug Administration
gave the company fast-track designation for its gene therapy Advexin, for the
treatment of head and neck cancers.

   Meanwhile, several gene therapy companies are moving ahead with early-stage
projects, including San Diego's Ceregene, which has licensed the rights to a
gene therapy developed at UCSD to treat Alzheimer's disease.  The therapy has
been tested on eight patients, and results from the basic safety study are
expected soon.

   This summer, San Diego's Corautus Genetics received $10 million in funding
from Boston Scientific, which it will use to launch a Phase 2 study of a gene
therapy to treat angina.  Corautus was formed last year by the merger of two
cash-strapped gene therapy companies, GenStar Therapeutics and Vascular
Genetics.

   The company plans to test its VEGF-2 gene, delivered by catheter to specific
areas of the heart, to promote the growth of new blood vessels in damaged heart
tissue.  An earlier trial using Corautus' VEGF-2 gene therapy showed promising
improvements in patients, including Richard Hooper, an Escondido man who
received the treatment in December 1999.

   Before receiving gene therapy, Hooper had undergone about a dozen angioplasty
surgeries to widen blocked arteries and improve the flow of blood and oxygen to
his damaged heart.

   "Life was terrible.  I couldn't walk from our bedroom to the living room
without taking nitroglycerine, and I couldn't pick up a bag of groceries and
carry it from the car without severe pain," Hooper said.

   After two heart attacks, Hooper was running out of options.  He wasn't a
candidate for bypass surgery because of lung problems, and there was a long
waiting list for a transplant.  So in early December, Hooper agreed to try the
experimental gene therapy.

   Two weeks after the procedure, his condition had improved dramatically -- so
much so that Hooper helped his son carry in the family's heavy, eight-foot
Christmas tree without pain.

   Since the procedure, Hooper said he has never suffered an episode of angina,
and he lives a fairly normal life, complete with household chores and regular
rounds of golf.

   "I believe that gene therapy is the wave of the future -- even more so now
that they've mapped the human genome," said Hooper, 63.  "There will be
failures, but I think the body has the capability to regenerate if the right
gene key is found -- it's certainly been a miracle for me."

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


CORRECTION-DATE: October 8, 2003

CORRECTION:

    The name of Richard Hooper, a gene therapy patient, was misspelled "Hopper"
in a photo caption Friday with a story about gene therapy. The Union-Tribune
regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1,3. Nelvin Cepeda / Union-Tribune 2. Charlie Neuman /
Union-Tribune; 1. Katrin Holfer, a research associate at Ceregene, worked on
tissue samples at the company's laboratory in La Jolla. 2. Richard Hopper of
Escondido credits a Corautus Genetics therapy for improving his heart condition.
3. Jeffrey Ostrove, president of Ceregene, oversees the company's efforts to
develop gene therapies to treat Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.
(C-4)

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2003
