
                             1001 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            December 15, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 3; Book Review Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1077 words

HEADLINE: A Diagnosis Is Not a Name

BYLINE:  By Maggie Jones;  Maggie Jones has written for The New York Times
Magazine, Salon.com and Elle.

BODY:

        CHOOSING NAIA
A Family's Journey.
By Mitchell Zuckoff.
301 pp. Boston:
Beacon Press. $25.

    If you're a pregnant woman, particularly one of a certain age, medicine
offers you an ever expanding platter of testing options. There are the standard
tests -- sonograms, blood work, amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling -- as
well as new technologies like preimplantation genetic diagnosis and 3-D
ultrasound. Test results give women options and, ideally, soothe parents-to-be.
But, as the sociologist Barbara Katz Rothman suggested with the phrase "the
tentative pregnancy," testing has also changed the nature of pregnancy. Now many
women don't celebrate until the amniocentesis or ultrasound gives the all-clear
signal. But what happens when the results aren't what we'd hoped for?

   Tierney Temple-Fairchild was 31 years old and five months pregnant when she
had a routine ultrasound, followed by an amniocentesis and other tests. Before
her fetus had a name, it had a diagnosis of Down syndrome. At this point 90
percent of women decide on abortion. "Choosing Naia" is a welcome narrative
about one couple's decision to continue their pregnancy. You might expect
Tierney and her husband, Greg Fairchild, to fall under the 90 percent category,
since they favored abortion rights. And as an interracial couple (Tierney is
white, Greg black), they could imagine how the world might discriminate against
them and their child.

   The most noteworthy portion of "Choosing Naia" centers on the fast-moving
three weeks between the diagnosis and the 24-week deadline for a legal abortion
in Connecticut, where Tierney and Greg then lived. Their struggle to decide,
and, later, their feelings about that decision, underscore the limits of
prenatal technology. With Down syndrome, an amniocentesis or a blood test can't
tell us how severe the disabilities might be. And no test -- so far -- can
reveal a child's temperament or personality, much less how much we will love
that child or how that child will change our lives, our priorities and our
values.

   Mitchell Zuckoff, a reporter for The Boston Globe, meticulously follows Greg
and Tierney's story and explores the history of prenatal testing and the
medical, social and educational issues surrounding Down syndrome. He tends to
include details -- doctors' notes, repetitive dialogue -- that don't necessarily
advance the story, and he occasionally colors the narrative with sentimentality.
But he gets it right when he celebrates Greg and Tierney's courage without
suggesting that their choice would be correct for other families. Indeed, he
conveys how difficult it is not to have an abortion following a bad diagnosis.
Such a diagnosis, he writes, can become "the sole, depressing focus because it's
the only information expectant parents know with certainty about their unborn
child."

   This is when balanced, sympathetic counseling can help. Greg and Tierney's
genetic counselor, Alicia Craffey, was constantly available, provided them with
extensive information and put them in touch with parents of children with Down
syndrome who helped answer their growing list of questions -- How do these
children change family life? How well do they interact with others? How do
disabled adults feel about their own lives?

   As a result, when Naia was born, Tierney and Greg fully embraced their child.
And with good reason: Naia, who by the end of the book is 3 years old, charms
everyone, loves to sing and is ahead of the curve for children with Down
syndrome in most respects. In Greg's mind, the syndrome is no longer something
to get rid of -- whether through abortion or gene therapy. "I'll bet money that
12 years from now, if someone walked up to me and said, 'Would you change who
Naia is?' the answer would probably be no. Part of what I love about Naia might
be directly related to the fact that she has Down syndrome."

   But Zuckoff doesn't shrink from pointing out the hardships and sadness of
raising a disabled child. At 4 months, Naia had to undergo open-heart surgery,
and while her medical and developmental problems aren't as severe as those of
some children with Down syndrome, her monthly schedule includes four visits with
a speech therapist, three with an occupational therapist and one with a physical
therapist. Though Naia attends a regular day care center, her family worries
that her peers will soon surpass her mentally and physically and lose interest
in her.

   In the last chapter, Zuckoff tells the story of an exceptional 23-year-old
with Down syndrome who has a "budding career as an actress and motivational
speaker." Ashley Wolfe graduated from high school and attended a two-year
college program for students with special needs and learning disabilities.
Still, she is often lonely -- living in a gray zone between "normal" social
circles and the world of Down syndrome. And while Ashley and her sister,
Rebecca, are close, Rebecca tells Zuckoff that if her fetus had Down syndrome,
she might not continue the pregnancy.

   As for Tierney, about 15 months after Naia's birth she became pregnant with
her second baby. This time, though, there was nothing tentative about the
pregnancy: she skipped the amniocentesis. Though prenatal testing helped prepare
the family for Naia, there was little point to it now. Their decision to keep
Naia would hold for any child they conceive.

   It's a refreshing tale in an age in which medical technology encourages us to
strive for perfection in ourselves and in our children. Prenatal testing isn't
inherently bad. But as the tests get more sophisticated, we should question how
much we understand about particular disabilities and where we draw the line on
what constitutes an "unacceptable" fetus. Is it the one who carries a gene
linked to an adult-onset disease like breast cancer? Or the one who has a cleft
palate? Is it a boy instead of a girl? For couples like Greg and Tierney with a
disabled child, it must be discouraging to see medicine put so much emphasis on
weeding out faulty pregnancies.

   At one point in "Choosing Naia," a mother complains that people didn't
congratulate her on the pregnancy when they learned her fetus had Down syndrome:
"It was like my baby had died." Likewise, when someone tells Tierney she's sorry
about the diagnosis, Tierney replies, "There's nothing to be sorry about." It
is, of course, a loss to learn that your child won't be perfectly healthy. But
as "Choosing Naia" makes clear, few of us understand how much we may gain.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2002


                             1002 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    December 15, 2002, Sunday, Metro Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 4S

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: A SPECIAL REPORT: MEDICAL IMAGING;
Beneath the skin;
New technology has produced a medical imaging revolution, allowing doctors to
see internal organs on a computer screen, sometimes in 3-D.

BYLINE: Jill Burcum; Staff Writer

BODY:

   1. CT scan

   Computed tomography

   Introduced in 1971, it uses X-rays to take pictures of the body from
different angles, generating cross-sectional slices. Now, improved CT scanners
make those slices clearer and more detailed than ever before.

   How it's used

    - Produces sharp diagnostic images of bones, organs, muscles and blood
vessels.

    - Helps doctors quickly detect internal bleeding, tumors and other
abnormalities such as aneurysms without surgery.

    - Can help doctors determine risk of heart attacks and other cardiovascular
disorders.

   2. PET scan

   Positron emission tomography

   PET scanning, developed in 1972, has recently found a niche in cancer
detection. It tracks how the body uses energy. Diseased tissue often uses more
or less energy than normal tissue and shows up as a bright spot or darkened area
on a PET scan.

   How it's used

    - Finds tumors and tracks their spread.

    - Holds hope for diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease,
epilepsy and heart disease.

   3. PET/CT scan

   PET/CT machines fuse positron emission tomography and computed tomography.
The resulting scan combines the best of both technologies.

   How it's used

    - Helps in cancer diagnosis, especially lung cancer, lymphoma and
esophageal, colorectal and

   breast cancer.

    - Eventually may be used to track whether gene therapy can cure

   disease.

   4. Given capsule

   This tiny, capsule-sized camera is swallowed. It takes photos every few
seconds on its way through the digestive system, allowing physicians to see
intestinal areas viewable only by surgery until now.

   How it's used

   Diagnosing diseases affecting the small intestine, such as Crohn's disease,
intestinal cancer, gastrointestinal bleeding, irritable bowel syndrome and
celiac disease - an intolerance to wheat products.

   5. MRI

   Magnetic resonance imaging

   MRI, first used in 1977, employs radio waves and magnetic fields to take
detailed pictures inside the body. The latest machines are so sharp that they
can be turned into 3-D computer images of internal organs.

   How it's used

    - The newest MRIs can show the working of the brain, blood flow and
hard-to-see tissue around bones.

    - Increasingly used to diagnose brain diseases.

    - Can evaluate the heart's strength and function.

   6. Ultrasound

   Ultrasound, which traces its roots to the 1950s, uses sound waves to see
inside the body. New 4-D ultrasound offers video-quality color, an improvement
on the blurry black-and-white images many parents have seen. The fourth
"dimension" is movement.

   How it's used

    - Offers more certainty about size and condition of the fetus.

    - Helps doctors evaluate the heart's pumping ability.

   Sources: Vital Images, Star Tribune research

   Images courtesy of Toshiba Medical Systems (3-D images); Given Imaging
(capsule images); Mayo Clinic (PET, CT and PET/CT images); and GE Medical
Systems (ultrasound).



GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2002


                             1003 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                    December 15, 2002 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1457 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE BRIGHT FOR VISION PROGRAMSPORTLAND'S CASEY AND DEVERS EYE
INSTITUTES WORK TOGETHER TO RACK UP RESEARCHGRANTS AND GROWING NATIONAL STATURES

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   On bright days, the glass floor of Casey Eye Institute's waiting room
radiates a tranquil blue green, the color of sunshine on a shallow sea floor.

   Just one floor down, however, is the hectic clutter of the institute's
research labs. There, desks spill from jammed offices to line hallways, and tan
stacks of files reach for the ceiling. Scientists and research assistants are
packed in like sardines.

   "Somehow we passed the fire marshal," says Dr. Joseph Robertson, institute
chairman since 1998, snaking his way through. "I think it gets more crowded each
time I come through."

   The crush at Casey is the most visible sign that, in the world of eye
medicine, Portland's star is on the rise.

   Since Casey opened in 1991, the Oregon Health & Science University institute
has more than tripled its annual tally of research funds from the federal
government. And it has doubled its staff, to 270 people, squeezing them into
cubicles in halls, old chart rooms, even the employee lounge.

   The growth has triggered plans for a $24 million addition to Casey's fairly
new building, doubling the amount of research space and increasing room for
patient care by 50 percent, Robertson said. Donors have already pledged $7
million, including a combined $1 million promised by Casey's faculty members.

   Across town, rival Devers Eye Institute, run by Portland-based Legacy Health
System, also boasts a fast-growing research arm.

   And increasingly, the two institutes grow together -- sharing faculty and lab
space, cooperating in resident training and coordinating some hiring and
equipment purchases. The heads of Casey and Devers started building this harmony
in the late 1990s, said Dr. Michael Van Buskirk, Legacy's chief of
ophthalmology.

   The plan is paying off.

   Neither Casey nor Devers has cracked the top rank of U.S. ophthalmology
schools, according to an annual survey of eye experts by the magazine
Ophthalmology Times. But both institutes have "excellent reputations," said Dr.
Morton Goldberg, who runs the eye institute at Johns Hopkins University,
regarded as the nation's best. And the Portland programs have lured researchers
from top-ranked schools.

   "Reputations evolve over decades, and literally over centuries. And they are
earned by long-term contributions in research," said Dr. William Mathers, who
came to OHSU from Iowa, a top U.S. ophthalmology school. "Really, Casey competes
against UCLA and Harvard and Hopkins and Michigan, those kinds of institutions
-- the top research institutions in our field."

   He added: "That's unusual for an institution like this, being in a relatively
smaller town and being relatively newer to the research arena. We are ahead of a
lot of institutions that are a lot older and bigger."

   Casey ranks eighth among eye programs in the amount of grant money it gets
from the National Institutes of Health, Robertson said. If you add in Devers'
NIH grants, "we'd be knocking on the door of the Top Five," he said.

   "Together, we're bigger than the sum of our parts . . . one of the largest
and most productive centers in the country," Van Buskirk said.

   "We think it's an especially successful model, because the medical community
in Portland is pretty competitive," he added. "We've been able to succeed
despite that competition."

   Competition's cost, benefits Competition between the OHSU and Legacy eye
doctors has waxed and waned over the years. Through the 1970s, the schools had
separate education programs, vying to attract medical school graduates to fill
residency spots. But the programs decided to merge their residency in 1980 and
work together more closely. That continued as Legacy turned its ophthalmology
department into the Devers Eye Institute in 1984.

   But "competition heated up in the '90s," Van Buskirk said, as the nation
experimented with managed care and other new ways of providing and paying for
medicine. The upheaval stressed the cultural and business differences between
OHSU, an academic medical center, and Legacy, a private nonprofit system.

   "Everybody was seeking their identity: Who were their customers? Who were
their competitors?" Van Buskirk said. "And sometimes those competitive
relationships got accentuated."

   Amid those changes, the two centers pulled apart, again separating their
residency programs and making internal changes. The OHSU ophthalmology
department, led by Dr. Frederick "Fritz" Fraunfelder, planned to tie research
and patient care more closely in a new building, which became Casey Eye
Institute. As that happened, Van Buskirk -- one of Fraunfelder's first hires,
and OHSU's main eye researchers -- left in 1990 to take over Legacy's
ophthalmology department.

   It only took a few years for both institutes to realize that competition
might hurt instead of help. To go head-to-head, both centers need to buy the
same highly technical equipment and hire competing "subspecialists" to treat
even relatively rare conditions, such as eye cancers. But there aren't enough
local patients to need, or fund, all that expense, said Dr. George "Jack"
Cioffi, who heads the research program at Devers, Discoveries in Sight.

   "I think the two camps have realized that, with the size of this city,
eliminating redundancies is really key," Cioffi said, adding that he speaks from
experience. "Coming from Baltimore, where there were five ophthalmology programs
that hated each other . . . that just doesn't work."

   Van Buskirk and Robertson meet regularly to coordinate their efforts. Casey
and Devers have consolidated some equipment and staffing. For instance, all of
the city's corneas for transplant are now banked at Devers, which has one of the
nation's largest eye tissue banks. And they jointly pursue some research
projects to strengthen their odds of winning and avoid submitting potentially
competing, and weaker, proposals.

   The institutes add staff strategically, to avoid overlapping in rare
specialties. Residents again work at both institutes, and they share grand
rounds -- a medical teaching program. Next year, Legacy will have its first
full-time resident since the 1980s.

   Dr. Tim Stout embodies this cooperation. Three years ago, he and his wife,
another ophthalmologist, worked at the University of Southern California's eye
department, one of the nation's top-ranked programs. But Casey came calling.
They recruited the couple by showing all that Portland had to offer -- not only
the institute on "Pill Hill," but Legacy's research center and the Oregon
National Primate Research Center.

   "There were very, very few places that could have enticed us away," Stout
said. "There aren't a lot of places that have all this."

   Stout spends two days each week seeing patients at OHSU, and two more seeing
patients at Legacy. He has labs at both research institutes to study ways of
using gene therapy to heal eye problems. Already, that research is bearing
fruit: Within months, he plans to start early human tests of a genetic therapy
to treat age-related macular degeneration, the nation's leading cause of vision
loss. It will be among the first gene therapy trials at OHSU.

   Many other Portland eye researchers also stand on the cutting edge of
science.

   At Casey, Dr. James Rosenbaum has become perhaps the word's leading expert on
uveitis, an inflammatory disease of the eye; Dr. Michael Klein is exploring
genes involved in macular degeneration; Dr. Earl Palmer is finishing a 15-year
study that proved the first treatment for retinopathy of prematurity, which can
blind infants born prematurely. Devers' research arm has made its name by
inventing new tests to screen for glaucoma, Cioffi said, and many of its
scientists are exploring the basic biology and development of the eye.

   Such sophisticated research demands space. When Discoveries in Sight opened
in 1997, Cioffi said, it filled about 1,200 square feet and employed five to 10
people. Today, it fills 10,000 square feet and employs 45 to 50 people. Van
Buskirk said the Legacy institute needs more research space.

   At Casey, Robertson plans to add space by growing south from Casey's current
building, toward the Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Plans call for a separate
building with a seismic barrier, but attaching it to the existing structure, so
that work at Casey can continue with minimal disruption, he said.

   Still more dramatic moves may come if "substantial growth" in research
continues as hoped, Cioffi said.

   "I wouldn't be at all surprised if it (eye research) doubles in the next five
or eight years," at Casey and Devers, Cioffi said. "There's been talk on and off
about having a joint building, too. . . . I wouldn't be surprised if we end up
cohabitating."

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

GRAPHIC: Photo by Benjamin Brink - The Oregonian ; Photo by Bruce Ely - The
Oregonian; Graphic by Steve Cowden - of The Oregonian staff; Photo by Peter
Steinkamp - 2 Eye pictures

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2002


                             1004 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     December 13, 2002 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 020

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy seen hopeful for sufferers of diabetes

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   The first patient has been enrolled in a groundbreaking gene therapy study at
Caritas St. Elizabeth's Medical Center that seeks to use a genetic growth factor
to repair diabetes-damaged nerves.

   "The National Institutes of Health gave us the OK two weeks ago, and we've
enrolled our first patient," said Dr. Alan Ropper, chief of neurology. "It's
exciting. This is the first trial using a gene for a nerve disease of this
sort."

   In the $ 10.2 million federally funded study, which will enroll 196 patients
over four years, doctors will inject vascular endothelial growth factor, or
VEGF, into the muscles near the damaged peripheral nerves in patients' legs.

   The idea is that the DNA in the growth factor will be picked up by cells in
the nerves and produce tiny new blood vessels to nourish and restore the damaged
nerves.

   "We have strong evidence that it happens in experimental (animal) models,"
Ropper said.

   Diabetic neuropathy is a common complication among diabetics. In the disease,
the peripheral nerves in the hands, legs and feet become damaged, resulting in
pain and numbness. The condition is caused when the tiny blood vessels in the
nerves are blocked.

   There is no cure at present. Many patients take anticonvulsive medications or
painkillers.

   The study follows the work of the late gene therapy pioneer Dr. Jeffrey
Isner, who used a similar growth factor to grow new blood vessels for patients
with heart and leg blockages.

   In the process of studies on the leg patients, researchers noticed that many
of them, including some diabetics, were seeing their neuropathic pain improved,
Ropper said.

   The new study specifically targets neuropathy.

   While gene therapy trials have been controversial, Ropper noted that this
trial involves injecting the DNA directly into patients' muscles, rather than
using a virus to deliver the material. Many gene therapy trials that have run
into problems used a virus as a delivery agent.

   Ropper said gene therapy also may be able to help those with peripheral nerve
damage from other causes, such as chemotherapy.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2002


                             1005 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                  December 13, 2002 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION

SECTION: UNSORTED; Pg. F15

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Kills germs - and you could eat it;
NanoBio Corp. is developing a nontoxic product to clean factory equipment,
prevent flu, and more.

BYLINE: By Heather Newman; Knight Ridder News Service

DATELINE: DETROIT

BODY:

   It's the best ad slogan you'll never see: "Kills germs, not you."

   Consider what you could do with something that disinfects as thoroughly as
chlorine bleach but is not poisonous. Factories that process cold food such as
lunch meat could constantly clean equipment without risking the safety or taste
of the finished product. Apple cider could stay fresh and cold from the press to
your refrigerator, since the mill would no longer have to boil the juice to
eliminate the chance of botulism.

   That's the promise of a range of disinfecting creams, tonics and sprays being
developed by NanoBio Corp. in Ann Arbor, Mich., one of several technology firms
created in recent years out of research projects at the University of Michigan.

   NanoBio specializes in the use of nanotechnology - specifically, small,
cell-sized particles - to kill germs and deliver drugs or vaccines. Founded by
James R. Baker, director of the university's Center for Biologic Nanotechnology,
the privately held firm began operations in March 2001. The university licensed
key technology to the company and is one of its owners.

   The firm is looking for partners to market its germ-killing goop, properly
called antimicrobial nanoemulsions. That means incredibly tiny micro-droplets of
vegetable oil, surrounded by a trace amount of alcohol and held suspended in
water, which destroy microbes without being toxic or having harmful residual
effects.

   The folks at NanoBio are hoping a cream version of the stuff will be as
effective in large-scale trials as it is in the lab at getting rid of one tough
health problem: toenail infections.

   Right now, the only effective treatment for nail fungal disease is an oral
medication that can have bad side effects on the liver. NanoBio's cream could be
slathered on from the outside and would not be toxic even if eaten straight from
the tube.

   The company's product samples are in plastic bottles on the break-room table
where the employees eat lunch. Chief executive Ted Annis nonchalantly
demonstrated the spray-on surface cleaner on the table and the hand lotion on
his hands. A thin version of the product looks like skim milk and can be used as
a nearly tasteless antibacterial mouthwash.

   In another room of the lab, dozens of Ziploc bags filled with cooked penne
pasta were laid out on a counter. The company was testing a version of the
product designed to inhibit mold in cooked foods. They had been there two weeks
and looked as if they had just been poured out of the pot.

   A 1999 test by Pfizer Inc. at the University of Michigan suggests that the
emulsion might be an effective ointment for cold sores. Other common ailments,
big and small, may be the next targets.

   Baker did a study spraying the stuff into the nostrils of mice. There it
stayed on the lining of the nose, killing airborne viruses and bacteria.

   There is hope, Annis said, that the product may someday become marketed as a
topical preventive for the flu. That research is being expanded into other
areas, including HIV, tuberculosis and hepatitis B. The company has trademarked
36 names for products ranging from spermicides to preservatives.

   NanoBio has become more famous over the last year for its antibioterrorism
agents, which include a slightly thicker (think whole milk) pump-bottle spray
for soldiers that can kill anthrax. Baker discovered the antimicrobial use for
the nanoemulsion while researching gene therapy. Its use was refined with a
grant from the Department of Defense.

   But for most people, NanoBio's other products will hit closer to home.

   While the materials that make up the company's sprays and creams are for the
most part perfectly ordinary, the process of making them is not. A huge amount
of energy goes into dividing oils into droplets so small that 25 of them could
fit in the diameter of a human hair.

   The drops are the same size as or smallerthan the bacteria and viruses they
target. When they meet up with the microbes, the energy from the droplet-making
process is released, exploding the bad cells. The human digestive system turns
the drops back into their original substances, which is why NanoBio says the
stuff is harmless to ingest.

   "It's in minuscule amounts," Annis said. "It would be the equivalent of
putting a drop of vegetable oil in your drink."

   Baker says the ointment for cold sores may be in clinical trials by the end
of the year. The foot fungus cream may hit soon after.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2002


                             1006 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    December 13, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 849 words

BODY:

   Ernie Davis of Syracuse, the first black running back to win the Heisman
Trophy, died of leukemia not long afterward. It was 1961.

    John Cappelletti of Penn State, the last white running back to win the
Heisman Trophy, dedicated it to his brother Joey, who died of leukemia not long
afterward. It was 1973.

    There's gotta be a reason I'm telling you that, aside from its appearance as
some slice of, at best, tortured coincidence, or, at worst, mindless and even
tasteless trivia.

    On the contrary, those two helpful Heisman facts represent just about
everything that's ever made the Heisman relevant. They illustrate, however
indirectly, the shamefully sluggish timeline of opportunity for black athletes;
they show the subsequent dramatic emergence of the black athlete in American
culture; they show, in their own way, the maddeningly undeniable fragility of
young lives.

    It's everything else about the Heisman that is trivial. It's trivial in its
general uselessness as a precursor to professional success certainly (where have
you gone, Eric Crouch?), although you might want to note who finishes sixth in
the balloting. The last two sixth-placers turned out pretty good: Michael Vick
and Antwaan Randle El. It's trivial in that a guy named William Shakespeare once
finished third. Was that 1935 or 1593? It's trivial in that no one seems to
remember the really cool arcania, such as Johnny Majors finishing second to Paul
Hornung in 1956, three places above Jim Brown. And it's annoying in that it
perpetuates the incorrect media label "former Heisman Trophy winner," which no
one is. Once you win it, you keep it. Unless they take it from you when you're
convicted in a wrongful death suit, but let's not start that.

    They'll present it again tomorrow night on live television, because if
television thought it could get a sponsor for the live selection of the K-Mart
Employee of the Week, well, that'd be on. too. I suggest you find a Country
Music Awards show instead. They're on every night, and the honorees at least
seem to be enjoying themselves.

    Larry Johnson, Penn State's finalist for the 2002 Trophy, hardly sounded
thrilled to be part of the ritual tomorrow in a conference call on the matter
this week. One New York writer even suggested that if Johnson wins, they should
re-design the trophy so that the football player has a chip on his shoulder.

    "It doesn't have to be me; I don't care if they look at me at all," Johnson
said. "Just look at the other players and break it down. Just because you're on
the No. 1 team [as is co-finalist Willis McGahee of Miami] doesn't mean you're
the No. 1 player."

    Very gracious, L.J.

    "A lot of people say I should be enjoying it because it is a once in a
lifetime experience, but I'm still in a fighting mood. It's good to hear from
Penn State fans. But there are so many people out there who run their mouth and
who don't really know what it's like to put together a season like this, or say
it's a fluke. I concentrate more on those people than I do on my success."

    What a joyless existence this gifted-young-man-with-an-NFL-destiny gig must
be for poor L.J. Hope you don't win, Larry. What are you playing for, to prove
people wrong, shut people up? This isn't 1961. Get a grip.

    Of course, should Johnson be forced to lug that trophy home from New York,
the chance that it means he's the best college football player in America
remains only that, a chance. It's just more evidence of how the Heisman is
preposterous on its face. The best college football player in the country
generally can't be identified with any conviction. It could well be Johnson, the
most effective big back at Penn State since Franco Harris, just as it could be
McGahee or any of the other three finalists -- Miami quarterback Ken Dorsey,
Southern Cal quarterback Carson Palmer, Iowa quarterback Brad Banks -- and it
could be an anonymous Division III tight end who is doing more with his
abilities amid a crushing academic load than any mouth-running big-time
playmaker can imagine.

    The Downtown Athletic Club of New York, which dreamed up this idea in the '
30s, tried to narrow it from the start. The telegram that reached Jay Berwanger,
its first winner in 1935, congratulated him on being the "most valuable football
player east of the Mississippi."

    Even at that, such a distinction was far more dubious then than it is now,
because blacks weren't playing college football in the ' 30s. As late as 1946, a
scheduled game between all-white Mississippi State and the University of Nevada,
which had two black players, was canceled out of fear of rioting. It was a mere
quarter century after that Alabama finally put a black player on the field
(Wilbur Jackson), and not until 1975 that Georgia Tech put Eddie McAshan on the
roster.

    Thankfully, the Heisman has at least endured to see such distinctions put
aside, and to sustain itself as the backdrop to gnawing, phantom propositions:
if Ernie Davis had lived . . . if Joey Cappelletti had lived . . . could they
have told us what is really the experience of a lifetime.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2002


                             1007 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 10, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 3; Science Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy for Hemophilia Shows Some Promise

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A new approach to gene therapy shows tantalizing evidence of working in a
patient with hemophilia, doctors said yesterday. But the patient also developed
signs of liver injury, forcing the clinical trial to halt.

        The patient, in his 30's, was given the gene for Factor IX, a protein
that helps the blood to clot and is lacking in people with hemophilia B, the
less common of two forms of the disease.

    In the two to four weeks after the treatment, the level of the clotting
factor in the patient's blood stayed above 10 percent of the level in a healthy
person. That is the highest level ever seen in a gene therapy trial, high enough
to virtually eliminate the need for routine infusions of clotting factor,
doctors reported yesterday to the American Society of Hematology in
Philadelphia.

   "It shows the proof of principle," said Dr. Mark A. Kay of Stanford
University, who presented the results at the conference.

   The patient has not had to have an intravenous infusion of Factor IX in the
six weeks since he received the gene therapy, despite suffering some minor
injuries that would have normally required such treatment.

   By the sixth week, however, the level of Factor IX has fallen, to 3 percent
of normal. Although that would still reduce the severity of the disease, a
further big drop would make the treatment ineffective, Dr. Kay said. Unless gene
therapy can keep the Factor IX levels high for years -- as it has been shown to
do in dogs -- the treatment will not be practical, he said.

   Moreover, starting in the fourth week, the patient's liver enzymes rose as
much as nine times as high as normal, a sign of liver injury. The patient never
felt sick, and the liver enzymes now seem to be falling again toward normal, Dr.
Kay said.

   Still, the investigators agreed with the Food and Drug Administration that no
new patients should be treated until doctors determine whether gene therapy
causes the liver problem.

   The stock of Avigen, the company in Alameda, Calif., that developed the
treatment, fell sharply yesterday, to $7.75, down $1.65.

   There are already concerns about the risks of gene therapy after the death of
a teenager in 1999 who was treated for another disease and a more recent case in
which a 3-year-old in France developed a disease that resembled cancer. The
hemophilia treatment uses an adeno-associated virus, a different type of virus
to ferry the genes into the body from the technique in those two cases.

   This is the second halt for this hemophilia trial. It was briefly delayed
last year after the gene-carrying virus was found in patient semen, meaning that
the gene could theoretically pass to subsequent generations.

   Dr. Kay and his collaborator, Dr. Katherine A. High of Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, had previously reported that genes injected in the muscles caused
patients to make some Factor IX. But doctors said yesterday that the levels were
never high enough to make a difference.

   The new study involved putting the genes into the liver. Four patients given
lower doses showed no effects. The patient for whom the treatment showed signs
of working received a higher dose. A second patient was treated with the higher
dose three weeks ago, but it is too soon to say whether it is working.

   Another gene therapy, developed by Transkaryotic Therapies of Cambridge,
Mass., and tested by Dr. David A. Roth of Harvard, has also shown signs of
reducing the need for clotting factor for up to 12 months. Some of his 12 test
patients produced up to 2 percent to 3 percent of normal levels, said Dr. Roth,
who also presented data yesterday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2002


                             1008 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                     December 9, 2002 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: Researchers: Stem cells can cure sickle-cell disease;
Of 69 trial transplants, 85 percent had success, a French team told a convention
in Phila.

BYLINE: By Maryclaire Dale; Associated Press

BODY:

   A French research team reported yesterday that doctors now believe they can
cure children with severe sickle-cell disease through stem-cell transplants
without risking serious complications or death.

   The French researchers, who have performed 69 transplants since 1988,
reported an 85 percent disease-free survival rate - and even better results
since revising their mix of anti-rejection drugs in 1992.

   Six patients died in the earlier phase - four after rejecting the new stem
cells - but there were no deaths in the last 30 transplants, said the lead
researcher, Dr. Francoise Bernaudin of the Hospital Intercommunal de Creteil,
outside Paris.

   The findings, which have not yet been published, were presented yesterday at
the Convention Center at the annual meeting of the American Society of
Hematology.

   "It's going to change the way we treat individuals with this disorder," said
Dr. Ronald Hoffman of the University of Illinois, the society's president. "If
they're truly cured... they're going to be freed of the consequences of a
chronic disease."

   Sickle-cell disease is an inherited blood disorder that affects about 70,000
Americans, most of them African Americans, as well as some people from the
Mediterranean, Africa and elsewhere.

   Researchers are pursuing several cures and treatments for sickle-cell
disease, including gene therapy, drug therapies and stem-cell transplants.

   The transplants have been conducted at several sites in the United States,
but the French study is the largest by any one team and has produced the best
results to date, Hoffman said.

   The disease causes a deformity in red blood cells that prevents the blood
from carrying enough oxygen and nutrients to the heart, brain and other organs.
Patients often suffer chronic, painful conditions including anemia and kidney
and lung damage and are prone to heart attacks and disabling strokes.

   Most sickle-cell patients used to die in childhood, but better treatments now
enable them to live into their 40s and 50s. However, doctors have been
frustrated in their attempts to improve the patients' quality of life.

   "Maybe if a new drug appears which seems efficacious, we will stop again. But
for the moment, stem-cell transplant remains the only treatment offering the
cure," Bernaudin said yesterday at the convention center, where about 20,000
people are attending the five-day conference.

   Patients in the study had a median age of 8.9 years.

   After four of the initial 12 patients rejected the transplant, Bernaudin and
her team in 1992 added an immunosuppressant, anti-thymocyte globulin, to the
drugs that patients receive before surgery. There were no rejections afterward.

   "That was her big innovation, and that led basically to a 100 percent success
rate," Hoffman said.

   One patient in the later phase required a second transplant, which proved
successful. Three showed the continued presence of the disease, but its severity
declined, Bernaudin said.

   Given the strong results, and the small number of complications, Bernaudin
believes children with severe sickle-cell disease - about half of all
sickle-cell patients - should get transplants by age 2 or 3, before suffering
organ damage.

   "I think the cost-effectiveness is a no-brainer. Because what you really have
to integrate into that equation is the ability of these folks to become
productive members of society," Hoffman said.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2002


                             1009 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            December 8, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 12-8-02;
The Healing Paradox

BYLINE:  By Abraham Verghese;  Abraham Verghese is a professor of medicine and
director of the Center for Medical Humanities and Ethics at the University of
Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio. His latest book is "The Tennis
Partner."

BODY:

   As a practicing physician, I confess that I learn about the latest medical
breakthroughs while reading my morning paper. When my office mail eventually
brings me the original study, my pleasure in the journal's pristine cover and
untouched pages has been diminished because the tidings arrived before the
messenger. But here is why I cannot complain: the science reported in my
newspaper is genuinely newsworthy, deserving its place alongside matters of
state and economy. For example, two weeks ago we learned of a promising approach
to the prevention of cervical cancer -- a vaccine against one type of papilloma
virus that is an antecedent to this malignancy. Imagine that. A vaccine for
cancer! On the same day as that announcement came the first report of a vaccine
that might prevent genital herpes. And then there's the ongoing news of the
unraveling of the human genome in all its amazing complexity. History will draw
a line here: Before Genome and After Genome. The Rosetta stone has been found
and applied to the sacred scroll, and it promises important breakfast reading
for years to come.

        But my morning paper, laden with science, also carries evidence of our
distrust of science and our search for another kind of healing. You've seen it:
a full-page advertisement for a product that you know is too good to be true.
The text has large type, a before-and-after picture, no listing of the contents
of the product and a blizzard of endorsements from "scientists" and "patients"
that take the place of data. These products are life extenders, fat fighters,
growth-hormone releasers, relievers of limb pains, rebuilders of muscle and bone
and sometimes all of the above together. I think of them as quark drugs,
phantoms that if they could be studied in careful trials would soon lose the "r"
for a "c" and be revealed for what they are.

    But the market for such remedies is huge. Indeed, estimates are that nearly
half of all adult Americans use some sort of dietary supplement, and the sales
of these products in 2000 amounted to more than $15 billion! I plead guilty:
echinacea and ginkgo have made appearances in my medicine cabinet, as I reached
for magic for some ailment or other. I had no guidance, no data of the sort a
scientist should accept, no package insert. I tried them on faith. Alas, they
did nothing.

   The good news is that many such treatments are being systematically and
carefully studied through the aegis of the National Institutes of Health; what
we know thus far is that few products live up to their claims, many have the
potential for toxicity and the quality control on this stuff is awful. Here is
the bad news: 70 percent of us would take these products anyway, even if they
were shown to be no better than snake oil. Even as science measurably changes
our life and extends our life spans, as a society we are suspicious of science.

   I am not a crusader against alternative medicines or its practitioners. I am
all for things that make us feel better and that don't hurt us. But I do wonder
at the paradox of even the most rational of us being drawn to these bottles with
pictures of ugly tubers and weedlike plants on them. Why do we become
dreamy-eyed hearing the songs of the New Age pied pipers whose melodies
interweave quantum physics and the workings of the colon in beautiful but
completely fictional ways? Like revivalist preachers, they invite our faith, our
willingness to search for magic in ancient, undecipherable Oriental practices
(as opposed to the new, quite decipherable, Western practices). In return they
offer nostrums, tonics, tapes, books, diets, retreats, mantras, votive candles
and cruises; they bring color, fragrance and incense to an illness experience
that otherwise plays out in black and white.

   In this golden age of science, disease and treatment have become demystified.
If you went to a doctor clutching your stomach in days of old, the doctor, after
a good bit of probing and hemming and hawing, would retreat to the dispensary
and with great ceremony compound a mistura carminativa, vividly colored in a
medicinal bottle. Short of surgery or an autopsy, no one would be precisely
certain what you had. But come clutching your stomach to a medical doctor these
days, and after a careful history and exam, the doctor can "see" your
gallbladder, measure the distress of your pancreas, examine the lining of your
colon and much, much more if need be and then institute the precise cure.

   Therein lies the rub: we are perhaps in search of something more than a cure
-- call it healing. If you were robbed one day, and if by the next day the
robber was caught and all your goods returned to you, you would only feel partly
restored; you would be "cured" but not "healed"; your sense of psychic violation
would remain. Similarly with illness, a cure is good, but we want the healing as
well, we want the magic that good physicians provide with their personality,
their empathy and their reassurance. Perhaps these were qualities that existed
in abundance in the prepenicillin days when there was little else to do. But in
these days of gene therapy, increasing specialization, managed care and major
time constraints, there is a tendency to focus on the illness, the cure, the
magic of saving a life.

   Science needs to be more cognizant of the other magic, the healing if you
will, even as we reach for the proven cures. We need to develop and refine that
magic of the physician-patient relationship that complements the precise
pharmacologic interventions we may prescribe; we need to ensure the wholeness of
our encounter with patients; we need to not lose sight of the word "caring" in
our care of the patient. And doggedly, in this fashion, one patient at a time,
we can restore faith in the fantastic advances of science we are privileged to
witness.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Hulton Archive/Getty Images) Chart: "BACK TO NATURE"* The
prevalence of CAM complementary and alternative medicine use increased from 25
percent in 1990 to 42 percent in 1997. . . . The prevalence of herbal remedy use
increased by 380 percent during the same time period.* Total visits to CAM
providers in 1997 (629 million) exceeded total visits to all primary care
physicians (386 million) during that year.* Three in 10 pre-baby boomers, 5 in
10 baby boomers and 7 in 10 post-baby boomers reported use of at least one CAM
therapy by the age of 33.   From Medscape Primary Care, based on a series of
consumer surveys tracking CAM use in the U.S. since 1990.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2002


                             1010 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     December 6, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 826 words

BODY:

   College football has taken a well-deserved flogging this week over the
continual festering of its bowl politics, but there is a particular criticism
still to be leveled, so I'll be taking care of that right now.

    There are not enough bowl games.

    I know there are 28 of them, making 56 teams "bowl bound" and maybe another
56 referenced under the horrid cliche "bowl eligible," and I know that most
critics feel as if that's way too many, but the fact is, too many players and
fans are still being kept home for the holidays when they could easily be out
there wasting time and money at meaningless bowl games.

    Not even the quizzical existence of the Continental Tire Bowl, the MainStay
Independence Bowl, the ConAgra Foods Hawaii Bowl and the Sega Sports Las Vegas
Bowl, none of which I'm making up, can meet the national demand for immediate
gratification.

    This is America, folks. We don't do disappointment very well, especially in
athletics. Eventually, every college football team will go to a bowl game, every
college basketball team will make the tournament, every Major League Baseball
team will make the playoffs -- except the Pirates -- and every Super Bowl will
be contested by all 32 teams simultaneously in a chaotic annual conflict not
even John Madden will be able to telestrate.

    By immediately adding, say, 20 bowl games, we can not only bring joy to the
incompetent, but also innovation to the television schedule. I suggest the
following:

    The Sylvania Kumquat Bowl, Bradenton Beach, Fla. -- Susquehanna vs.
Otterbein, Dec. 18, 8 p.m., ESPN, Sam Nover play-by-play, Whitney Houston color.

    The V.F.W.-UAW-IBM ThinkPad Bowl, Oxnard, Calif. -- UAB vs. SMU, Dec. 19, 3
p.m., Lifetime, Thor Tolo play-by-play, Carrot Top color.

    The Trojan Condoms Disease Prevention Bowl, Lubbock, Texas -- Oral Roberts
vs. Robert Morris, Dec. 19, 7:30 p.m., Cinemax, Alex Trebek play-by-play,
SpongeBob Squarepants color.

    The Schlotzky's Deli Meats Pickle & Pimento Bowl, Largo, Fla. -- Minnesota
vs. Minnesota Mankato, Dec. 20, 10 a.m., HBO, Dan Marino play-by-play, James
Gandolfini color.

    The UPMC Chest Pain Center Bowl, Bakersfield, Calif. -- Arkansas-Pine Bluff
vs. Pennsylvania, Dec. 20, 1 p.m., Animal Planet, Keith Jackson play-by-play,
Michael Jackson color.

    The Kinko's Chick-pea Bowl, Yuma, Ariz. -- Case Western vs. Cal Davis, Dec.
20, 3 p.m., Fox Family, Brett Hume play-by-play, Darva Conger color.

    The Korbet Canyon-Cannon Camera Cantaloupe Bowl, Galveston, Texas -- Temple
vs. Northwestern, Dec. 20, 7 p.m., MTV, Ozzy Osbourne play-by-play, Snoop Doggy
Dog color.

    The Mellon Honeydew Melon Bowl, Fort Pierce, Fla. -- Niagara vs. Pepperdine,
Dec. 20, 8 p.m., The Golf Channel, Jim Kelly play-by-play, William "Hootie"
Johnson color.

    The Mt. Lebanon Office Equipment Cabbage Bowl, Shreveport, La. -- Grove City
vs. Austin Peay, Dec. 20, 9 p.m., C-SPAN, Senator Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia)
play-by-play, Christopher Shays (R-Connecticut) color.

    The Rent-A-Wreck Blown Head Gasket Bowl, Jupiter, Fla. -- Northeast
Louisiana vs. Southwest Texas, Dec. 21, 1 p.m., PCNC, John McIntire
play-by-play, Bob O'Connor color.

    The Radon Testing and Remediation Services Dormant Toxin Bowl, Van Nuys,
Calif. -- Missouri vs. West Virginia State, Dec. 21, 3 p.m., WQED, Rick Sebak
play-by-play, Henrietta Pussycat color.

    The George Foreman Grill Grease Runoff Bowl, Albuquerque, N.M. -- San Diego
State vs. Buffalo State, Dec. 22, 6 p.m., The WB, Homer Simpson play-by-play,
Alan Thicke color.

    The Express Sewer Service Sani-Flush Bowl, Stockton, Calif. -- Miami of Ohio
vs Ohio of Miami, Dec. 23, 7:30 p.m., WPCB, Pat Robertson play-by-play, Jerry
Falwell color.

    The Enron-Adelphia-Martha Stewart Fifth Amendment Bowl, Waco, Texas -- Fort
Hayes State vs. Bluffton, Dec. 24, 7 p.m., ENCORE, Woody Allen play-by-play,
Gwyneth Paltrow color.

    The Antique Oriental Rug Gallery Dust Bowl, Ybor City, Fla. -- Oglethorpe
vs. Furman, Dec. 25, 7:30 p.m., Cartoon Network, Bam Bam Rubble play-by-play,
Bam Morris color.

    The Meinecke Discount Mufflers Ozone Bowl, San Clemente, Calif. -- Rutgers
(yes, Rutgers) vs. Middle Tennessee, Dec. 26, 1 p.m., TBS, Kevin Bacon
play-by-play, Ted Turner color.

    The Tony's Tuxedo Cumberbund Bowl, Plano, Texas -- Thiel (that's right,
Thiel) vs. Drake, Dec. 26, 7 p.m., OXYGEN, Oprah Winfrey play-by-play, Xena
Warrior Princess color.

    The Dairy Queen Big Ol' Banana Split Bowl, Birmingham, Ala. -- Appalachian
State vs. St. Francis (Pa.), Dec. 27, 7:30 p.m., MSNBC, Phil Donahue
play-by-play, Chris Matthews color.

    The Beer World Beer Nuts Bowl, Atlanta, Ga. -- Boise State vs. Merrimack,
Dec. 28, 7:30 p.m., LIFETIME, Rue McClanahan play-by-play, James Brolin color.

    The American Respiratory Alliance Oxygen Bowl, Tuscon, Ariz. -- Moravian vs.
Arkansas-Monticello, Dec. 29, 7:30 p.m., E!, Howard Stern play-by-play, Anna
Nicole Smith color.

    As ever, no need to thank me.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2002


                             1011 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   December 4, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: ASTRUE TO STEP DOWN AT TKT EXPECTED TO LAND POST IN BUSH ADMINISTRAION

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Michael J. Astrue, the lawyer, biotechnology executive, and public servant
who has played a major role in the local industry for nearly a decade, will
leave his post as senior vice president and general counsel of Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., industry insiders said yesterday.

   Astrue last year was President Bush's first choice to head the Food and Drug
Administration, but the nomination was blocked by Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts. Astrue is likely now to be considered for another senior post in
the Bush administration, according to people close to the administration.

       Astrue could not be reached for comment yesterday.

   Local industry leaders praised Astrue, who had played a key role at Biogen
Inc. before joining TKT and who was chairman of the Massachusetts Biotechnology
Council for two years that ended in March.

   "I'm going to miss Michael," said Janice Bourque, president of the biotech
council. "He has a deep understanding of how policy decisions are made, as well
as a unique perspective on the challenges involved in successful drug
development. Whether he stays here in Massachusetts - and there may be some
opportunities for him in the Romney administration - or goes to Washington, he
brings one of the strongest backgrounds imaginable."

   In the late 1980s, Astrue served as associate counsel to the president,
advising and representing presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush. He
later served as general counsel in the Department of Health and Human Services,
where he brought the federal case alleging discrimination by an employer against
a person infected with the AIDS virus. He also helped expand the so-called
fast-track drug approval process at the FDA.

   Astrue was Bush's first choice to head the FDA last year, but Democratic
senators said they would refuse to hold hearings if he were formally nominated.
Kennedy opposed the nomination, saying it would be wrong to appoint an industry
executive to the key regulatory role.

   Despite the setback, Astrue's star hasn't waned inside the Beltway.

   "He was the president's preferred choice to head the FDA," said one
Republican with close ties to the White House. "It's a no-brainer that they'd
want him involved in some other capacity. There's no question he'll be a hot
property now that he's available."

   Should Astrue be nominated for an administration role, he could be approved
quickly, because his nomination for FDA chief had progressed so far last year,
this person said. "He's a known quantity, he's already been vetted, and he's
highly thought of."

   A spokesman for the Romney transition team said the governor-elect doesn't
comment on personnel matters.

   Astrue, a Belmont resident, is an instructor at Boston University, teaching a
course in biotechnology law.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2002


                             1012 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 4, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   GenStar auditor raises concern

   GenStar Therapeutics Corp.'s auditor raised "substantial doubt" about the
gene therapy company's ability to continue as a going enterprise, according to a
filing yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

   As reported earlier, the San Diego company said it believes it has enough
cash -- $7.6 million at the end of September -- to fund operations through June
2003.

   GenStar is planning a merger with an Atlanta-based gene therapy company,
Vascular Genetics, that is expected to close by the end of the year.  The
combined companies will be renamed CorAutus Genetics.

   Exten moves headquarters

   Exten Industries yesterday said it has moved its headquarters from San Diego
to Rhode Island as part of a consolidation with its merger partner, MultiCell
Technologies.

   The San Diego biotechnology company, whose stock trades over the counter,
employs about a dozen people.  Exten is developing a synthetic liver through its
subsidiary, Xenogeneics Corp., which will also be headquartered in Rhode Island.

   Exten's MultiCell division, which supplies liver cells for drug research, is
the main revenue generator for the company and the move to MultiCell's Warwick
facility "makes sense financially and logistically," the company said in a
written statement.

   ViaSat awarded retail chain pact

   ViaSat Inc. of Carlsbad announced that it has been awarded a contract in
excess of $5 million to install a new satellite-based system to upgrade
communications to more than 800 retail drug stores operated by Shoppers Drug
Mart and Pharmaprix in Canada.  The contract includes installation of the new
LinkStar terminals, plus ongoing operation and maintenance of the network by
ViaSat's Worldwide Service group.

   Genetronics extends pact

   Genetronics yesterday said it extended an agreement with Chiron Corp. to
conduct additional research to test an HIV vaccine.  The San Diego company did
not disclose financial terms of the agreement.

   Vistant names Barth president

   San Diego-based Vistant named David S. Barth president of the company
yesterday, effective immediately.  Barth was vice president of Austria-based VWR
International.  Vistant is a subsidiary of Cardinal Health Inc. based in Ohio.
The company develops point-of-use technology and supply automation.

   WORLD AND NATION

   United in talks for financing

   United Airlines is close to lining up special financing for bankruptcy even
as it awaits a crucial government decision on a separate loan package and a
revote on pay cuts by mechanics, sources familiar with the situation said
yesterday.  In addition, the company said yesterday it would furlough 352
pilots, or about 4 percent of its pilots, early in 2003 under a plan announced
in November to reduce its flight schedule by 6 percent next year.

   United, the No. 2 U.S. airline, is negotiating with various financial
institutions to secure debtor-in-possession financing of about $1.5 billion, the
sources said.  Such loans get priority for repayment over most other forms of
credit.  The talks are ongoing but could be wrapped up by the week's end, the
sources said. Reuters

   Disney lowers profit forecast

   Walt Disney Co. lowered its fiscal 2002 earnings to 60 cents a share after
ticket sales for its film "Treasure Planet" were lower than expected, the
company said in a statement.  Also, the company said dim prospects for "Treasure
Planet" will cut first-quarter 2003 earnings by about 1 cent per share from a
Nov. 7 earnings announcement.  The company lowered fourth-quarter profit to 9
cents a share, from a previously reported 11 cents.

   The film was released after a Nov. 7 earnings statement and before the
company's annual report.  Accounting rules require an adjustment to the Sept. 30
book value of the film, the company said. Bloomberg News

   Bristol to keep same dividend rate

   Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. said it will pay dividends at an annual rate of
$1.12 a share, marking the first time in 30 years the company didn't increase
its payout to investors.  The 28-cent quarterly dividend will be payable on Feb.
1, to shareholders of record at the close of business on Jan. 3, the company
said. Bloomberg News

   Chicago Merc's IPO to hit market

   The Chicago Mercantile Exchange plans to go public this week, becoming the
first U.S. financial market to sell stock in itself.  The CME is expected to
launch its initial public offering of stock after the close of trading tomorrow
on the New York Stock Exchange, with the shares making their trading debut
Friday.

   Associated Press


LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2002


                             1013 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 4, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA GenStar auditor raises concern GenStar Therapeutics
Corp.'s auditor raised "substantial doubt" about the gene therapy company's
ability to continue as a going enterprise, according to a filing yesterday with
the Securities and Exchange Commission. As reported earlier, the San Diego
company said it believes it has enough cash -- $7.6 million at the end of
September -- to fund operations through June 2003. GenStar is planning a merger
with an Atlanta-based gene therapy company, Vascular Genetics, that is expected
to close by the end of the year.

   The combined companies will be renamed CorAutus Genetics. Exten moves
headquarters Exten Industries yesterday said it has moved its headquarters from
San Diego to Rhode Island as part of a consolidation with its merger partner,
MultiCell Technologies. The San Diego biotechnology company, whose stock trades
over the counter, employs about a dozen people.

   Exten is developing a synthetic liver through its subsidiary, Xenogeneics
Corp., which will also be headquartered in Rhode Island. Exten's MultiCell
division, which supplies liver cells for drug research, is the main revenue
generator for the company and the move to MultiCell's Warwick facility "makes
sense financially and logistically," the company said in a written statement.
ViaSat awarded retail chain pact ViaSat Inc. of Carlsbad announced that it has
been awarded a contract in excess of $5 million to install a new satellite-based
system to upgrade communications to more than 800 retail drug stores operated by
Shoppers Drug Mart and Pharmaprix in Canada.

   The contract includes installation of the new LinkStar terminals, plus
ongoing operation and maintenance of the network by ViaSat's Worldwide Service
group. Genetronics extends pact Genetronics yesterday said it extended an
agreement with Chiron Corp. to conduct additional research to test an HIV
vaccine.

   The San Diego company did not disclose financial terms of the agreement.
Vistant names Barth president San Diego-based Vistant named David S. Barth
president of the company yesterday, effective immediately.

   Barth was vice president of Austria-based VWR International.

   Vistant is a subsidiary of Cardinal Health Inc. based in Ohio. The company
develops point-of-use technology and supply automation. WORLD AND NATION United
in talks for financing United Airlines is close to lining up special financing
for bankruptcy even as it awaits a crucial government decision on a separate
loan package and a revote on pay cuts by mechanics, sources familiar with the
situation said yesterday.

   In addition, the company said yesterday it would furlough 352 pilots, or
about 4 percent of its pilots, early in 2003 under a plan announced in November
to reduce its flight schedule by 6 percent next year. United, the No. 2 U.S.
airline, is negotiating with various financial institutions to secure
debtor-in-possession financing of about $1.5 billion, the sources said.

   Such loans get priority for repayment over most other forms of credit.

   The talks are ongoing but could be wrapped up by the week's end, the sources
said. Reuters Disney lowers profit forecast Walt Disney Co. lowered its fiscal
2002 earnings to 60 cents a share after ticket sales for its film "Treasure
Planet" were lower than expected, the company said in a statement.

   Also, the company said dim prospects for "Treasure Planet" will cut
first-quarter 2003 earnings by about 1 cent per share from a Nov. 7 earnings
announcement.

   The company lowered fourth-quarter profit to 9 cents a share, from a
previously reported 11 cents. The film was released after a Nov. 7 earnings
statement and before the company's annual report.

   Accounting rules require an adjustment to the Sept. 30 book value of the
film, the company said. Bloomberg News Bristol to keep same dividend rate
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. said it will pay dividends at an annual rate of $1.12 a
share, marking the first time in 30 years the company didn't increase its payout
to investors.

   The 28-cent quarterly dividend will be payable on Feb. 1, to shareholders of
record at the close of business on Jan. 3, the company said. Bloomberg News
Chicago Merc's IPO to hit market The Chicago Mercantile Exchange plans to go
public this week, becoming the first U.S. financial market to sell stock in
itself.

   The CME is expected to launch its initial public offering of stock after the
close of trading tomorrow on the New York Stock Exchange, with the shares making
their trading debut Friday. Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1014 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 3, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-5

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: FLOSSIE WONG-STAAL

BODY:
 Age: 56

   Title: Chief scientific officer and vice president of genomics

   Company: Immusol

   Flossie Wong-Staal is co-founder of Immusol, a privately held biotechnology
company in San Diego.  Immusol was founded in 1992 to develop a gene therapy
treatment for HIV based on Wong-Staal's research at the University of California
San Diego.

   The gene therapy never materialized, but in the process of trying to crack
that complex scientific problem the company hit on a technology called "inverse
genomics." The technology allows scientists to block or inactivate genes of
medical interest.

   By turning off a gene, researchers can determine what role it plays in a
disease -- and then try to develop a therapeutic drug that will inhibit or block
the bad gene.  Last year, Immusol signed a multimillion-dollar deal with Swiss
drug giant Novartis to develop new cancer drugs based on Immusol's inverse
genomics platform.

   Why does your company exist?

   I spent 17 years at the National Institutes of Health in the laboratory that
co-discovered HIV, and in 1990 moved to UCSD to continue my AIDS research.  At
the time, there was no good treatment for AIDS, and I wanted to bridge that gap
between basic research and clinical application -- and that took the form of a
biotechnology company.

   As part of the gene therapy research, we were looking at ribozymes, genetic
material that acts as molecular scissors to cut RNA, and from that we eventually
developed our gene knock-out tool.

   And we still have an HIV program.  Until now all the strategies for HIV have
been to target the virus.  Our rationale is that maybe we should target the
host, the cells or genes that are important for the virus.

   An analogy would be if someone comes and robs your house, you can try to
shoot at the burglar, but the burglar may be a moving target, difficult to hit.
The alternative is to close all the window and doors, so he can't come in.  And
that is what we are trying to do with HIV.

   What about your job keeps you up at night?

   Usually it is the excitement of a good result that keeps me up at night.  I
try to leave the headaches at the office.

   What aspects of your job do you brag about?

   I am very lucky to have really bright and enthusiastic scientists around me.
I enjoy brainstorming with them over new ideas.

   Immusol was created a decade ago as a gene therapy company, but suffered
setbacks and ultimately had to reinvent itself.  How does a company survive a
major setback and restore investor confidence?

   We reinvented ourselves because our collaboration partner, Pfizer, did not
want to pursue gene therapy for AIDS, and we saw that the development of a gene
therapy product would be a long haul.  At the same time, based on our experience
in gene delivery technology, we came up with this great tool.  My advice to
other companies is to be adaptable, and always maximize your assets according to
the needs.

   Tell us something interesting about yourself?

   I was born in China, grew up in Hong Kong and came over to the United States
when I was 18 to go to college.  I remember I was really depressed, crying at
night, and couldn't wait until I finished my four years and got back home.  But
things change.  I feel very blessed in getting satisfaction from my career,
through the whole gamut of research environments.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; (Flossie Wong-Staal)

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2002


                             1015 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      December 2, 2002 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for heart disease has encouraging results

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER jfauber@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Chicago -- The concept of injecting genes directly into the heart to improve
blood flow got a shot in the arm last month with the results of the largest
study to date on whether gene therapy can treat heart disease.

   Using a gene that encourages the formation of new blood vessels in
oxygen-starved areas of the heart, researchers reported significant improvement
in a group of patients with severe angina who were not candidates for
traditional treatments.

   The six-month trial involved 71 patients, 36 who received the gene therapy
plus standard medical treatment and 35 who got the standard medical treatment.

   Researchers injected a gene known as vascular endothelial growth factor at 30
different locations in the heart in the hope that it would result in the
formation of new blood vessels, a process known as angiogenesis. The growth
factor gene was inserted into a deactivated virus, which then was injected into
the patients.

   Six months after receiving the injections, several improvements were seen.

   Compared with the control patients, the gene therapy patients exercised 37%
longer on a treadmill before chest pain occurred. Electrocardiograms done while
they walked on a treadmill also showed that the gene therapy group could walk
28% longer before researchers saw signs of oxygen starvation.

   There also were significant improvements in quality of life and daily
functioning as determined by standard medical questionnaires.

   The findings represent a milestone in the evolution of gene therapy for heart
disease, said the study's lead researcher, Duncan Stewart, chief of cardiology
and internal medicine at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto.

   If confirmed by larger studies, angiogenesis-based gene therapy could provide
a new approach for treating patients with advanced heart disease.

   The results of the trial were presented at the American Heart Association's
Scientific Sessions 2002.

   Over the next few years, the therapy probably will be limited to those 10% to
15% of heart patients who are not candidates for conventional revascularization
treatments such as bypass surgery and angioplasty, said Augustus Grant,
president-elect of the Heart Association and professor of medicine at Duke
University Medical Center.

   Those procedures are done to open larger arteries that have become blocked.
Gene therapy is limited to encouraging the growth of much smaller vessels.

   "It's not a substitute for a direct approach. . . through bypass or
angioplasty," Grant said.

   In addition, at least a couple of concerns were raised by the trial.

   Two of the patients in the gene therapy group died as a result of
complications related to the surgical procedure used to inject the gene into
their hearts. One patient in the control group died of a heart attack.

   Stewart said that in future trials researchers are planning to use a
catheter-based drug delivery system.

   There also was one cancer case among the gene therapy patients, but that was
a recurrence of a pre-existing bladder cancer deemed unrelated to the therapy,
Stewart said.

   The other problem with the study, which was funded by GenVec Inc., a Maryland
biopharmaceutical company, was that there was no way to set up a placebo control
group. Because of the surgical procedure needed to deliver the drug, the
patients knew they were getting the gene therapy.

   Stewart said he was encouraged by the fact that after six months, the
improvements continued.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2002


                             1016 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    December 2, 2002, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: Bond science: Not now, but maybe another day?

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:
Can evil geniuses change their identity with gene therapy?

   Will releasing the passenger ejector seat flip your speeding car rightside up
if it's careening upside down on a frozen lake?

   Is it scientifically possible to make your car invisible?

   The answers are yes, yes and yes -- if your name is James Bond and you are
saving the world from destruction in the new film Die Another Day.

   So what about the real world? A brief USA TODAY investigation examines these
questions.

   First, let's tackle the gene therapy/identity change scenario:

   The Bond screenwriters have the terminology all wrong. What they are talking
about is actually a "whole genome conversion," according to experts who asked
not to be identified for fear of being laughed at by their colleagues.


   That means swapping out all of your own DNA for someone else's -- quite the
technical challenge.

   After a decade of real human gene therapy, scientists have succeeded in
adding only a single gene to the DNA of a small number of patients to correct
the so-called bubble boy disease, in which patients have no immune system. Even
that limited success has its glitches: One patient developed cancer from the
therapy.

   At the moment it may be slightly more realistic to live in the fantasy world
of Austin Powers. That secret agent was cryogenically frozen and thawed after
more than 20 years, and Dr. Evil was cloned, albeit with side effects.

   In reality, baseball legend Ted Williams was frozen last summer, though no
one knows yet how to thaw and resurrect him from the dead. Just last week,
Italian doctors claimed that a cloned human baby would be born in January. Those
results remain to be seen.

   If you are a real-life evil genius in need of a total identity change,
plastic surgery remains the option of choice. No one can dispute its powers to
alter the appearance.

   However, one scientist who does not fear his colleagues' ridicule raises the
frightening prospect that gene therapy is secretly being used to produce new
versions of the same identity.

   "It's obviously being utilized by (Britain's) MI6 and the CIA. Just how many
Bonds, Moneypennys, and Felixes have there been over the years?" asks Simon
Gregory, one of the world's leading geneticists at The Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute in Cambridge, England.

   Indeed.

   A car worth flipping over

   Now, what about the ability of an ejector seat to flip your car right-side up
in an emergency?

   Die Another Day features the Aston Martin V12 Vanquish -- a car to die for.
Aston Martin has built cars for five Bond movies. The 1964 release of Goldfinger
marked the debut of the DB5. Company officials say it had an ejector seat.

   The V12, however, has only an ejector seat button, spokeswoman Cristina
Bruzzi says. The Die scene in which Bond turns his car back over using a
passenger ejector seat was actually a special effect.

   Bruzzi says a real car ejector seat released on a frozen lake might punch a
hole in the ice, which "would not be a good thing."

   She adds that a passenger ejector seat is not an option on the commercially
available V12 Vanquish because "it might be hard on relationships."

   Nevertheless, the Vanquish is a fairly remarkable piece of real-world
technology:

    * The six-liter, 460-horsepower engine can blast you from zero to 60 mph in
five seconds and aid your escape from real villains at a top speed of 190 mph.

    * The Formula 1 six-speed manual transmission has no clutch. You zip through
the gears by flicking paddles on the steering console with your fingers. Just
remember to ease off the accelerator between first and second gear.

    * Price tag: $ 234,260. Not only does Pierce Brosnan as Bond get to drive it
in the movie, the studio gave him one as part of his deal.

   The Bond version has some rather unique options not provided by Aston Martin:


    * Two 9-mm machine guns that rise from the hood on hydraulic lifters.

    * Five heat-seeking missiles that fire from behind a retractable grille.

    * Two shotguns in the grille.

   "These options could give a new meaning to road rage," Bruzzi says.

   But perhaps they will have more meaning for the video game.

    Now you see it . . .

   Finally, what about invisibility?

   The U.S. military is developing new materials for battlefield vehicles that
can change colors to match the environment.

   Though they are not invisible, the vehicles would be difficult to see during
the day.

   Materials scientists also are working to reduce engine heat emissions to make
aircraft and ground vehicles invisible to infrared sensors.

   In April, the Department of Defense financed a nanotechnology research
program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. That program will be
developing microscopic robots that one day, in theory, could make a vehicle
invisible.

   One thing is certain in the realm of real science: The U.S. military is
paying for much of the most exciting research on the planet. But the most
sophisticated technologies will be in use for years before the public ever finds
out.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Jay Maidment, United Artists; PHOTO, B/W, Keith Hamshere,
MGM; Vanishing Vanquish: James Bond's Aston Martin V12 Vanquish has an
invisibility option in Die Another Day; the military seeks that capability. Bad
genes: Bond's current foe, Gustav Graves (Toby Stephens).

LOAD-DATE: December 02, 2002


                             1017 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 1, 2002, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 1364 words

HEADLINE: BOOK    REVIEW CHOOSING NAIA: A FAMILY'S JOURNEY BY MITCHELL ZUCKOFF
BEACON, 301 PP., $25 Joe R. Neel is deputy science editor at National Public
Radio.;
IN THE INNER CIRCLE OF A FAMILY CRISIS

BYLINE: By Joe R. Neel

BODY:

   People with Down syndrome "are often stereotyped as relentlessly happy and
preternaturally sweet - 'Angels on Earth' some people call them," Mitchell
Zuckoff tells us early on in "Choosing Naia." "But they have the same range of
behaviors and emotions as other people. They get angry. They can be stubborn.
They get impatient. They can be disobedient. Hurt their feelings and they cry."

   In other words, they're a lot like you and me, Zuckoff would have us believe.
They deserve respect. Maybe they're a little slower, or more prone to colds, or
need extra help in school. Or perhaps they need help from social services to
live a so-called normal life.

      Without a doubt, people with Down syndrome, particularly those with the
milder forms, truly have made great strides in the past decade. They've
conquered a public who would simply closet them away in institutions. They've
fought for their rights, and they've taken on jobs, often quite successfully.
Some now live to 50 and beyond.

   But getting there still isn't easy. The struggles of childhood and early
adulthood originate in the womb, before birth. One too many chromosomes can
wreak havoc on a fetus.  Down syndrome can be so severe that abortion has been
an almost automatic option for those who find it acceptable. Now that view is
beginning to change.

   "Choosing Naia" is a continuation of a series of stories first published in
the Boston Globe in 2000, a chronicle of the birth and early life of Naia
Fairchild, who turned 4 last month.  Expanding on that series's rich tableau of
life-and-death decisionmaking, painful discrimination, and day-to-day dramas,
reporter Mitchell Zuckoff picks up where he left off and fills us in on many
details not included earlier, showing us how the Fairchild family has matured
and grown.

   The book is simultaneously provocative and inspirational, told in a vivid
style that makes you feel you're watching a truly excellent Discovery Channel
special on disability. The author's prose takes the reader as close as any
camera can get to the hearts and minds of the Fairchilds and their friends and
family.

   We're there when the parents are hit with the wrenching decision of whether
to abort when they learn the fetus has a major heart defect and, probably, Down
syndrome. We are with them every step of the way as they launch an intensive
two-week drive to learn everything they can before it's too late for an
abortion.

   Indeed, we learn so much about Greg and Tierney Fairchild's inner thoughts,
and those of their friends, families, and doctors, that at times one wonders if
this is the author's own autobiography or perhaps a carefully crafted fiction.
Or has the reporter cloned himself and hidden under all the pillows in the
house?

   It turns out that much of the dialogue is reconstructed from people's
recollections, we learn in an author's note at the end of the book.
Journalistically, it would have been better to disclose this to the reader
upfront, in a prologue, but this is a minor quibble. The writer was trying his
best to re-create the dramatic tension in a powerful story, and he didn't want
to give away the surprises too soon.

   In fact, after I read the author's note, I was even more impressed by
Zuckoff's journalism. He confesses that he drove the same routes the Fairchilds
traveled, read some of the same books they read, and watched some of the same
videos they viewed in making their decision. He also tells us he "visited places
they did, at one point even lying down on the examination table in Ultrasound
Room 1 at Saint Francis Hospital." Now that's a journalist's journalist.

   What makes the book significant is how Zuckoff brings into the story a
historical and contemporary context, weaving the great issues of our time -
genetics, racism, abortion - into the tale of one family's private struggle. He
even provokes us with the thought that we may stand at the edge of a new era of
eugenics, able to screen out the imperfect before they're even conceived. We are
also asked to contemplate how gene therapy may someday eliminate or temper many
of the birth defects and disabilities people now struggle with, including Down
syndrome. One of the book's strengths is science, particularly the explanations
of its shortcomings.

   Throughout, Zuckoff is scrupulously fair to supporters and opponents of
abortion rights. Still, you can't walk away from the book without feeling that
"Choosing Naia" has been chosen as a lesson in morals for those who have opted
to have an abortion. Its biggest intellectual dare is to those who support
abortion rights under any and all circumstances. Those who don't like abortion
but feel women should always have a choice will feel similarly challenged.
Outright opponents of abortion rights will feel sanctified.

   As one family friend arguing for abortion reminds the Fairchilds, the fetal
heart defect that was seen on the ultrasound alone could doom the child to a
"brief and horrible life." He goes on to say, "If you add mental retardation to
the equation, why should you put yourselves and this child through such an
ordeal?"

   It's the central question the Fairchilds must confront, and fast. They learn
of a hole in the heart of the fetus just two weeks before a late-abortion
deadline. All the other tests have been perfectly normal. But then the bad news
comes in waves. The most expensive and accurate tests are ordered. It suddenly
matters a great deal how accurate these tests are - even the ones that are
supposedly reliable 97 percent of the time. A small margin of error can mean the
difference between severe retardation or a relatively normal and independent
life.

   The health care system doesn't make it easy at all to sort through these
decisions, even though the Fairchilds are fortunate to have excellent insurance.
Among the biggest problems they face is deciding which experts to believe. It
would be an issue with almost any serious medical condition, but trust takes on
added weight when abortion is an issue.

   For example, the obstetrician presents what seems to the Fairchilds a
positive assessment of the risks of carrying the fetus to term, which persuades
them for a time that they should seriously consider having a child with Down
syndrome. But then they wonder aloud whether the doctor's presence in a Catholic
hospital has any bearing on his medical advice. Zuckoff quotes the doctor as
saying "I do practice at a Catholic hospital, and we hold to the principles that
religion and the hospital espouse." He tells the couple that he doesn't
encourage or practice abortion choices, but insists that "it's our duty to make
people aware of them." One is left wondering whose agenda is active here,
Hippocrates' or the church's.

   At one point, the Fairchilds are so inundated with conflicting information
and intense emotions that "Tierney told Greg she was growing skeptical of almost
everything she heard and everyone who was saying it."

   They're also torn when a family member bluntly asks, "Knowing what you do
about this child, is it fair for you to take state money, resources?" The
Fairchilds had calculated into their decision the public-supported social
services available for people with Down syndrome in Connecticut, where they
lived at the time.

   Shocked by the hurtful remark, Tierney and Greg plow ahead. As Zuckoff
writes, "They could never stop being vigilant, educating the ignorant, battling
the cruel." They already had some experience in this realm. Even in the late
1990s, interracial couples like the Fairchilds never knew what would hit them
next.

   "I'm just so sick of having to deal with discrimination," Greg tells friends
one night. "Why couldn't this have happened to someone who has lived the most
privileged life of all? Then they would have some way of understanding that yes,
people do discriminate against people and it does hurt and it does have impact."

   In the end, life goes on, and discrimination is just one more tribulation to
battle in uncharted seas. One can hope that in the world to come, technology and
tolerance will continue to merge, as they did to create Naia, and help us find
ways to respect and nurture the weaker among us.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, The Fairchild family has matured and grown since the birth of
Naia (right front), now 4.  PHOTO / SUZANNE KREITER

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2002


                             1018 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                     December 1, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1961 words

HEADLINE: Plain people, exotic illnesses

BYLINE: By Susan FitzGerald; Inquirer Staff Writer

DATELINE: MIFFLINBURG, Pa.

BODY:

   Bedtime comes early at the Martin farm, where life is still ordered by the
rhythms of nature and the Old Order Mennonite faith. By dinnertime, with the
cows milked and the animals fed, Amy, 10, and Derick, 12, are struggling to stay
awake.

   By 8 p.m., they are off to bed, soon fast asleep beneath rows of special
four-foot fluorescent lights that bathe them all night in a purplish-blue glow.

   The lights keep them alive.

   Amy and Derick have a rare liver disease that causes a dangerous accumulation
of a substance called bilirubin. It yellows their skin and the whites of their
eyes and could kill them if too much builds up.

   Each night they must sleep under special lights to break down the bilirubin
and clear it from their systems. Without the lights, they could suffer brain
damage and die.

   The disease, Crigler-Najjar syndrome, is extremely rare - there are believed
to be no more than 200 cases worldwide. But among the Mennonite and Amish
communities, it's all too familiar. Three of Amy and Derick's cousins have it;
so do 16 other Amish and Old Order Mennonite children in the area.

   Crigler-Najjar is one of dozens of rare inherited disorders that run through
the plain sects of Pennsylvania. A Lancaster doctor who cares for the families
has counted 38 disorders in Amish children and 23 disorders among Mennonites
that are found far less often in the general population.

   Many of the disorders are metabolic, requiring special diets and medication.
Others involve physical defects - one is marked by dwarfism and extra fingers or
toes; another produces babies with very small heads.

   For the Martins, the deadly liver malady affecting two of their four children
has meant learning about a disease almost no one has heard of - and living every
night with the lights.

   "I don't like it because sometimes it's kind of hot," says Amy, whose panel
of eight long bulbs hangs just above her when she is stretched out in bed. In
winter she cannot wear a nightgown or use covers because the light must shine
directly on her skin.

   Derick keeps a flyswatter next to his bed because of the insects drawn to the
lights.

   "They buzz and hop around," he says. "If I get them, I make sure they're
dead."

   Often, Amy and Derick are awake before dawn, unable to sleep because of the
lights.

   "Amy didn't sleep through the night until she was 7," says Katie Martin,
their mother.

   It's a strange nocturnal routine. But Katie and her husband, Floyd, have
known nothing else since the yellow tinge of Derick's skin at birth turned out
to be far more serious than temporary newborn jaundice.

   "Sometimes people ask if I just see yellow, because my eyes are yellow," says
Amy.





   There's a small wooden sign by the lane to the Clinic for Special Children,
two miles from picturesque Strasburg, in Lancaster County. It's easy to miss
when driving by, past Amish farms with dark-colored clothes drying on lines and
tobacco leaves hanging in the barns.

   The clinic, a handsome building with cedar siding and a slate roof, sits on
an Amish farm. It has a hitching post in the parking lot.

   In this unlikely setting for cutting-edge medical research, Dr. D. Holmes
Morton, 52, and his staff are treating and studying the unusual genetic diseases
that turn up among the insular communities of the plain sects.

   Most of the disorders follow a recessive pattern of inheritance, passed on by
two parents who carry a genetic mutation and are themselves unaffected, but
whose babies have a 1-in-4 chance of having the disease.

   The Amish and Mennonites both sprang from Swiss-German Anabaptists who began
migrating to Pennsylvania in the 1700s. Because most of the 20,000 modern-day
Amish in Lancaster County are descended from a few dozen settlers, the resulting
gene pool is not as diverse as the general population. The sects are relatively
closed societies whose members tend to marry within the group, increasing the
chances that two people with the same gene mutation for a certain disorder will
get together and pass it along.

   At the same time, certain genetic diseases relatively common in the general
population, such as cystic fibrosis, are unknown among the plain sects.





   Miriam Martin carried a plate of peanut butter cookies when she, her
sister-in-law Katie Martin and their children piled out of a van in front of the
clinic.

   Twice a year, they bring their five children with Crigler-Najjar to the
doctor, hiring a driver to take them.

   The Mennonite families avoid modern conveniences such as TV and radio, and
close to home they travel by buggy. Miriam and Katie's families moved from
Lancaster County to rural Union County in the late 1960s.

   "We think the world of Dr. Morton," says Katie Martin. "If it wasn't for his
help, we wouldn't be here."

   For the children, the trips to the doctor's clinic are a chance to see the
outside world and get a day off from studies at their one-room schoolhouse.
Three-year-old Joyce, Miriam's youngest, was especially excited. "Are we going
to see Dr. Morton now?" she kept asking. Eric, 5, suggested bringing the
cookies.

   The families had left home around 6 a.m., stopping first at a medical center
in Lancaster for ultrasounds on Eric and Joyce. Children with Crigler-Najjar
develop gallstones, and Morton is watching for problems. The youngsters' sister,
Dawn, 7, had her gallbladder removed when she was 3; so did cousins Derick and
Amy.

   Their next stop was an Amish farm to deliver a set of lights. Three of that
family's six children have Crigler-Najjar, and they use electricity only in the
children's bedroom, to run the lights. Katie's husband, Floyd, who runs a
150-acre dairy farm, now also has a business constructing bilirubin lights.

   It was the first trip to the clinic since April for the Martins, and nurse
practitioner Donna Robinson made sure to greet them wearing an embroidered
sweatshirt given to her by Miriam. She ushered the children into an examining
room with Amish quilts on the wall, and began to draw their blood to check their
bilirubin levels.

   Bilirubin is produced by the breakdown of worn-out red blood cells. Normally
a liver enzyme clears bilirubin from the body, but with Crigler-Najjar, a
genetic defect causes the enzyme to be missing or scant.

   High levels of bilirubin are toxic to the nervous system, causing strokelike
injuries.

   Ten to 12 hours each day under bilirubin lights, as well as exposure to
sunlight, keep levels down, but a simple cold or ear infection or an injury can
send levels soaring.

   "It's remarkable how well they can be, but how quickly they can die," Morton
said.

   Elevated bilirubin also affects muscle cells, causing fatigue.

   Like many mothers intent on saving their children, Katie and Miriam have
become experts on Crigler-Najjar. Katie published a book, God's Golden Children,
filled with families' stories, including that of a nephew who died at age 3.

   The usual approach to Crigler-Najjar is to treat with lights and pills and
vitamins that cost about $500 a month, then do a liver transplant by about age
5. As children grow, bilirubin lights are less effective.

   A new liver produces the enzyme needed to rid bilirubin, but transplants also
carry risks: The body may reject the new organ, and drugs used to ward off
rejection can be brutal.

   Morton encourages families to stick with the light therapy as long as
possible, hoping for an alternative to transplant.

   "We have more confidence we can keep the kids healthy for an indeterminate
period of time," he says. "I never felt there's a great urgency in rushing them
off to transplant, but you worry about one of those injuries."

   Several years ago, it seemed gene therapy might be used to treat
Crigler-Najjar. Morton hosted a scientific conference, which Miriam and Katie
attended, and they came away with great hope. But the field of gene therapy is
moving slowly.

   "Since the last meeting, I have to say I haven't seen any progress in any
direction to give you encouragement," Morton told Katie and Miriam, who settled
in for a chat while the children played.

   The mothers know their children will ultimately want a normal life; how can
they grow up and marry and still sleep under the lights?

   Morton said it may be time to start considering a transplant for Derick, soon
to be a teen.

   "I think whenever he is ready and says 'I'm sick of this,' " Katie said. "I
think Amy will want it before Derick. She's sick of all these pills. She's sick
of all these lights. She wants to wear nighties. She wants a blanket."





   Holmes Morton, a Harvard-trained pediatrician, came by chance to caring for
those whom the Amish and Mennonites refer to as "special children." He was doing
a fellowship in biochemical genetics at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia in
1988 when the lab received a urine sample from a child with a rare metabolic
disease called glutaric aciduria, which can cause sudden brain damage and death.

   Morton drove to Lancaster to see the family members, who were Amish, and they
told him of other children with the disease.

   Morton spent the summer traveling from farm to farm, meeting with families.
He became convinced of the need for treatment for children with disorders
unfamiliar to general practitioners. Early diagnosis and treatment could prevent
disabilities and even death.

   The Clinic for Special Children was built in 1990, its frame raised in a day,
in the style of an Amish barn-raising. Morton's wife, Caroline, oversees the
business, which operates as a nonprofit foundation.

   Morton collaborates with scientists worldwide, including those at the
National Human Genome Research Institute in Bethesda, Md. His work with the
families here has helped lead to four gene discoveries.

   Morton said he has also learned a lesson from the families who come to him.

   "They have a very accepting and different attitude about what it means to
have a child with a genetic disease," he said. "Even kids with a lethal disease
are seen to have a special purpose in this society."





   The light is falling fast at the Martin farm, nestled in the Buffalo Valley
of Union County.

   Katie had received a phone call from Morton's clinic in the morning - the
children's bilirubin levels were fine.

   Derick pulls on his jacket and knit cap and heads for the barn to feed the
cows and help with the 5 p.m. milking. It's Amy's job to feed the horse, two
ponies and 11 cats in the barn.

   Soon, the nighttime routine will begin again. Amy uses a timer to turn on her
lights so that she can relish the darkness as she falls asleep. Derick switches
on his lights when he climbs into bed.

   "In the morning when they get up, they're bleached," Katie says, a sign their
bilirubin levels are lower. "They look like they were bleached - they're a lot
brighter."

   Down the road, Miriam Martin is closing out the day, too.

   Joyce is first to bed, her body illuminated by the lights above her crib.
Eric and Dawn sleep in the room with her, each with their own lights. A
purple-blue haze engulfs the room.

   "As much as they hate the lights, I tell them, 'It keeps you alive,' " Miriam
says.

   When pregnant with Joyce, Miriam and her husband, John, were certain their
baby would be healthy. They already had two with Crigler-Najjar and thought they
had more than met the 1-in-4 odds of having an afflicted child.

   "It was really hard when we had Joyce and had the third," Miriam says. "I
said it couldn't be. God made a mistake. But people told me, 'God doesn't make
mistakes.' And I know now that it's true."

   Miriam's voice grows softer, careful not to wake Joyce.

   "I say, 'God, take care of my children and see us through another day.' "

   Contact Susan FitzGerald at 215-854-2780 or sfitzgerald@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2002


                             1019 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            December 1, 2002 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1923 words

HEADLINE: Nothing Wrong With A Little Frankenstein

BYLINE: Chris Mooney

BODY:

   If only Victor Frankenstein had some media savvy, he might have been J. Craig
Venter. Rather than living in dread of his appalling creature, he could have
assembled a panel of bioethicists and theologians to bless it, applied for a
Swiss government grant to research it, and hired an investment bank to explore
an initial public offering -- FrankenCell Inc. -- to exploit the results of his
research.

   But the fictional Frankenstein created by novelist Mary Shelley went on to a
grimmer fate, and greater fame. And Craig Venter is, well, Craig Venter. The
first researcher to fully sequence a bacterium in 1995 and president of Celera
Genomics in 2000 when it raced the National Institutes of Health to decode the
human genome, Venter has exposed nature's secrets with Promethean gusto -- and
more than a little arrogance.

   His latest project, the artificial creation of a new form of bacteria in
order to determine the "minimal genome" required for sustaining life, strays
into Mary Shelley's territory like never before. The idea is to take the
simplest known bacteria, a urinary tract pest know as M. genitalium, remove all
of its 517 genes, and then reinsert a pared-down and artificially constructed
string of DNA that includes just enough genetic material to get the cell going
again. If it works, Venter and company will be able to claim that they know just
how many genes are the minimal number needed to make the most basic form of life
-- because they've actually done it. Venter just received $ 3 million from the
Energy Department to pursue the idea, setting off a new round of public
attention to a project his researchers once dubbed "Frankencell."

   But in reality, the Frankenstein model of bioethics, based on the novel
published in 1818, is a misleading framework for thinking about Venter's goal of
"creating life." The question should be whether his work will help us understand
and protect life. The Frankenstein anxiety only obscures the difference between
the fictional scientist who secretly created, then abandoned, his living
creature, and who shirked responsibility for it even after it had killed a
person, and Venter, who -- at least so far -- has proceeded in a measured
manner.

   In fact, Venter, acutely aware of the comparison to Frankenstein, appears to
have done his best to defuse it. In 1998, when Venter saw that his "minimal
genome" inquiry was heading toward an act of creation, he publicly called for
and preemptively assembled an ethical review before delivering anything new in a
petri dish.

   That is the appropriate way forward, for while scientists must take into
account the ethical ramifications of their work, they can't be held hostage to
an ethical code that prohibits the pursuit of knowledge. Surely, there's little
reason to suspect Venter will end up suffering any of the angst that plagued his
fictional forebear, Dr. Frankenstein, who in Shelley's novel warns, "Learn . . .
by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge, and how much
happier that man who believes his native town to be the world, than he who
aspires to become greater than his nature will allow."

   Still, it's no surprise that Venter's activities have prompted allegations
that he's a mad scientist playing God. These worries are not allayed by the
thought that Venter has said he will make sure his living organism lacks the
specific genes it needs to infect people or to live outside the laboratory. If
indeed it is acceptable for Venter to create life, does that give him the right
to destroy it too? Does this only confirm his legendary hubris?

   In some ways Venter's effort to manufacture life, to be overseen by the Nobel
Prize-winning geneticist Hamilton Smith, was implied from the very beginnings of
the biotechnological manipulation of DNA. The past two decades of genetically
engineering a few genes at a time for insertion in various organisms -- Bt corn,
transgenic salmon -- always carried the seeds of an attempt to eventually swap
all the genes of an organism at once, or artificially synthesize them.

   Still, now that we've actually arrived at this point, where Venter could
create life in a petri dish, there's a lot of gingerness. "This has major
symbolic significance," Dartmouth bioethicist Ronald Green explained when I
asked him about Venter's work. "In theology there has been a tendency to plug
God into whatever science cannot explain, in this case the very origins of life.
But if scientists can actually create life, then at least in scientific terms,
there's pretty much not anything else left for God to do."

   Most people have faith in God, however. They don't trust scientists. That can
be seen in the popular press coverage of Venter -- a 1999 Business Week article
about his work was titled "Playing God in the Lab" -- and in the portrayal of
scientists in popular culture. The latest James Bond film "Die Another Day," for
example, features bad guys who practice a sinister form of gene therapy. There's
also "Gattaca," portraying a futuristic world where genetic inheritance
determines a person's place in society; "Jurassic Park," with its moralism about
arrogant scientists who lose control of their creations; and countless other
films bearing messages similar to Shelley's horror story, "Frankenstein." Sure
enough, in his 1998 book "Frankenstein's Footsteps: Science, Genetics, and
Popular Culture," University College of London science and technology scholar
Jon Turney calls Frankenstein "the governing myth of modern biology" and a
narrative that's based on "science as a substitute for God" in that most
mysterious and profound of acts, the creation of life.

   These horror stories have created trepidation about new steps in science, but
so far they remain in the stuff of fiction, not journalism. The panel of
ethicists convened by Venter directly repudiated Frankenstein-inspired playing
God concerns in a paper published in Science magazine in 1999, arguing that the
minimal genome research had both benefits and risks but that there was nothing
to make it fundamentally out of bounds. Moreover, they wrote that "too often,
concern about playing God has become a way of forestalling rather than fostering
discussion about morally responsible manipulation of life."

   It's not even clear that the inevitable take-home conclusion from a reading
of "Frankenstein," at least for a modern sensibility, is that every single
possible form of scientific meddling into questions involving life is
proscribed. After all, can't we denounce Victor Frankenstein for failing to
grasp the gravity of what he has done, and for failing to take responsibility
for his creation, without necessarily branding his research as "playing God"?

   What does playing God mean? Mankind has been playing God for ages. Isn't
saving someone's life playing God, too? Don't some allegedly "unnatural" acts
that have been widely accepted by our society, such as childhood vaccinations or
birth control, affect the decision of who shall live and who shall die? Would we
have it any other way?

   Human beings also have been involved in the creation of entirely new forms of
life in the past, through the breeding of domesticated animals over the
centuries. Charles Darwin himself began "On the Origin of Species" with a
discussion of the impressive abilities of pigeon breeders; he termed their
activities "Artificial Selection."

   The playing God argument is even weaker when it comes to instances in which
biotechnology allows us to create or modify life in a way that will undo or
correct previous human transgressions, particularly environmental ones. Wired
magazine, for example, reported recently about a plan to use biotechnology to
undo the ecological damage wrought in Australia by the introduced European carp.
The strategy is to genetically modify a variety of carp to sire only male
offspring, and then release them into waterways where they will presumably
reproduce until there are no remaining females -- thus killing off the invader
species. Surely this approach has a strong element of playing God to it, at
least as much as does the genetic modification of so-called "Frankenfoods." And
yet humans introduced the invasive carp to Australia in the first place, so how
can it possibly be wrong to try to counter this damaging action?

   Consider yet another telling example, also from Australia. Scientists at the
Australian Museum in Sydney are currently embarked upon a project to clone the
extinct Tasmanian tiger, or thylacine, from the DNA of a well-preserved
specimen. The thylacine, a kind of marsupial wolf, was indisputably killed off
by humans. In the 19th century, the Tasmanian government offered bounties for
dead animals because they were notorious hunters of sheep. An introduced
species, dogs, narrowed the thylacine's habitat and provided competition. The
last thylacine known to exist died in captivity in 1936.

   Now, surely it's a good thing to try and bring back these fascinating animals
-- predatory marsupials, of all things -- if we can. Indeed, to hear Australian
Museum director Michael Archer describe the justification for the cloning
project, as he did to me recently by e-mail, is to see why once again, "don't
play God" simply won't fly. "In the end NOT to do these things," wrote Archer,
"if technology allows us to do them, is a breach of what I regard to be our
moral obligation, particularly if WE are the reason for the problems we are now
trying to fix."

   We need to get beyond fiction-based arguments against research into pressing
biological issues. The argument against "playing God" is frequently an
anti-intellectual mantra used to stifle debate about new technologies, the
epitome of fear-mongering. The entire Frankenstein approach simply fails to help
us think clearly about the attempt to create a microorganism with a minimal
genome -- and about other issues on the biotechnological vanguard.

   Venter's research has obvious benefits: It could allow us to create minimal
organisms that excel at breaking down environmental toxins, producing insulin,
or taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and thus battle the greenhouse
effect. Learning what actually makes life happen on the bacterial level also
could help us better combat microbes such as pneumonia on their own terms,
invading their bodies before they invade ours and hobbling the most virulent
strains through genetic tinkering -- what University of Pennsylvania bioethicist
Arthur Caplan, who headed up Venter's bioethics panel, terms "the ultimate
revenge."

   But Venter's project has risks. The knowledge he's seeking to obtain could
also allow terrorists to create minimal bacteria with extremely virulent
properties. Venter and Smith have volunteered to self-regulate and suggested
they will hold back publishing all the details of their research, but we may
need more stringent rules to ensure that other scientists don't create dangerous
life forms. Once we leave behind the one-size-fits-all don't-play-God approach
to biotechnology, we can easily have that regulatory discussion, and evaluate a
new technology like Venter's on a cost-benefit basis. Granted, that discussion
may be a bit less scintillating than the "debate" that you get from "Jurassic
Park." But that's a good thing. In fact -- to use the No. 2 fear-mongering
analogy in the life sciences after "Frankenstein" -- we should welcome the
arrival of that "Brave New World" of bioethics. It's been long overdue.

    </body> Chris Mooney, who lives in Washington, writes frequently about
science, bioethics and technology.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2002


                             1020 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 29, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 862 words

BODY:

   At the approach of winter, while some infinitesimal percentage of the sports
addled public awaits this weekend's results of the World Cup downhill and
super-G races from Lake Louise, Alberta, I might tune in just to see if anyone
out there skis like Myron Cope.

    Not likely, of course, but were I to discover anything close to the Cope
Method, I'm sure I'd never forget it. If not, it would still prove irrevocably
that I have absolutely positively nothing to do.

    I first heard the full description of Myron's skiing "career" this week,
coming to me right from the Yoi!ster's mouth.

    "This was back in the very early ' 60s," Myron said. "It was early in my
freelance [magazine writing ] career, and skiing, which had been like golf, a
sport only for the rich, in recent years had become popular. Middle-class people
were goin' skiing. I wanted no part of it because I was working for myself and,
if I broke a leg, nobody was going to hand me a salary. But I decided one day I
could undertake a one-day adventure into skiing and maybe find something
writeable that I could sell."

    So there's your detailed foreshadowing, that formidable trait of great
writers, a class in which Cope remains to this day despite the fact that most of
his frothing Steelers audience remains oblivious to it.

    But here's the backshadowing of the foreshadowing: Cope was reminded of the
skiing story the other night while driving the snowswept Parkway East to a book
signing in Monroeville. His autobiographical "Double Yoi!" -- new in stores this
fall -- is the No. 1 selling so-called local book in the country, according to a
Walden's representative who chatted up the author at a previous signing.

    "Double Yoi!" -- that rarity among sports books in that it's worth opening
-- succeeds immensely because it is more about the singular Cope than about
sports, not that it wouldn't satisfy the intense sports fan availing him or
herself to Myron's signature mix of insight and good-natured crankiness.

    An eloquent collection of anecdotes and rants, Cope's book couldn't possibly
contain every story worth telling from a half century in sports, and this skiing
misadventure is among those omitted.

    So where were we? Oh yeah, Myron resolves to go skiing. His motives are
completely disassociated to the sensation of whooshing down a mountainside while
the crisp winter air clears his lungs, and certainly not in touch with the
athletic object of commanding his body's gyroscope to tame the brilliant but
treacherous white slopes.

    No, he was just trying to make a buck, generally wanting no more a slice of
winter than the thrill of extracting a freelance check from an ice encrusted
mailbox.

    "For my ski outfit, I went to Gimbel's," Myron said. "I figured, 'I'm not
getting my expenses paid, so I'm not going to any fancy outfitter.' The
middle-aged salesman at Gimbel's found only one pair of ski pants to fit me.
They were the most awful shade of green. Traffic light green. And they fit so
the waistband was well under my stomach. The salesman tells me that's the way
they wear them. This guy had an established pool-room pallor and looked like
he'd never been near a ski slope in his life."

    On the drive to Seven Springs, Myron plotted his day. He would rent
equipment, arrange for some instruction, and try to avoid the agony of defeat.
He would wind up 2 for 3.

    "A teenager in the rental shop outfitted me with boots and skis and I can
tell he's snickering at my pants," he said. "When he finishes, I hoist the skis
over my shoulder like a veteran skier, and on the way out, the top of the door
frame catches my skis and sends me right back into the shop in a clatter.

    "I asked for an instructor and was assigned to a fellow with a real
Scandinavian accent, Ulf or Lars was his name. He takes me to the top of this
beginners' slope and gives me the routine, all the tips, and sends me down this
slope, see?"

    Yeah, I see. And this is where Myron gave me that, "anyway, to make a long
story short" line, which I don't want from Myron. I want him to make a long
story its actual size.

    "So what happens is, when I'm about halfway down the slope, the points of my
skis converge and my legs spread apart to the maximum, and I'm stuck in the snow
like that. What came immediately to mind was the scenes from those B movies in
which the great white hunter or doctor or whatever goes on some business to
Africa. Sometimes the local tribe would put him in a pot of oil, but the other
treatment would be to bend two trees together and tie the victim upside down
between them, then take a machete to the rope and rip the guy apart at his
[crotch].

    "That's the kind of position I was in."

    Uh-huh. Not the kind of thing that ever happened to, say, Alberto Tomba.

    "I started hollering for this damn Ulf Lars; he's at the top of the slope
talking to these two beautiful women. Finally, he realizes I'm hollering bloody
murder. He comes down and puts my legs back together."

    Myron got $750 from Sports Illustrated for that one, a nice enough piece of
change in that day to cover most indignities. Probably not traffic-green pants,
but most indignities.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2002


                             1021 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 28, 2002 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 038

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic shares tumble; Poor Replagal results help rival Genzyme

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shares plunged 33 percent yesterday after the
company reported disappointing results from a clinical test of its Fabry's
disease drug.

   Meanwhile, shares of rival Genzyme Corp. rose nearly 12 percent, ending the
day at $ 33.73. Genzyme is racing to beat Transkaryotic to market with a
competing Fabry's treatment.

   Transkaryotic shares fell $ 4.70 to close at $ 9.56.

   One of the Cambridge rivals stands to gain "orphan drug" status for its
Fabry's medicine if it is first to win regulatory approval to sell the treatment
for the rare, inherited metabolic disorder. An orphan drug receives seven years
of exclusive U.S. marketing rights.

   Yesterday, Transkaryotic reported that an 80-patient study found its drug
produced no difference in kidney functions between patients who got it and those
who received a placebo.

   The company also said that the federal Food and Drug Administration told it
that it hasn't sufficiently proven the effectiveness of its Fabry's drug, called
Replagal, to win approval. In a letter, the FDA said it would discuss Replagal's
test data at an advisory panel meeting in January, Transkaryotic said.

   Transkaryotic officials said they remain confident that Replagal, sold in
other countries, can win FDA approval.

   "Although the results of the current clinical study are disappointing, we
continue to believe Replagal is saving lives, and we believe that longer-term
data from these patients will confirm Replagal's efficacy," said Richard F.
Selden, Transkaryotic's president, in a statement.

   The study released yesterday doesn't mean that Transkaryotic's drug won't
work, said Jennifer Chao, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets in New York.

   "What we have is an absence of positive data," she said.

   Chao also said that despite Genzyme's stock market gain, yesterday's news
doesn't mean it is more likely to win FDA approval for its Fabry's drug,
Fabrazyme.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2002


                             1022 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 28, 2002 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 038

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic shares tumble; Poor Replagal results help rival Genzyme

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shares plunged 33 percent yesterday after the
company reported disappointing results from a clinical test of its Fabry's
disease drug.

   Meanwhile, shares of rival Genzyme Corp. rose nearly 12 percent, ending the
day at $ 33.73. Genzyme is racing to beat Transkaryotic to market with a
competing Fabry's treatment.

   Transkaryotic shares fell $ 4.70 to close at $ 9.56.

   One of the Cambridge rivals stands to gain "orphan drug" status for its
Fabry's medicine if it is first to win regulatory approval to sell the treatment
for the rare, inherited metabolic disorder. An orphan drug receives seven years
of exclusive U.S. marketing rights.

   Yesterday, Transkaryotic reported that an 80-patient study found its drug
produced no difference in kidney functions between patients who got it and those
who received a placebo.

   The company also said that the federal Food and Drug Administration told it
that it hasn't sufficiently proven the effectiveness of its Fabry's drug, called
Replagal, to win approval. In a letter, the FDA said it would discuss Replagal's
test data at an advisory panel meeting in January, Transkaryotic said.

   Transkaryotic officials said they remain confident that Replagal, sold in
other countries, can win FDA approval.

   "Although the results of the current clinical study are disappointing, we
continue to believe Replagal is saving lives, and we believe that longer-term
data from these patients will confirm Replagal's efficacy," said Richard F.
Selden, Transkaryotic's president, in a statement.

   The study released yesterday doesn't mean that Transkaryotic's drug won't
work, said Jennifer Chao, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets in New York.

   "What we have is an absence of positive data," she said.

   Chao also said that despite Genzyme's stock market gain, yesterday's news
doesn't mean it is more likely to win FDA approval for its Fabry's drug,
Fabrazyme.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2002


                             1023 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 28, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: SHARES OF TKT FALL 33% REPLAGAL FINDINGS A SETBACK IN BID FOR FDA
APPROVAL

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. tumbled 33 percent yesterday after the
Cambridge firm said a study failed to show its drug, Replagal, improves kidney
function in patients with a rare inherited condition known as Fabry disease.

   The news is the latest disappointment in a two-year bid to win approval for
the drug.  Transkaryotic Therapies, or TKT, and its crosstown rival Genzyme
Corp. are vying to be the first provider of a drug to treat the rare disease.

       Both drugs will be reviewed in January by a panel of experts, who will
recommend to the Food and Drug Administration whether the drugs should be
approved. But yesterday's finding cast doubt on the likelihood that the panel
will recommend that TKT's drug be approved.

   "I think you have to step back and ask whether these drugs work at all," said
William Tanner, a biotechnology analyst with Leerink Swann & Co. in Boston. "If
you keep doing more clinical trials and you keep coming up with data that is not
so promising, you have to question the likelihood of these drugs getting
approved at all."

   Although some investors clearly believe that TKT's setback is Genzyme's gain,
Tanner said a setback for one drug could just as easily be viewed as a setback
for the other. TKT stock closed yesterday at $9.56, down $4.70, while Genzyme
rose $3.59, to $33.73.

   TKT's Replagal and Genzyme's Fabrazyme are both designed to replace an enzyme
missing in Fabry patients.  Both firms submitted their applications in June
2000.

   Under FDA rules guiding the approval of drugs to treat rare diseases, the
first company to win approval for a new treatment for a disease such as Fabry,
which affects only 5,000 people worldwide, wins seven years of exclusivity. But
the FDA has never before faced a situation in which two companies have submitted
dueling applications within weeks of each other.

   Speculation about which drug will emerge the winner has been fierce with some
analysts favoring approval of one drug over another and others predicting that
regulators will find a way to approve both. But recent setbacks in TKT's
applications have spurred a growing number of investors to question whether
either drug will win.

   "I think Genzyme has painted itself into a corner by saying how similar
Fabrazyme is to Replagal," Tanner said. "If Replagal doesn't work, why should
you believe Fabrazyme works?"

   TKT yesterday said its study found no difference between Replagal and a
placebo in patients with Fabry disease after six months of treatment. Patients
with the inherited disorder lack an enzyme to process a certain type of fat, and
as it builds up in their bodies, it causes severe pain and clogs major organs,
destroying the heart and kidneys.

   The findings are the second recent setback to Transkaryotic's application.
Calling a portion of TKT's data "uninterpretable," regulators last month said
the medication's effects on pain would not support approval of the drug.

   TKT said it is conducting an additional analysis of the latest data,
indicating that longer studies might show more benefit, compared with the
six-month results released yesterday.

   Replagal, which is Transkaryotic's only marketed product, is already approved
in 25 countries. The US market could reach an estimated $500 million, however,
making the drug's approval in the United States critical to TKT's success.

   With other marketed products, Genzyme is dependent on Fabrazyme's success in
the United States. Fabrazyme is also available in Europe. The two medicines are
among the most expensive in the world, with an annual cost of $165,000.

   "We continue to believe Replagal is saving lives," said Richard Selden, TKT's
chief executive.

   The FDA plans to convene the panel of experts to review the research on
Fabrazyme on Jan. 13 and then on Replagal on Jan. 14.

   "It's still going to end up in the hands of panel members," said Jennifer
Chao, a biotech analyst with RBC Capital Markets in New York. "So the question
is, how much has really changed?"

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2002


                             1024 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           November 28, 2002 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 133 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF / PHARMACEUTICALS;
Transkaryotic Kidney Drug Fails in Test

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said a study showed its Replagal medicine
doesn't improve kidney function in patients with a rare metabolic condition.
Transkaryotic shares tumbled as much as 41%.

   The biotechnology company's test found no difference between Replagal and a
placebo in patients with the hereditary disorder called Fabry disease. The
condition, which destroys major organs and causes severe pain, affects about
5,000 people worldwide.

   The findings are a second setback in Transkaryotic's race against Genzyme
Corp. to win the first U.S. approval for a Fabry drug. Transkaryotic shares
tumbled 62% on Oct. 3, when regulators said a test of Replagal's effects on pain
wasn't enough to merit clearance.

   Transkaryotic shares fell $4.66 to $9.60 on Nasdaq after falling to a record
low of $8.41.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2002


                             1025 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: Drug Concern's Shares Fall After a Disappointing Trial

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies lost a third of their value yesterday after
the company reported that its drug for Fabry disease, a rare inherited disorder,
had not improved kidney function in a clinical trial.

        The failure increases the chances that a rival, the Genzyme Corporation,
will win the battle to obtain the first approval for a drug to treat Fabry
disease, analysts said. Under a law intended to encourage the development of
drugs for rare diseases, the company that wins the first approval could have the
market to itself for seven years.

    The setback is the second in two months for Transkaryotic, a biotechnology
company in Cambridge, Mass., that is usually called TKT. Its stock fell 62
percent on Oct. 3 after it said the Food and Drug Administration would not
accept data that tried to show the Fabry drug had reduced pain in patients.

   Unable to use the pain data, the company said it was hoping for approval
based on data showing that the drug, Replagal, improves kidney function. But the
new trial, with 80 patients, found no statistically significant difference in
kidney function after six months between patients who received the drug and
those on a placebo.

   The company said yesterday that it thought Replagal would improve kidney
function after more than six months. "Although the results of the current
clinical trial are disappointing, we continue to believe Replagal is saving
lives," the chief executive, Richard F. Selden, said.

   A spokeswoman for TKT, Justine E. Koenigsberg, said the company believed it
could win approval in the first half of next year based on other data. Although
the drug agency has told the company that its medication is not ready for
approval, the drug will be discussed by an advisory panel in mid-January.

   Still, Genzyme, whose drug will also be on the panel's agenda, now appears to
be in the lead. "Clearly we haven't heard about any major issues that the F.D.A.
has had with Genzyme's application," said Ronald Renaud, the biotechnology
analyst at Bear, Stearns & Company.

   Fabry disease affects only about 5,000 people in the world. Still, with the
drugs expected to sell for around $165,000 a patient a year, annual sales could
reach several hundred million dollars. That makes it particularly important to
TKT, which has no other drugs on the market. Shares of TKT fell $4.70, to $9.56,
while Genzyme General rose $3.59, or 12 percent, to $33.73.

   Both Replagal and Genzyme's drug, Fabrazyme, consist of an enzyme that is
lacked by patients with Fabry disease. Without the enzyme, a particular lipid
builds up, causing pain and organ problems. Many people with the disease die by
age 50.

   The companies have taken different approaches in trials. Genzyme showed that
its drug decreased the buildup of the particular lipid. If the lipid levels are
lower, the patients should presumably do better.

   TKT tried to show that patients actually had less pain or better heart and
kidney function. Data showing such a direct benefit is often preferred by
regulators. But with so few patients available for clinical trials, it has
seemed difficult for TKT to show this, Mr. Renaud said.

   Both companies first applied for approval in 2000. Patients have been growing
frustrated that at least one drug has not been approved yet, particularly since
both were approved in Europe more than a year ago.

   "The amount of time that this is taking is a major concern for us and
incredibly discouraging," said Jack Johnson, a Fabry sufferer who heads the
Fabry Support and Information Group. He said at least 100 Americans have died of
the disease since late 2000, when patients first thought the drugs might be
approved.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2002


                             1026 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   Allergy Drug Is Approved For Sale Over the Counter
Regulators approved the nation's top-selling allergy drug, Claritin, as an
over-the-counter medicine, a decision that will bring substantial savings for
the uninsured. Schering-Plough, the maker of Claritin, said that the
nonprescription drug would be available in mid-December.

        With prescription costs rising, insurers are pressing regulators to make
more brand name drugs available over the counter. WellPoint, the insurer that
initiated the reappraisal of Claritin, has also asked regulators to make
Clarinex, Schering-Plough's newest allergy drug, available over the counter.
Page A1.


   Another Setback for Biotech Drug
Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies lost a third of their value after the company
reported that its drug for Fabry disease, a rare inherited disorder, had not
improved kidney function in a clinical trial. The failure increases the chances
that the Genzyme Corporation will win the battle to obtain the first approval
for a drug to treat Fabry disease.  C2.

U.S. Clears Way for Mexican Trucks
President Bush has modified a 20-year-old moratorium, clearing the way for
Mexican trucks to travel throughout the United States within the next few weeks.
A26.

Bush Will Ease Rules on Forest Use
The Bush administration proposed to give managers of the 155 national forests
more discretion to approve logging and commercial activities.  A1.

A judge has rejected administration efforts to protect as confidential documents
from Vice President Dick Cheney's energy panel.  A30.

Russia Plans Pipeline to Arctic Port
After a year of talk about how to make large-scale oil exports to the United
States profitable, the Russian oil industry said it would build a 1,550-mile
pipeline to a new oil terminal at Murmansk.  World Business, Section W.

EchoStar Revises Offer for Hughes
EchoStar Communications revised its plan to buy Hughes Electronics in an effort
to persuade regulators to reverse a decision blocking the proposed merger.  C10.


Stocks Rise on Economic Reports
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 255.26 points, at 8,931.68. The
Nasdaq rose 43.51 points, to 1,487.94. The Standard & Poor's 500 advanced 25.56
points, to 938.87.  C4.

Consumer confidence rebounded in November from a nine-year low, while orders for
durable goods rose in October for the first time since July and last week's
initial jobless claims fell to their lowest level in 21 months.  C2.

British Bank Predicts Loss for Year
Reeling from an ill-starred push into corporate lending that left it saddled
with bad loans, Abbey National, Britain's second-largest mortgage bank, said
that it expected to lose money for the fiscal year. Under its former chief
executive, Ian Harley, left, Abbey National moved away from its roots as a
retail bank and began to make more and more risky loans to corporations.  World
Business, Section W.

Secretary Fails to Show Up in Court
The former personal assistant to a top American investment banker failed to
appear at a scheduled court hearing to answer charges of embezzling $5 million
from her boss.  C4.

Different Shades of Unemployment
As unemployment fell through the 1990's, the number of Americans unemployed fell
by five million workers. Millions of people who lost their jobs found new ones
more quickly and far fewer workers had to settle for part-time positions. But
the labor market has now changed. Jeff Madrick: Economic Scene.  C2.

U.S. Financial Markets Are Closed
United States government offices, banks and financial markets are closed today
in observance of Thanksgiving. Foreign markets are open. Most United States
markets will reopen tomorrow, but stock markets will close at 1 p.m. and the
bond markets will close at 2 p.m.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 8,931.68 up 255.26Nasdaq
composite -- 1,487.94 up 43.5110-yr. Treasury yield -- 4.26% up 0.19The euro --
$0.9902 down 0.0025The dollar -- 122.35 yen up 0.67 Graph shows Transkaryotic
Therapies' share price since last Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2002


                             1027 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    November 27, 2002 Wednesday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO - EDITORIALS; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: Not without a fight;
Athersys' defection would be a blow to Northeast Ohio, and to the campaign to
make a go of biotechnology here

BYLINE: Plain Dealer

BODY:

   Greater Cleveland's most promising biotech company is in play.

   Athersys Inc., the firm whose gene therapy research represents the potential
foundation of a burgeoning life-sciences industry here, is being wooed by
suitors in Phoenix and at North Carolina's famed Research Triangle.

   If biotech is to have a future here, state and city officials must assemble a
competitive package to persuade Athersys to stay. Anything less would send a
message that Greater Cleveland can't compete in attracting and retaining
cutting-edge technology companies that will be so essential to the 21st-century
economy.

   That Athersys landed in Cleveland in the first place was something of an
accident. Gil Van Bokkelen came here in 1994 to work on the world's first
artificial chromosome with his friend and mentor, geneticist Huntington Willard,
who at the time was the new research chief at University Hospitals. Van
Bokkelen's goal was to launch a biopharmaceutical firm that would someday rival
industry giants like Merck or Pfizer.

   Eight years later, Athersys has attracted $100 million in capital and created
125 good-paying jobs. The company has signed an option to build a world
headquarters at Chagrin Highlands and has been touted frequently by Gov. Bob
Taft and Mayor Jane Campbell as a prime example of the kind of business central
to the region and state's economic future.

   But despite Athersys' great promise, the company still spends more money than
it makes. For that reason, its future is tied to the need for more investors and
generous government incentives.

   Van Bokkelen has stated repeatedly that his goal is to keep Athersys here.
But Willard's recent departure from UH for a more prestigious position at Duke
University has prompted a campaign to woo Athersys to the Research Triangle.
Athersys executives also visited Phoenix recently to meet with civic and
political leaders who would like the company to relocate there.

   All evidence suggests that Van Bokkelen is being honest in insisting that his
first choice is to keep the company in Cleveland. But unless the city and state
offer a compelling incentive package, doing what is best for his company may
force him to accept a better offer.

   How Taft and Campbell respond to this challenge will speak volumes about
their commitment to biotech's becoming an integral part of the region's economy.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2002


                             1028 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     November 26, 2002 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Other regions wooing Cleveland biotech firm;
City, state officials will draft proposal to keep Athersys Cleveland aims to
keep affections of Athersys Biotech company wooed by suitors in warmer climes

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   The city of Cleveland and the state will try to devise a package persuasive
enough to keep biotech company Athersys Inc. around despite wooing from other
parts of the country.

   "We will be working together to figure out the best way to get these guys to
stay," Tim Mueller, the city development officer, said yesterday. "I'm not even
saying that it's at the stage that we should or could. We have to present them
with something."

   Mayor Jane Campbell has not nailed down details with Gov. Bob Taft, however,
Mueller said.

   Athersys, the developer of gene therapies, is critical to Cleveland's budding
bioscience hopes. Some fear that losing the company would be the biggest blot on
the city's bleak track record. The company's local peers have mostly closed or
left town, but Athersys has still been around, still raising money despite grim
times for the industry nationally.

   It landed $16 million in May. In total, it has raised more than $100 million,
and it has scored lucrative partnerships with industry giants, including
Bristol-Myers Squibb.

   But other cities are aggressively luring the company to move from its
headquarters on Carnegie Avenue.

   Several Athersys executives flew to Phoenix a few months ago to meet with the
mayor, local chief executives and other civic leaders, said Len Becker, a vice
president with the Phoenix Chamber of Commerce.

   Athersys Chairman Gil Van Bokkelen and his team said, "This is what we do.
This is what it will take" to get us, Becker recalled. A package would include
relocation costs and a new facility.

   Athersys has a tie to that area. It hired a Phoenix-based lobbyist with
former vice president Dan Quayle's lobbying firm, Quayle & Associates. Craig
Whitney is registered to promote Athersys in discussions about cloning and stem
cell issues on Capitol Hill and at the White House.

   Separately, the Chamber of Commerce in Durham, N.C., has sent Athersys
information about relocating. "We're a good fit for a company like Athersys,"
said Edward Conner, a vice president with the organization. For now, "no
decision has been made," he said. "We do not have a timetable."

   Huntington Willard, president of University Hospitals Research Institute and
critical to Athersys' development in Cleveland, recently announced he would be
going to Duke University in Durham.

   Athersys spokesman Kevin Mendelsohn said the company has not signed any
corporate relocation packages.

   But Cleveland officials are feeling the pressure. "We've reached out to Gil
on a regular basis," Mueller said, "to ensure that they don't get any ideas of
leaving us."

   Van Bokkelen couldn't be reached for comment. Colleagues said he doesn't
appear intent on leaving Cleveland.

   The city doesn't want that to change. "We're waiting to hear back from Gil to
see what exactly he needs to raise as far as money," Mueller said. "It is
extremely important and very high on our priority list to make sure that they
stay here."

   Because Cleveland and Ohio are both cash-strapped, though, it will be tough
to match the kind of multimillion-dollar packages that the most aggressive
cities could offer.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2002


                             1029 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 26, 2002, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: Mistrust of doctors widespread across the USA

BYLINE: Kathleen Fackelmann

BODY:
Nearly 80% of blacks and 52% of whites believe they could be used as "guinea
pigs" for medical research, shows a survey out today.

   The findings reflect a deep reservoir of mistrust that cuts across racial
lines, says study author Giselle Corbie-Smith at the University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill.

   Such fear could hamper the nation's ability to carry out crucial research on
heart disease, cancer and other diseases that afflict millions of Americans,
says Jordan Cohen, president of the Association of American Medical Colleges in
Washington, D.C. He was not connected with the study.


   The researchers surveyed more than 500 blacks and 400 whites, randomly
selected from all over the USA.

   Despite increasing attention to regulations aimed at protecting human
subjects, many people still said they worried about being subjected to an
experiment without their consent. The study, published in the Archives of
Internal Medicine, revealed that:

    * Nearly 42% of blacks and more than 23% of whites did not trust their
doctor to fully explain research participation to them.

    * More than 37% of blacks and nearly 20% of whites thought their doctor
might ask them to join a research study -- even if that meant they might suffer
some harm from an experimental drug or treatment.

    * About 15% of blacks and 8% of whites did not feel they could freely
question their doctors.

   The findings held true even when the researchers accounted for education
level and income, two factors that might affect trust, Corbie-Smith says.

   Many African-Americans say they distrust the medical system for good reason:
They remember the 1932-1972 Tuskegee study in which researchers denied treatment
to nearly 400 black men with syphilis to see how the disease progressed.

   More recently, the highly publicized case of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old
with a rare genetic disease, raised questions about the safety of clinical
trials. Gelsinger died after receiving a highly experimental gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania in 1999. Critics say the researchers didn't fully
understand the risks of that treatment before starting a human trial.

   Cohen says cases like Gelsinger's are few and far between. The vast majority
of medical researchers put patient safety above all else, he says.

   Other experts blame the commercialization of medicine for the trust problems.
LaVera Crawley, an ethics researcher at Stanford University, says blacks and
whites alike worry that a doctor pushing a research agenda may have a financial
stake in the outcome.


   A gap of trust

   A new national survey reveals that many Americans have trust issues with
their own doctor.

   * More than 45% of African- Americans and nearly 35% of whites thought that
their doctor sometimes exposed them to unnecessary risks when deciding on a
treatment course.

   * About 63% of African-Americans and 38% of whites said doctors often
prescribe medication to experiment on people without their consent.

   * Nearly 25% of African-Americans and 8% of whites thought that their own
doctor had given them treatment as part of an experiment without their
permission.

   Source: Giselle Corbie-Smith, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2002


                             1030 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 24, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 8; Column 4; Sports Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1033 words

HEADLINE: Sports of The Times;
Who's Testing the Drug Testers?

BYLINE:  By SELENA ROBERTS

BODY:

   OVER the past few years, unsettling visuals have tumbled out of Berlin
courtrooms from former East German athletes who describe how the Doctor Evils
behind the doping program enticed them as children with new bathing suits and
then fed them blue pills.

        During the trials, there were stories of women who had morphed into
masculine forms and tales of ghoulish medical conditions, all after the
athletes' bodies had been used as toxic pumps to turn out gold medals. Anabolic
steroids, that was the culprit, they said.

    Over the past few years, suspicions of doping have been stirred each time a
former American Olympian dies before the average life span, whether it was a
38-year-old Flo-Jo in 1998 or the 48-year-old Ben Plucknett this past week.

   Given all the sinister influences on Olympians, considering the passive
policing by past United States leaders, it is easy for speculation to leap into
fact based on anecdotal evidence. Doping, that has to be it, the whispers go.

   "Most of the usage is clandestine," said Dick Pound, who heads the World
Anti-Doping Agency. "You don't have the same kind of data that is available for
aspirin or birth-control pills, where there is a therapeutic application. At the
moment, it's anecdotal, but the body of evidence is building."

   No one should dismiss the anecdotes -- some of which conjure images of
bubbling beakers in a dark basement -- but sometimes middle-aged athletes simply
die.

   "Just remember virtually everyone who ever died in an auto wreck ate
potatoes," said Dr. Charles Yesalis, a professor of health and human development
at Penn State University, who co-wrote, "Performance Enhancing Substances in
Sport and Exercise" (Human Kinetics Publishers, 2002). "We don't know the
long-term effects of anabolic steroids, and they came out in 1935. What about
some drug that came out last year?"

   Without financing for studies on doping, without a truth serum for
participants in such a survey, the medical community cannot sound an alarm that
doesn't feel like another fire drill to athletes.

   Data as a deterrent do not exist. So, the real question an elite athlete has
to ask before taking a drug is moral, not physiological: should I cheat to
produce results?

   This same question often trips up the International Olympic Committee.
Although its president, Dr. Jacques Rogge, has made doping a top priority, there
are signs the organization is only masking its need for the superhuman with a
transparent spin about integrity.

   How serious are Olympic leaders about doping when they are so unconvincing in
their approach to it?

   For decades, I.O.C. leaders knew there was systematic doping in totalitarian
states, but did nothing until there was a public outcry in the 90's. This
criticism of passivity dogged Prince Alexandre de Merode, the leader of the
Olympic drug war, until the day he died this past week.

   Only when scandal breaks do Olympic officials act. The World Anti-Doping
Agency was formed as a semi-independent agency after the Tour de France drug
debacle in 1998, and U.S.A.D.A. (the United States Anti-Doping Agency) was
assembled after the shot-putter C. J. Hunter was revealed to have flunked four
drug tests before the 2000 Sydney Games.

   As one doping expert said privately last week: "The I.O.C. takes a stand in
reaction. They don't lead; they follow. That's why the athletes are ahead of the
testing."

   What good are drug cheats to the I.O.C.? Superhumans are boons for ratings
and broken records seduce the public.

   "I can make a strong argument that drugs, to paraphrase, have been very, very
good for Olympic sport," Yesalis said. "They've created bigger-than-life
athletes, able to do bigger-than-life things. That's what sells.

   "Would you have watched the Atlanta Games if you kept hearing the announcers
say, 'Ladies and gentlemen, you've just witnessed the 154th fastest running of
the 200 meters'? I think not."

   Imagine what records will be broken -- how freakish the athletes may look --
when the era of genetic doping begins. If officials cannot get a grip on the
cocktail of endurance drugs and growth hormones in motion, how can they play
cowboy with high-tech cheats? "If it gets to the genetic battlefield, it's all
over," Yesalis said.

   There are well-meaning people at world and American anti-doping agencies who
are desperate to right the wrongs of a lax past in Olympic drug oversight, all
eager to jump on the gene therapy before the outbreak.

   "I think in my business, and I think in the Olympics at large, you have to be
an idealist with a good dose of cynicism." Pound said.

   Optimism could be propped up by the I.O.C. if officials truly treated doping
more than as a public relations buzz phrase. So far, they have put up half the
world doping agency's $18 million budget. "A napkin to clean up a flood," one
doping official said.

   To experts, $18 million is hardly enough in the lab-room chase to develop
drug tests that will stand up in a court of law. Athletes remain ahead of the
science to nab them, with a head start from the I.O.C.

   "I think a lot of the I.O.C. is driven by money," Yesalis said. "A lot of
them are greedy. What has evolved is they've done a controlled retreat. At
first, they didn't do drug tests at all. Then people started talking about
doping, and it was bad for publicity. So it's like, 'Well, we'll put in place a
drug-testing system that we all know won't catch anyone, but the public won't
know.'

   "That strategy worked well until 1988 when a journalist raised his hand and
said, 'How did Ben Johnson pass those other 19 drug tests?' "

   The more questions, the more subterfuge. Rogge often barks of a desire to
cleanse the system of all drugs. If that is the case, then finance the change.

   "Part of the controlled retreat is to crank up their level of sincerity in
trying to deal with it," Yesalis said. "At first blush, it's more of an open-air
process. You can't use the dog ate my test results anymore, but on the other
hand, you have this multibillion-dollar agency. They think a few million is a
big deal for research."

   There are reasons to think small. After all, is doping really so awful if
there are only anecdotes about the consequences? And really, what is an Olympics
without a record?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2002


                             1031 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 22, 2002, Friday ,THIRD EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ARTS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: WEEKEND / MOVIE REVIEW Die Another Day Directed by: Lee Tamahori
Screenplay by: Neal Purvis and Robert Wade Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Halle
Berry, Toby Stephens, Judi Dench At: Boston Common, Fenway, suburbs Running
time: 123 minutes Rated: PG-13 (gunplay, explosions, sexuality** 1/2;
BOND'S DAY MAY FINALLY BE DONE EVEN HALLE BERRY CAN'T SAVE 007 FROM THE SILLY
PLOT OF 'DIE'

BYLINE: By Wesley Morris, Globe Staff

BODY:

   "Die Another Day," the 20th and world-weariest James Bond picture yet, more
or less opens with her majesty's randy superspy (Pierce Brosnan) being tortured
by North Koreans, snapped at by scorpions, and imprisoned for more than a year.
During his stay, the world changes. But "Die Another Day" is still as
professionally mediocre as its predecessors.

   As an attempt to get right with current events, the movie has Bond land - or,
rather, surf - smack in the center of the demilitarized zone between North and
South Korea. There, the young, rebellious Colonel Moon (Will Yun Lee) is fresh
from a stint at Oxford and Harvard, where he "majored in Western hypocrisy" and,
based on his addiction to illegally mined African diamonds, presumably graduated
with distinction. Now he's ready to bring the Occident to its knees. But Bond
doesn't care. He's shown up merely for the jewels - and for the bruising
inaugural chase sequence.

      This one features hovercrafts. They're as big as tanks. But there's no
getting around it: Watching people maneuver these things around wetlands is like
watching hippos fight. They're lethal, sure, but are they sexy? The dueling
results in a crash that sends Moon to a watery grave. His father, General Moon,
is hot with hurt and desperate to discover the Western culprit who made his son
so hateful.

   In a confusing move that has left M (Judi Dench) ready to disown him, Bond
gets traded for the late colonel's right-hand man, a terrorist named Zao (Rick
Yune, who smolders even when turned into a diamond-studded albino). The details
in Neal Purvis and Robert Wade's script come at such a rapid, inane clip that I
couldn't keep straight the nuances of the swap. But all you need to know is that
Bond is let loose, and his libido is hungry.

   He jets to sunny Havana, where Zao has fled. But there's a bigger buzz on the
beachfront: Halle Berry's in the water. "Die Another Day" is the first Bond
picture in years to generate glee over the girl and not the gadgets.

   Playing a loosely explained secret agent named Jinx, Berry emerges from the
sea in spectacular Sports Illustrated fashion, and the earth sighs. (Brosnan's
reaction, through binoculars, might be the easiest acting he's been asked to
do.) She's the most chipper superspy - not to mention sex goddess - ever. Still,
she's the only person in this production with a personality, so you miss her
when she's off-screen getting a pedicure.


CORRECTION:

   Berry is the only person with a personality not bent on world destruction.
Toby Stephens makes a splash as Gustav Graves, the intercontinental bad boy of
fencing. His entrance is via Union Jack parachute, and, with Zao as his
henchman, he's come up with something called Icarus, a pseudo-solar device
powerful enough to turn the planet into the universe's biggest tanning salon.
Graves is the result of a wild and improbable DNA plot twist that will leave
gene therapists rolling in the aisles and identity politicians picketing in
protest. The director of this overloaded, overlong nonsense is New Zealand's Lee
Tamahori. His career got off to a walloping-good start with 1994's "Once Were
Warriors," and since then he's been spitting out mechanical genre numbers such
as "Along Came a Spider." At this point, he's perfectly suited to treat a
contraption like "Die Another Day" with a straight face. Believe it or not, it's
Madonna who puts the franchise in its place with a sly knock against the
series's phallocentrism. In a cameo, she plays a fencing guru, and when invited
to watch Bond and Graves square off, she dismisses the whole affair with a
suggestive rooster metaphor. She appears to be the only person who knows this
bird can't fly.  Wesley Morris can be reached at wmorris@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Pierce Brosnan is unshaken as James Bond, but little else is
stirring in "Die Another Day." / PHOTO / KEITH HAMSHERE 2. In "Die Another Day,"
Pierce Brosnan's Bond saves the world but not the movie. / KNIGHT RIDDER PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2002


                             1032 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                    November 22, 2002 Friday, 7 SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: STRONG VOICE FOR CF STILL CRACKS

BYLINE: JEFF JACOBS; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Joe Tessitore remembers the tears of joy that flowed from his mother Anna's
eyes that day in 1989. Word had come from the Hospital for Sick Children in
Toronto that a team of doctors had, at last, identified the wretched cause.

   The medical journals would report the defective gene responsible for cystic
fibrosis had been mapped to chromosome 7q, but at this bonding moment between
mother and son, the genetic code mattered little.

   "All we could say was, 'Oh, my God, this is great! By 1995, we're going to
have a cure,"' Tessitore said. "My mom was so happy she kept crying and crying."

    At this moment, Tessitore's own voice, a sportscaster's instrument trained
deep and sure, cracks and gives way.

    "... It's 2002 and all we've got is this stupid gene," he said. "We can't
figure out how to correct it, get it back into the body to allow the body to
heal itself."

    There is something both dark and hopeful in Joe Tessitore, and no doctorate
in psychology is needed to understand why. The genetic roulette wheel that
decides who lives and who dies of respiratory and digestive collapse came to a
stop in Schenectady, N.Y., during the early 1970s. Omnipotent fate made its
choice.

    Joe would live.

    His sister would not.

    "I know," Tessitore said, "it could be me in the grave."

    Joe was only 3 when Dana was born. The information on cystic fibrosis was
not nearly as widespread and his parents, frightened, pressed for the prognosis.

    "Your daughter will probably live to be the age of a sixth-grader," the
doctor answered.

    Dana didn't make it to preschool.

    More than 12 million people walk around our nation, lovers, nurturers,
oft-unsuspecting killers.  If both parents carry the gene for CF, there is a 25
percent chance a child will have the disease and a 50-50 chance that the child
will be a healthy carrier.

    Fate made Joe Tessitore an only child. Conception made him a carrier. Boomer
Esiason is a carrier. Frank Deford is a carrier.

    Symptoms vary. The root problem does not. There is an abnormality in the
glands that produce mucus and sweat. Thick mucus forms in the lungs and
intestines. Lung disease is the most common killer among the 30,000 Americans
with CF.  Even with medical advances, the average age of death is 30.

    "A child coming into the world who didn't choose these circumstances,"
Tessitore said, "it just isn't fair."

    After Dana's death, Tessitore's parents struggled mightily.  Even today, the
subject is too difficult for Anna to broach publicly. Solace would be found in
helping other families with the disease. The CF cause is all Tessitore, the
sports anchor at WFSB and a boxing broadcaster for ESPN, has known. His dad
started a charity golf tournament. His mom has attended thousands of
fund-raisers.

    "In our house, CF was as mandatory as church and pasta dinner at 1 o'clock
at my grandfather's," Tessitore said. "I think in that way my parents were able
to have my sister still be there in our lives."

    Anna's going to be at the first Sportscasters Super Ball at the Oakdale
Theatre on Saturday night. So will more than a dozen ESPN sportscasters and
high-profile athletes. Steve Young will be the recipient of the Native Son
Award. Sue Bird will receive athlete of the year honors.

    With added ESPN work, Tessitore has been busier than ever this past year.
Career success, however, left him haunted with the feeling he was letting the
foundation down. He went for the big bang. Big names mean big money and big
money means research to find the cure.

    "An event of this magnitude doesn't happen without [co-host] Chris Berman,"
Tessitore said, "and that's why I called him immediately. The most touching
thing for me is there's going to be somebody the entire world knows alongside
somebody a handful of people in the room know. But when the night's over, I
believe people there are going to think as highly of Ross Craig as they do of
Steve Young."

    Tessitore and Berman wanted to honor a CF athlete. Tessitore called Paul
Drury at the Foundation's Connecticut Chapter. Drury, who folks may remember as
the CF double-lung transplant recipient who caddied for Esiason at the GHO, knew
the perfect candidate.

    Craig will receive the Hero's Award and, for the life of him, he can't
understand why anybody sees him as a hero. Diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at 3
months, Craig set one individual and two relay records at Brookfield High. Part
of the Wilton Wahoos, he qualified for the 2001 YMCA national championships in
the 100- and 200-yard butterfly. He raised $22,000 last year for CF at his own
swim-a-thon. He also suffered his first substantial CF problems, a bacteria
infection in his lungs and needed IV treatment for much of last April. No big
deal, he says. A freshman majoring in physical therapy and swimming at
Springfield College, Craig is sure of only one thing.

    "I know there will be a cure in my lifetime," Craig said. "The progression
of gene therapy has been awesome the past 10 years. I'm going to live a long
time."

    Growing up, Craig used to write letters to Esiason, whose son Gunnar, 11,
has CF. Esiason and Jim Nantz, who are unable to attend the event because of
work, sent along a video tribute. Esiason sounded just as optimistic about
Gunnar's prognosis as Craig does in his.

    "I've met these young guys with CF and I'm taken by their spirit," said
Tessitore, whose wife, Rebecca, pregnant with their second child, is not a
carrier. "I became close to Sean Fawcett, who played football at Wolcott. He's
the same way, these guys downplay everything. They've trained their minds to be
so strong."

    Tessitore's voice begins to crack. He has become close to many CF families
over the years. He shares their buoyancy and resolve. They're on the doorstep.
The cure is close. He knows the inevitable.

    "I see these young guys with CF and I see a boxer with eyes slashed and nose
halfway off their face and they're looking at the trainer, like, 'Why are you
stopping this?' These guys believe so much they can win this fight, they didn't
even know what their own condition is.

    "We're going to have this event every year and it's going to grow. But the
best news will be when we cancel it. That's the day we find the cure."

   E-mail: jjacobs@courant.com


COLUMN: JEFF JACOBS

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2002


                             1033 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    November 22, 2002 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: CASEY INSTITUTE GETS $5 MILLION FOR STUDY

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Bula Buck Arveson's estate donates the money to fight macular
degeneration, a disease that limits vision

   A dedicated volunteer who died last year at 98 continued her giving ways
Thursday, when her estate donated $5 million to medical researchers trying to
fight the leading cause of age-related blindness.

   Bula Buck Arveson, known as "Bea," left the money to the Casey Eye Institute
at Oregon Health & Science University in memory of herself and her husband,
Charles C. Arveson, who died in 1988.

   The money sets up an endowment to pay for research into macular degeneration,
a disease in which the eye's retina breaks down, limiting vision and sometimes
causing blindness. The disease limits the vision of an estimated 1.7 million
U.S. residents, and has caused at least small eye changes in one-third of people
older than 75.

   Three of those affected were Arveson and her two siblings, each of whom part
or all of their eyesight was lost to macular degeneration. Arveson had been
treated at Casey for more than a decade before her death. Her doctor, macular
degeneration researcher Dr. Michael Klein, said the donation will let him and
his colleagues at Casey "dramatically accelerate" their existing research into
the disease.

   "The center has already been instrumental in advances in drug therapy,
genetics and nutrition to prevent and treat this disease, but this is the kind
of transformative gift that can lead to greater things," he said.

   Klein said a combination of genetic, environmental and molecular triggers
seem to combine to cause age-related macular degeneration. To pin down the genes
responsible, Casey scientists have studied families that tend to have the
problem. So far, they have found one "promising" candidate that may be involved,
and think they have found four other regions on chromosomes that might contain
related genes.

   Early in 2003, the Casey institute will probably start a trial of gene
therapy, developed elsewhere, to battle the disease, Klein said. It would be
OHSU's first gene therapy trial, spokesman Jim Newman said.

   Arveson, who was born in Idaho Falls in 1902, moved to Portland in the 1920s.
In 1925, she married Charles Arveson, who spent 35 years as vice president and
western manager of U.S. Epperson Underwriting Co., where Bea Arveson worked in
public relations.

   She also dedicated much of her time to public service, volunteering for
groups such as Head Start and the Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center.
According to OHSU, she was instrumental in getting the first African American
woman admitted to the school's nursing program in the early 1930s.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2002


                             1034 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 22, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 775 words

BODY:

   There is nothing quite like, at least for the next 750 words or so, the great
rivalries of college football, the matchups that bring the sport's fabled color
and pageantry to full boil, many of them falling this weekend.

    Mind you, professional football is colorful as well, but dressing the
cheerleaders like hookers somehow expels it from the pageantry category,
according to the Federal Pageantry Bureau, Keith Jackson executive director
emeritus.

    All across the map, soon-to-be-legendary collisions between archrival
bastions of higher education are about to bring the college football season to
climax, but remember not to ask for map-reading assistance from any of the
athletes. A National Geographic poll released this week indicates that 70
percent of people 18 to 24 cannot find New Jersey on a map.

    What are they teaching in these colleges?

    As a famous New Jerseyite, the redoubtable former Pitt running back Ironhead
Heyward, said when asked if he'd ever been west of the Mississippi, "Don't be
breakin' out no maps on me now."

    The best of the rivalries are readily identifiable: Ohio State-Michigan,
USC-UCLA, Georgia-Georgia Tech, Florida-Georgia, Miami-Florida State,
Texas-Oklahoma, Notre Dame-Everybody, but clearly the national consciousness
remains most magnetized by the big one -- St. Olaf-Carleton, played annually for
the coveted Goat Trophy.

    Don't ask.

    St. Olaf (what, the Fighting Oafs?) takes this one seriously enough to
include Carleton in its own fight song. All together now:

    We come from St. Olaf, we sure are the real stuff

    Our team is the cream of the colleges great

    We fight fast and furious, our team is injurious

    Tonight Carleton College will sure meet its fate

    Um! Yah! Yah! Um! Yah! Yah!

    Um! Yah! Yah! Um! Yah! Yah!

    Um! Yah! Yah! Um! Yah! Yah!

    Um! Yah! Yah! Yah!

    Honest to God. How could I make that up?

    St. Olaf-Carleton really gets 'em pumped up there in Minnesota every fall,
and I was just thinking the other day how nice it would be if the people of the
great state of Pennsylvania, which some geographers suspect actually borders New
Jersey, had the kind of college football rivalry that would easily create 100
times that much excitement.

    How about Pitt-Penn State? I wonder if anybody's ever thought of that?

    Seems logical enough, doesn't it? Two fine football-worshipping institutions
separated by a mere three hours and 3,000 orange traffic cones on Route 22 in
any given November.

    Of course, Pitt-Penn State was a great rivalry. The equal of any. Historic,
dramatic, and a credit to the game well into the ' 80s. Now it's been reduced to
reconstituted sarcasm. I laughed this week when Joe Paterno said he'd love for
the Nittany Lions to play the Panthers again, and that all the Panthers have to
do is join the Big Ten, which is actually 11, to make it 12.

    Pitt responded politely but needn't have been so nice.

    Paterno and Penn State have no interest in playing Pitt that isn't attached
to eight hoops Pitt must jump through to make it happen. This week, it was
joining the Big Ten; last time it was that poor Penn State must be able to
finance 29 intercollegiate sports with its football revenue, and so Pitt must
agree to play six times in University Park for every four Penn State plays in
Pittsburgh. Paterno could fund 99 collegiate sports if the football program
weren't outfitted like royalty, but if he cut funding for the football program,
State might not have been able to average six wins a year over the past three.

    Not to be critical.

    So instead of playing Pitt tomorrow for the Golden Traffic Cone, State
readies for Michigan State in a sham rivalry fought listlessly for the Land
Grant Trophy, like anybody wants it. There's more excitement over the Old Oaken
Bucket, the prize in the completely unriveting Indiana-Purdue series.

    Most of us couldn't report the result of a single Indiana-Purdue game, but
the Bucket is apparently highly coveted. Former Indiana Coach Lee Corso, who
wasn't nearly as good a coach as he is hyperventilating on ESPN's College
GameDay, once said: "When I finally got [the Bucket], I slept with it between my
legs. My wife thought I was crazy."

    Well Lee, that's probably because you are.

    You should have calmed down and adopted the approach of the University of
Minnesota, which plays for more stuff in more alleged rivalries than any other
school, never mind that nobody cares. Minnesota plays Iowa for the Bronze Pig,
Wisconsin for the Paul Bunyan Axe and Penn State for the Governor's Victory
Bell.

    That's why Minnesota doesn't win much. They just don't have room for all
that crap.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2002


                             1035 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              November 21, 2002 Thursday 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: Study calls gene therapy balm for bad chest pain

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: CHICAGO; WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The largest study yet of gene therapy for heart disease shows the approach
can significantly relieve severe chest pain, though the improvements may take
months.

   Researchers have been working for several years on the idea of injecting
genes directly into the heart to improve blood flow. Several smaller studies
have suggested a benefit, but the latest experiment is the first to subject the
approach to a careful comparison with standard treatment.

   "This is the first trial to provide a clear indication of efficacy of gene
therapy," said Dr. Duncan Stewart, cardiology chief at St. Michael's Hospital in
Toronto.

   Several teams around the world are competing to prove the benefits of various
combinations of genes for people with severe chest pain that cannot be treated
with drugs, angioplasty or bypass surgery. All involve delivering genes to the
heart to promote the growth of new blood vessels to carry nutrition and oxygen
to starved heart muscle.

   Stewart's study was financed by GenVac Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md. He presented
the results Wednesday at the annual scientific meeting of the American Heart
Association.

   HORMONE, VITAMIN THERAPY DISCOUNTED: Neither hormone replacement therapy nor
antioxidant vitamin supplements appear to ward off worsening heart disease in
postmenopausal women and may actually make things worse, a new study concludes.

   Although the number of deaths among the 423 women with narrowed arteries in
the study was small, women taking hormones and vitamins had the highest death
rate, while those taking placebo versions of both treatments had the lowest.

   While several other recent studies have discounted the heart benefits from
hormone therapy, the results published Wednesday in the Journal of the American
Medical Association are the first to look at the effects of high doses of
vitamin C and E on blockages in the blood vessels of the heart.

   SPECIALIST'S CARE ADVISED: Heart attack patients fare better if treated by a
specialist after leaving the hospital rather than by a general-care doctor, a
government-backed study suggests.

   Earlier studies had indicated that such patients did better with hospital
care by cardiologists, but less was known about how they fared in the months of
outpatient care that followed.

   The latest findings by Boston researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School were published today in the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   They studied Medicare data from 35,520 patients age 65 or older in hospitals
in Florida, California, Texas, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Massachusetts.

   After two years, 14.6 percent of patients with outpatient care from a
cardiologist had died, compared with 18.3 percent of a similar group of patients
under the sole care of a family doctor or internist.

Study: More seniors,

jobless get psychotherapy

   The number of Americans who received psychotherapy increased slightly from
1987 to 1997, according to a large national study, and rose significantly for
two groups: older adults and the unemployed.

   But the average length of time patients spent in the consulting room dropped
precipitously over the same period, the study found, and the percentage of
patients who combined psychotherapy with psychiatric medication nearly doubled.

   "With all the attention given to antidepressants and other medications, the
role of psychotherapy can be easily overshadowed," said Dr. Mark Olfson, an
associate professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University and the lead
author of the study, which appeared in the November issue of the American
Journal of Psychiatry. "But these findings make clear that psychotherapy
continues to play an important role in the mental health care of many
Americans."

New federal campaign

aims to stave off diabetes

   WASHINGTON - The government launched a national diabetes prevention campaign
Wednesday, promoting modest lifestyle changes as a way to help prevent the onset
of the disease.

   The campaign, "Small Steps, Big Rewards," stresses that a healthy diet and
exercise can help people reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes - the most common
form of the disease.

   "You don't have to be a marathon runner or starve yourself to prevent
diabetes. You can make small changes and take small steps that translate into
big rewards," Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson said.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2002


                             1036 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 21, 2002, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: Doctors: Gene therapy boosts heart's oxygen supply

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:
CHICAGO -- A form of gene therapy that prompts the heart to grow new, healthy
blood vessels helps relieve patients' heart disease symptoms and boosts their
ability to exercise, doctors reported Wednesday.

   The study is the first to measure whether the new vessels actually increase
the heart's oxygen supply. It is also the first to test the effect of injecting
genes directly into the heart muscle and the first to compare the new approach
with the best available drug therapy.


   "The results suggest that it's possible to introduce new blood vessels into
regions of the heart that are starved for a blood supply," says the study's lead
researcher, Duncan Stewart of St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto. "At six months,
there was a marked improvement in the gene group."

   His team's findings were presented at the American Heart Association meeting
here.

   Most heart attacks are caused by blockages in the vessels supplying the
heart, some of them far narrower than a ballpoint refill. About 15% of patients
have blockages that run much of the length of their arteries, making it
impossible for surgeons to bypass them or clear them using balloon angioplasty.
Doctors are trying to fill in those gaps with grow-your-own bypasses.

   In earlier studies, physicians have produced images showing new blood vessel
growth and surveys indicating that patients feel better. But those studies
haven't provided firm evidence that the approach works.

   In the new study, Stewart's team used genes prepared by GenVec of
Gaithersburg, Md., and trademarked the BioBypass.

   The firm took the gene for a blood vessel growth factor called VEGF 121 and
inserted it into the adenovirus, the type of virus that causes the common cold.
Then the researchers made small incisions in the chests of 36 patients and
injected gene-packed viruses into their hearts.

   Another 35 patients were given the best combination of drugs available to
reduce pain, improve blood flow and prevent heart attacks.

   Three months later, doctors could detect no difference between the two
groups. But after six months, those who received the genes lasted a full minute
longer during an exercise test designed to measure oxygenation of the heart.
That 28% improvement represents a significant gain over the drug-treatment
group.

   Two of the gene recipients died of complications from surgery, and a patient
in the control group died of a heart attack. One way to avoid surgical deaths,
Stewart says, would be to deliver genes to the heart through catheters like
those used for angioplasty.

   Augustus Grant of Duke University says the study "tells us that you can get
the virus to the site, it confirms that the genes work, and it points out the
risks of surgery."

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2002


                             1037 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           November 21, 2002 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:

    A new drug designed to stop cancer by cutting off its blood supply has
surprised experts by showing a tumor shrinkage rate unprecedented for a drug so
early in its development.

    In the first human trials, involving 23 people with terminal cancer, the
tumors of one-quarter of the patients shrank by half or more.

    Similar drugs have proved disappointing -- prompting no dramatic tumor
shrinkage in early tests. Scientists say the latest results, presented yesterday
at a meeting in Frankfurt, Germany, will likely revive flagging enthusiasm for
the approach.

    In the new study, led by Eric Raymond of the Gustave-Roussy Institute in
Villejuif, France, tumors shrank by more than 50 percent in six of the 23
patients. The cancer stabilized in five other people.

   The drug is a newcomer to the field of anti-angiogenics -- drugs designed to
damage tumors by attacking blood vessels that feed them.

   Part of the reason the new drug may be so much more powerful than others is
that it attacks from three directions instead of just one.

    The drug is being developed by Sugen Inc., a subsidiary of the U.S.
pharmaceutical company Pharmacia Corp.

   The largest study yet of gene therapy for heart disease suggests the approach
can relieve severe chest pain, though the improvements may take months to become
apparent and in some cases the procedure can prove fatal.

   Researchers have been working for several years on the idea of injecting
genes directly into the heart to improve blood flow. Several smaller studies
have suggested a benefit, but the latest experiment is the first to subject the
approach to a careful comparison with standard treatment.

    Several teams around the world are competing to prove the benefits of
various combinations of genes for people with severe chest pain that cannot be
treated with drugs, angioplasty or bypass surgery. All involve delivering genes
to the heart to promote the growth of new blood vessels to carry nutrition and
oxygen to starved heart muscle.

    The new study was financed by GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg and presented at
the annual scientific meeting of the American Heart Association in Chicago.

    Unlike earlier studies reported so far, the experiment randomly assigned 71
volunteers to undergo gene therapy or receive the usual medical treatment. After
three months, there was no difference. However, by six months, people who got
the gene therapy could walk 25 percent longer on a treadmill.

    To deliver the therapy, doctors opened the patients' chests and injected the
growth hormone genes 30 times into their hearts. The operation itself was fatal
to two of the volunteers.

    After they recovered, the patients walked on treadmills until their
electrocardiograms showed clear signs of oxygen deprivation. The treadmill time
improved by one minute in the gene therapy patients but was unchanged in the
comparison group.

    -- Compiled from reports by the Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2002


                             1038 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           November 21, 2002 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: Gene-Therapy Tests Show Positive Results, GenVec Says

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Early human tests of a drug intended to increase blood flow in patients with
chronic chest pain have shown positive results for safety and effectiveness,
officials at GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg said yesterday. The results highlight
the potential benefits of injecting genes directly into the heart to treat
circulatory disease, a process known as gene therapy.

   The study involved 71 patients with severe coronary artery disease, a
progressive narrowing of blood vessels that often triggers the debilitating pain
associated with the condition. Thirty-six patients received the gene therapy,
called BioBypass; 35 were given traditional treatment.

   BioBypass is designed to improve blood flow in the legs, heart and other
tissues by stimulating the formation of new blood vessels.

   Patients who received BioBypass were able to walk longer distances on a
treadmill before stopping because of chest pain -- the principal measure of the
treatment's success. The treatment delayed the onset of chest pain by an average
of 1.5 minutes, said Duncan Stewart, cardiology chief at St. Michael's Hospital
in Toronto, who administered the tests.

   GenVec chief executive Paul H. Fischer said the company plans to conduct the
larger human tests of BioBypass that are required to gain Food and Drug
Administration approval.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2002


                             1039 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 20, 2002 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.A-17

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: A PILL TO EASE ALL PAIN?;
 MEDICINE SEEKS TO HEAL, BUT ERASING THE PAST MIGHT BE GOING TOO FAR

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Imagine that you have arrived at the emergency room after a horrific car
crash. The doctor in charge offers you two pills. One will relieve the
inflammation of whiplash. The other will reduce the psychological trauma, muting
the nightmarish flashback to a manageable memory.

    Would you take one? Would you take both? Is there any difference?

    Imagine, for that matter, that a child came to the hospital after being
raped or abused. Should she be given a pill if it would prevent the trauma from
literally changing the anatomy of her brain and setting her up for a lifetime of
vulnerability?

    And finally, if your imagination isn't overtaxed already, what about a
soldier just back from battle? Should he be treated with medicine that helps dim
the effect of the horrors he has experienced?

    These are not idle science fictions. Once we drew a bright line between the
pain of the body and the mind, between treatments for physical and mental
illness. Now researchers are into the chemistry of emotions, the biology of
feelings, the anatomy of psychology.

    It appears that memories of shocking events may be like water -- an
overwhelming flood or a manageable stream. And scientists may be designing
chemical faucets.

    Just last week, a meeting of traumatic stress specialists heard that a
common hypertension drug may help prevent post-traumatic stress disorder. If the
human trials pan out, it could, in effect, keep a wrenching experience from
being burned too deeply in memory.

    There is research as well, on treatments designed to interrupt the way a
painful event can change the brain. And there is also talk of gene therapies
that might make vulnerable people react to emotional injuries like resilient
people.

    What are we to make of this? The goal is, after all, simple and
uncontroversial. Dr. Roger Pitman of Harvard Medical School, who is doing
research in this field, says, "I look at it from a medical perspective. We
intervene in diseases and disorders to make people more comfortable and to
reduce suffering."

    Fair enough. A bad memory can be as painful and crippling as a bad back or
heart. PTSD is not trivialized by those who live with it or treat it. Pitman
repeats the words of veterans he has treated: "One said to me if Vietnam was
only a memory I would be OK. It's more than a memory. It's happening again." If
we can heal that, surely we should.

    I don't romanticize mental illness. But at the same time, I wonder what will
happen if we are able to lighten the load of memory. Would we end up with a drug
to make loss "lite," to speed up "closure," to make horror "manageable"? At some
point reducing human suffering is editing human experience. For better or for
worse.

    I remember what happened to Prozac. A drug to alleviate severe depression
morphed into what is called a cosmetic pharmacology. It was used to help people
feel "better than well," in a phrase made famous by Peter Kramer in "Listening
to Prozac." The class of drugs not only replaced counseling but was routinely
prescribed by internists for patients and even by veterinarians for pets.

    It's not that hard to envision PTSD preventive drugs being offered to those
who witnessed a Columbine massacre or the collapse of the World Trade Center.
Nor is it hard to imagine preventive drugs offered to parents who have just lost
a child. Where do we draw the line on the prescription pad?

    Kramer sees benefits in helping those who are truly "overwhelmed and
haunted." But he too can see abuse. "Imagine," he says, "a totalitarian,
militaristic society giving it to soldiers so they will be immune to the horrors
of war." And if the horrors of war or of crime are not so "horrible," wouldn't
that change our attitude toward war or crime themselves?

    Such worries race ahead of the research. Pitman says succinctly, "We don't
want to make people happy automatons. We're not going to eliminate the horrors
of war." He says that we won't know where to draw the line -- or the dosage --
until we know what medicine can do.

    But it seems to me that we often find ourselves behind the research curve,
playing ethical catch-up with cloning or cosmetic pharmacology after they are on
the market and in the doctor's office. Now we are at the outset of treatments
that could alter mind and memory and our ideas about humanity.

    Today, we have to ask the questions first. And so we begin with this one:
Isn't human suffering more than a matter of chemistry?


NOTES:
Ellen Goodman is a syndicated columnist for The Boston Globe
(ellengoodman@globe.com).

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2002


                             1040 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     November 17, 2002 Sunday FINAL Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: HOME & FAMILY, Pg. 1N

LENGTH: 1846 words

HEADLINE: Where Do Babies Come From These Days?;
 For modern-day families, answering a child's question may have as much to do
with science as the birds and the bees.

BYLINE: Peter Jensen

SOURCE: Sun Staff

BODY:

   Rene Danford has a message for her in vitro fertilized babies, and she has
told it to them many times: "You are special. A doctor helped create you."

   Whether to tell her children about their origins was never really a question
for Danford or her husband. And she saw no reason to wait until they were grown.
Practically from Day 1, she started a conversation she planned on sharing with
them for many years to come.

   "I spent $45,000 to get success and had to fly across the country. You're
darn right I'm going to tell them," says Danford, 38, a New Orleans mother of
two in vitro fertilized babies, now ages 1 and 3. "I'm very proud of this. I
want to tell my kids where they came from."

   A mere decade or so ago, such sentiments would have been rare. IVF and other
forms of assisted reproduction were often kept secret, not just from children,
but from family, friends and co-workers as well.

   But that has largely changed. Just as adoptions have become more open, so has
information about infertility, in vitro pregnancies, donors and surrogates, and
the like.

   "There's been an evolution in thinking," says Barbara Cohen, an Annapolis
social worker who counsels surrogate mothers and others in fertility clinics.
"We have borrowed from the adoption world. We know it's better to give
information."

   Still, the change in social norms begs the question: How do you talk to your
children? It's a question that has no easy answer, and, even among experts,
there is some disagreement over how -- and even whether -- to go about it in
certain circumstances.

   "Frankly, we don't really have empirical data about whether telling a child
or not telling them is good or bad," says Dorothy Greenfield, associate
professor at the Yale Center for Reproductive Medicine & Infertility in New
Haven, Conn.

   Greenfield usually advises couples to be as open as possible. In cases of
routine IVF, where both parents are donors, the egg is fertilized in the lab and
the resulting embryo implanted in the mother, this is usually not considered
particularly controversial anymore. Some parents might choose not to discuss the
information because they simply deem it irrelevant and on a par with talking
about Mom's facelift, Dad's ulcer or some other private medical condition.

   Not so in cases where sperm or egg are donated. There, Greenfield sometimes
encounters resistance from parents who wonder how children will react to the
news and whether one partner's lack of biological involvement will harm their
bond with the child.

   Most choose openness

   Yet, even in most of those cases, parents are choosing to talk. One major
reason is that advances in DNA mapping and gene therapy make it far more likely
a child's genetic origins will need to be documented -- to predict or treat
certain diseases, for instance.

   "It's usually easier to live day to day in an open field than with family
secrets," says Linda Hellmann, a Baltimore psychotherapist who specializes in
infertility issues.

   Anne C. Bernstein, a Berkeley, California psychologist and author, recommends
that the conversation begin as soon as a child shows interest in his or her
origins. That should probably take place well before adolescence, she says, when
identity issues become a little more problematic.

   "It's perfectly fine to be talking to children when they get home from the
hospital," says Bernstein, whose book, Flight of the Stork: What Children Think
(and When) About Sex and Family Building (Perspectives Press, 1994), is often
recommended reading in fertility clinics. "It gets parents comfortable talking
about something they might otherwise have anxiety about."

   A recently released children's book, Our Beautiful Work of A.R.T. (Beaver's
Pond Press, $19.95), has been billed as the first children's book geared
specifically toward helping parents teach youngsters about their clinical
origins. (ART stands for Assisted Reproduc-tive Technology, which is the
technical name for IVF and its related procedures).

   "Dreams come true when a baby is born, / But when we tried to have you our
hearts were torn," the book begins. "Mommy and Daddy had been trying so long, /
We had to go to the doctor to see what was wrong."

   With its simple language and brightly colored artwork, the book is appealing
and not at all technical or graphic. To concoct a baby, for instance, the
doctor's office is seen with a batter-filled "mixomatix" in the "Sugar-N-Spice
Everything Nice Kitchen."

   Author Rozanne Nathalie says readers have shown enthusiasm for her work. With
financing from fertility drug maker Serono Inc. drugs, she has written companion
children's books to explain egg donations and surrogate mothers to youngsters as
well. A former Las Vegas fertility clinic worker who helped recruit egg donors
nationwide, she thinks the book can be introduced to children as young as 12
months.

   "People feel it's about time," says Nathalie, 31.

   Answer what is asked

   Experts generally agree that parent-child conversations of these matters
should be matter-of-fact and uneventful. Language should be specific and not
euphemism-filled, but should only include as much detail as a child can handle.

   "The most important thing is that a child should never feel deceived," says
Linda Applegarth, head of psychology for Cornell's Center for Reproductive
Medi-cine and Infertility in New York City. "Secrets end up being much more
destructive than the truth."

   Psychologists also recommend that the information be offered in a positive
context -- not "This is how much I suffered to have you" but more like: "We're
so glad we had help to create our family."

   "And remember to answer the question they are asking, not what you think
they're asking," says Cohen. "When they ask, 'Where did I come from?' you don't
give a blow-by-blow account if all they want to know is that you used to live in
Ohio."

   Still, it's not easy to decide when to tell. There are two schools of
thought, says Applegarth: Either tell them right away, or wait until they are
old enough to understand the basics of biology, anywhere from kindergarten to
third grade.

   Which philosophy is better? That's up to the family involved, she says.

   "Some parents will never, ever tell the kids for whatever reason, but most
others start talking about it when the child is 8 or 9," says Dr. Jairo Garcia,
head of the IVF program at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He suggests parents get
advice on how to go about that from their local chapter of RESOLVE, the
Boston-based national infertility association.

   Rena Makres of Lutherville, a mother of twin 6-year-old boys who were
conceived in vitro, says she's still not sure how she will talk to them about
it, but senses that now is not the right time. They "just wouldn't grasp the
issue," she says.

   "I have no need to keep it from them," says Makres, who is president of the
Maryland chapter of RESOLVE. "If they asked, I'd explain it. But at this age, I
don't think they'd understand."

   Mary Carrier's twins are just 7 1/2 years old, yet she's been talking to them
about IVF for years, but not necessarily including a full description of what
was involved. She has not, for instance, discussed the fact that a donor was
involved.

   "They understand that something different happened when I got pregnant," says
Carrier, 44, a Carroll County homemaker who has also been active in the
fertility support group. "They don't feel odd or different. They just feel
lucky."

   Advocates hope that the increased openness among IVF parents has reduced the
stigma associated with fertility treatments. While many of these procedures are
still relatively new -- the first test-tube baby was born in 1978--- in vitro
fertilization now accounts for more than 20,000 pregnancies each year.

   But they also acknowledge that not every parent will be comfortable
disclosing much information to their children. And when children do find out,
they may find the knowledge frustrating and finite -- states don't mandate
public access to information about sperm or egg donors, nor do private companies
keep much background information anyway.

   Surrogate parenting, frozen embryos, and other recent advances make the issue
even more complicated -- and that's why most fertility clinics have therapists
and support groups available to patients from the first day they walk in the
door.

   "If a parent does feel some shame or stigma is attached to this, they had
better resolve that first before they talk to their children," says Hellmann.
"Some people are just very private. It's not necessarily more right to be open.
It just has to be consistent with your own temperament."

   How to start talking

   Parents who want to talk to their children about in vitro fertilization and
related issues need not find the chore daunting, says psychologist Anne C.
Bernstein. Here are some of her suggestions to make it easier:

   1. If you conceived through IVF without outside donors, don't sweat it --
talking is purely optional. "Most parents don't discuss the circumstances under
which a child is conceived, so you don't have to either," she says.

   2. Talk sooner rather than later. By the teen years, children are sorting
through enough identity issues without being additionally burdened.

   3. Make sure you are the first to talk about this with the kids. Finding out
from other sources can harm the trusting relationship between parent and child.

   4. The discussions with young children should be matter-of-fact. It "just is
what it is," not something that makes them different or unusual. They can learn
later in life that some children are conceived in a different way.

   5. Don't assume this is a single discussion, but think of it as part of a
dialogue that will continue -- and raise a lot more questions -- as the child
gets older.

   6. Use specific language like ovum and sperm even with your preschooler. It's
just simpler and less confusing in the end than using euphemisms.

   7. Try practicing the conversation -- giving thought to saying neither too
much nor too little. You might say, for instance, that "Daddy had a sickness
that hurt his sperm, and we had to get some from another man," and that may
suffice.

   8. Give reassurance about how happy you are with your family. If you are able
to talk about these issues freely and without defensiveness, your children will
feel much better about themselves.

   9. And yes, it's appropriate to talk to a young child about how he or she has
two mommies or two daddies. The children of same-sex couples need to know how to
respond to other children who will no doubt be puzzled by their situation.

   Resources

   RESOLVE: The National Infertility Association www.resolve.org 888-623-0744

   Maryland chapter, RESOLVE www.path.jhu.edu / resolve 410-243-0235

   American Society for Reproductive Medicine www.asrm.org 205-978-5000

   American Infertility Association www.americaninfertility.org 888-917-3777

   Center for Disease Control, Reproductive Health Information Source
www.cdc.gov / nccdphp / drh / 770-488-5200

   Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility www.socrei.org

CORRECTION-DATE: November 17, 2002

CORRECTION:

   An article in last Sunday's Home & Family section about talking to children
about infertility incorrectly described Mary Carrier's experience. She conceived
her children through in vitro fertilization, but it did not involve donor
assistance. The Sun regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), (Babies); Getty Images

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2002


                             1041 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 17, 2002, SUNDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E8; SALUD

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: Medical advances hold promise for fetal surgery

BYLINE: Ulysses Torassa

BODY:
Fetal surgery remains rare, with fewer than 150 performed at UCSF, which
pioneered the field more than 20 years ago. But with advances on the frontiers
of medicine, it's possible the techniques could eventually be used against a far
wider variety of conditions.

    "These new areas of science and biology -- stem cell therapy, gene therapy
and tissue engineering -- all of them will find their best application in the
fetus," said Dr. Michael Harrison of UCS, who essentially founded the field in
1981 when he unblocked the urinary tract of a 21-week-old fetus. "Eventually,
we'll be able to treat adult diseases in fetuses."

    Many of those prospects are clearly far off in the future, but doctors are
attempting to repair fetuses with spina bifida. The spinal cord defect strikes
about 1 in 2,000 babies born in the United States.

    The debate over whether to perform risky surgeries on fetuses with the birth
defect, also known as myelomeningocele, has been going on for several years now.
Initial attempts at closing the spinal lesion in utero did not yield spectacular
results. And many doctors and ethicists have doubts about resorting to such
drastic measures when the condition is not fatal.

    But children with spina bifida are typically paralyzed from the waist down,
have no control over their bladders and bowels, and often require implanted
shunts to drain excess fluid from their brains. Many parents choose to abort
once they find out about the diagnosis.

    "Certainly if we could improve their lifelong disability, that would be a
wonderful thing," said Harrison, who is the director of pediatric general
surgery at UCSF Children's Hospital. He has explored the use of fetal surgery
for spina bifida. "We're not very enthusiastic about it," he said.

    Harrison, along with like-minded surgeons, has persuaded colleagues to
participate in a controlled clinical trial of the procedure that is now under
way. That means some parents who want their fetus to have surgery will have to
enroll in the experiment. Half won't get the surgery; researchers will then
compare the outcomes of the groups.

    It took a great deal of effort to get the study off the ground. Some centers
in the country were offering the surgery to any family that wanted it, leaving
no incentive for anyone to enroll in a controlled trial.

    "Some families believe so much that they have to do this, they go somewhere
else, even though it's not proven that it's better (than not intervening in
utero)," said Jean-Martin Laberge, president of the International Fetal Medicine
and Surgery Society, and director of pediatric surgery at Montreal Children's
Hospital of McGill University Health Center. "But sometimes we save more lives
by not intervening than intervening."

    Results are expected in about two years. Meanwhile, doctors are excited
about the prospects for intervening in another type of birth defect, known as
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, in which the left side of the heart is
underdeveloped.

    "Our buddies in Boston have really gotten it off the ground only in the last
year or so," Harrison said. "The general idea, if it proves correct, is that you
could prevent the development of an anatomic heart problem by doing something
relatively simple early on -- getting the blood to flow in a different
direction," to better shape the developing heart muscle.

    It's part of an ever-expanding range of conditions that Laberge said are
being explored as the safety of fetal medicine improves.

    "At some point, it will become so safe for the mother that you can start to
consider doing fetal surgery for things that are not necessarily lethal" if left
untreated, Laberge said.E-mail Ulysses Torassa at utorassa@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1042 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2592 words

HEADLINE: A Balm for the Afflicted;
Study Suggests Benefits of Lorenzo's Oil, but Its First Patient Waits for More

BYLINE: Fredrick Kunkle, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    He is bearded now, and handsome, as anyone might have expected from seeing
photographs of him as a boy.

    Awakening from a deep sleep, he blinks his large brown eyes, and a vague
look of alarm seems to flit across his face. He blinks again, languidly, as if
brushing away remnants of a dream.

    But the ruddy-faced young man, cocooned in blankets on a brisk autumn day,
has been unable to escape his solitary dreamworld since a rare genetic disease
began attacking nerve cells in his brain some 20 years ago. The disease --
adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD -- has left him unable to see, speak or move.

    That Lorenzo Odone is alive at all has made him famous, thanks to a
seemingly miraculous potion that bears his name. His parents, Augusto and
Michaela Odone -- he a former World Bank economist and she a linguist -- plunged
into the unfamiliar world of biochemistry to discover "Lorenzo's oil," a
controversial treatment made of rarefied oils normally used in the kitchen. The
discovery has been celebrated in a Hollywood movie -- and ridiculed by some
scientists. But now Augusto Odone is proclaiming vindication. Odone, 69, caring
for his son in Northern Virginia since his wife's death of lung cancer two years
ago, has been tirelessly touting a new study that he says proves Lorenzo's oil
is an effective treatment.

    The 10-year international trial, led by researchers at a Johns Hopkins
University affiliate, focused on 105 boys under the age of 6 who carried the ALD
gene but had not shown symptoms of the disease. All of the children -- 69 boys
in the United States and 36 in Europe -- were started on Lorenzo's oil. Using
magnetic resonance imaging and other diagnostic tools, researchers then followed
the group from 1989 to 1999 to evaluate whether the disease produced
neurological damage. The results suggest that boys who begin taking Lorenzo's
oil early, take it religiously and follow a restricted diet are more than 73
percent more likely to remain healthy than those who are less strict.

    The study, which has generated intense media coverage in the United States
and abroad since its release in late September, has lifted Odone's hopes not
only for finding a cure for ALD, but also perhaps for reversing the course of
his son's disease. From Lorenzo's bedside and a nearby office in Fairfax County,
Odone has launched an international media blitz to silence the skeptics. He has
written told-you-so letters to scientists and reporters who had dismissed
Lorenzo's oil as quackery.

    "Now they don't say that anymore, because there is scientific evidence,"
Odone said. "It is, in fact, a fantastic thing."

    But among professionals in the small field of ALD research, the latest study
has failed to quell doubts about Lorenzo's oil -- and in some cases redoubled
skepticism. The New England Journal of Medicine rejected the study for
peer-reviewed publication, and critics point out that its design, duration and
lack of a control group render any conclusions unreliable.

    "It might be that Lorenzo's oil, for reasons we do not understand, has a
slight effect. But in any case, the data do not demonstrate that Lorenzo's oil
has a major effect," said Patrick Aubourg, Europe's leading ALD researcher. "I
consider that its conclusions go far beyond the data themselves."

    Along with pointing up the difficulty medicine has in deciding whether to
endorse hopeful but still unproven treatments for catastrophic disease, the
latest chapter in the story of Lorenzo's oil also highlights a parent's
passionate dedication to alleviating his child's suffering -- or, at the very
least, making sure that his child's suffering is not in vain.

    Dismissing criticism of the study as "baloney," Odone shrugs off the medical
journal's rejection and continues the battle against disbelievers.

    "Why? Because I want children to live! I don't give a damn about publication
after publication," he said. "I want the whole world to know that Lorenzo's oil
might prevent -- may prevent -- the onset of this terrible disease!"

    A single enzyme tied to a single gene on a defective X chromosome wiped away
the life Augusto Odone had imagined for himself.

    It nearly killed his son. It strained his marriage. It reshaped his
religious beliefs. It kept him from returning to his beloved Italy. And it
launched a 20-year crusade to find a cure for the rare disease that crippled his
son with terrible swiftness.

    The experience, even the suffering, has deepened his faith in God. But it
shook it first.

    "The first reaction was, 'Why of all people was it me?' " he said. "But then
the second question was, 'Perhaps God sent him to me because we could do
something.' "

    Sitting at a table in his home near Fairfax City, Odone points to an early
school photo of Lorenzino, as he sometimes calls his son. Nearby is a poster for
the 1992 movie "Lorenzo's Oil" with Susan Sarandon and Nick Nolte that
proclaims, "Some People Make Their Own Miracles."

    The portrait shows a towheaded 5-year-old in bright red overalls, his face
lit by a puckish smile. The framed picture, one of the last taken before the
onset of the disease, has become a record of what was snuffed out.

    At the age of 4, Lorenzino was able to speak English, Italian and a little
French and, while listening to opera, gently chide his father for being unable
to discern the difference between Luciano Pavarotti and Placido Domingo.

    But soon after returning from a World Bank posting in the Comoro Islands in
1983, the family noticed changes in their delightfully precocious son: slurred
speech, a loss of balance. He threw fits in school. Then his hearing began to go
-- a frightening development discovered one day when his mother was reading to
him.

    "He said, 'Mommy, can't you talk louder? I can't hear you,' " Odone
recalled.

    As they made the rounds of doctors, his parents feared he might have
contracted an exotic disease in the Comoros. Eventually, doctors told them that
Lorenzo had ALD, a rare, inherited disease marked by the accumulation of very
long chain saturated fatty acids in the body.

    These fatty acid molecules, based on strings of carbon more than 22 atoms
long, are normally broken down in the process of metabolism. But those with ALD,
because of an impaired gene, lack the necessary enzyme for the process.

    In its most virulent form, the buildup of the very long chain fatty acids is
thought to trigger an attack on myelin, the protective sheath that covers nerve
fibers, in the brain and the adrenal complex. Known as demyelination, this
process, like stripping insulation from electrical wires, disrupts the ability
of the nerves to communicate with each other. The result is severe neurological
damage and, eventually, breakdown of bodily function.

    Though the symptoms and progress of the disease can vary greatly, when it
strikes children, usually around age 7, its development is rapid and horrifying.
In just two years, a child's first, often subtle symptoms -- trouble with
schoolwork, behavioral problems or impaired eyesight -- can progress to a
comalike state or death. Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), a milder form of the
disease, strikes later, between ages 20 and 30.

    Because the disease is caused by a gene on the X chromosome, and women have
two X's, they are far less likely to develop symptoms. But they can pass the
defect to their sons, who have one X and one Y chromosome and more often suffer
the disease's effects. About one in 20,000 people worldwide suffers from ALD.
The only generally accepted treatment, bone marrow transplant, carries a high
risk of death and is effective only when used early in the progress of the
disease. Researchers also are exploring the prospects of treatment with gene
therapy and cell cloning therapy.

    Although some recent research suggests that the accumulation of fatty acids
may be a marker of the demyelinating disease, and not its direct cause,
scientists have theorized that controlling the level of very long chain fatty
acids might halt ALD's progress.

    That was the launching point for the Odones. Augusto and Michaela had no
medical background. Their grounding in Latin and Greek, however, helped them
pierce the dense language of science.

    Eventually, their research led them to believe that a single enzyme was
responsible for converting shorter-chain fatty acids into two kinds of very long
chain fatty acids, one of which is dangerous and one of which is not. They hit
on a brilliant idea: Perhaps, by introducing a certain type of fatty acid into
the diet, they could trick the body into creating the benign form of very long
chain fatty acids.

    So they gave Lorenzo doses of oleic acid -- a substance found in olive oil.
This cut the level of harmful very long chain fatty acids, but not enough. The
Odones added erucic acid, which is found in rapeseed, and the fatty acid levels
became normal.

    Odone still kicks himself that their discovery came too late to slow the
disease's ravages in his son.

    "It was fast. Very fast. Lightning fast," Odone said.

    A machine, puttering intermittently beside his son's bed, clears away his
son's saliva.

    "But I don't want to record all those things, because they make me sad,"
Odone said. "Okay?"

    These days, Odone looks after his son with the help of nurses and Oumouri
Hassane, 36, who befriended the family years ago in the Comoros. They monitor
Lorenzo's vital signs, take blood samples and supervise his four daily feedings.
Each meal -- a soupy mix of meat and vegetables, sauteed in Lorenzo's oil -- is
pumped through a nasogastric tube. Lorenzo, who weighs 105 pounds, consumes
about 10ml of oil per meal.

    The oil, manufactured by Gaithersburg-based SHS North America, costs about $
73 for a 720ml bottle, or enough to last about two weeks. Odone owns the patent.

    Though organized religion leaves him cold, Odone's quest to understand the
workings of a living cell confirmed his belief that a superior intelligence
created the universe.

    That faith, in science and miracles, has convinced him that his son may step
from his bed someday if the body can be coaxed into rebuilding myelin. The
Myelin Foundation, a nonprofit group begun by him and his wife, has raised more
than $ 800,000 to underwrite such research. And even if all is for naught, he
believes it is enough that his son survived. Who is to say, he asks, what the
quality of life is?

    "He shows pleasure," Odone said. "For example, when I caress his face, when
I talk to him in an affectionate way, he vocalizes," Odone said, imitating a
sound that resembles an urgent hum of pleasure.

    Before the disease, Odone imagined that he would retire from the World Bank
and return to Italy. There is a house in the Piedmont that he bought, thinking
of old friends and the tomatoes that grow in its rich soil.

    "Instead, I'm stuck in Fairfax, talking to squirrels," Odone said, sitting
in his Dunn Loring office. He gestures beyond the picture window where the
animals come to feed. "Really -- you think that's a joke? Some of my best
companions are squirrels."

    There is no irony when he describes his marriage to Michaela Murphy Odone, a
native of Yonkers, N.Y., as "the love story of the century."

    But that, too, suffered. Michaela devoted her time almost exclusively to her
son's care, while Augusto worked at the World Bank and both hunted for a cure.

    "At the end, we had short fuses. But, really, we loved each other very
much," he said.

    Odone believes that the new study, as well as his 24-year-old son's
survival, offers proof of the treatment's efficacy, and he cites other families
that claim success.

    "Trying Lorenzo's oil seemed like a no-brainer to me," said Patti Chapman,
whose 23-year-old son, Michael Benton, has been taking Lorenzo's oil for about
15 years, since doctors discovered that he had the defective gene. He shows no
symptoms of the disease.

    "I feel pretty strongly this was a real proactive thing to do for Michael.
In my heart, I feel it's what got him to this point," she said.

    Chapman still remembers panicking when she learned what the disease could
do. In the 1950s, one of her younger brothers died at age 4 of what was then
believed to be a brain tumor but was later thought to be ALD. Another brother
died a year ago of the adult form of the disease. He had been taking Lorenzo's
oil.

    Knowing that studies have cast doubt on whether the oil can penetrate brain
tissue, she wonders whether the treatment will really protect her son.

    He wonders, too.

    "I'd have to agree with some of the people who say they're still not sure,"
Benton said.

    No one disputes that Lorenzo's oil lowers the level of fatty acids. Even
critics suggest that at-risk ALD children should take Lorenzo's oil as long as
the treatment could still prove effective.

    But Aubourg, a French researcher at the French Institute of Health and
Medical Research in Paris who was the first to identify and clone the ALD gene,
said at best the new study suggests that Lorenzo's oil might slow the brutal
progress of the disease in some patients. But no one knows for sure whether the
boys who have escaped ALD's debilitating symptoms did so because of Lorenzo's
oil or a quirk of their own biology, he said. Further study is necessary to
determine whether they will show symptoms of milder forms as they grow older.

    William B. Rizzo, who as a doctor at the Medical College of Virginia was
among the first to embrace Lorenzo's oil as a possible therapy, said the time
has come to consider studies with placebos and control groups, as is done with
any other uncertain remedy.

    "I don't know that we should be making recommendations on therapy based on
unpublishable studies," said Rizzo, who now teaches at the University of
Nebraska Medical Center.

    But Donald Hunneman, a researcher at the University of Gottingen who took
part in the study, said he had been more pessimistic about the oil before he saw
the results.

    "It's proven that it does have an effect. The patients who keep their fatty
acids below a certain level survive statistically better than those who don't,"
Hunneman said. "It doesn't work all the time. People do, nevertheless, get sick,
even if you treat with the oil."

    Even the study's lead researcher, Hugo W. Moser, director of the
Neurogenetics Research Center at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore,
acknowledges its shortcomings.

    But Moser, the preeminent U.S. authority on ALD, said he saw enough that was
hopeful in the results that he felt an ethical obligation to publicize the
findings.

    "I find myself in a dilemma. Here I have data, flawed as they are,
suggesting that this stuff, this medication, may be of help," Moser said. "On
the flip side, there is nothing else."

    Odone's face shows that he has heard all the skepticism before as the light
pouring through the windows of his house plays up his monumental features: high
cheekbones, deeply sunken cheeks, a large, almost Clintonesque nose and hair
that is silvery and thick for a man nearing 70.

    Years of smoking have imparted a mild grumble to his rich, Italian-accented
voice and left him gobbling nicotine pills. His tone conveys casual surety
whether discussing chains of carbon atoms or the merits of espresso.

    Beneath the courtly bearing and Old World hospitality, however, is a
relentlessly purposeful man. He does not suffer fools, and a certain sharpness
emerges the moment the word "theory" is mentioned in regard to Lorenzo's oil.

    "Don't call it a theory anymore, because it's been proven!" he says. "I
don't want to sound angry, but it's 10 years I've been fighting this."

CORRECTION-DATE: November 19, 2002, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

    In a Nov. 17 article on Lorenzo Odone and the disease known as
adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) that afflicts him, the Myelin Project was
misidentified. The story should also have made clear that the foundation raised
more than $ 800,000 in the fiscal year ending in September 2001.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1043 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2592 words

HEADLINE: A Balm for the Afflicted;
Study Suggests Benefits of Lorenzo's Oil, but Its First Patient Waits for More

BYLINE: Fredrick Kunkle, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    He is bearded now, and handsome, as anyone might have expected from seeing
photographs of him as a boy.

    Awakening from a deep sleep, he blinks his large brown eyes, and a vague
look of alarm seems to flit across his face. He blinks again, languidly, as if
brushing away remnants of a dream.

    But the ruddy-faced young man, cocooned in blankets on a brisk autumn day,
has been unable to escape his solitary dreamworld since a rare genetic disease
began attacking nerve cells in his brain some 20 years ago. The disease --
adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD -- has left him unable to see, speak or move.

    That Lorenzo Odone is alive at all has made him famous, thanks to a
seemingly miraculous potion that bears his name. His parents, Augusto and
Michaela Odone -- he a former World Bank economist and she a linguist -- plunged
into the unfamiliar world of biochemistry to discover "Lorenzo's oil," a
controversial treatment made of rarefied oils normally used in the kitchen. The
discovery has been celebrated in a Hollywood movie -- and ridiculed by some
scientists. But now Augusto Odone is proclaiming vindication. Odone, 69, caring
for his son in Northern Virginia since his wife's death of lung cancer two years
ago, has been tirelessly touting a new study that he says proves Lorenzo's oil
is an effective treatment.

    The 10-year international trial, led by researchers at a Johns Hopkins
University affiliate, focused on 105 boys under the age of 6 who carried the ALD
gene but had not shown symptoms of the disease. All of the children -- 69 boys
in the United States and 36 in Europe -- were started on Lorenzo's oil. Using
magnetic resonance imaging and other diagnostic tools, researchers then followed
the group from 1989 to 1999 to evaluate whether the disease produced
neurological damage. The results suggest that boys who begin taking Lorenzo's
oil early, take it religiously and follow a restricted diet are more than 73
percent more likely to remain healthy than those who are less strict.

    The study, which has generated intense media coverage in the United States
and abroad since its release in late September, has lifted Odone's hopes not
only for finding a cure for ALD, but also perhaps for reversing the course of
his son's disease. From Lorenzo's bedside and a nearby office in Fairfax County,
Odone has launched an international media blitz to silence the skeptics. He has
written told-you-so letters to scientists and reporters who had dismissed
Lorenzo's oil as quackery.

    "Now they don't say that anymore, because there is scientific evidence,"
Odone said. "It is, in fact, a fantastic thing."

    But among professionals in the small field of ALD research, the latest study
has failed to quell doubts about Lorenzo's oil -- and in some cases redoubled
skepticism. The New England Journal of Medicine rejected the study for
peer-reviewed publication, and critics point out that its design, duration and
lack of a control group render any conclusions unreliable.

    "It might be that Lorenzo's oil, for reasons we do not understand, has a
slight effect. But in any case, the data do not demonstrate that Lorenzo's oil
has a major effect," said Patrick Aubourg, Europe's leading ALD researcher. "I
consider that its conclusions go far beyond the data themselves."

    Along with pointing up the difficulty medicine has in deciding whether to
endorse hopeful but still unproven treatments for catastrophic disease, the
latest chapter in the story of Lorenzo's oil also highlights a parent's
passionate dedication to alleviating his child's suffering -- or, at the very
least, making sure that his child's suffering is not in vain.

    Dismissing criticism of the study as "baloney," Odone shrugs off the medical
journal's rejection and continues the battle against disbelievers.

    "Why? Because I want children to live! I don't give a damn about publication
after publication," he said. "I want the whole world to know that Lorenzo's oil
might prevent -- may prevent -- the onset of this terrible disease!"

    A single enzyme tied to a single gene on a defective X chromosome wiped away
the life Augusto Odone had imagined for himself.

    It nearly killed his son. It strained his marriage. It reshaped his
religious beliefs. It kept him from returning to his beloved Italy. And it
launched a 20-year crusade to find a cure for the rare disease that crippled his
son with terrible swiftness.

    The experience, even the suffering, has deepened his faith in God. But it
shook it first.

    "The first reaction was, 'Why of all people was it me?' " he said. "But then
the second question was, 'Perhaps God sent him to me because we could do
something.' "

    Sitting at a table in his home near Fairfax City, Odone points to an early
school photo of Lorenzino, as he sometimes calls his son. Nearby is a poster for
the 1992 movie "Lorenzo's Oil" with Susan Sarandon and Nick Nolte that
proclaims, "Some People Make Their Own Miracles."

    The portrait shows a towheaded 5-year-old in bright red overalls, his face
lit by a puckish smile. The framed picture, one of the last taken before the
onset of the disease, has become a record of what was snuffed out.

    At the age of 4, Lorenzino was able to speak English, Italian and a little
French and, while listening to opera, gently chide his father for being unable
to discern the difference between Luciano Pavarotti and Placido Domingo.

    But soon after returning from a World Bank posting in the Comoro Islands in
1983, the family noticed changes in their delightfully precocious son: slurred
speech, a loss of balance. He threw fits in school. Then his hearing began to go
-- a frightening development discovered one day when his mother was reading to
him.

    "He said, 'Mommy, can't you talk louder? I can't hear you,' " Odone
recalled.

    As they made the rounds of doctors, his parents feared he might have
contracted an exotic disease in the Comoros. Eventually, doctors told them that
Lorenzo had ALD, a rare, inherited disease marked by the accumulation of very
long chain saturated fatty acids in the body.

    These fatty acid molecules, based on strings of carbon more than 22 atoms
long, are normally broken down in the process of metabolism. But those with ALD,
because of an impaired gene, lack the necessary enzyme for the process.

    In its most virulent form, the buildup of the very long chain fatty acids is
thought to trigger an attack on myelin, the protective sheath that covers nerve
fibers, in the brain and the adrenal complex. Known as demyelination, this
process, like stripping insulation from electrical wires, disrupts the ability
of the nerves to communicate with each other. The result is severe neurological
damage and, eventually, breakdown of bodily function.

    Though the symptoms and progress of the disease can vary greatly, when it
strikes children, usually around age 7, its development is rapid and horrifying.
In just two years, a child's first, often subtle symptoms -- trouble with
schoolwork, behavioral problems or impaired eyesight -- can progress to a
comalike state or death. Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), a milder form of the
disease, strikes later, between ages 20 and 30.

    Because the disease is caused by a gene on the X chromosome, and women have
two X's, they are far less likely to develop symptoms. But they can pass the
defect to their sons, who have one X and one Y chromosome and more often suffer
the disease's effects. About one in 20,000 people worldwide suffers from ALD.
The only generally accepted treatment, bone marrow transplant, carries a high
risk of death and is effective only when used early in the progress of the
disease. Researchers also are exploring the prospects of treatment with gene
therapy and cell cloning therapy.

    Although some recent research suggests that the accumulation of fatty acids
may be a marker of the demyelinating disease, and not its direct cause,
scientists have theorized that controlling the level of very long chain fatty
acids might halt ALD's progress.

    That was the launching point for the Odones. Augusto and Michaela had no
medical background. Their grounding in Latin and Greek, however, helped them
pierce the dense language of science.

    Eventually, their research led them to believe that a single enzyme was
responsible for converting shorter-chain fatty acids into two kinds of very long
chain fatty acids, one of which is dangerous and one of which is not. They hit
on a brilliant idea: Perhaps, by introducing a certain type of fatty acid into
the diet, they could trick the body into creating the benign form of very long
chain fatty acids.

    So they gave Lorenzo doses of oleic acid -- a substance found in olive oil.
This cut the level of harmful very long chain fatty acids, but not enough. The
Odones added erucic acid, which is found in rapeseed, and the fatty acid levels
became normal.

    Odone still kicks himself that their discovery came too late to slow the
disease's ravages in his son.

    "It was fast. Very fast. Lightning fast," Odone said.

    A machine, puttering intermittently beside his son's bed, clears away his
son's saliva.

    "But I don't want to record all those things, because they make me sad,"
Odone said. "Okay?"

    These days, Odone looks after his son with the help of nurses and Oumouri
Hassane, 36, who befriended the family years ago in the Comoros. They monitor
Lorenzo's vital signs, take blood samples and supervise his four daily feedings.
Each meal -- a soupy mix of meat and vegetables, sauteed in Lorenzo's oil -- is
pumped through a nasogastric tube. Lorenzo, who weighs 105 pounds, consumes
about 10ml of oil per meal.

    The oil, manufactured by Gaithersburg-based SHS North America, costs about $
73 for a 720ml bottle, or enough to last about two weeks. Odone owns the patent.

    Though organized religion leaves him cold, Odone's quest to understand the
workings of a living cell confirmed his belief that a superior intelligence
created the universe.

    That faith, in science and miracles, has convinced him that his son may step
from his bed someday if the body can be coaxed into rebuilding myelin. The
Myelin Foundation, a nonprofit group begun by him and his wife, has raised more
than $ 800,000 to underwrite such research. And even if all is for naught, he
believes it is enough that his son survived. Who is to say, he asks, what the
quality of life is?

    "He shows pleasure," Odone said. "For example, when I caress his face, when
I talk to him in an affectionate way, he vocalizes," Odone said, imitating a
sound that resembles an urgent hum of pleasure.

    Before the disease, Odone imagined that he would retire from the World Bank
and return to Italy. There is a house in the Piedmont that he bought, thinking
of old friends and the tomatoes that grow in its rich soil.

    "Instead, I'm stuck in Fairfax, talking to squirrels," Odone said, sitting
in his Dunn Loring office. He gestures beyond the picture window where the
animals come to feed. "Really -- you think that's a joke? Some of my best
companions are squirrels."

    There is no irony when he describes his marriage to Michaela Murphy Odone, a
native of Yonkers, N.Y., as "the love story of the century."

    But that, too, suffered. Michaela devoted her time almost exclusively to her
son's care, while Augusto worked at the World Bank and both hunted for a cure.

    "At the end, we had short fuses. But, really, we loved each other very
much," he said.

    Odone believes that the new study, as well as his 24-year-old son's
survival, offers proof of the treatment's efficacy, and he cites other families
that claim success.

    "Trying Lorenzo's oil seemed like a no-brainer to me," said Patti Chapman,
whose 23-year-old son, Michael Benton, has been taking Lorenzo's oil for about
15 years, since doctors discovered that he had the defective gene. He shows no
symptoms of the disease.

    "I feel pretty strongly this was a real proactive thing to do for Michael.
In my heart, I feel it's what got him to this point," she said.

    Chapman still remembers panicking when she learned what the disease could
do. In the 1950s, one of her younger brothers died at age 4 of what was then
believed to be a brain tumor but was later thought to be ALD. Another brother
died a year ago of the adult form of the disease. He had been taking Lorenzo's
oil.

    Knowing that studies have cast doubt on whether the oil can penetrate brain
tissue, she wonders whether the treatment will really protect her son.

    He wonders, too.

    "I'd have to agree with some of the people who say they're still not sure,"
Benton said.

    No one disputes that Lorenzo's oil lowers the level of fatty acids. Even
critics suggest that at-risk ALD children should take Lorenzo's oil as long as
the treatment could still prove effective.

    But Aubourg, a French researcher at the French Institute of Health and
Medical Research in Paris who was the first to identify and clone the ALD gene,
said at best the new study suggests that Lorenzo's oil might slow the brutal
progress of the disease in some patients. But no one knows for sure whether the
boys who have escaped ALD's debilitating symptoms did so because of Lorenzo's
oil or a quirk of their own biology, he said. Further study is necessary to
determine whether they will show symptoms of milder forms as they grow older.

    William B. Rizzo, who as a doctor at the Medical College of Virginia was
among the first to embrace Lorenzo's oil as a possible therapy, said the time
has come to consider studies with placebos and control groups, as is done with
any other uncertain remedy.

    "I don't know that we should be making recommendations on therapy based on
unpublishable studies," said Rizzo, who now teaches at the University of
Nebraska Medical Center.

    But Donald Hunneman, a researcher at the University of Gottingen who took
part in the study, said he had been more pessimistic about the oil before he saw
the results.

    "It's proven that it does have an effect. The patients who keep their fatty
acids below a certain level survive statistically better than those who don't,"
Hunneman said. "It doesn't work all the time. People do, nevertheless, get sick,
even if you treat with the oil."

    Even the study's lead researcher, Hugo W. Moser, director of the
Neurogenetics Research Center at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore,
acknowledges its shortcomings.

    But Moser, the preeminent U.S. authority on ALD, said he saw enough that was
hopeful in the results that he felt an ethical obligation to publicize the
findings.

    "I find myself in a dilemma. Here I have data, flawed as they are,
suggesting that this stuff, this medication, may be of help," Moser said. "On
the flip side, there is nothing else."

    Odone's face shows that he has heard all the skepticism before as the light
pouring through the windows of his house plays up his monumental features: high
cheekbones, deeply sunken cheeks, a large, almost Clintonesque nose and hair
that is silvery and thick for a man nearing 70.

    Years of smoking have imparted a mild grumble to his rich, Italian-accented
voice and left him gobbling nicotine pills. His tone conveys casual surety
whether discussing chains of carbon atoms or the merits of espresso.

    Beneath the courtly bearing and Old World hospitality, however, is a
relentlessly purposeful man. He does not suffer fools, and a certain sharpness
emerges the moment the word "theory" is mentioned in regard to Lorenzo's oil.

    "Don't call it a theory anymore, because it's been proven!" he says. "I
don't want to sound angry, but it's 10 years I've been fighting this."

CORRECTION-DATE: November 19, 2002

CORRECTION:

   In a Nov. 17 article on Lorenzo Odone and the disease known as
adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) that afflicts him, the Myelin Project was
misidentified. The story should also have made clear that the foundation raised
more than $ 800,000 in the fiscal year ending in September 2001.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1044 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           November 16, 2002 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: Matter Over Mind?

BYLINE: Ellen Goodman

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

    -- Imagine that you have arrived at the emergency room after a horrific car
crash. The doctor in charge offers you two pills. One will relieve the
inflammation of whiplash. The other will reduce the psychological trauma, muting
the nightmarish flashback to a manageable memory.

    Would you take one? Would you take both? Is there any difference?

    Imagine, for that matter, that a child came to the hospital after being
raped or abused. Should she be given a pill if it would prevent the trauma from
literally changing the anatomy of her brain and setting her up for a lifetime of
vulnerability?

    And finally, if your imagination isn't overtaxed already, what about a
soldier just back from battle? Should he be treated with medicine that helps dim
the effect of the horrors he has experienced?

    These are not idle science fictions. Once, we drew a bright line between the
pain of the body and the mind, between treatments for physical and mental
illness. Now researchers are into the chemistry of emotions, the biology of
feelings, the anatomy of psychology.

    It appears that memories of shocking events may be like water -- an
overwhelming flood or a manageable stream. And scientists may be designing
chemical faucets.

    Just last week, a meeting of traumatic-stress specialists heard that a
common hypertension drug may help prevent post-traumatic stress disorder. If the
human trials pan out, it could, in effect, keep a wrenching experience from
being burned too deeply in memory.

    There is research as well on treatments designed to interrupt the way a
painful event can change the brain. And there is also talk of gene therapies
that might make vulnerable people react to emotional injuries like resilient
people.

    What are we to make of this? The goal is, after all, simple and
uncontroversial. Roger Pitman of Harvard Medical School, who is doing research
in this field, says, "I look at it from a medical perspective. We intervene in
diseases and disorders to make people more comfortable and to reduce suffering."

    Fair enough. A bad memory can be as painful and crippling as a bad back or
heart. Post-traumatic stress disorder is not trivialized by those who live with
it or treat it. Pitman repeats the words of veterans he has treated: "One said
to me: If Vietnam was only a memory, I would be okay. It's more than a memory.
It's happening again." If we can heal that, surely we should.

    I don't romanticize mental illness. But at the same time, I wonder what will
happen if we are able to lighten the load of memory. Would we end up with a drug
to make loss "lite," to speed up "closure," to make horror "manageable"? At some
point reducing human suffering is editing human experience. For better or for
worse.

    I remember what happened to Prozac. A drug to alleviate severe depression
morphed into what is called a cosmetic pharmacology. It was used to help people
feel "better than well," in a phrase made famous by Peter Kramer in "Listening
to Prozac." The class of drugs not only replaced counseling but was routinely
prescribed by internists for patients and even by veterinarians for pets.

    It's not that hard to envision preventive drugs for post-traumatic stress
disorder being offered to those who witnessed the Columbine massacre or the
collapse of the World Trade Center. Nor is it hard to imagine preventive drugs
offered to parents who have just lost a child. Where do we draw the line on the
prescription pad?

    Kramer sees benefits in helping those who are truly "overwhelmed and
haunted." But he also can see abuse. "Imagine," he says, "a totalitarian,
militaristic society giving it to soldiers so they will be immune to the horrors
of war." And if the horrors of war or of crime are not so "horrible," wouldn't
that change our attitude toward war or crime themselves?

    Such worries race ahead of the research. Pitman says succinctly, "We don't
want to make people happy automatons. We're not going to eliminate the horrors
of war." He says that we won't know where to draw the line -- or the dosage --
until we know what medicine can do.

    But it seems to me that we often find ourselves behind the research curve,
playing ethical catch-up with cloning or cosmetic pharmacology after they are on
the market and in the doctor's office. Now we are at the outset of treatments
that could alter mind and memory and our ideas about humanity.

    Today, we have to ask the questions first. And so we begin with this one:
Isn't human suffering more than a matter of chemistry?

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2002


                             1045 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     November 15, 2002 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: Big financial bump in road faces struggling EntreMed;
 Stock buyback may cost firm up to $3.8 million

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   EntreMed Inc. said yesterday that it has sufficient cash to finance
operations until the end of the year, but the struggling Rockville drug
developer acknowledged it faces another financial hurdle soon.

   EntreMed must renegotiate an agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. by Dec.
1, or face the possibility of buying back 291,666 of its own shares at a
guaranteed price of $13.14 each, according to a recent company filing with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. EntreMed can ill afford the $3.8 million the
buyback might cost.

   The company said it had $4.8 million in cash and investments as of Sept. 30.

   Shares of EntreMed lost 3 cents yesterday to close at $1.22 on the Nasdaq
stock market, where they continue to trade as EntreMed fights a Nasdaq effort to
delist it.

   "We're in productive and active dialogue" with Bristol-Myers, said EntreMed
Chairman John W. Holaday.

   EntreMed reported a net loss of $11.8 million, or 54 cents a share, on
revenue of $345,569 for the third quarter. Analysts had expected a loss of 51
cents a share, according to Thomson First Call.

   The company reported a profit of $6.2 million, or 34 cents a share, on
revenue of $90,988 in the third quarter last year, when the company had a
one-time gain of $22.4 million from selling its rights to future royalties from
the drug thalidomide.

   EntreMed estimated its liabilities currently top assets by $9.1 million.

   The company already has laid off all but 57 of its 150 employees since
August, deferred top executive's salaries and discontinued sponsoring academic
research, including at the Boston laboratory of Dr. Judah Folkman, where its
marquee drugs were discovered.

   The company also has decided not to start additional clinical trials of
protein drugs Endostatin or Angiostatin, though it has enough of the drugs to
continue current trials into 2004.

   Instead, EntreMed has narrowed its focus to so-called small-molecule drugs to
save money and attract investment. The drugs, which include Panzem, are cheaper
and easier to make as well as easier to take than proteins, which are injected.
Panzem and EntreMed's thalidomide derivative, ENMD 0995, are taken orally.

   All four are in clinical trials as cancer treatments.

   Holaday said the company is looking at cutting costs by reducing its 96
percent stake in MaxCyte Inc.

   The subsidiary is in the early stages of developing ways to use blood cells
to transport gene therapies inside the body to targeted sites. EntreMed Vice
Chairman Wendell M. Starke said the move would result in EntreMed retaining a
large, but not majority, share of MaxCyte's stock.

   The company said it continues attempts to raise money from investors and by
selling rights to one of its drugs to a larger company in exchange for upfront
cash and future payments.

   "The upside is people are interested," analyst Peter McDonald of Gerard
Klauer Mattison said of EntreMed's licensing attempts.

   "The downside is any potential partner could wait them out and just do a deal
after the end of the year" - when EntreMed could be out of money and at the end
of its rope.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), EntreMed Chairman John Hola day says talks are under way with
Bristol-Myers Squibb to ease buyback of stock.; SUN FILE PHOTO : 2001

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1046 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 15, 2002, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 999 words

HEADLINE: TRANSITION TEAM LINEUP

BODY:

   HEALTH CARE

   Chair:  Charles Baker, president and CEO, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care

   Michael Astrue, vice president and counsel, Transkaryotic Therapies

      Judith Beals, executive director, Jane Doe Inc.

   Dr. Michael Collins, president and CEO, Caritas Christi Health Care System

   Sandra Fenwick, chief operating officer, Children's Hospital

   Paul Fireman, chairman and CEO, Reebok International Ltd.

   Dr. Gloria White Hammond, South End Community Health Center

   Marian Heard, president and CEO, United Way of Massachusetts Bay

   Mark Helberg, founder, New England Shelter for Homeless Veterans

   David Jordan, president, Seven Hills Foundation

   Jemma Lambert, director, Barnstable Senior Center

   Nancy Leaming, CEO, Tufts Health Plan

   Carolyn Markey, president, Visiting Nurses Association of America

   Eric Schultz, president and CEO, Fallon Community Health Plan

   Alison Taunton-Rigby, president, Forester Biotech

   Dr. Charles Welch, president, Massachusetts Medical Society

   Linda Whitlock, CEO, Boston Boys and Girls Club

   Jobs and the Economy

   Chair: Michael Porter, professor, Harvard Business School

   Chris Anderson, president, Massachusetts High Tech Council

   Mark Bergeron, owner, Bergie's Seafood

   Janice Bourque, president and CEO, Massachusetts Biotechnology Council

   Susan Brazil, vice president, United Steelworkers of America, Local 9358

   David D'Alessandro, president and CEO, John Hancock Financial Services

   Jim Davis, president, New Balance Athletic Shoes

   Rick Fielding, president, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers,
Local 1505

   Anne Finucane, executive vice president, FleetBoston Financial

   Nancy Fitzpatrick, CEO, Country Curtains

   Orit Gadiesh, chairman, Bain and Co.

   Alfred Goldstein, president, Lynn Plastics Company, LLC

   Shira Goodman, CEO, Stride Rite Corp.

   Jeff Grogan, The Monitor Group

   Sara Johnson, managing director, Global Insight.

   Rosabeth Moss Kanter, professor, Harvard Business School

   Liz Lempres, managing director, McKinsey and Co.

   Sheryl Marshall, managing partner, Axxon Capital

   Ralph Martin, former Suffolk district attorney

   Cathy Minehan, president, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

   Bob O'Connell, president and CEO, Mass Mutual Financial Group

   Kathleen Schatzberg, president, Cape Cod Community College

   Gail Snowden, executive vice president and managing director, Fleet Community
Investment Group

   Tom Stemberg, CEO and chairman, Staples, Inc.

   Kendall Wallace, publisher, Sun newspaper of Lowell

   Joe Wong, president, Asian-American Republican Association

   Education

   Chair: Tripp Jones, executive director, MassINC

   Denise Dupre, former dean, Boston University School of Hospitality Management

   Grace Fey, chair, University of Massachusetts Board of Trustees

   Michael Goldstein, founder and executive director, Media and Technology
Charter School

   Jo-Anne Hodgson, principal, Abraham Lincoln Elementary School

   James Karloutsas, retired principal, John F. Kennedy Elementary School

   Wilfredo Laboy, superintendent, Lawrence public schools

   Marlyn McGrath Lewis, director of admission, Harvard University

   Peter Lynch, vice chairman, Fidelity Management and Research Co.

   Linda Mason, chairman and cofounder, Bright Horizons Family Solutions

   Kristen McCormack, director of public and nonprofit Management Program,
Boston University Graduate School of Management

   Susan Minihane, teacher, David A. Ellis Elementary School

   Peter Nessen, chairman, Nessen Associates

   Lincoln Tamayo, former principal, Chelsea High School; chairman, English for
the Children

   Public Safety

   Chair: Lieutenant Governor-elect Kerry Healey

   Paul Byrne, president, MBTA Police Association

   Robert Campbell, president, Massachusetts Police Chiefs Association

   John Coflesky, president, State Police Association of Massachusetts

   Frank Cousins, sheriff, Essex County

   Donna Cuomo, victim's rights advocate

   Peter Flaherty, former prosecutor, Suffolk district attorney's office

   Mark Goshko, partner, Kirkpatrick and Lockhart, LLP, Chair, Log Cabin Club of
Massachusetts

   Margot Hill, lieutenant, Boston Police Department

   Paula Meara, chief of police, Springfield

   Shiela Moore, executive director, Casa Myrna Vazquez

   Kim O'Hara, assistant superintendent, Essex County Women in Transition
program

   Kathy O'Toole, former secretary, Executive Office of Public Safety

   Wayne Sallale, vice president, Fraternal Order of Police

   Elizabeth Scheibel, district attorney, Northwestern District

   Connie Wong, board of directors, Asian Task Force Against Domestic Violence

   Transportation and Housing

   Chair: Gloria Cordes Larson, Foley Hoag Attorneys at Law

   Gregory Beeman, executive director, Massachusetts chapter of the Associated
Builders and Contractors

   Wayne Budd, executive vice president and general counsel, John Hancock
Financial Services

   Charles Chieppo, Pioneer Institute

   Lyndia Downie, president, Pine Street Inn

   Rosalind Gorin, CEO, H.N. Gorin

   Aaron Gornstein, executive director, Citizens Housing and Planning
Association

   Daniel Grabauskas, former registrar, Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles

   Patrick Guerriero, former mayor, Melrose

   John Judge, executive director, Habitat for Humanity of Greater Boston

   Vivien Li, executive director, Boston Harbor Association

   Dean Mazzarella, mayor, Leominster

   Pearl Moy, community lending, Liberty Bank

   Michael Sullivan, mayor, Lawrence

   Mary Truong, vice president, Fleet Boston Financial's Community Investment
Group

   Alberto Vasallo, editor and publisher, El Mundo

   Environment

   Chair: Diane Conrad, managing director of environmental programs, Salt Lake
Organizing Committee

   Elizabeth Adams, program director for Municipal Finance, Trust for Public
Land - New England Region

   Doug Foy, president, Conservation Law Foundation

   Jill Kravetz, partner, The Parthenon Group

   Sandra Moose, senior vice president, Boston Consulting Group

   Joe Nolan, senior vice president, NStar

   Ellen Roy, senior lecturer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   Jack Yunits, mayor, Brockton

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1047 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 15, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 840 words

BODY:

   Aside from possibly the National Association of Former Husbands of Jennifer
Lopez, is there any identifiable segment of American society that is
consistently more agitated than football coaches?

    Is there enough black market Ritalin out there to collectively calm these
folks before OSHA mandates that coaches be kept on the sideline in a Hannibal
Lecter cage and faceplate?

    Most important, how many times can I continue to ask the same question in a
different way before at least flirting with the main point?

    Let's review, shall we, the recent events of a pretty frightening autumn.

    It would not be advised, I don't imagine, that a 75-year-old man become
extremely agitated and then sprint across a field in central Pennsylvania, but
that's what Joe Paterno did on his way to grabbing an official immediately after
losing at home to Iowa.

    That was Episode I in Paterno's descent into serial official grabbing. Joe
has felt up more guys this fall than Elton John. There was a time when Joe
Paterno could walk into a postgame news conference and instruct fidgety writers
that they'd just witnessed an awfully fine football game between two awfully
fine football teams even when Penn State lost. Thrice this fall in precisely
those circumstances, his agitation was palpable, even foreboding.

    He still hasn't explained what a dummy dressed as a game official was doing
hanging on the door of his State College home. And he's not about to. He's too
agitated.

    This week's installment of classical coach agitation comes from the unlikely
Perry Traditional Academy, where head coach Bill Gallagher is suspended at least
for tomorrow's PIAA playoff game after having allegedly spewed vulgarities at
security officers and Heinz Field personnel before last week's City League title
game.

    Gallagher understandably has a lot to be hacked off about, coming off a
season in which his players outscored opponents one million to nothing. When
there's nothing to get upset about during the game, coaches have to get their
rage out pregame.

    The coaches at Miami of Ohio had to wait until the final moments of Tuesday
night's 36-34 loss at Marshall to act like idiots, but it was worth the wait.
The defensive coordinator was led off the field in handcuffs and is charged with
battery, while another assistant to coach Terry Hoeppner acknowledged trashing
the visiting coach's booth in the press box. Now that's some coaching.

    The Marshall fan defensive coordinator Jon Wauford allegedly slapped around
was treated and released from a West Virginia hospital, proving for the moment
that Miami of Ohio's defense could stop somebody.

    Earlier in the day, a continent away, more than 40 players at the University
of Arizona met with the school's president to present complaints about their
treatment at the hands of head coach John Mackovic, who has guided the Wildcats
to an 0-6 record in the PAC-10. Players said he was verbally abusive and that
there was no joy in playing for him.

    Well, no kiddin' .

    There's no joy in football boys. The joy goes out of it pretty much the
minute you put that equipment on.

    Sunday at Heinz Field, the Steelers and the Atlanta Falcons stampeded up and
down the beleaguered lawn, trading record-setting performances over more than
four hours of athletic brilliance, in the aftermath of which everyone was
plainly miserable.

    Bill Cowher refused at first to even answer questions regarding strategy,
but relented two days later. Cowher couldn't do it in the minutes after the game
because he was simply too agitated. What he has in common with the coaches at
Miami of Ohio, with the coach at Arizona, with Joe Paterno, and even with the
coach at Perry is this simple tyranny: the pressure to win is staggering.

    It requires a single-mindedness and in many cases a boiling agitation and
rage just to function. There's just no room for fun. Cowher and coaches like
Tampa Bay's Jon Gruden are not at the very peak of the coaching profession for
nothing.

    Cowher replaced Chuck Noll essentially because Noll could no longer sustain
his rage and focus. Noll talked about wine, played guitar, had a range of
informed opinions on current events, education, most things civilians might care
to talk about.

    In the post-modern NFL, that was a recipe for 5-11.

    Gruden works 21-hour days and admits to a certain kind of shallowness that
makes it possible. He told Sports Illustrated in September that he was not
impacted by the advice of his idol, former San Francisco 49ers assistant Bob
McKittrick, who called him in 1999 and said: "Jon, I've got cancer and I'm going
to die. I wanted to call you and tell you: It's not just about football. Go be
with your kids and your wife. Football is irrelevant."

    You'd never know it in this culture.

    Before last year's Virginia-Penn State game at Virginia, a sideline reporter
asked Virginia coach Al Groh a pointed strategical question. Groh bristled,
"What are you, a coach?"

    The interviewer resisted the impulse to reply, "No, I'm a sane person."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1048 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 15, 2002, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 1004 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFS

BYLINE: Complied from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Peregrine lays off 14 finance workers

   Peregrine Systems laid off 14 employees in its finance department yesterday.
Peregrine spokeswoman MeeLin Nakata said the reductions were part of a
"right-sizing" that brings the finance department in line with corporate-wide
layoffs done in June. The troubled software company, whose chairman is Padres
owner John Moores, filed for bankruptcy reorganization in September.

   Neurocrine says study is promising

   Neurocrine Biosciences yesterday said its first Phase 3 clinical trial for an
experimental drug to treat insomnia achieved the study's patient benefit and
safety goals.  The San Diego biotechnology company said its drug, indiplon-IR,
helped insomnia patients fall asleep without next day side effects.

   The study is the first of eight that are being conducted to test two
formulations of the drug.  All of the studies are expected to be completed and
results reported in the fall of 2003.

   If the trials are successful, Neurocrine could expect regulatory approval for
the drug in 2004. The drug, which acts on a specific brain receptor to promote
sleep, would compete with approved insomnia drugs Ambien, made by French drug
maker Sanofi-Synthelabo, and Wyeth's Sonata.

   GenStar plans to trim staff

   GenStar Therapeutics Corp. said it is restructuring its operations to cut
expenses and prepare for its merger with Vascular Genetics.  The San Diego
biotechnology company will lay off about 30 percent of its 45 employees.
GenStar has also signed a services agreement for the experimental gene therapy
to treat heart disease that will be the focus of the two companies when the
merger is completed early next year.

   In other news, GenStar posted a loss of $2.7 million in the third quarter,
compared with a year-earlier loss of $3 million.  Revenue grew to $422,565 from
$89,898.

   Venetec gets funds from investors

   Venetec International yesterday said it raised $19 million from investors.
The San Diego company, which makes catheter securement devices, will use the
money to expand its business.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Honeywell may shore up pensions

   Honeywell International Ltd. said it may contribute up to $900 million to its
employee pension plans after assets tumbled this year, raising fears yesterday
that 2003 profit would be hurt.  Honeywell's stock dropped as much as 14 percent
before recovering some of the lost ground.  Analysts also said the market for
Honeywell's key aerospace products may be weaker than expected next year.

   A Merrill Lynch analyst said Honeywell may need to contribute up to $1
billion to create a separate trust for current and future asbestos claims.
Honeywell already has $2 billion worth of insurance protection for such claims.

   Honeywell joins a long list of other U.S. manufacturers that now have to
shore up their pension plan assets after enjoying a stock market boom that
boosted plan assets and corporate profits. Reuters

   Comdex producer eyes bankruptcy

   Key3Media Group Inc., producer of the Comdex tech trade show, said yesterday
it may not be able to make debt payments and may have to file for bankruptcy
protection.  The announcement, made in its third-quarter financial results, also
said the Los Angeles-based company was exploring other alternatives, such as a
merger or raising additional capital.

   No decision will be made until after the fall Comdex show, scheduled to open
Monday in Las Vegas and run through Friday. Associated Press

   Fleming discloses informal inquiry

   Grocery wholesale giant Fleming Cos. has disclosed that it is the subject of
what it calls an informal Securities and Exchange Commission inquiry.  The
Lewisville, Texas-based grocery distributor said the Fort Worth staff of the SEC
was looking into Fleming's accounting and sales reporting.

   In particular, Fleming officials said that the SEC was checking its vendor
trade practices, how it reported per-share earnings for last year's second
quarter, and how it calculated same-store sales in the its retail food chains.

   "We will, of course, cooperate fully with the informal inquiry and will
provide the staff with all the information it needs in responding to its
fact-finding," said Fleming chairman and chief executive Mark Hansen.

   The disclosure came hours after Fleming announced it was selling 26 Food4Less
stores in California and two still under construction to Save Mart Supermarkets
for $165 million.

   Fleming shares fell 89 cents, or 14.8 percent, to close yesterday at $5.11 on
the New York Stock Exchange. Associated Press

   Delta readies its low-cost airline

   Delta Air Lines may unveil as early as next week details for a low-cost
airline to compete with Southwest Airlines, JetBlue Airways and AirTran Airways,
which have bitten into its key markets, an analyst said yesterday.  Chief
executive Leo Mullin in September called low-cost carriers a top threat to
airlines like Delta and Delta expects to unveil details about the shape and size
of the planned low-cost airline within an airline by the end of November.

   Atlanta-based Delta, the No. 3 U.S. carrier, has higher fixed costs than
smaller competitors.

   Adelphia ex-exec enters guilty plea

   Members of the Rigas family conspired to lie to the public and plunder the
cable TV system owner Adelphia Communications Corp., a former executive said
yesterday as he pleaded guilty to securities fraud.

   As part of his guilty plea in federal court in Manhattan, James Brown, the
former vice president of finance at Adelphia, has promised to testify against
the family members about the scandal which cost investors billions of dollars.

   Adelphia, based in Coudersport, Pa., sought bankruptcy court protection from
its creditors on June 25.

   Brown also admitted to bank fraud and conspiracy to commit securities fraud.
The bank fraud charge carries up to 30 years in prison, but Brown hopes his
cooperation will earn him a far more lenient sentence, which is scheduled for
April 14. Associated Press


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1049 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 15, 2002 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFS

BYLINE: Complied from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Peregrine lays off 14 finance workers Peregrine
Systems laid off 14 employees in its finance department yesterday.

   Peregrine spokeswoman MeeLin Nakata said the reductions were part of a
"right-sizing" that brings the finance department in line with corporate-wide
layoffs done in June. The troubled software company, whose chairman is Padres
owner John Moores, filed for bankruptcy reorganization in September. Neurocrine
says study is promising Neurocrine Biosciences yesterday said its first Phase 3
clinical trial for an experimental drug to treat insomnia achieved the study's
patient benefit and safety goals.

   The San Diego biotechnology company said its drug, indiplon-IR, helped
insomnia patients fall asleep without next day side effects. The study is the
first of eight that are being conducted to test two formulations of the drug.

   All of the studies are expected to be completed and results reported in the
fall of 2003. If the trials are successful, Neurocrine could expect regulatory
approval for the drug in 2004. The drug, which acts on a specific brain receptor
to promote sleep, would compete with approved insomnia drugs Ambien, made by
French drug maker Sanofi-Synthelabo, and Wyeth's Sonata. GenStar plans to trim
staff GenStar Therapeutics Corp. said it is restructuring its operations to cut
expenses and prepare for its merger with Vascular Genetics.

   The San Diego biotechnology company will lay off about 30 percent of its 45
employees. GenStar has also signed a services agreement for the experimental
gene therapy to treat heart disease that will be the focus of the two companies
when the merger is completed early next year. In other news, GenStar posted a
loss of $2.7 million in the third quarter, compared with a year-earlier loss of
$3 million.

   Revenue grew to $422,565 from $89,898. Venetec gets funds from investors
Venetec International yesterday said it raised $19 million from investors. The
San Diego company, which makes catheter securement devices, will use the money
to expand its business. WORLD AND NATION Honeywell may shore up pensions
Honeywell International Ltd. said it may contribute up to $900 million to its
employee pension plans after assets tumbled this year, raising fears yesterday
that 2003 profit would be hurt.

   Honeywell's stock dropped as much as 14 percent before recovering some of the
lost ground.

   Analysts also said the market for Honeywell's key aerospace products may be
weaker than expected next year. A Merrill Lynch analyst said Honeywell may need
to contribute up to $1 billion to create a separate trust for current and future
asbestos claims. Honeywell already has $2 billion worth of insurance protection
for such claims. Honeywell joins a long list of other U.S. manufacturers that
now have to shore up their pension plan assets after enjoying a stock market
boom that boosted plan assets and corporate profits. Reuters Comdex producer
eyes bankruptcy Key3Media Group Inc., producer of the Comdex tech trade show,
said yesterday it may not be able to make debt payments and may have to file for
bankruptcy protection.

   The announcement, made in its third-quarter financial results, also said the
Los Angeles-based company was exploring other alternatives, such as a merger or
raising additional capital. No decision will be made until after the fall Comdex
show, scheduled to open Monday in Las Vegas and run through Friday. Associated
Press Fleming discloses informal inquiry Grocery wholesale giant Fleming Cos.
has disclosed that it is the subject of what it calls an informal Securities and
Exchange Commission inquiry. The Lewisville, Texas-based grocery distributor
said the Fort Worth staff of the SEC was looking into Fleming's accounting and
sales reporting. In particular, Fleming officials said that the SEC was checking
its vendor trade practices, how it reported per-share earnings for last year's
second quarter, and how it calculated same-store sales in the its retail food
chains. "We will, of course, cooperate fully with the informal inquiry and will
provide the staff with all the information it needs in responding to its
fact-finding," said Fleming chairman and chief executive Mark Hansen. The
disclosure came hours after Fleming announced it was selling 26 Food4Less stores
in California and two still under construction to Save Mart Supermarkets for
$165 million. Fleming shares fell 89 cents, or 14.8 percent, to close yesterday
at $5.11 on the New York Stock Exchange. Associated Press Delta readies its
low-cost airline Delta Air Lines may unveil as early as next week details for a
low-cost airline to compete with Southwest Airlines, JetBlue Airways and AirTran
Airways, which have bitten into its key markets, an analyst said yesterday.
Chief executive Leo Mullin in September called low-cost carriers a top threat to
airlines like Delta and Delta expects to unveil details about the shape and size
of the planned low-cost airline within an airline by the end of November.
Atlanta-based Delta, the No. 3 U.S. carrier, has higher fixed costs than smaller
competitors. Adelphia ex-exec enters guilty plea Members of the Rigas family
conspired to lie to the public and plunder the cable TV system owner Adelphia
Communications Corp., a former executive said yesterday as he pleaded guilty to
securities fraud. As part of his guilty plea in federal court in Manhattan,
James Brown, the former vice president of finance at Adelphia, has promised to
testify against the family members about the scandal which cost investors
billions of dollars. Adelphia, based in Coudersport, Pa., sought bankruptcy
court protection from its creditors on June 25. Brown also admitted to bank
fraud and conspiracy to commit securities fraud.

   The bank fraud charge carries up to 30 years in prison, but Brown hopes his
cooperation will earn him a far more lenient sentence, which is scheduled for
April 14. Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1050 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 14, 2002 Thursday FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 23A

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: Eradicating trauma through chemistry

BYLINE: Ellen Goodman

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   BOSTON -- Imagine that you have arrived at the emergency room after a
horrific car crash. The doctor in charge offers you two pills. One will relieve
the inflammation of whiplash. The other will reduce the psychological trauma,
muting the nightmarish flashback to a manageable memory.

   Would you take one? Would you take both? Is there any difference?

   Imagine that a child came to the hospital after being raped or abused. Should
she be given a pill if it would prevent the trauma from literally changing the
anatomy of her brain and setting her up for a lifetime of vulnerability?

   And finally, what about a soldier just back from battle? Should he be treated
with medicine that helps dim the effect of the horrors he has experienced?

   These are not idle science fictions. Once we drew a bright line between the
pain of the body and the mind, between treatments for physical and mental
illness. Now researchers are into the chemistry of emotions, the biology of
feelings, the anatomy of psychology.

   It appears that memories of shocking events may be like water -- an
overwhelming flood or a manageable stream. And scientists may be designing
chemical faucets.

   Last week, a meeting of traumatic stress specialists heard that a common
hypertension drug may help prevent post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). If the
human trials pan out, it could keep a wrenching experience from being burned too
deeply in memory.

   There is research, as well, on treatments designed to interrupt the way a
painful event can change the brain. And there is also talk of gene therapies
that might make vulnerable people react to emotional injuries like resilient
people.

   What are we to make of this? The goal is simple and uncontroversial. Roger
Pitman of Harvard Medical School, who is doing research in this field, says, "I
look at it from a medical perspective. We intervene in diseases and disorders to
make people more comfortable and to reduce suffering."

   Fair enough. A bad memory can be as crippling as a bad back or heart. PTSD is
not trivialized by those who live with it or treat it. Dr. Pitman repeats the
words of veterans he has treated: "One said to me, 'If Vietnam was only a memory
I would be OK. It's more than a memory. It's happening again.'" If we can heal
that, we should.

   I don't romanticize mental illness. But what will happen if we are able to
lighten the load of memory? Would we end up with a drug to make loss "lite," to
speed up "closure," to make horror "manageable"? At some point reducing human
suffering is editing human experience. For better or for worse.

   I remember what happened to Prozac. A drug to alleviate severe depression
morphed into what is called a cosmetic pharmacology. It was used to help people
feel "better than well," in a phrase made famous by Peter Kramer in Listening to
Prozac. The class of drugs not only replaced counseling but was routinely
prescribed by internists for patients and even by veterinarians for pets.

   It's not that hard to envision PTSD preventive drugs being offered to those
who witnessed a Columbine massacre or the collapse of the World Trade Center.
Nor is it hard to imagine preventive drugs offered to parents who have just lost
a child. Where do we draw the line?

   Mr. Kramer sees benefits in helping those who are truly "overwhelmed and
haunted." But he too can see abuse. "Imagine," he says, "a totalitarian,
militaristic society giving it to soldiers so they will be immune to the horrors
of war." And if the horrors of war or of crime are not so "horrible," wouldn't
that change our attitude toward war or crime themselves?

   Such worries race ahead of the research. Dr. Pitman says succinctly, "We
don't want to make people happy automatons. We're not going to eliminate the
horrors of war." He says that we won't know where to draw the line -- or the
dosage -- until we know what medicine can do.

   But it seems to me that we often find ourselves behind the research curve,
playing ethical catch-up with cloning or cosmetic pharmacology after they are on
the market and in the doctor's office. Now we are at the outset of treatments
that could alter mind and memory and our ideas about humanity.

   Today, we have to ask the questions first. And so we begin with this one:
Isn't human suffering more than a matter of chemistry?

   Ellen Goodman is a columnist for The Boston Globe. Her column appears Mondays
and Thursdays in The Sun. She can be reached via e-mail at
ellengoodman@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2002


                             1051 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 14, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 755 words

HEADLINE: ELLEN GOODMAN;
A PILL FOR WHAT HAUNTS YOU

BYLINE: BY ELLEN GOODMAN

BODY:

   IMAGINE THAT YOU HAVE ARRIVED AT THE EMERGENCY ROOM AFTER A HORRIFIC CAR
CRASH. THE DOCTOR IN CHARGE OFFERS YOU TWO PILLS. ONE WILL RELIEVE THE
INFLAMMATION OF WHIPLASH. THE OTHER WILL REDUCE THE PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA, MUTING
THE NIGHTMARISH FLASHBACK TO A MANAGEABLE MEMORY.

   Would you take one? Would you take both? Is there any difference?

   Imagine, for that matter, that a child came to the hospital after being raped
or abused. Should she be given a pill if it would prevent the trauma from
literally changing the anatomy of her brain and setting her up for a lifetime of
vulnerability?

       And finally, if your imagination isn't overtaxed already, what about a
soldier just back from battle? Should he be treated with medicine that helps dim
the effect of the horrors he has experienced?

   These are not idle science fictions. Once, we drew a bright line between the
pain of the body and the mind, between treatments for physical and mental
illness. Now researchers are into the chemistry of emotions, the biology of
feelings, the anatomy of psychology.

   It appears that memories of shocking events may be like water - an
overwhelming flood or a manageable stream. And scientists may be designing
chemical faucets.

   Just last week, a meeting of traumatic stress specialists heard that a common
hypertension drug may help prevent post-traumatic stress disorder. If the human
trials pan out, it could, in effect, keep a wrenching experience from being
burned too deeply in memory.

   There is research as well on treatments designed to interrupt the way a
painful event can change the brain. And there is also talk of gene therapies
that might make vulnerable people react to emotional injuries like resilient
people.

   What are we to make of this? The goal is, after all, simple and
uncontroversial. Dr. Roger Pitman of Harvard Medical School, who is doing
research in this field, says: "I look at it from a medical perspective. We
intervene in diseases and disorders to make people more comfortable and to
reduce suffering."

   Fair enough. A bad memory can be as painful and crippling as a bad back or
heart. Post-traumatic stress disorder is not trivialized by those who live with
it or treat it. Pitman repeats the words of veterans he has treated: "One said
to me, 'If Vietnam was only a memory I would be OK. It's more than a memory.
It's happening again.' " If we can heal that, surely we should.

   I don't romanticize mental illness. But at the same time, I wonder what will
happen if we are able to lighten the load of memory. Would we end up with a drug
to make loss "lite," to speed up "closure," to make horror "manageable"? At some
point reducing human suffering is editing human experience. For better or for
worse.

   I remember what happened to Prozac. A drug to alleviate severe depression
morphed into what is called a cosmetic pharmacology. It was used to help people
feel "better than well," in a phrase made famous by Peter Kramer in "Listening
to Prozac." The class of drugs not only replaced counseling but was routinely
prescribed by internists for patients and even by veterinarians for pets.

   It's not that hard to envision preventive drugs being offered to those who
witnessed a Columbine massacre or the collapse of the World Trade Center. Nor is
it hard to imagine preventive drugs offered to parents who have just lost a
child. Where do we draw the line on the prescription pad?

   Kramer sees benefits in helping those who are truly "overwhelmed and
haunted." But he also can see abuse. "Imagine," he says, "a totalitarian,
militaristic society giving it to soldiers so they will be immune to the horrors
of war." And if the horrors of war or of crime are not so "horrible," wouldn't
that change our attitude toward war or crime themselves?

   Such worries race ahead of the research. Pitman says succinctly: "We don't
want to make people happy automatons. We're not going to eliminate the horrors
of war." He says that we won't know where to draw the line - or the dosage -
until we know what medicine can do.

   But it seems to me that we often find ourselves behind the research curve,
playing ethical catch-up with cloning or cosmetic pharmacology after they are on
the market and in the doctor's office. Now we are at the outset of treatments
that could alter mind and memory and our ideas about humanity.

   Today we have to ask the questions first. And so we begin with this one:
Isn't human suffering more than a matter of chemistry?

   Ellen Goodman's e-mail address is ellengoodman@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JOHN OVERMYER ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1052 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                 November 14, 2002 Thursday City final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22A

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy still a no man's land

BODY:

   Our position is: Suspending U.S. gene therapy trials on children was the
right decision until scientists learn more.

   Too high a cost for a cure? The question was posed in a recent U.S. News
article detailing a major blow to what had been viewed as the first clear
success in the field of gene therapy. Two French scientists had perfected a
technique that cured 10 children of     the "bubble-boy disease," a rare immune
disorder. They did so by introducing a new gene into the children's bone marrow
cells, thus enabling the recipients to fight off infections.

   The result was hailed as little short of miraculous. But early last month,
the experiments were suddenly suspended. A Dutch toddler who had been treated
when he was 2 months old had developed a leukemia-like illness and was
undergoing chemotherapy. Early indications are that the new gene disrupted the
child's DNA in a way that caused cancer, a risk scientists have known existed.
Thus far, none of the other children has shown disquieting side effects.

   Following the action of the French, the Food and Drug Administration
suspended three similar trials under way in the United States. U.S. News said a
group of geneticists at the National Institutes of Health had six sick children
lined up for treatment and samples of their bone marrow frozen when news of the
French trouble broke.

   Numerous other gene therapy trials targeted at serious diseases such as
cystic fibrosis and HIV continue. The idea is to give patients a healthy gene to
replace or compensate for whatever defective gene is at fault. Even so, the
Dutch toddler's cancer is bound to have a chilling effect on a field already
clouded by the 1999 death of an Arizona teenager, the first person known to have
died as a result of genetic experimentation.

   Suffering from a rare metabolic disorder, the young man volunteered for
experiments conducted by the University of Pennsylvania. Following his death,
applications to the FDA to approve gene therapy declined 50 percent, fewer
patients enrolled in such experiments, and the cost of trials increased
dramatically. The French case may cause a similar reaction.

   For now, optimism about gene therapy continues among researchers and
individuals desperate for a cure. So do the debates about tinkering with the
wondrous complexities of human DNA. While science is demonstrating the awesome
power to alter genes, it has made little progress in guarding against disastrous
consequences. Those in command of the marvels must begin to show more respect
for what they don't know.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1053 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                           November 14, 2002 Thursday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 423 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy still a no man's land

BODY:

   Our position is: Suspending U.S. gene therapy trials on children was the
right decision until scientists learn more.

   Too high a cost for a cure? The question was posed in a recent U.S. News
article detailing a major blow to what had been viewed as the first clear
success in the field of gene therapy. Two French scientists had perfected a
technique that cured 10 children of     the "bubble-boy disease," a rare immune
disorder. They did so by introducing a new gene into the children's bone marrow
cells, thus enabling the recipients to fight off infections.

   The result was hailed as little short of miraculous. But early last month,
the experiments were suddenly suspended. A Dutch toddler who had been treated
when he was 2 months old had developed a leukemia-like illness and was
undergoing chemotherapy. Early indications are that the new gene disrupted the
child's DNA in a way that caused cancer, a risk scientists have known existed.
Thus far, none of the other children has shown disquieting side effects.

   Following the action of the French, the Food and Drug Administration
suspended three similar trials under way in the United States. U.S. News said a
group of geneticists at the National Institutes of Health had six sick children
lined up for treatment and samples of their bone marrow frozen when news of the
French trouble broke.

   Numerous other gene therapy trials targeted at serious diseases such as
cystic fibrosis and HIV continue. The idea is to give patients a healthy gene to
replace or compensate for whatever defective gene is at fault. Even so, the
Dutch toddler's cancer is bound to have a chilling effect on a field already
clouded by the 1999 death of an Arizona teenager, the first person known to have
died as a result of genetic experimentation.

   Suffering from a rare metabolic disorder, the young man volunteered for
experiments conducted by the University of Pennsylvania. Following his death,
applications to the FDA to approve gene therapy declined 50 percent, fewer
patients enrolled in such experiments, and the cost of trials increased
dramatically. The French case may cause a similar reaction.

   For now, optimism about gene therapy continues among researchers and
individuals desperate for a cure. So do the debates about tinkering with the
wondrous complexities of human DNA. While science is demonstrating the awesome
power to alter genes, it has made little progress in guarding against disastrous
consequences. Those in command of the marvels must begin to show more respect
for what they don't know.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2009


                             1054 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 14, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-13

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: Taking a pill to make you happy

BYLINE: Ellen Goodman; THE BOSTON GLOBE

BODY:
 Imagine that you have arrived at the emergency room after a horrific car crash.
The doctor in charge offers you two pills.  One will relieve the inflammation of
whiplash.  The other will reduce the psychological trauma, muting the
nightmarish flashback to a manageable memory.

   Would you take one? Would you take both?  Is there any difference?

   Imagine, for that matter, that a child came to the hospital after being raped
or abused.  Should she be given a pill if it would prevent the trauma from
literally changing the anatomy of her brain and setting her up for a lifetime of
vulnerability?

   And finally, if your imagination isn't overtaxed already, what about a
soldier just back from battle?  Should he be treated with medicine that helps
dim the effect of the horrors he has experienced?

   These are not idle science fictions.  Once we drew a bright line between the
pain of the body and the mind, between treatments for physical and mental
illness.  Now researchers are into the chemistry of emotions, the biology of
feelings, the anatomy of psychology.

   It appears that memories of shocking events may be like water -- an
overwhelming flood or a manageable stream.  And scientists may be designing
chemical faucets.

   Just last week, a meeting of traumatic stress specialists heard that a common
hypertension drug may help prevent post-traumatic stress disorder.  If the human
trials pan out, it could, in effect, keep a wrenching experience from being
burned too deeply in memory.

   There is research as well, on treatments designed to interrupt the way a
painful event can change the brain.  And there is also talk of gene therapies
that might make vulnerable people react to emotional injuries like resilient
people.

   What are we to make of this?  The goal is, after all, simple and
uncontroversial.  Dr. Roger Pitman of Harvard Medical School, who is doing
research in this field, says, "I look at it from a medical perspective.  We
intervene in diseases and disorders to make people more comfortable and to
reduce suffering."

   Fair enough.  A bad memory can be as painful and crippling as a bad back or
heart.  PTSD is not trivialized by those who live with it or treat it.  Pitman
repeats the words of veterans he has treated: "One said to me if Vietnam was
only a memory I would be OK. It's more than a memory.  It's happening again." If
we can heal that, surely we should.

   I don't romanticize mental illness.  But at the same time, I wonder what will
happen if we are able to lighten the load of memory.  Would we end up with a
drug to make loss "lite," to speed up "closure," to make horror "manageable"? At
some point reducing human suffering is editing human experience.  For better or
for worse.

   I remember what happened to Prozac.  A drug to alleviate severe depression
morphed into what is called a cosmetic pharmacology.  It was used to help people
feel "better than well," in a phrase made famous by Peter Kramer in "Listening
to Prozac." The class of drugs not only replaced counseling but was routinely
prescribed by internists for patients and even by veterinarians for pets.

   It's not that hard to envision PTSD preventive drugs being offered to those
who witnessed a Columbine massacre or the collapse of the World Trade Center.
Nor is it hard to imagine preventive drugs offered to parents who have just lost
a child.  Where do we draw the line on the prescription pad?

   Kramer sees benefits in helping those who are truly "overwhelmed and
haunted." But he too can see abuse.  "Imagine," he says, "a totalitarian,
militaristic society giving it to soldiers so they will be immune to the horrors
of war." And if the horrors of war or of crime are not so "horrible," wouldn't
that change our attitude toward war or crime themselves?

   Such worries race ahead of the research.  Pitman says succinctly, "We don't
want to make people happy automatons.  We're not going to eliminate the horrors
of war." He says that we won't know where to draw the line -- or the dosage --
until we know what medicine can do.

   But it seems that we often find ourselves behind the research curve, playing
ethical catch-up with cloning or cosmetic pharmacology after they are on the
market and in the doctor's office.  Now we are at the outset of treatments that
could alter mind and memory and ideas about humanity.

   Today, we have to ask the questions first.  And so we begin with this one:
Isn't human suffering more than a matter of chemistry?

   Goodman can be reached via e-mail at ellengoodman@globe.com.


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2002


                             1055 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 13, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Incyte Genomics buys Maxia

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 A privately held San Diego biotechnology company is being acquired by
once-high-flying Incyte Genomics, the latest in a wave of consolidations and
mergers in the financially troubled industry.

   Maxia Pharmaceuticals, founded in 1995 by a professor at the Sidney Kimmel
Cancer Center, will be purchased by Palo Alto-based Incyte for $28.3 million in
cash and stock, as well as up to $14 million in performance-based milestone
payments.

   Maxia, which employs 28, is one of numerous biotechs across the nation that
are running short on cash.  Though the company has several potential drugs to
treat ailments such as diabetes and cancer, none has made it into human testing,
the most expensive phase of drug development.

   "Unfortunately, we were hit by the terrible market conditions, and it seemed
to be difficult to raise money at (good) valuations," said Magnus Pfahl, chief
executive of Maxia.  "We wanted to make sure we could continue with what we were
doing, so this was an attractive choice for us."

   Incyte is buying Maxia as part of its effort to reinvent itself as a drug
development company.  Yesterday Incyte posted a wider net loss in the third
quarter amid a 61 percent drop in revenue, and announced plans to cut its
700-person work force by 37 percent.

   Incyte, which sells genetic information to other drug companies, was one of
several genomics companies to score big with investors in 2000 after the mapping
of the human genome.

   At that time, shares of Incyte rose as high as $140, but skepticism about the
ultimate value of such genomics databases and the speed at which the information
can be translated into real drugs has since brought the stock to heel.
Yesterday, Incyte closed at $5.69, down 16 cents, in trading on the Nasdaq Stock
Market.

   With about $450 million in the bank, Incyte remains cash-rich but
product-poor, a condition it hopes to remedy by buying drug companies such as
Maxia or licensing promising drug candidates.  Despite the announced layoffs,
the company plans to hire up to 100 scientists in the next year to support its
drug discovery program.

   Paul Friedman, Incyte's chief executive, said buying Maxia will "accelerate
our efforts to build a successful drug discovery and development organization."

   After the deal closes, Maxia will remain in San Diego as a wholly owned
subsidiary of Incyte.

   Other cash-strapped San Diego biotechs have faced tough financial choices
recently.

   Last month, La Jolla's Advanced Tissue Sciences filed for bankruptcy, and its
joint venture partner, London-based Smith & Nephew, agreed to buy Advanced
Tissue's stake in two wound-healing products.  In September, local gene-therapy
company GenStar Therapeutics merged with Vascular Genetics.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1056 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 13, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS ; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: Incyte Genomics buys Maxia

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A privately held San Diego biotechnology company is being acquired by
once-high-flying Incyte Genomics, the latest in a wave of consolidations and
mergers in the financially troubled industry. Maxia Pharmaceuticals, founded in
1995 by a professor at the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, will be purchased by
Palo Alto-based Incyte for $28.3 million in cash and stock, as well as up to $14
million in performance-based milestone payments. Maxia, which employs 28, is one
of numerous biotechs across the nation that are running short on cash.

   Though the company has several potential drugs to treat ailments such as
diabetes and cancer, none has made it into human testing, the most expensive
phase of drug development. "Unfortunately, we were hit by the terrible market
conditions, and it seemed to be difficult to raise money at (good) valuations,"
said Magnus Pfahl, chief executive of Maxia.

   "We wanted to make sure we could continue with what we were doing, so this
was an attractive choice for us." Incyte is buying Maxia as part of its effort
to reinvent itself as a drug development company.

   Yesterday Incyte posted a wider net loss in the third quarter amid a 61
percent drop in revenue, and announced plans to cut its 700-person work force by
37 percent. Incyte, which sells genetic information to other drug companies, was
one of several genomics companies to score big with investors in 2000 after the
mapping of the human genome. At that time, shares of Incyte rose as high as
$140, but skepticism about the ultimate value of such genomics databases and the
speed at which the information can be translated into real drugs has since
brought the stock to heel.

   Yesterday, Incyte closed at $5.69, down 16 cents, in trading on the Nasdaq
Stock Market. With about $450 million in the bank, Incyte remains cash-rich but
product-poor, a condition it hopes to remedy by buying drug companies such as
Maxia or licensing promising drug candidates.

   Despite the announced layoffs, the company plans to hire up to 100 scientists
in the next year to support its drug discovery program. Paul Friedman, Incyte's
chief executive, said buying Maxia will "accelerate our efforts to build a
successful drug discovery and development organization." After the deal closes,
Maxia will remain in San Diego as a wholly owned subsidiary of Incyte. Other
cash-strapped San Diego biotechs have faced tough financial choices recently.
Last month, La Jolla's Advanced Tissue Sciences filed for bankruptcy, and its
joint venture partner, London-based Smith & Nephew, agreed to buy Advanced
Tissue's stake in two wound-healing products.

   In September, local gene-therapy company GenStar Therapeutics merged with
Vascular Genetics. Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1057 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           November 12, 2002 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1953 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Undergoes a Reevaluation

BYLINE: Rosie Mestel, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Gene therapy has become a science of irony and unintended consequences.

   Through its decades of development, the once-glamorous child of the genetic
revolution has faced bad press, lackluster results and a tragic death. Now, fast
on the heels of its first-ever success -- and one of its biggest disappointments
-- the field is having to reevaluate its use of a principal method of inserting
therapeutic genes into cells.

   The upheaval has placed new emphasis on a range of experimental strategies
that hold great promise but are technically difficult and will take even more
time to become useable in the clinic.

   Those strategies include ways to control the placement of therapeutic genes
so they don't damage the genome, implement precise DNA repair methods so no new,
potentially dangerous genetic information is added to a patient, and create
"suicide" genes that are programmed to wipe out genetically altered cells if
anything should go wrong.

   The cause of the upheaval is one small child. Not long ago, researchers were
reveling in the apparent cure of nine French children afflicted with the rare
immune system disorder, X-SCID, commonly known as "bubble boy" disease. Then, a
few weeks ago, the researchers announced that one of the children has leukemia
-- caused, they suspect, by the therapy itself.

   Risks that were once only theoretical have become real. Promising strategies
that seemed to overcome enormous hurdles may have to be scrapped. Concerns by
some scientists and bioethicists that the endeavor has moved too quickly to the
clinic have found a more emphatic voice.

   "This is definitely an attention-getter, a wake-up call for everybody, and we
need more information," said Dr. Kenneth Weinberg, professor of pediatrics at
USC and a physician at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   Many scientists still see ultimate promise for the gene therapy. But they
cannot predict its fate for the foreseeable future: whether it will be only a
niche science for the treatment of the most extreme diseases for which sizable
risks are worth taking or, as scientists have long envisioned, a broader
strategy for tackling a range of ills, from blindness to baldness.

   "At the very best, it looks like this will add years and years to the
clinical development of gene therapy," said Dr. Alan Schechter, chief of the
laboratory of chemical biology at the National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

   Gene therapy is a prospect that has long touched deep nerves among the public
and magnified both hope and revulsion, causing unrealistic expectations and
extreme reactions when things go wrong.

   Scientists too were seduced by its clean logic, often rushing too quickly to
make promises of cures and then facing a backlash when trials failed.

   "There was the impression among some people that it was going to be rather
easy. You have the disease, you put in the gene and correction would be pretty
straightforward," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, director of the gene therapy
program at UC San Diego. "There was too much hype, too much downplaying of the
problems."

   Scientists had known for decades that many inherited diseases were because of
errors in individual genes. As the genetic revolution gathered momentum -- and
scientists learned how to manipulate DNA -- the notion of mending errors no
longer seemed fantastic.

   Ideally, doctors could correct the genetic error in cells where the gene was
required (lung cells, say, in people with cystic fibrosis), leaving the rest of
the genome untouched. Such tidy fixes are technically very difficult.

   A messier, but easier, strategy is to add a good gene to a cell without
getting rid of the faulty one. That's what scientists do in today's gene therapy
trials, and what was used in the French case.

   Getting a gene to its target isn't easy, so scientists have turned to
viruses, which are tailor-made to steal through the body and enter cells. The
disease-causing parts of the virus DNA are removed, the therapeutic gene spliced
in, and the whole thing wrapped up in the virus coat. Then the hybrid creation
is added to the body.

   Today, there is a medley of "viral vectors" capable of entering a variety of
tissues. Gene therapists pick the ones to suit the disease they're trying to
cure, which today includes everything from inherited diseases to HIV infections
and cancers.

   For some therapies (such as for cancer), a gene doesn't have to stay
permanently or be passed on to new cells if the original cell divides. In those
cases, a virus that efficiently enters cells but eventually dies away fits the
bill.

   In other cases, such as inherited diseases like cystic fibrosis, a repair has
to be permanent. Here, the use of special viruses that insert their genetic
material into cells' genomes ensures that the fix is replicated when cells
divide.

   Using such methods, researchers have cured mice by the thousands -- of
hemophilia and sickle cell disease, of diabetes and cystic fibrosis.

   But they have learned, to their pain, that mice are not people.

   Thus, it was with great excitement that the field received news of its first
human cure of 9 out of 10 young children treated for X-SCID. The trial was led
by Dr. Alain Fischer of Necker Hospital in Paris.

   For once, the news was not only good but spectacularly so. And so it remained
through the summer.

   Then came Labor Day weekend, and gene therapists working on similar SCID
trials received an upsetting e-mail from Fischer reporting that one of the
successfully treated boys had a sickness resembling leukemia.

   In response, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration halted four gene therapy
trials, although an advisory panel has since recommended that the studies
resume.

   In a sign of the field's uncertainty, Britain has opted to continue with its
trial for the same disease, while Germany has put a temporary stop to all trials
using viruses that insert therapeutic genes into the genome.

   "This was the most successful study in the history of gene therapy, so to
have one's worst fears realized in the context of this trial was really
upsetting," said Dr. Donald Kohn, director of the gene, immune and stem cell
therapy program at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles and a professor at USC. Kohn
is leading one of the gene therapy trials halted by the FDA.

   Scientists are still trying to figure out what happened to the child. He may
have been at special risk for cancer: Several members of his family had
developed a rare brain tumor.

   This much is clear: When the viral vector jumped into the genome of one of
the boy's bone marrow stem cells, it apparently disrupted a gene (known as LMO2)
that, when altered, can push a cell toward cancer. After several years, cells
with that insertion started dividing out of control.

   Scientists have long known that something like this could happen because
viruses insert themselves into the genome at random sites. There was always the
chance that their landing could damage a gene, but only a very small chance
because the genome is vast and large swaths of it don't consist of genes.

   Yet in at least one young child, the very unlikely has apparently happened.

   Now, scientists must evaluate the chance of it happening again. Researchers
suspect that the risks for SCID may turn out to be higher than for other
therapies because the viruses insert more frequently into the cells treated in
SCID than they do into other kinds of tissues. This might increase the
likelihood of a rare, dangerous event.

   Gene therapy trials that don't insert genes into the genome are not directly
affected by the French case. But the trials that use such strategies -- about
half of the 181 underway in the U.S. -- now face the possibility that random
insertion may be too risky.

   Dark clouds have blown over the field in the past.

   In 1980, a UCLA physician conducted the first gene therapy trial -- overseas,
because his university had denied him permission. The trial, to correct an
inherited blood disorder, beta-thalassemia, was a scandalous ethics breach that
sullied the field from the start.

   A chilly cold front moved in during 1995, when the director of the National
Institutes of Health roasted the field for skimping on groundwork and hyping the
therapy after a string of unsuccessful experiments.

   In 1999, a teenage boy died from a violent immune reaction during a gene
therapy trial. Afterward, hundreds of other unreported side effects came to
light, and noted scientists decried gene therapy's premature rush to the clinic.

   Some say the field never recovered from the succession of errors and ethics
breaches.

   "Gene therapy is a wheezing, very sick organism," said Arthur Caplan,
chairman of the department of medical ethics at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Several scientists said that the gene therapy field has learned hard lessons,
and that in the French case, Fischer and the government agencies responded
quickly.

   Gene therapy supporters believe the field also can overcome the technical
hurdles.

   "These are all tough problems," said Inder Verma, professor of molecular
biology at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla. "But
necessity, you know, is the mother of invention."

   For instance, Stanford University scientists say they've figured out a way to
shuttle a gene into a cell and have it leap into the genome at only a few,
precise places.

   The feat is achieved using an enzyme (derived from a bacteria-eating virus)
that recognizes particular parts of the genome and guides the DNA to insert at
those points. By removing the randomness from insertion, the scientists hope
they can render it safe.

   They already have shown that their strategy can deliver genes into precise
locations in the genome of mice, creating animals that produce a key clotting
factor that is missing in many patients with hemophilia.

   Scientists also are trying to use viruses that never or rarely jump into
genomes, yet hang around in the cell for the long haul. Scientists at Stanford,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Avigen Inc., an Alameda-based biotech
company, have treated hemophiliac dogs with a blood-clotting gene spliced into
what may be such a viral vector.

   Even if genes are inserted into the genome, there are other ways to cut down
on risk.

   In some trials -- such as the French case -- a patient's cells are
genetically altered in a test tube, and then added back to the body.
Theoretically, scientists could screen these cells before returning them, in
order to weed out ones with insertions in dangerous places.

   Alternatively, a so-called suicide gene could be put in the virus along with
the therapeutic gene. If the cell turns rogue -- becomes cancerous, for instance
-- scientists can give the patient a drug that will activate the suicide gene,
and the rogue cells will then be killed. Such a strategy has proved successful
in one gene therapy trial.

   But the ideal solution is to perfectly fix a genetic error without
introducing any extra DNA, like the deft replacement of a spent battery in a
car.

   One strategy coaxes the cell to repair the error using tiny pieces of genetic
material as guides. Another cuts out the bad part of a gene and stitches in a
good piece to replace it.

   Both strategies are technically feasible but are years away from the clinic.

   Ultimately, researchers say, all the animal experiments in the world won't
prevent unexpected results in people.

   Unpredictability is the nature of medical research. Bone marrow
transplantation, chemotherapy, vaccine development -- all have hurt and killed
people before being assigned to their appropriate medical niche.

   "These are early days in the field, but I think it would be foolhardy to
concentrate only on the dangers now," Friedmann said. "We know that patients can
be helped."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Gene therapy CREDIT: Rosendo A. Toro Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2002


                             1058 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           November 12, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: GenVec Reports Success With Cancer Treatment

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, reported yesterday that
its experimental cancer treatment, combined with traditional radiation therapy,
appeared to shrink tumors in early-stage patient tests.

   The data are highly preliminary; this round of tests is designed primarily to
evaluate the treatment's safety, but in many cases, the results also hint at its
effectiveness. Any treatment is at least several years from reaching the public.
It must undergo wider patient studies before the company can apply for federal
approval to commercialize the product.

   Company officials said 22 out of 30 patients, or 73 percent, experienced a
reduction of at least 25 percent of their tumors, some a much greater degree. In
a small number of cases, tumors in patients with pancreatic and malignant skin
cancer could no longer be detected, although it is possible they could return.
Four of the 30 patients showed no change; in another four, the disease grew
worse, the company said.

   GenVec said the early results were encouraging enough that it planned to go
forward with larger, more advanced tests of the drug's effectiveness.

   The treatment, known as TNFerade, delivers a gene that triggers the
production of a cancer-fighting protein called tumor necrosis factor, or TNF. It
is injected directly into tumor and activated by radiation. In the past, TNF has
proved too toxic for use in many cancer treatments. GenVec's drug is designed to
limit exposure to the area of the tumor.

   In the most recent human tests, TNFerade was injected one or two times a week
for up to six weeks. The tested patients included those with cancer of the
pancreas, breast, lung, head and neck, skin, colon, and rectum. The data
indicated that the cancer treatment caused no serious side effects.

   TNFerade is one of several gene therapies the company is developing. It is
also conducting advanced human tests on a product called BioBypass in patients
with heart and artery disease.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2002


                             1059 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                  November 11, 2002 Monday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07B

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: CONCERT RAISES MONEY FOR STUDY OF BATTEN DISEASE

BYLINE: Brian Williams, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Phil and Tricia Milto of Indianapolis are nearing their goal of raising $2.5
million to test a gene therapy -- which may or may not ease their children's
struggles with a rare neurological disease.

   Nathan, 8, was diagnosed four years ago with Batten disease, a hereditary,
degenerative condition that is fatal. Last year, about the same time they
learned that Cornell University would do gene-therapy clinical tests, Batten was
diagnosed in the Miltos' youngest son, P.J., now 5.

   Nathan, P.J. and their healthy 6-year-old brother Nicholas, were in Columbus
yesterday for a concert to benefit the Nathan's Battle Foundation, which so far
has raised $1.8 million.

   "We try to focus on the positive," Phil Milto said. "A lot of people say,
'It's in God's hands,' but we think God gave us hands to do things differently
if we can.

   "We have hope now. Before they told us there was nothing we could do."

   Christian recording artist Mark Schultz of Nashville performed the benefit
concert at Brice United Methodist Church. Cheryl Duckworth, a friend of the
Milto family who attends the church, helped organize the concert.

   Batten disease is the common name for neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, or NCL,
which has several forms that mostly strike children. Infantile NCL occurs in
children ages 6 months to 2 years. The two Milto children have late-infantile
NCL, which typically occurs in children ages 2 to 4 years. Juvenile NCL begins
at age 5 to 8.

   Two to four of every 100,000 children get Batten disease. Adult NCL is rarer
than the infantile and juvenile forms.

   Children can get the disease only if both parents carry the defective gene
that causes it. Children of carriers have a one-in-four chance of getting two
copies of the defective gene and suffering from NCL.

   Vision deterioration or loss is often an early sign of Batten.

   "With Nathan, it took us nine months to get it diagnosed," Milto said. "Not
many physicians have seen it."

   Now, Nathan is blind, in a wheelchair, has a feeding tube and has lost the
ability to communicate. PJ can still walk, feed himself and communicate, but his
abilities are below normal.

   "It's a gruesome disease," Milto said. "We try to keep them as healthy as
possible. We treat the symptoms at this point. All we can do is focus on hope."

   Despite the challenge of caring for Nathan and P.J. -- and helping Nicholas
cope -- Milto finds time to raise money for the foundation.

   "He's done quite well," said Lance Johnston of Reynoldsburg, who understands
Milto's motivation. Johnston is executive director of the Batten Disease Support
and Research Association, which he formed in 1987, five years before his
daughter died of the disease at age 21.

   The association has 900 family members worldwide and, so far this year, has
contributed $400,000 for research into various forms of the disease. It funds a
variety of efforts in smaller amounts and offers support and educational
materials for families.

   "That group is very good," Milto said. "They do things I never could do. But
we focused solely on therapy development for late-infantile Batten."

   bwilliams@dispatch.com

   Box Story:How to help
Donations to help Nathan Milto or to help with Batten disease research can be
sent to:
 * Nathan's Battle Foundation
 459 State Road 135 South
 Greenwood, Ind. 46142
 1-317-888-7396
 www.nathansbattle.com
 * Batten Disease Support and Research Association
 120 Humphries Dr., Suite 2
 Reynoldsburg, Ohio 43068
 1-800-448-4570 or 1-740-927-4298
 www.bdsra.org

GRAPHIC: Photo, ROBERT CAPLIN DISPATCH,, Tricia and Phil Milto of Indianapolis
and their sons -- from left, P.J., 5,, Nathan, 8, and Nicholas, 6 -- attended a
Columbus concert that raised money to, test a gene therapy for Batten disease.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2002


                             1060 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     November 8, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 792 words

BODY:

   For reasons probably best left unexamined, NFL teams appear to be relying
more and more on sportscasters to buttress their rosters in times of acute need.
Or at least perceived acute need, sometimes known as panic.

    I imagine this will stop well short of the Cincinnati Bengals talking Beano
Cook out of the ESPN studio to play nose tackle, but certainly, were there an
NFL team out there that's hot on Beano, that team would be in Cincinnati.

    At least in terms of backstage buzz, the NFL's Formerly Retired Player of
the Week appears to be Troy Aikman, rumored to be leaving the Fox studio for the
Miami Dolphins. If that happens, two of the AFC's better teams will be led by
as-seen-on-TV QBs. The other is your Steelers, who got their quarterback from
watching an XFL production in which the New Jersey Carcinogen Dogs got out of
the way of their cheerleaders, the Toxinettes, long enough to whip up on the Los
Angeles Regurgitators in a game that went down the wire like few others. They
yanked the wire on the whole league within minutes.

    That was Tommy Maddox, a former MVP of the XFL, and he would replace Kordell
Stewart, a former MVP of the Pittsburgh Steelers. It's so bizarre.

    But no more so than the Aikman situation.

    Aikman works for Fox in the booth, but as his nine career concussions as a
member of the Dallas Cowboys suggest, he might not be aware that he works for
Fox. What he does know, apparently, are the parameters in which he'd agree to
leave the booth, described rather obliquely by his agent, the diabolical genius
Leigh Steinberg, as "the right situation."

    A Dolphins source told ESPN this week that "the right situation" means "I'm
the permanent starter on a team with a chance to win the Super Bowl, and thus
I'm 'intrigu- ed.' " Not even Stewart had that kind of guarantee, and he'd been
concussed about eight fewer times.

    Miami is expected to decide today whether to pursue Aikman with vigor. It
will likely depend on how Ray Lucas throws in practice after a physically
humbling performance Monday night in Green Bay. Lucas, currently the backup to
injured starter Jay Fiedler, who'll be out another three weeks with a hand
injury, is the only man keeping the Dolphins from being quarterbacked by someone
named Sage Rosenfels.

    Rosenfels apparently starred a few years ago at Iowa State but is probably
in the league for his striking resemblance to Dewey on Fox's "Malcolm in the
Middle." That probably keeps the Dolphins from having to raid Fox's
entertainment side.

    The NFL's Formerly Retired Player of the Week for last week was another
accomplished offensive player who'd barely just arrived in the studio on what
used to be a one-way street: Cris Carter. A week out of his suit and tie, Carter
was in the Dolphins' lineup Monday night and didn't take long to prove that when
a broadcaster takes a huge hit, he generally fumbles.

    Regardless of the Aikman hype, it's a trend with little promise frankly, but
don't be at all surprised to see dispatches such as these in the second half of
the NFL season.

    EDEN PRAIRIE, Minn. -- The Vikings, who'd be the worst team in the league if
it weren't for the cleverly nicknamed Houston Texans, are expected to attempt to
plug in former Senator Walter Mondale at the "Fritz" linebacker spot. Noted more
currently for his occasional studio spots on C-SPAN, Mondale, Vikings front
office sources admit, can't go sideline to sideline the way he did in the Carter
Administration. Still, those same sources, speaking on the condition that they
be given six cases of beer, said Mondale remains more effective from a morale
standpoint than, say, Randy Moss.

    CHICAGO -- ABC Sports was expected to arrange a news conference today for
Monday Night Football analyst John Madden, presumably to refute reports in the
Chicago Tribune that Madden will sign with the Bears to shore up their offensive
line. Bears officials scrambled yesterday to clarify their interest, with one
front office executive saying, "while it's true that Madden still looks like a
Bear, at his current compensation of $312,500 per game, he's just not cap
friendly."

    NEW YORK -- Acting on reports that Monday Night Football would soon lose
John Madden to the Chicago Bears, ABC today began negotiations with Ozzy
Osbourne to join Al Michaels in the booth. Osbourne, in his audition, reportedly
managed to say, "The Dal-Dal-Dallas team, the what? The @#$%& Cowboys, they've
got, uh, uh, uh, mmm, mmm, gotta put points, on the thing, the big @#$%& thing,
the what? Right right right, put @#$%& scores on the @#$%& point board."

    Asked by the New York Post how he thought Osbourne would fare in a live
telecast, Michaels would say only, "Do you believe in miracles?"

NOTES:
Gene Collier can be reached at gcollier@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2002


                             1061 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           November 7, 2002 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: California;
Amgen Shares Fall 7.7% After Downgrade;
Analyst says sales of three of the biotech firm's key drugsmay fall short of
expectations.

BYLINE: Denise Gellene, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Shares of Amgen Inc., the world's largest biotechnology company, dropped
Wednesday after an analyst downgraded the stock and cited concerns about three
of the company's key drugs.

   Amgen's shares closed down 7.7% after a report by UBS Warburg's Meirev Chovav
said there was "limited upside potential" in stock of the industry bellwether.

   Her report followed a decision by Amgen, based in Thousand Oaks, to postpone
until February a meeting in New York with analysts that had been scheduled for
Nov. 21.

   Most analysts on Wall Street recommend that investors buy Amgen stock. But
Chovav cut her rating to "hold" from "buy" and said sales of three drugs may
fall short of expectations.

   Chovav said Wall Street estimates of $1.3 billion in sales for the rheumatoid
arthritis drug Enbrel are too high because approval of Humira, a competing drug
from Abbott Laboratories, could come before the end of the year -- four months
sooner than expected.

   She said $1.1 billion represents the "best-case scenario" for Enbrel sales in
2003 and it assumes that a factory in Rhode Island will receive FDA approval in
the first quarter of next year. The factory, needed to ease a shortage of
Enbrel, is scheduled for an FDA inspection next week.

   Chovav said last week's decision by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services to lower the hospital outpatient payment rates for Aranesp will limit
sales of the drug.

   She said Aranesp, a second-generation anemia treatment, will be reimbursed at
a disadvantage to Procrit, which is marketed by Johnson & Johnson under a
license from Amgen. She estimated that Procrit will be reimbursed at 68.2% of
its average wholesale price, while Aranesp would be reimbursed at 47.6% of its
average wholesale price. The hospital outpatient market accounts for 10% of
Aranesp's current sales.

   Finally, Chovav said that as much as $74 million in excess inventories of
Neupogen may have accumulated in the second and third quarters, and that will
result in lower fourth-quarter sales of the drug. Neupogen is used to prevent
infections in cancer patients whose immune systems are compromised by
chemotherapy.

   Amgen spokesman Jeff Richardson said sales of Neupogen are driven by demand.
"We don't see any inventory issues."

   Amgen, in a statement late Tuesday, said it postponed its meeting with
analysts because it couldn't fully address concerns about Enbrel, Aranesp and a
patent lawsuit with Transkaryotic Therapies of Cambridge, Mass. An appeals court
decision is due soon in the case involving Epogen, Amgen's best-selling drug.
Richardson wouldn't elaborate on the statement.

   S.G. Cowan analyst Eric Schmidt said Amgen had legitimate reasons to postpone
its meeting and that investors overreacted to the news. The timing was awkward,
considering next week's factory inspection, he said. And Amgen probably wasn't
ready to discuss its strategy on Medicare reimbursement, which he expects Amgen
to fight on a "legislative, legal and lobbying level."

   In an interview this week, Amgen Chairman and Chief Executive Kevin W. Sharer
said he was "cautiously optimistic" that the factory in West Greenwich, R.I.,
would receive FDA approval in first-quarter 2003. Amgen has stuck by that
forecast since it announced the $9.6-billion purchase of Immunex, developer of
Enbrel, last December.

   Sharer said that although the company was "comfortable" with the deadline
last year, meeting it will be a "heroic" accomplishment due to problems later
discovered at the factory Amgen acquired in the Immunex deal.

   Sharer said Amgen did its due diligence before buying Immunex and taking on
the factory project, but likened the process to buying a car: "You don't know
what you have until you drive it."

   Amgen closed Wednesday at $46.81, down $3.87, on Nasdaq, in an otherwise
strong session for major drug shares.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2002


                             1062 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 5, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1270 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH USES COLD VIRUS TO STIR UP DISEASE DEFENSE

BYLINE: By Stephen Smith, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   It makes more people sick than almost any other microbe: the adenovirus,
better known as the culprit behind the common cold.

   But four people at a Boston hospital, aided and abetted by respected
researchers, are allowing themselves to be injected with a neutralized version
of that very virus, in the hope that it will treat or even prevent a far more
lethal infection, HIV.

      Like molecular Jekylls and Hydes, bacteria and viruses best known for
their ability to spawn death and disease are increasingly being put to work to
combat cancer, AIDS, and other illnesses. The same qualities that make them good
at causing illness, it turns out, also make them ideal for building up the
body's immune system.

   It represents a twist on the tried and true science of inoculation. Since the
late 18th century when Edward Jenner immunized a wailing child against smallpox,
researchers have strengthened the immune systems of patients by using strains of
the diseases they actually want to prevent.

   Now, in laboratories from Boston to London, scientists are using normally
harmful microbes such as listeria and E. coli to provoke immune system attacks
against even more dangerous conditions. Acting like a bullfighter's red cape,
these microbes provoke the immune system's attention.

   But the viruses and bacteria that stimulate the initial response are really
Trojan horses: Sewn inside are signals meant to switch on the body's natural
defenses against more lethal threats. For instance, scientists at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center are giving injections of an experimental HIV vaccine
that carries bits of the AIDS virus engulfed in a weakened version of the cold
virus.

   "It's all about taking a bad bug that the human body has been exposed to over
millions of years and that the body has found careful ways to say, 'Uh-oh. Here
comes a bad bug; time to mount a big response,' " said Dr. Clyde Crumpacker, the
Beth Israel Deaconess infectious disease specialist testing HIV vaccine. "And
that's a very good thing for a bad bug to do."

   But Crumpacker and other researchers say the risk of working with harmful
microbes to make vaccines is modest, especially compared to gene therapy, when
researchers sometimes use viruses to permanently change the genes of sick
patients. A French child with a rare immune system disorder called bubble boy
syndrome contracted leukemialike symptoms as a result of his gene therapy
recently.

   By comparison, the viruses and bacteria used in vaccines make no long-term
genetic changes.

   "Using these things for vaccines is very different," said Kelvin Lee, a
University of Miami immunologist. "You're not trying to actually get a gene into
somebody's genome. You're trying to get the immune response to whatever your
vaccine has targeted.

   "Essentially, what you have to do is wave a red flag in front of the immune
response to get it to go. And viruses and bacteria are great red flags."

   One of the more novel uses of such red flags is going on at Harvard Medical
School and is documented in this month's edition of the journal Gene Therapy.

   Harvard microbiologist Darren Higgins uses both E. coli and listeria in his
quest to prevent melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer, responsible for
7,400 deaths a year in the United States. The very traits that make both bugs so
perilous as agents of food-borne illness also make them ideally suited as
potential vectors for ferrying vaccines.

   "Some of the best delivery vehicles are these infectious agents that have
evolved over eons to get into host cells of your body," Higgins said. "What you
really need to know is: Can I take something that has evolved and that is very
efficient already and modify it, making it safe for people?"

   For several decades, micro biologists have trained their efforts on listeria
because it is such a relentless and efficient bacterial invader, colonizing host
cells with stunning ease. All those years spent dissecting listeria means that
scientists have a particularly thorough knowledge of its genetic constitution.

   Higgins and colleagues at London's Hammersmith Hospital decided that to build
their vaccine, they needed a pivotal protein from listeria, so they harvested
it, manipulated it, and cloned it.

   The next step involved marrying the listeria protein with a neutralized form
of E. coli, the bacterium chosen as the vaccine freight car.

   "This," Higgins said, "is not your hamburger-infecting strain of E. coli."

   Finally, they seeded a molecular signal into the E. coli that they hoped
would cause the body's immune system to establish a permanent defense against
melanoma.

   In using this engineered version of E. coli, the researchers were, at once,
appealing to the body's ancient need to defend itself, while employing the most
cutting-edge vaccine research.

   They knew that advance scouts from the immune system - they're called
macrophages - would gobble up the E. coli, recognizing the bacteria as foreign
invaders. When that happened, the molecular signals would burst out of the E.
coli and migrate to the surface of the macrophage. That, in turn, would spawn an
army of defenders trained to permanently be on the lookout for similar signals
expressed by cancer cells.

   Researchers tested the vaccine in mice infected with a virulent type of
melanoma. Six of the eight vaccinated animals remained tumor- free for more than
90 days, while the other two developed tumors at a rate far slower than the mice
that were not vaccinated. All of the unvaccinated mice died within 16 days.
While more research in mice is necessary before the E. coli vaccine can be
tested in humans, trials in people are already underway to determine whether
adenovirus and the smallpox virus are effective mechanisms for treating tumors,
as well as HIV.

   In one trial at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, now in its second phase, an
agent designed to induce tumor death is carried in adenovirus, which is injected
directly into cancer sites. In another, a safe version of smallpox contains
genes designed to provoke an immune response in men with prostate cancer.

   "We're taking the good points of the viruses and using them to our advantage,
hopefully," said Dr. Donald Kufe, a Dana-Farber medical oncologist. "If we can
decipher how to activate the immune system against tumor cells - and we're
already doing it - there's already a lot of evidence in the field that we can
really have an impact. And the beauty of it is that in almost all of the vaccine
trials, they're nontoxic."

   AIDS is the target of first-phase vaccine trials unfolding at Beth Israel
Deaconess and Massachusetts General Hospital. Using deactivated pieces of HIV
engineered onto the cold virus, researchers hope to both treat patients with
AIDS as well as prevent it in uninfected study participants.

   If it's successful, the hope of scientists is that patients whose infections
are kept in check through daunting regimens of medication will be able to stop
taking those pills and instead let their own immune systems fend off the virus.

   Still, researchers such as Crumpacker at Beth Israel Deaconess are mindful
that their investigations involve bacterial and viral agents that have spent
millions of years honing their ability to infect, and that turning that on its
head can also present peril.

   "There certainly has to be a degree of humility in all of this," Crumpacker
said. "We have to be aware these bugs can cause disease if we don't properly
engineer them. As a very wise person once said, 'When you attack nature, she
comes back at you with a pitchfork.' "

   Stephen Smith can be reached at stsmith@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2002


                             1063 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 5, 2002 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-1 TODAY'S RX

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: A SAFETY ANNIVERSARY

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, POST-GAZETTE NATIONAL BUREAU

BODY:

   This year is the 100th anniversary of the first major federal law to regulate
medical products -- the Biologics Control Act in 1902. That preceded the 1906
federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act, which usually gets the credit.

    The act led to creation of an agency that now regulates biologics -- medical
products from living sources -- as well as cutting-edge treatments such as gene
therapy.

    It all started with a St. Louis milk wagon horse named Jim.

    At the turn of the 20th century, horse owners made extra money by selling
their animals' blood to companies that made an antitoxin to treat diphtheria
before a vaccine was developed.

    Horses like Jim or other animals were injected with small amounts of
diphtheria bacteria. Their immune systems made disease-fighting antibodies,
which were extracted, purified and injected into patients to attack the
disease-causing toxins. There were no federal safeguards to protect the blood.

    In 1901, more than a dozen St. Louis children treated with the antitoxin
died from tetanus. The source of the disease became clear when Jim also died
from tetanus, then common in animals.

    That episode, and a similar one in Camden, N.J., led Congress to enact the
Biologics Control Act.

    It sets strict standards for vaccines, blood and blood products, allergy
patch tests, disease tests, cells and tissues for transplantions and gene
therapy products.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2002


                             1064 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 5, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: Monster movie sales send Pixar profits soaring

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 It was a monster of a fiscal quarter for Pixar Animation Studios, which
reported its highest profit ever on the strength of DVD and home video sales of
its film, "Monsters, Inc."

   Emeryville-based Pixar yesterday reported a net profit of $46.9 million, or
87 cents per share, compared with a profit of $6 million, or 12 cents per share,
in the same period last year.

   Revenue soared to $102.4 million compared with $11.3 million in the same
quarter last year.

   The results caused Pixar, which produces computer-animated feature films and
shorts and animation software, to raise its estimates for the full year.

   The company said earnings per share for 2002 would be between $1.50 and $1.55
per share instead of the $1.25 to $1.35 per share previously expected.

   Shares of the company were up $2.35, or 4 percent, to $55.30 at the end of
regular trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market.  The stock rose 91 cents more in
after-hours trading.

   Local earnings

   Vical reported a loss of $10.2 million in the third quarter ended Sept. 30,
compared with a loss of $2.6 million in the same period a year ago.  Revenue
rose to $2.5 million from $2.4 million

   The increased loss included a $4.2 million write-down of the San Diego
biotechnology company's investment in Vascular Genetics, which recently merged
with San Diego gene therapy company, GenStar Therapeutics.

   Vical had $119 million in cash and securities at the end of September.

   First Community Bancorp in Rancho Santa Fe generated net income of $4.5
million during the third quarter, or 37 cents per diluted share.  That compares
with $1,652,000, or 34 cents per diluted share, during the same period of 2001.

   La Jolla Pharmaceutical posted a loss of $10.7 million in the third quarter
ended Sept. 30, compared with a loss of $5.3 million in the same period a year
ago.  No revenue was reported.

   The San Diego biotechnology company had $65.4 million in cash and short-term
investments at the end of September.


LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2002


                             1065 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 5, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: Monster movie sales send Pixar profits soaring

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   It was a monster of a fiscal quarter for Pixar Animation Studios, which
reported its highest profit ever on the strength of DVD and home video sales of
its film, "Monsters, Inc." Emeryville-based Pixar yesterday reported a net
profit of $46.9 million, or 87 cents per share, compared with a profit of $6
million, or 12 cents per share, in the same period last year. Revenue soared to
$102.4 million compared with $11.3 million in the same quarter last year. The
results caused Pixar, which produces computer-animated feature films and shorts
and animation software, to raise its estimates for the full year. The company
said earnings per share for 2002 would be between $1.50 and $1.55 per share
instead of the $1.25 to $1.35 per share previously expected. Shares of the
company were up $2.35, or 4 percent, to $55.30 at the end of regular trading on
the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   The stock rose 91 cents more in after-hours trading. Local earnings Vical
reported a loss of $10.2 million in the third quarter ended Sept. 30, compared
with a loss of $2.6 million in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue rose to $2.5 million from $2.4 million The increased loss included a
$4.2 million write-down of the San Diego biotechnology company's investment in
Vascular Genetics, which recently merged with San Diego gene therapy company,
GenStar Therapeutics. Vical had $119 million in cash and securities at the end
of September. First Community Bancorp in Rancho Santa Fe generated net income of
$4.5 million during the third quarter, or 37 cents per diluted share.

   That compares with $1,652,000, or 34 cents per diluted share, during the same
period of 2001. La Jolla Pharmaceutical posted a loss of $10.7 million in the
third quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with a loss of $5.3 million in the same
period a year ago.

   No revenue was reported. The San Diego biotechnology company had $65.4
million in cash and short-term investments at the end of September.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1066 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2002 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                     November 3, 2002 Sunday No dot Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 772 words

HEADLINE: Despite setback, gene therapy still promises a cure

BYLINE: Michael Fumento

BODY:

   Just weeks ago, gene therapy celebrated one of its greatest successes, the
almost-miraculous cure of a two-year-old Dutch child afflicted with "bubble boy
syndrome." His severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) forced him to spend what
was destined to be a short life hermetically sealed in plastic. But by removing
stem cells from his marrow, genetically modifying them, and re-injecting them,
researchers gave him a shiny new fully functional immune system.

   Now such SCID treatments in the United States have ground to a halt. Why?
Similar therapy, which had cured a 3-year-old French boy, appears to have given
him a leukemia-like illness.

   Gene therapy has always been controversial, mostly because it got off to a
promising start and then floundered for almost a decade. But it is now the
comeback kid of biotechnology and is involved in more than 600 clinical trials
in 20 different countries. Gene therapy has shown promise not just against SCID
but many hereditary disorders. Five percent of children worldwide are born with
congenital or hereditary problems, and nearly 40 percent of adults are thought
to have some genetic predisposition to common illnesses ranging from minor
ailments to killers like cancer and sickle cell anemia.

   Originally, the purpose of gene therapy was precisely what the "bubble boy"
doctors did: Treat a disease caused by a single defective gene by substituting a
good one for a bad one. Then scientists found that adding genes that caused the
right proteins to be produced could potentially alleviate any number of
disorders.

   Gene therapy is being applied to problems ranging from Parkinson's to heart
disease to AIDS, although about two-thirds of the clinical trials are for
cancer. A rodent study at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia was
spectacularly successful in preventing the animals from developing stomach
cancer after they were heavily dosed with a powerful carcinogen. Further, the
genes were delivered orally. It worked like a "cancer prevention pill."

   Looking further, the researchers found that among 26 different cancer cell
lines -- including tumors of the lung, head and neck, esophagus, stomach,
cervix, pancreas and kidney -- the new genes inhibited tumor cell growth in more
than half of the experiments.

   The tragic case of the French toddler must be seen as a lesson, not the end
of the road. And part of that lesson is that using viruses to insert and spread
the corrective genes appears to have major limitations.

   All of the early gene therapy experiments took advantage of the infectious
power of viruses, which by nature burrow into the nucleus of living creatures
and set up house.

   Viruses comprise a small piece of DNA or RNA stuffed inside a protein
envelope. Researchers render the virus theoretically harmless by deleting some
or all of its genes. They then splice the therapeutic gene into the remaining
genetic material and mix it with human cells. The altered virus, called a
carrier, can then deliver the therapeutic gene into the nucleus. Even the
aforementioned rat pills contained viruses.

   But in the French child's case, a retrovirus was used, and it has long been
suspected that in exceptional cases these could cause cancer if they lodged in
or near a cancer-causing gene. The one gene therapy-related death, that of Jesse
Gelsinger in 1999, was an apparent reaction to proteins on a mere cold virus.

   Add to this that many genes are far too large to be inserted with a tiny
virus. But scientists are working hard to come up with alternatives.

   Researchers at Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, Germany are using
infrared lasers to cut temporary holes in mammal cells and insert DNA. The
genetic material was encoded so it would glow green. This allowed the Germans to
see that only the cells they aimed for were hit, that they were undamaged, and
that they went on to grow and divide naturally.

   Using bacteria would be another way to avoid viruses and to insert genes far
larger than a virus could handle. Virginia Waters of the University of
California-San Diego in La Jolla is working on this approach.

   Just as it would have been wrong to blast the space program as unethical
because brave astronauts were killed and hurt, so too with gene therapy. Yet
this isn't about beating the Russians to a cold rock, but rather treating and
curing an as-yet unknown but vast array of crippling and killing diseases. Let's
take a deep breath, try to figure out what went wrong, and plow ahead.

   We owe it to the bubble boys and ourselves.

   The Issue

   Should a setback in experimental gene therapy treatments derail further
research?

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2002


                             1067 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2209 words

HEADLINE: Companies That Seek Cures Now Fight for Life

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   WHEN the terror attacks halted air traffic last year, an exception was made
for a private jet flying from Southern California to Washington. It carried
sheets of human skin cells to treat people burned at the Pentagon.

        Now the manufacturer of that biotechnology product, Advanced Tissue
Sciences, is itself in need of emergency aid. The company, based in San Diego,
filed for bankruptcy protection last month and is still operating, although it
has been unable to raise money.

    "What we ran into was the change in the investment climate," said Abe
Wischnia, the senior director for investor relations at Advanced Tissue
Sciences. "A year or two ago, we would have had no trouble raising additional
money."

   The biotechnology industry is facing one of its worst financial squeezes
ever. The prices of many biotechnology stocks have plummeted, and Wall Street's
vaults have snapped nearly shut, making it almost impossible for capital-hungry
companies to finance themselves.

   As a result, many companies are now fighting for their lives. About 35
percent of publicly traded biotechnology companies have less than a year's worth
of cash left at their current spending levels, according to a recent survey by
Merrill Lynch. Since the beginning of July, at least 45 biotechnology companies
in the United States and Europe have announced layoffs or other cutbacks,
according to BioCentury, a newsletter.

   Among the companies in the most precarious positions are those whose research
breakthroughs have attracted much attention in the past. Such technology often
tends to be not only far-reaching, but also far out -- in terms of the time when
it will start making money. These are exactly the types of businesses that
risk-averse investors are now shunning.

   The Alliance Pharmaceutical Corporation, just down the road from Advanced
Tissue Sciences, was the subject of a front-page article two years ago in USA
Today for its work developing a blood substitute, a chemical that could deliver
oxygen to a patient's tissues when there was no blood available for a
transfusion.

   Today, Alliance is virtually out of money, unable to resume its clinical
trials, down to 90 employees from 180 at its peak and delisted from the Nasdaq
National Market. Desperate for cash, it recently borrowed $3 million -- at an
annual interest rate of 100 percent.

   Four years ago, the stock of Entremed soared to $85 a share after The New
York Times reported that its experimental drugs had eradicated cancer in mice by
cutting off the blood supply to their tumors. Now the stock is trading at $1.69,
and the company, based in Rockville, Md., said in September that it had enough
cash to last only through the end of the year.

   But grabbing headlines does not always translate into business success. Sales
have been slow for Advanced Tissue Sciences' artificial skin, which costs up to
$600 a sheet and competes with ordinary bandages. Alliance halted a clinical
trial of its blood substitute last year because some patients developed strokes,
although the company says the product was not at fault. Entremed's drugs have
not shown the same astounding results in people as they did in mice. Indeed,
many of the companies hit hardest have spent tens or hundreds of millions of
dollars on drugs and business plans that have failed, but only now are facing
the day of reckoning.

   Still, some analysts and executives say that if many companies fold, some
useful technology may never be developed.

   The recent bear market, of course, has been hard on many industries. But few
depend as much as biotechnology does on investors willing to bet huge sums on
technology that may not pay off for years, if ever.

   "I see the biotechnology industry as always struggling, always fighting for
capital," said Kevin W. Sharer, the chief executive of Amgen, the biggest
company in the field and one of the relatively few that are profitable and
therefore not that dependent on continually raising money from investors. In the
future, he said, "it'll be a lot of losers and not very many winners."

   Among the more troubled areas is one that has received much political and
public attention in the last year -- stem cells and other aspects of
"regenerative medicine," involving the regrowth of damaged organs. Despite the
technology's long-term promise, profits are not expected for years, and some of
the pioneers are ailing.

   Organogenesis, of Canton, Mass., a competitor of Advanced Tissue Sciences in
the artificial-skin business, filed for bankruptcy protection a few weeks ago.
Nexell Therapeutics, of Irvine, Calif., which was working largely on blood stem
cells, is liquidating itself. The Geron Corporation, the widely acknowledged
leader in human embryonic stem cells, laid off 43 people, or 30 percent of its
work force, in June.

   "STEM cells has been a hot area with regard to the press, but it has not been
a hot area with regard to investors," said Clayton I. Duncan, the chief
executive of Incara Pharmaceuticals, a company based in Research Triangle Park,
N.C., that worked on using liver stem cells to regrow diseased livers.

   Incara, which had two drugs fail in clinical trials, ran out of cash at the
end of September but has continued to operate. Two weeks ago, to save itself,
Incara sold its liver stem cell business to concentrate on more traditional
drugs.

   Another sector that has suffered is bioinformatics, which uses computers to
analyze masses of genetic data. Several young companies have gone out of
business or been acquired for a pittance after sales did not meet expectations.

   Companies pursuing another futuristic field -- tailoring medicines to
patients by testing their genes -- have also fallen on hard times. Shares of
Genaissance Pharmaceuticals, Variagenics and Interleukin Genetics are all
selling at around $1; Interleukin has said that its existing cash will last only
until January.

   The biotechnology industry periodically goes through money droughts, but some
say this one is the worst. "This is the first time we've had a bear market on
top of a tough environment for biotech," said Jim Scopa, co-head of health care
investment banking at Thomas Weisel Partners in San Francisco.

   Many companies, however, have withstood the famine because they raised huge
sums in 2000, when investors were in a frenzy about the deciphering of the human
genome. The industry as a whole raised more than $30 billion that year, several
times as much as in any previous year.

   "The last stop at the gas station was two years ago, and people filled up
their tanks very well," said Stelios Papadopoulos, a health care investment
banker and vice chairman of S. G. Cowen Securities.

   Still, the feeling of wealth led some companies to spend profligately. Like
Internet start-ups, some biotechnology companies decided to spend heavily to
build their business while ignoring the need for profits.

   So now, even companies in no immediate danger of running out of money are
slowing their "burn rate" -- the speed at which they go through cash -- in case
the market downturn lasts for years.

   DeCode Genetics, a company searching disease-causing genes in the relatively
homogeneous population of Iceland, its home, cut 200 employees in September --
on the same day that it announced a collaboration with Merck & Company worth up
to $90 million. In Alameda, Calif., Avigen, which is developing gene therapy to
treat hemophilia, cut 28 percent of its work force last month so that its cash
will last for four or five years instead of three, said John Monahan, the chief
executive. Even Human Genome Sciences, with $1.5 billion in cash, and Abgenix,
with $464 million, are facing investor pressure to preserve cash.

   THE biggest shortage of financing has been from public investors. In the
first three quarters this year, there were only five initial public offerings of
stock by biotechnology companies worldwide and only 10 secondary offerings,
according to Recombinant Capital, a consulting and research firm in Walnut
Creek, Calif. Together, the stock sales raised $870 million, less than half the
$1.9 billion raised in the first three quarters of 2001 and just a small
fraction of the more than $12 billion in the same period of 2000.

   The drought has shown some signs of easing. Four companies -- Trimeris,
Tularik, Telik and NPS Pharmaceuticals -- have completed secondary stock
offerings since late September, raising more than $300 million combined.

   But all those companies have what most biotechnology companies lack: drugs
that are close to reaching the market, and possible profits. Indeed, drug
development companies are held in relatively good stead by investors compared
with companies pursuing genomics, cell therapies or other exotic technologies.

   With the public markets virtually closed, public companies can still raise
money by selling stock privately to investors, though often on onerous terms.
And venture capitalists still have ample money to invest in privately held
start-ups.

   But venture capitalists make their returns when those start-ups go public.
With the market for public offerings effectively closed, venture capitalists are
starting to cut back as well on the amounts of money they offer to companies.

   "We're starting to see values fall pretty aggressively," said Brian G.
Atwood, a managing director at Versant Ventures in Menlo Park, Calif. He added,
"Almost every private company I know is considering doing a layoff."

   In some cases, venture capitalists must now put additional money into
companies in their portfolios that would normally have gone public by now,
leaving less for new companies. And with the valuations of publicly traded
companies so low, some venture firms are tempted to invest in public companies
rather than private ones.

   For public companies, raising money is difficult because their stock prices
have been driven down, in part by a series of failures in clinical trials of
drugs. About 16 percent of public biotechnology companies have market valuations
lower than their cash on hand, according to Merrill Lynch, meaning that
investors effectively assign no value to their technology. About 25 percent of
biotechnology stocks have sold for less than $1 a share in the past year,
according to Burrill & Company, an investment firm in San Francisco.

   With prices so low, some stocks are being delisted or threatened with
delisting by Nasdaq, making it even harder for companies to attract investors.
Nasdaq is considering lowering its listing standards because so many stocks, not
just biotechnology, have fallen so far.

   Cygnus, which has never been profitable in its 17-year history, finally
achieved what it thought was a breakthrough earlier this year when it began
selling its GlucoWatch Biographer, a device worn by diabetics that continually
monitors their blood sugar levels. But last month, Nasdaq told the company,
based in Redwood City, Calif., that its stock would be delisted for trading at
too low a price.

   "There is a dichotomy," said John C. Hodgman, the chief executive of the
company, which said it plans to appeal. "You're the strongest you've ever been,
but you don't meet the requirements for remaining listed on the trading board."

   Analysts said that they expect more companies to close or be acquired. "There
was a massive overinvestment in the industry, and there is going to have to be a
workout period where some companies fail," said Mark N. Lampert, who runs the
Biotechnology Value Fund, an investment company in San Francisco.

   Still, biotechnology companies often manage to hang on for years, even with a
skeleton staff, hoping for a recovery like that of Amylin Pharmaceuticals of San
Diego. Four years ago, Amylin laid off 80 percent of its employees and nearly
closed after running into problems with its first drug. But two months ago, it
licensed the rights to its second experimental drug, for diabetes, to Eli Lilly
& Company in a deal that could bring Amylin up to $325 million.

   "MANAGEMENT teams and founders are so passionate about what they are doing
that they never believe it is going away," said Peter J. Crowley, the head of
health care investment banking at CIBC World Markets. "They will stay at it
until someone absolutely turns the lights out."

   The Calypte Biomedical Corporation, which sells a urine test for the virus
that causes AIDS, announced in April that it was winding down and preparing to
file for bankruptcy. "We had gone as far as to box up the company," said Richard
D. Brounstein, the chief financial officer.

   But a month later, it got a new chairman, who has attracted more than $6
million to the company. Calypte, based in Alameda, has hired back most of its
top management and is making its product again, though at the end of the third
quarter its cash reserve was down again, to only $19,000.

   The artificial-skin products of Advanced Tissue Sciences are being acquired
by its marketing partner, Smith & Nephew of Britain, for $10 million plus the
assumption of debt, so the technology will live on. Smith & Nephew hired 110
Advanced Tissue employees. An additional 70 were laid off, leaving 35 at the
company.

   The board of Advanced Tissue will decide soon whether the company should stay
in business or shut down. If it stays open, Mr. Wischnia said, "this time the
company is going to do it in a way that makes money."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: TransCyte, a temporary skin substitute, was developed by
Advanced Tissue Sciences, now under bankruptcy court protection. The company has
been unable to raise money. (Advanced Tissue Sciences)(pg. 1); The skin
substitute Dermagraft, from Advanced Tissue Sciences, a biotechnology company,
has been approved for use in the United States to treat chronic foot ulcers of
people with diabetes. (Photographs from Advanced Tissue Sciences)(pg. 13) Chart:
"Hard Times for Biotechnology"As investment slows in biotechnology companies,
more of the businesses are running short of cash. Graphs track public
investment, private investment in public companies and venture capital, measured
in billions, from 1992 through first nine months of 2002. Graph tracks number of
public biotechnology companies from 1992 to 2001. Graph tracks years of cash
left (median) measured in 1st quarter figures, except latest, from 1993 to 3rd
quarter of 2002. (Source: Recombinant Capital)(pg. 13)

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2002


                             1068 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 2, 2002, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHER SEES HOPE ON AUTISM GENES THERAPY LIKELY TO BE FAR OFF,
SPECIALISTS SAY

BYLINE: By Ellen Barry, Globe staff

BODY:

   Within a year, researchers will probably identify the first "strong candidate
genes" that make children vulnerable to autism, Joseph Daniel Buxbaum, who heads
the neuropsychiatric lab at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, said yesterday.

   Buxbaum, who has spent five years searching for the genes, said that
laboratories working on the genetic roots of autism have made surprising
progress over the past year. Autism is a brain disorder that leaves children
unable to communicate or form normal relationships.

       "I go through periods of optimism and pessimism, and I've been optimistic
for a good long time now," said Buxbaum, who spoke at a conference on the
disorder sponsored by LADDERS, a neurological clinic affiliated with the
Massachusetts General Hospital.

   But he warned that families should not assume that the discovery of the first
genes will translate into treatment or prevention over the short term or even
within their children's lives.

   "It's the first thread," said Buxbaum, an assistant professor of psychiatry
at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.  "Families want to know when the ball of
yarn is going to unravel. Scientists want to know when it is going to start to
unravel."

   The hunt for the autism gene, begun with great optimism in the mid-1990s, has
proven far more difficult than expected, and many parents and advocates contend
that it is caused by environmental factors such as vaccines or infections.

   Diagnoses of autism - an inability to communicate and form relationships -
are increasing nationwide, radically in some locations, although some scientists
believe that better diagnosis may account for the sharp rise. A study
commissioned by the California Legislature reported last month that autism had
increased by 273 percent between 1987 and 1998.

   Few brain disorders have been more perplexing than autism, which strikes at
the age of 18 months to 3 years and leaves children isolated from the world
around them.

   Researchers studying twins have found that many, but not all, identical twins
share the disorder, suggesting that genetic factors are important, but that
environmental factors can make a child more vulnerable.

   Meanwhile, lawsuits have proliferated as parents identified environmental
causes for their children's illness, most commonly, a childhood measles vaccine
that contains minute traces of a mercury preservative.

   US Representative Dan Burton, Republican of Indiana, whose grandson has
autism, urged a congressional inquiry into what he terms an epidemic.

   Two years ago, researcher Buxbaum's hope to find the cause and a treatment
for autism had reached a low ebb, even as advocacy for the disease grew
stronger. Emerging from a successful quest for the genetic roots of Alzheimer's
disease, he had expected to isolate three or four genes linked to autism in the
course of a year or so. It didn't happen.

   "It seemed like we weren't going to get it," he said. "I was telling people
to stay in the business just so that we would have a holding pattern."

   But the last year has brought increased collaboration between international
research teams, increased funding, and better technology. By dividing sample
sets according to special characteristics, researchers have found much stronger
links between regions of the human genome and the illness. Once the first genes
are identified, Buxbaum said, later genes should be identified with less time
and effort.

   Scientists from Tufts-New England Medical Center and Massachusetts General
Hospital warned against attaching too much hope to the the research. Unlike
sickle-cell disease or Tay-Sachs disease, autism has such complex causes that
there is little likelihood of a simple prenatal screening test for the disease.

   Even if researchers succeed in identifying genes that make children
susceptible to autism, it is unclear whether the discovery would lead to the
development of new therapies in the near future, Buxbaum said.

   Susan Santangelo of the Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Unit at MGH said,
"If we find something that directly positive, we'll be extremely lucky."

   But if it turns out that the genes launch a process that begins very early in
a child's development and affects an area deep inside the brain, then the
prospect of developing a preventive therapy may seem more distant than ever, she
said.

   Santangelo said she is less optimistic that a major discovery will be coming
in the next year. "I kind of don't like to hear things like that, because it
really is hard on the parents," she said.

   Ellen Barry can be reached at barry@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2002


                             1069 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     November 1, 2002 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 614 words

BODY:

   In The Region

   Pa. canner buys former Nabisco plant in Cambridge

   A canning company based in Pennsylvania has purchased the old Nabisco plant
in Cambridge on Maryland's Eastern Shore in a $2.5 million deal, according to
MacKenzie/ONCOR International, the real estate firm that handled the
transaction.

   Mushroom Canning Co., of Kennett Square, Pa., will move into the
168,000-square-foot plant that was left vacant this fall when Nabisco moved out
of the facility where it had made Grey Poupon and A-1 Steak Sauce. The move put
about 100 people out of work in Dorchester County, which already had the state's
highest unemployment rate.

   Betty B. Causey, director of the Dorchester County Economic Development
Department, said she expected the company to create about 80 jobs; she declined
to discuss what, if any, economic incentives were involved. Company officials
were unavailable for comment.
State awards $140,000 for Harford business park

   The state has awarded a $140,000 grant to the city of Havre de Grace to
upgrade the infrastructure at Chesapeake Industrial Park, the Maryland
Department of Business and Economic Development said yesterday. The grant
supplements a $90,000 grant from Harford County.

   The municipal business park, which employs 1,200, is one of the oldest in the
county. Government officials said it needs work to remain attractive to existing
tenants and lure new businesses.

   The money will pay for upgrades to the roadways, lighting and storm water
management system in the 150-acre park. Tenants there include Pepsi Cola
Bottling Co., Solo Cup and Smuckers Quality Beverages.
GenVec reports wider loss, higher revenue during 3Q

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that its third-quarter loss widened despite
increased revenue as its experimental gene therapies advanced in clinical
trials, increasing costs.

   The Gaithersburg company said it lost $6.9 million, or 32 cents a share, on
$2.7 million in revenue. That compares with a loss of $5.7 million, or 31 cents
a share, on revenue of $249,000 in the year-ago quarter.

   The increased revenue came in part from a collaboration with the federal
Vaccine Research Center, under which GenVec's technology is being used for the
development and manufacture of AIDS vaccine candidates.
State invests $500,000 in Functional Genetics

   The state of Maryland said yesterday that its venture capital fund has made a
$500,000 investment in Functional Genetics Inc., a Rockville drug-discovery
company, in exchange for stock in the private company.

   The state Department of Business and Economic Development's Enterprise
Investment Fund requires companies to match its investment by a 3-to-1 ratio
with privately raised money. Functional Genetics, founded in December 2000 with
$8 million in venture capital, said it has raised an undisclosed sum in a second
fund-raising round led by Berkeley, Calif.-based Alafi Capital.

   Elsewhere
Tyson says judge dismissed lawsuit involving IBP unit

   Tyson Foods Inc. said yesterday that a federal judge has dismissed a lawsuit
against its IBP Fresh Meats unit, saying the court lacked jurisdiction.

   Tyson said Judge Michael Mihm of U.S. District Court Central District of
Illinois ruled last week that the suit was out of his jurisdiction because wages
at IBP's Joslin, Ill., beef plant are governed by a collective bargaining
agreement between the company and a labor union. Tyson acquired IBP in September
2001.

   The lawsuit, filed by the government, alleged that Tyson reduced wages by
hiring undocumented workers.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press and Bloomberg News.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2002


                             1070 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Company Plans Trials on Gene Therapy for Anemia

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A biotechnology company hopes to begin clinical trials next year on what it
says will be a cheaper and more convenient way to provide the anemia drug
erythropoietin, posing a potential challenge to Amgen and Johnson & Johnson.

        The company, Ariad Pharmaceuticals, of Cambridge, Mass., said it planned
to use gene therapy to provide patients with the gene responsible for producing
erythropoietin, or EPO. Instead of constantly receiving injections of EPO,
patients would be able to make their own.

    EPO, a kidney-made protein that stimulates the body to produce
oxygen-carrying red blood cells, is the best-selling product developed by the
biotechnology industry. Combined sales by Amgen and its licensee, Johnson &
Johnson, exceed $5 billion a year, which has made it a tempting target for
potential competitors.

   Currently the protein is given either by intravenous infusion or by
injection, with up to three injections a week. For patients undergoing kidney
dialysis, a major market, the cost is at least $7,000 to $9,000 a year.

   At the meeting of the American Society of Nephrology in Philadelphia this
weekend, Ariad and its collaborators at the University of Pennsylvania will
report that 22 monkeys injected one time with the EPO gene were able to produce
EPO for four years in some cases. Ariad uses a virus to carry the genes into
muscles.

   "All the moving parts now work really well long term, and the next stage is
clinical and commercial," Ariad's chief executive, Harvey J. Berger, said.

   With Ariad's system, the implanted genes do not switch on to make EPO until
the patient takes a pill. That would allow patients to control how much EPO is
produced and prevent harmful overproduction. Ariad said the pill would need to
be taken once or twice a month.

   Dr. F. John Gennari, a nephrologist at the University of Vermont, called the
work intriguing because dialysis centers are always under pressure to cut the
costs of EPO therapy. Dr. Steven J. Scheinman, chief of nephrology at SUNY
Upstate Medical University in Syracuse, agreed, saying, "It might be nice to
take a pill rather than get these injections."

   Still, the clinical trials will take years and many challenges remain.

   Gene therapy has a history of failure, even when scientists allow the
implanted genes to be active all the time. Trying to switch genes on and off is
even more difficult, and such switches tend to weaken over time. "You just
better be sure your switch works," said John Monahan, chief executive of Avigen,
another gene therapy company.

   The therapy also carries safety risks, as highlighted by the 1999 death of
teenager Jesse Gelsinger after he received gene therapy at the University of
Pennsylvania, the same institution working with Ariad.

   Questions might also be raised about the gene switch pill, a modified version
of the drug rapamycin, which suppresses the immune system. Ariad maintains that
its modified version is only minimally immunosuppressive. But dialysis patients
who receive the gene therapy and then receive a kidney transplant would not be
able to use rapamycin to fight organ rejection.

   Amgen's patents are another potential obstacle. Amgen has already sued to
stop one company, Transkaryotic Therapies, from selling EPO produced by another
means. That case is on appeal.

   Dr. Berger said Ariad's system infringes only Amgen's patent on the EPO gene,
which expires in 2004 - well before Ariad's treatment would reach the market.

   But a spokesman for Amgen disagreed, saying, "It would be certain that one or
more other patents that expire much later" would be infringed.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2002


                             1071 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   S.E.C. Chairman at Center Of Furor Over Audit Chief
Three investigations began into the Securities and Exchange Commission's choice
of William H. Webster to head a new board overseeing the accounting profession.
House and Senate Democrats called for the resignations of both Mr. Webster and
Harvey L. Pitt, the commission's chairman.

        The White House expressed support for Mr. Webster as well as for Mr.
Pitt, who was harshly criticized for failing to inform other commissioners
before they approved the choice of Mr. Webster that he had led the audit
committee of a company facing fraud accusations.  Page A1.


   Microsoft Ruling Is Expected Today
The judge overseeing the Microsoft antitrust case will issue a ruling today,
determining whether to impose sanctions beyond the proposed settlement reached
last year.  C4.

Former Enron Executive Is Indicted
Andrew S. Fastow, left, the former chief financial officer of Enron, was
indicted on 78 counts of fraud, money laundering, conspiracy and obstructing
justice. The indictment is the first to be brought against an Enron executive
since the company collapsed last year. John W. Keker, a lawyer for Mr. Fastow,
said his client would be exonerated.  C2.

Tests Planned on Anemia Treatment
A biotechnology company, Ariad Pharmaceuticals, hopes to begin clinical trials
next year on the use of gene therapy to patients with the anemia drug
erythropoietin.  C6.

ImClone and Bristol-Myers Squibb are planning two large trials of the cancer
drug Erbitux in an effort to have it approved.  C6.

China Telecom Delays Share Offering
China Telecom has abruptly postponed its $3.68 billion initial public offering.
World Business, Section W.

Suit Filed to Stop EchoStar Deal
The Justice Department and 23 state attorneys general sued to block EchoStar's
proposed $26 billion acquisition of DirecTV.  C4.

Lower Earnings for Oil Companies
Exxon Mobil and Royal Dutch/Shell Group said that third-quarter profits fell 17
percent, and ChevronTexaco reported a loss.  C12.

Amazon.com Previews Apparel Site
Amazon.com has switched on a preview of its widely anticipated apparel
department, announcing it in an e-mail message to many of its best customers.
The site included clothing and footwear from 400 retailers and manufacturers
including the Gap, Nordstrom, Eddie Bauer, Foot Locker, Guess and Phillips-Van
Heusen.  C4.

Equity Group Is Seeking Vivendi Unit
Vivendi Universal has entered into exclusive negotiations with a group of
private equity investors to sell its Houghton Mifflin publishing unit for $1.7
billion.  C6.

Nasdaq Rises; Other Markets Fall
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 30.38 points, to 8,397.03. The Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index was down 4.95 points, to 885.76. The Nasdaq was up 3.02
points, at 1,329.75.  C6.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 8,397.03 down 30.38Nasdaq
composite -- 1,329.75 up 3.0210-yr. Treasury yield -- 3.90% down 0.06The euro --
$0.9899 up 0.0051The dollar -- 122.48 yen down 0.33 Graph: "TODAY" shows
personal income figures since March 2002.September figures due at 8:30 a.m.
Eastern time.Expected: +0.5% Graph: "TODAY" shows unemployment figures since
April 2002.October figures due at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time.Expected: 5.8% Graph:
"TODAY" shows construction spending figures.September figures due at 10 a.m.
Eastern time.Expected: +0.1% Graph shows Amazon.com share prices for the week.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2002


                             1072 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 1, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: Loss Widens at Gaithersburg Gene-Drug Firm GenVec

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg company that develops gene-based medicines, said
its third-quarter loss grew by more than $ 1 million, or about 22 percent, but
reported a boost in revenue from steady government contracts.

   For the three months ended Sept. 30, GenVec had a loss of $ 6.9 million (32
cents per share), compared with a loss of $ 5.7 million (31 cents) a year ago,
largely because of higher spending on clinical trials for its three leading drug
candidates -- gene-derived treatments for cardiovascular disease, cancer and
blindness.

   Operating expenses for the quarter increased to $ 9.9 million from $ 6.3
million, the company said.

   Revenue from contracts with the National Institutes of Health and a research
partnership with Fuso Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. soared to $ 2.7 million
from $ 249,000.

   Chief Financial Officer Jeffrey W. Church said GenVec will present the
results of a second-phase clinical trial of its top drug candidate, BioBypass,
on Nov. 20 at the annual meeting of the American Heart Association. BioBypass,
one of the most advanced products in the experimental field of gene therapy, is
being studied in patients with coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular
disease.

   BioBypass has completed its second phase of clinical trials, but the results
are sealed. After GenVec officials review the results, they will decide whether
to launch a third and final phase of the patient trials required to win approval
from the Food and Drug Administration.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2002


                             1073 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 31, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 732 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Dot Hill gets loan, Sun order

   Dot Hill Systems Corp. of Carlsbad received a $4.5 million short-term loan
and a $19 million purchase order from Sun Microsystems Inc. Dot Hill said it
will use the loan to ramp production of private-label goods for the three-year
contract obtained from Sun Microsystems in May. Dot Hill makes data storage
systems.  Its shares closed up 1 cent yesterday at $2.51.

   Greenland moves, in 50-to-1 split

   Greenland Corp., whose stock has been trading under a penny per share,
implemented the 50-to-1 reverse stock split this week and announced that it has
moved from Oceanside to San Diego.  The company, which is involved in automatic
check cashing machines, also said the company's ticker symbol had changed to
GRLC. The company's shares closed yesterday at 2 cents.

   Epimmune to use Valentis know-how

   Epimmune said yesterday it will license DNA vaccine delivery technology from
Burlingame-based Valentis for use in cancer therapy.

   The San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing preventive and
therapeutic gene therapies for a variety of diseases, will pay an undisclosed
amount in milestones and royalties on product sales that use the technology to
Valentis.

   Cubic wins 2 defense orders

   San Diego-based Cubic Corp. said it won two new service contracts totaling $2
million.  Under one contract, Cubic will help the U.S. Army plan and coordinate
force transformation efforts in Alaska.  In the other, Cubic will assist the
Utah Army National Guard in establishing a new simulation training center.
Cubic's Defense Applications unit, one of the company's two business segments,
makes military training and simulation equipment.

   Realty Income in credit deal

   Realty Income Corp., an Escondido real estate investment trust that owns
stand-alone retail buildings, entered into a new credit deal to replace its
existing $225 million acquisition credit lines, which were scheduled to expire
in 2003. Under the terms of the new credit facility, total funds available were
increased by $25 million to $250 million.

   The borrowing rate also was reduced.  The term of the new facility will
extend through October 2005. Wells Fargo Bank and The Bank of New York are the
lead lenders.  They are joined by the Bank of America and Wachovia Bank. Five
other banks also participated.

   New director on NTN board

   NTN Communications Inc. named John Salvador to the company's board of
directors.  Salvador's background is in investor relations, most recently at
Coffin Communications Group.  One of NTN's goals is to make its stock better
known in the investment community.  The company's shares closed up 5 cents
yesterday at 79 cents.

   WORLD AND NATION

   FERC to weigh El Paso charges

   The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission said yesterday it will hear from
both sides before deciding whether El Paso Corp. withheld natural gas from
California and contributed to rising power prices during the state's energy
crisis.  The commission agreed to a request from El Paso to the sessions on a
federal administrative judge's initial ruling in September that the company
"withheld extremely large amounts" of natural gas during the state's energy
crisis in 2000 and 2001. The judge recommended FERC impose penalties on the
company.

   The arguments will take place Dec. 2. Associated Press

   Levi's shows new discount brand

   Seeking to win back bargain-minded shoppers, slumping jeans maker Levi
Strauss & Co. yesterday unveiled a discount clothing line that will be sold by
Wal-Mart Stores next year.

   Levi's new Signature brand represents the company's long-awaited attempt to
appeal to a fast-growing consumer segment with frugal fashion tastes.

   Shoppers buy nearly one-third of their clothes at Wal-Mart, Target and other
discounters, a trend that pushed Levi's to expand beyond the department store
business that has generated most of its sales.  Levi's hopes to sell the
Signature clothes in other discounters besides Wal-Mart.

   "We want to sell our clothes in places where people want to shop," said Phil
Marineau, Levi's chief executive officer.

   Levi's previous refusal to sell its jeans in discount chains contributed to
the company's steadily declining sales since 1996. Levi's sales this year will
total about $4 billion, down from a peak of $7.1 billion six years ago.
Associated Press


LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2002


                             1074 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 31, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Dot Hill gets loan, Sun order Dot Hill Systems Corp.
of Carlsbad received a $4.5 million short-term loan and a $19 million purchase
order from Sun Microsystems Inc. Dot Hill said it will use the loan to ramp
production of private-label goods for the three-year contract obtained from Sun
Microsystems in May. Dot Hill makes data storage systems.

   Its shares closed up 1 cent yesterday at $2.51. Greenland moves, in 50-to-1
split Greenland Corp., whose stock has been trading under a penny per share,
implemented the 50-to-1 reverse stock split this week and announced that it has
moved from Oceanside to San Diego.

   The company, which is involved in automatic check cashing machines, also said
the company's ticker symbol had changed to GRLC. The company's shares closed
yesterday at 2 cents. Epimmune to use Valentis know-how Epimmune said yesterday
it will license DNA vaccine delivery technology from Burlingame-based Valentis
for use in cancer therapy. The San Diego biotechnology company, which is
developing preventive and therapeutic gene therapies for a variety of diseases,
will pay an undisclosed amount in milestones and royalties on product sales that
use the technology to Valentis. Cubic wins 2 defense orders San Diego-based
Cubic Corp. said it won two new service contracts totaling $2 million.

   Under one contract, Cubic will help the U.S. Army plan and coordinate force
transformation efforts in Alaska.

   In the other, Cubic will assist the Utah Army National Guard in establishing
a new simulation training center.

   Cubic's Defense Applications unit, one of the company's two business
segments, makes military training and simulation equipment. Realty Income in
credit deal Realty Income Corp., an Escondido real estate investment trust that
owns stand-alone retail buildings, entered into a new credit deal to replace its
existing $225 million acquisition credit lines, which were scheduled to expire
in 2003. Under the terms of the new credit facility, total funds available were
increased by $25 million to $250 million. The borrowing rate also was reduced.

   The term of the new facility will extend through October 2005. Wells Fargo
Bank and The Bank of New York are the lead lenders.

   They are joined by the Bank of America and Wachovia Bank. Five other banks
also participated. New director on NTN board NTN Communications Inc. named John
Salvador to the company's board of directors.

   Salvador's background is in investor relations, most recently at Coffin
Communications Group.

   One of NTN's goals is to make its stock better known in the investment
community.

   The company's shares closed up 5 cents yesterday at 79 cents. WORLD AND
NATION FERC to weigh El Paso charges The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
said yesterday it will hear from both sides before deciding whether El Paso
Corp. withheld natural gas from California and contributed to rising power
prices during the state's energy crisis.

   The commission agreed to a request from El Paso to the sessions on a federal
administrative judge's initial ruling in September that the company "withheld
extremely large amounts" of natural gas during the state's energy crisis in 2000
and 2001. The judge recommended FERC impose penalties on the company. The
arguments will take place Dec. 2. Associated Press Levi's shows new discount
brand Seeking to win back bargain-minded shoppers, slumping jeans maker Levi
Strauss & Co. yesterday unveiled a discount clothing line that will be sold by
Wal-Mart Stores next year. Levi's new Signature brand represents the company's
long-awaited attempt to appeal to a fast-growing consumer segment with frugal
fashion tastes. Shoppers buy nearly one-third of their clothes at Wal-Mart,
Target and other discounters, a trend that pushed Levi's to expand beyond the
department store business that has generated most of its sales.

   Levi's hopes to sell the Signature clothes in other discounters besides
Wal-Mart. "We want to sell our clothes in places where people want to shop,"
said Phil Marineau, Levi's chief executive officer. Levi's previous refusal to
sell its jeans in discount chains contributed to the company's steadily
declining sales since 1996. Levi's sales this year will total about $4 billion,
down from a peak of $7.1 billion six years ago. Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1075 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    October 30, 2002 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief

BODY:

   Lead-paint jury causes mistrial

   PROVIDENCE - A mistrial was declared yesterday because of a deadlocked jury
in Rhode Island's landmark lawsuit against the lead paint industry, derailing
state efforts to hold the toxic paint's former makers liable for lead poisoning
in children.  - AP

   Allmerica firing 400

   NEW YORK - Worcester-based Allmerica Financial Corp. said yesterday that it
will likely take an additional restructuring charge in the fourth quarter as it
cuts 400 jobs, shutters its proprietary life business and transforms into a
full-service broker-dealer.  - DOW JONES

   PerkinElmer retrenches

   PerkinElmer Inc. said yesterday that it will use a new $ 445 million
financing agreement from Merrill Lynch Capital Corp. to repay debt. The company
also said third-quarter net income fell 77 percent, to $ 715 million, or 6 cents
a share.  Revenue rose to $ 366 million from $ 348.3 million. The company also
said it will combine its Life Sciences and Analytical Instruments into a new
unit.  - STAFF

   Genzyme news is boost

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology shares rose 27 percent yesterday, to $ 1.36, after
the company reported its experimental DNA-based cancer vaccine helped shrink
cancer tumors in mice.   - STAFF

   Hospital changes name

   St Elizabeth's Medical Center is changing its name to Caritas St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center.   - STAFF

   Dunkin' sales rise

   Allied Domecq Plc., the British owner of Dunkin' Donuts, said yesterday that
the Randolph-based doughnut chain's sales rose 10 percent, to $ 2.8 billion, in
the fiscal year ended Aug. 31. Sales in stores open at least a year rose 6
percent, Allied said.  - STAFF

   Updates aid CMGI

   CMGI Inc. yesterday reduced its net losses for the fourth quarter and fiscal
year to 48 cents and $ 1.22 a share, respectively, down from the 55 cents and $
1.29 a share the Andover company reported Oct. 24, after the company updated its
estimated cost of discontinuing its former NaviSite Inc. subsidiary.  - STAFF

   Avid gains assets

   Avid Technology Inc. in Tewksbury bought assets of Lexington software maker
iKnowledge Inc. yesterday for undisclosed terms.   - STAFF

   Correction

   The Food and Drug Administration rescheduled a review of the the Fabry
disease treatment application submitted by Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. The name
of the company was incorrect in yesterday's Herald.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2002


                             1076 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   October 30, 2002, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 1249 words

HEADLINE: To Kass, science's sword cuts both ways

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

BODY:
Some people look at the promise of genetic therapy, stem cells and embryo
selection and see longer, better lives for people, eased of suffering and
misery.

   Bioethicist Leon Kass looks at the same promise and sees a Brave New World
looming.

   Death, suffering and ignorance of one's genetic destiny aren't such bad
things, Kass argues in his new book, Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity.
The head of the President's Council on Bioethics, Kass warns that although
biotechnology might be able to eliminate some of these burdens, it will take
with them some of the virtues that make life meaningful and dignified.


   "It's a very tough sell," he says.

   In the past year, Kass, 63, has emerged as a central figure in the national
debate over cloning, stem cells and the future of biotechnology. A scholar at
the American Enterprise Institute, a think tank favoring private-enterprise
solutions to problems, and a University of Chicago professor, Kass was named by
President Bush to head a bioethics panel that would oversee the administration's
policy on embryonic-stem-cell research. Kass was identified as a key adviser
behind the administration's plan, which allows federal funding of research on
existing colonies, or lines, of embryonic stem cells but bans it for any embryos
created after the announcement of Bush's policy on Aug. 9, 2001.

   What Americans got with Kass' appointment was a man who has consistently
warned of the dangers of science unchecked, during a four-decade career that
began as a physician and biochemist at the National Institutes of Health.

   "I'm only trying to raise questions," Kass says of his latest book. The
specter of Aldous Huxley's Brave New World haunts its chapters on topics that
include cloning, embryo research and the sale of organs. Kass warns of the
"tragedy" of technology, the continuous effort to break down natural human
boundaries and remake the human body. Like the genetically manipulated,
drug-stupefied and obsessively entertained masses of Huxley's novel, humanity
today faces a future of biotechnological advances that he believes threaten
human dignity.

   That dignity, he says, "rests on the fact our lives are limited and we know
it." Modern medicine's pursuit of cures for misery-causing diseases is really an
immortality hunt that threatens to stampede humankind into a world of sterile
perfection, he warns.

   He argues against the unquestioned pursuit of genetic testing: "Many people,
taking their bearings from life lived open-endedly rather than from preventive
medicine practiced rationally, would prefer ignorance of the future," he writes.


   "I'm not saying suffering is a good thing," Kass says, but it might be a
requirement for people to lead fulfilling lives. Medicine's pursuit of
perfection threatens this opportunity, he suggests in the book. Immortality once
gained through genetic engineering may erase the human drive toward improvement,
setting society on a course both bland and barren.

   But how do Kass' notions of dignity play out for someone whose loved one
could be helped by biotechnology's advances?

   Steve Leider of Sussex, N.J., has watched his 44-year-old wife, Linda,
deteriorate from Alzheimer's disease for eight years. He confesses he is
"greedy" for embryonic-stem-cell research to yield some therapy that can help
her, and he would want that for his wife regardless of where it led humanity.
But after reading Kass' book at USA TODAY's request, he agrees someone probably
will misuse the technology, as Kass fears. Leider's wife is too young to qualify
for clinical trials of experimental Alzheimer's treatments, he says, and his
experience has left him as suspicious as Kass of the motives behind medical
research.

   "Maybe some things aren't worth knowing," Leider concedes.

   Kass also chastises the bioethicists for blessing the coming genetic
revolution in medicine. In overly rational approaches to solving questions like
when to end care for terminally ill patients and the pluses and minuses of
various organ-donation schemes, bioethicists have "turned the big human
questions into pretty thin gruel," he writes. They ignore the big question of
where medicine is headed while picking apart smaller issues, he suggests.

   One problem with his argument is that many bioethicists already are raising
the same issues as Kass, says John Lantos of the University of Chicago,
president of the American Society of Bioethics and Humanities. In debates at the
group's meeting last week in Baltimore, much concern centered on bioethicists
being co-opted by the pharmaceutical industry and paid big bucks to provide a
stamp of approval to dicey research involving genes and conditions like anxiety
and shyness.

   Moreover, says bioethicist Carl Elliott of the University of Minnesota in
Minneapolis, "The problem with his arguments is that many of them are about
striving for immortality, when the real issue is not immortality but extended
life span. If genetic manipulation could allow people to live longer, healthier
lives, what would be wrong with that? What if, instead of living to 75 or 80 in
a state of increasing frailty, sickness and disability, people could live to 100
in a state of health and vigor?"

   Even those who do not share Kass' political views admire his larger
philosophical approach, Elliott says. He says Kass has rescued a moral
vocabulary that gets lost in mainstream bioethics -- words like duty, virtue,
honor, shame, dignity, degradation and the soul. In contrast, mainstream
bioethics today prefers to make decisions based on maximizing individual choices
and risk/benefit ratios, Elliott says.

   Although he is a favorite of conservatives, Kass' ambivalence about science
and medical progress has come to mirror similar opinions expressed by those who
are more liberal, Lantos says. The combination came into play this year when
technology critic Jeremy Rifkin joined abortion opponents in calling for a total
ban on embryonic-stem-cell research.

   "Kass is willing to look at the larger human questions about the meaning of
life, death, sex and reproduction that many bioethicists are afraid or unwilling
to take on," Elliott says. "He brings a tremendous sense of moral seriousness to
his subject."

   TEXT OF BIO BOX BEGINS HERE

   The Leon Kass file

   When President Bush created a Council on Bioethics in 2002, he picked Leon
Kass to lead a group charged with overseeing stem-cell research in the USA:

   * Age: 63

   * Profession: Addie Clark Harding Professor in the College and the Committee
on Social Thought, the University of Chicago.

   * Education: M.D. 1962, the University of Chicago; Ph.D. Biochemistry, 1967,
Harvard University.

   * How he got into bioethics: Headed for a career in academic medicine, Kass
detoured into a bioethics career after a mid-'60s stint of civil rights work.
Starting with a 1970 role on a National Research Council social policy
committee, he has focused on the morality of science.

   * Where he's coming from: Kass worries that amid its many benefits,
technology is pushing humanity toward an unsavory future. Though lauding the
benefits of science, he warns that new technologies, chiefly genetic ones,
threaten to degrade the human condition. Modern medicine's pursuit of cures for
many diseases is really a hunt for an immortality that threatens to stampede
humankind into a brave new world of stunted humanity, he believes.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, James H. Kegley for USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W; On the front
lines: Leon Kass, left, talks with Alfonso Gomez-Lobo, a Georgetown University
philosophy professor, during a visit to Olsson's bookstore in Washington, D.C.
Kass was there promoting his book, Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2002


                             1077 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           October 30, 2002 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: HGS Loss Tripled In Quarter;
Biotech Firm Cites Drug-Trial Costs

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Human Genome Sciences Inc., the Rockville biotechnology firm that has
shepherded eight drugs into clinical trials, said yesterday that its
third-quarter loss tripled because of higher spending on late-stage product
development.

   The company's loss grew to $ 75.1 million (58 cents per share), compared with
a loss of $ 24.9 million (19 cents) during the same period a year earlier.
Excluding a one-time charge of $ 32.1 million tied to an investment in another
biotech firm, the loss for the quarter was $ 42.9 million (33 cents).

   HGS's report provided more evidence that the road to profitability remains
agonizingly long for the region's largest genomics companies-turned-drugmakers,
which must lavish large sums on research and development before they can deliver
products to the public market.

   Rockville-based Celera Genomics Corp., which abruptly abandoned the genetic
data business in favor of drug development earlier this year, reported widening
third-quarter losses of its own last week. Human Genome Sciences, which is
trying to develop improved versions of several blockbuster drugs already on the
market, is further along in the transition. But the losses are adding up.

   Revenue did not keep pace with higher spending in the past three months. In
fact, it was flat, at $ 1.6 million, the same as in the third quarter a year
earlier. For the nine months ended Sept. 30, the company said, revenue declined
76 percent, to $ 2.9 million, from $ 12.2 million during theperiod in 2001.

   Human Genome Sciences blamed the fallin revenue over the past nine months to
the expiration of payments from the Human Gene Therapeutic Consortium, a
partnership of large drugmakers that paid HGS to use its genetic data research
in drug development. That consortium has provided more than $ 325 million in
revenue for the firm since 1993, said Chief Financial Officer Steven Mayer. The
largest portion of payments from the consortium ceased in June 2001.

   Research-and-development spending, meanwhile, grew in the third quarter --
the result, the10-year-old company said, of an ambitious drug-development
program that has pushed eight drugs, five of them for treating cancer, into
human trials. During the last quarter, Human Genome Sciences has expanded those
trials and its product-manufacturing efforts. The firm spent about $ 10 million
more on research and development in the third quarter of this year than in the
same period in 2001, according to its Securities and Exchange Commission
filings.

   "The more success we have entering drugs into clinical development, the more
our expenses will increase," Steven C. Mayer, the company's chief financial
officer, said in an interview. None of the drugs, he said, are nearing Food and
Drug Administration approval. Most remain in Phase 1 or Phase 2 clinical trials,
putting them in the early stages of a typically long regulatory road.

   The firm said yesterday that it will soon meet with the FDA to arrange for
testing of the human growth hormone Albutropin on children with deficiencies of
the hormone. Early human trials showed that Albutropin can be injected safely
and appears to work on adults.

   The data from a recently completed Phase 1 trial, announced in early October,
suggest Human Genome Sciences may someday leap into the lucrative market for
human growth hormone, taken by people who either lack the right amount of the
substance or have certain illnesses the hormone is known to treat. HGS says
Albutropin is longer-acting than other forms of the hormone now on the market.

   The company said it will spend up to $ 15 million in the fourth quarter to
make design changes on the new manufacturing headquarters it plans to build in
Rockville. The facility, located on an 18-acre site in the Shady Grove Life
Sciences Center in Montgomery County, consists of three buildings with 240,000
square feet of lab and office space.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2002


                             1078 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 29, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: JAN. DATES SET FOR FABRY DRUG REVIEWS CONVENING PANEL TO RULE ON
GENZYME, TKT APPLICATIONS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   One month after postponing a meeting to review rival applications from
Genzyme Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. to be the sole provider of a drug
to treat the rare inherited Fabry disease, regulators have set a new date in
January to convene a panel of specialists.

   The news is the latest development in a controversial review process that has
dragged on for more than two years. The Food and Drug Administration panel now
is scheduled to evaluate Genzyme's application for Fabrazyme on Jan. 13 and
TKT's application for Replagal on Jan. 14, and recommend whether the drugs
should be approved.

      The FDA delayed the meetings, initially planned for September, citing
scheduling difficulties and conflict of interest concerns over two panel members
with close ties to Genzyme. Since then, however, TKT has disclosed that
regulators decided a key portion of its data would not support the approval of
its drug.

   The delay coupled with the disclosure sparked yet another round of fierce
speculation in what has been a closely watched competition to bring the drugs to
market. Analysts differed yesterday on which drug, if any, had the best chance
to win approval. But they agreed on one thing: that despite their best guesses,
the outcome remains mired in uncertainty.

   "Until we get to the panel reviews, it's going to be difficult to speculate
either way," said Jennifer Chao, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets in New
York.

   Even after the panel reviews, however, the outcome could remain unclear. FDA
rules require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such as
Fabry, which affects only a few thousand people worldwide. The "orphan drug" act
gives a company seven years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in
exchange for being the first to develop a drug to treat a rare disease.

   The rule seems to turn the race for approval into a winner-take-all
proposition for one of the two Cambridge companies. Both submitted applications
to the FDA in June 2000 for nearly identical drugs to treat the same rare
disease - a situation the regulatory agency has never before confronted.

   The panel will not be asked to address the orphan drug issue, however, and if
it recommends the approval of both drugs, the FDA will be forced to decide
whether it can legally approve both or whether it is bound to block one of the
drugs from the market. The US market is worth an estimated $300 million to $400
million.

   Analysts said FDA's orphan drug division has indicated that only one drug
should be approved. In the winner-take-all scenario, the loss would be far more
devastating to TKT than to Genzyme. Replagal would be TKT's first marketed
product in the United States, whereas Fabrazyme would represent a relatively
modest percentage of Genzyme's US sales. But the orphan drug division won't have
the final word.

   "This is going to be a highly politicized decision that will likely climb all
the way up the FDA ladder to the top of the agency," said Dr. Yaron Werber, an
analyst with SG Cowen in New York.

   Genzyme said the same panel of specialists convened to review Fabrazyme and
Replagal will also review the drug Aldurazyme on Jan. 15. Genzyme is developing
that drug in partnership with BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. to treat another rare
genetic disorder called MPS-1, or Hurler disease.

   Shares of Genzyme fell 28 cents to $27.24 yesterday while TKT rose 68 cents
to $13.68 on the Nasdaq Stock Market. Genzyme stock has fallen 55 percent this
year and TKT has dropped 68 percent.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2002


                             1079 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                October 29, 2002 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: METRO ; Greg Freeman Column; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1239 words

SERIES: SHARING LIFE: UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD; Part of an ongoing yearlong series.

HEADLINE: 8-YEAR-OLD BOY AND HIS FAMILY CELEBRATE HIS SECOND CHANCE

BYLINE: Greg Freeman

BODY:

   * Two years ago, Russell Witek received a transplant of cord blood from St.
Louis that knocked out his leukemia. For his mother, getting women to donate has
become a quest.

   Russell Witek is your average, curious, 8-year-old boy -- and not
incidentally a miracle of modern medicine.

   Without a transplant using donated umbilical cord blood from the St. Louis
Cord Blood Bank, Russell likely would not be with us today.

   His story began four years ago, when Russell and his mother, Karen Witek,
were attending a wedding rehearsal. Russell was to be the ring bearer the next
day. At the rehearsal, Witek noticed her son coughing so much that he created a
distraction.

   The coughing persisted the next day and, even though the family was dressed
for the wedding, Russell's father, Brian, thought it would be a good idea to see
the doctor. A doctor looked at Russell, who was quite pale, suggested that he
might be suffering from anemia or pneumonia and conducted some tests. The family
then took Russell to the wedding, where he was very uncooperative. His mother
had to bribe him with licorice to get him to walk down the aisle.

   "He was really exhausted," Karen Witek said. "He did one dance on the dance
floor, and he was wiped out."

   The next day, the family -- Brian, Karen and their older son, Garrett -- took
Russell back to the doctor to have blood drawn. Within hours, they learned that
he was suffering from acute lymphoblastic leukemia, also known as ALL.

   ALL is a rapidly progressing cancer of the blood that is characterized by the
overproduction of a form of white blood cell called a lymphoblast. The
overproduction crowds the bone marrow, radically reducing the body's ability to
form other normal and necessary blood cells.

   The Witeks live in Geneva, Ill., about 40 miles west of Chicago. Russell was
transferred to a hospital in Chicago, and the family made the trek.

   Russell was in the hospital for four days and had a multitude of tests. He
had a variety of spinal taps and marrow aspirations - a procedure where a needle
is put into the pelvis and marrow is, in effect, plunged out - and was put on a
2 1/2-year course of chemotherapy. Thirty days after the leukemia was first
diagnosed, it went into remission.

   Russell continued with the chemotherapy, and his parents thought all was
well. But when they took him to the doctor for his two-year checkup, they
learned the worst - the leukemia had returned.

   Doctors said that Russell would need a bone marrow transplant and that his
chance for survival wasn't very good. Karen, Brian and Garrett all were typed,
in hopes of being a match to give Russell the much-needed marrow. As it turned
out, none of them matched.

   Meanwhile, Russell had been placed on a national marrow donor registry, and
the family soon learned that there were three bone marrow matches and one cord
blood match. The cord blood match was from the St. Louis Cord Blood Bank at
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital.

   During pregnancy, the placenta and the blood within it serve as the lifeline
of nourishment from the mother to the baby through the umbilical cord. Following
the birth, the placenta, the cord and blood are usually discarded. But as a
result of technology developed in the 1990s, doctors have learned that cord
blood can serve as an alternative source of stem cells for stem transplantation
and gene therapy. If parents are willing, delivering physicians collect the
blood during the third stage of labor.

   Umbilical cord blood is comparable to blood found in bone marrow. But unlike
bone marrow blood, it can be frozen, stored and used later. Even better, it's
often easier to match patients with umbilical cord blood than blood in bone
marrow.

   "You might explain it like a lottery," said Kathy Mueckl, nurse coordinator
with the blood bank. "It's the difference between having to match six out of six
numbers, and having to match only four out of six numbers. You get more winners
when you only have to match four."

   Though the use of some types of stem cells is in dispute these days, there's
none when it comes to stem cells from cord blood. "We're approved by the pope,
the president and everyone else," Mueckl said. "It's a way for a mother to give
life twice."

   The St. Louis Cord Blood Bank began collecting umbilical cord blood in 1996
and is now the second-largest program in the world.

   The Witeks did their research on cord blood, and the more they learned, the
more excited they were. "I kept saying, 'Wow! Cool!'" Karen Witek said.

   The blood was shipped to Chicago, and in October 2000, Russell received a
cord blood transplant at Children's Memorial Hospital there. He didn't bounce
back immediately but gradually he returned to his normal self. "Now the biggest
complaint he has is a flaky scalp," Witek said.

   So thrilled is Witek that she has become practically an evangelist for cord
blood transplants. "I approach virtual strangers and ask them to donate their
cord blood," she said.

   Earlier this month, Russell celebrated the second anniversary of his
transplant. The family sang "Happy Transplant Anniversary to You," and he blew
out candles.

   The family continues to celebrate life.

   = = = =

   What you can give

   * One person can save the lives of up to seven people by donating the
following organs after death: heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, pancreas and small
intestine.

   * Living donors can provide blood, bone marrow, a kidney, a piece of the
liver or a segment of a lung.

   * One person can improve the lives of 40 to 50 people by donating after death
skin, eyes, bone and soft tissue, heart valves, veins and arteries.

   Source: Mid-America Transplant Services

   = = = =

   For information

   Where to go for information about organ disease, transplants and donation.

   * American Association of Kidney Patients, 1-800-749-2257, www.aakp.org

   * American Association of Tissue Banks, 1-703-827-9582, www.aatb.org

   * American Heart Association, St. Louis chapter, 314-367-3383,
www.americanheart.org

   * Children's Organ Transplant Association, 1-800-366-2682, www.cota.org

   * American Liver Foundation, Missouri and Southern Illinois chapter,
314-352-7377 or 1-866-455-4837, www.liverfoundation.org

   * The Living Bank, the nation's oldest and largest donor education group,
1-800-528-2971, www.livingbank.org

   * National Marrow Donor Program, 1-800-627-7692, www.marrow.org

   * Mid-America Transplant Services, the organization that distributes h uman
organs and tissues in Missouri, Illinois and Arkansas, 314-991-1661,
www.mts-stl.org

   * National Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program, 1-202-865-4888
or 1-800-393-2839, www.nationalmottep.org

   * National Kidney Foundation of Eastern Missouri and Metro East, 314-961-2828
or 1-800-489-9585, www.nkfstl.com or www.kidney.org

   * Eye Bank Association of America, 1-202-775-4999, www.restoresight.org

   * The Coalition on Donation, an alliance of national transplant groups and
local coalitions, 1-804-330-8620, www.shareyourlife.org

   * National Transplant Assistance Fund, 1-800-642-8399, www.transplantfund.org

   * St. Louis Cord Blood Bank, 1-314-268-2787

   * Transplant Recipients International Organization Inc., 1-202-293-0980 or
1-800-874-6386, www.trioweb.org

   * United Network for Organ Sharing, the organization that oversees the
nation's organ allocation system. For transplant information, 1-888-894-6361;
for a brochure on organ donation, 1-800-355-7427; www.unos.org

NOTES:
SHARING LIFE - UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD; Pregnant women can register to donate their
cord blood through the St. Louis Cord Blood Bank by calling 314-268-2787.; ;
Organ donations: The promise and problems; This story is part of a yearlong
series looking at the promise and the problems of organ donations. The effort is
inspired by columnist Greg Freeman and the successful kidney transplant surgery
he underwent last year. It will include columns, news stories, features,
editorials and commentary as well as a public education campaign mounted by the
newspaper's marketing department. Suggestions and news tips are welcome. Call
deputy metro editor Richard Weiss at 314-340-8229, or e-mail him at
rweiss@post-dispatch.com.; ; Read the entire transplant series, and get links to
groups involved in the issue, online at STLtoday.com/transplants.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) FAMILY Color Photo - Karen Witek and her son
Russell. Four years ago, the family learned that Russell was suffering from
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.  GRAPHIC GRAPHICS; (2) Graphic/chart - What you
can give (see text field); Source: Mid-America Transplant Services; ; (3)
Graphic/illustration - Organ Donor Registry form; Complete the information below
to be added to the Organ Donor Registry; The registry is a confidential
computerized database that documents a person's intentions regarding organ,
tissue and eye donation after death. You are not required to be on the registry
to be a donor. Talking about your wishes is the best way to let your family know
what to do.; ;
_________________________________________________________________;
PARTICIPANT'S NAME (LAST)    (FIRST)    (MIDDLE)   (SUFFIX);; ;
_________________________________________________________________;
ADDRESS (STREET)              (CITY)         (STATE)   (ZIP CODE);; ;
___________________________________________ ___ Male ___ Female;
COUNTY OF RESIDENCE                          GENDER;;
___/___/_________________________________________________________;
DATE OF BIRTH          SOCIAL SECURITY NO. OR DRIVERS LICENSE NO.;; ; _____ YES,
I want my name and information included on the Organ Donor Registry.; ; ; ; ;
_________________________________________________________________;
PARTICIPANT'S SIGNATURE                           DATE;; ; ; ; ;
_________________________________________________________________;
WITNESS                                            DATE;; Fax or mail completed
form to:
MidAmerica Transplant Services     Phone: 314-991-1661;1139 Olivette Executive
Parkway Fax: 314-991-2805; St. Louis, MO 63132; ; If you have questions or need
additional information, please contact MidAmerica Transplant Services.; ; ____
Check here if you are interested in receiving information on becoming a living
donor.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2002


                             1080 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    October 26, 2002 Saturday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-3 SPORTS MAILBAG

LENGTH: 112 words

HEADLINE: NEWSPAPER THERAPY

BODY:

   Gene Collier's "Gene Therapy" column Oct. 18 was perhaps the funniest and
most entertaining piece of writing I have ever read on the sports pages.

    Using the proven technique of "making it up," Collier laid out for readers
the process that Bill Cowher went through in coming up with the quote from the
1976 movie "Network" that inspired the Steelers to a 34-7 romp against the
Bengals.

    These days, the newspaper is filled with stories about Saddam Hussein, North
Korea's secret nuclear arms buildup and the sniper shootings. It was truly
"therapy" to stumble across this article on an airplane after a long week of
work.

    WILLIAM GIULIANI

    Bethel Park


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2002


                             1081 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       October 26, 2002, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: SPORTS; Doping in sports ; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1153 words

HEADLINE: High-tech cheating a threat ; Testing agencies facefuture that
includes genetic alteration.

BYLINE: David King


BODY: The concepts sound like something out of science fiction:

    Specially designed genes injected directly into the muscles of athletes to
allow them to grow beyond their genetic capacity.

    Newly synthesized stimulants, designed for military troops on extended duty,
pushing sprinters and jumpers to new heights.

    Naturally occurring chemicals used to boost the number of red blood cells
without leaving a trace of themselves in the body.

    Welcome to the brave new world of doping.

    "It's kind of frightening," said Richard McLaren, a law professor at the
University of Western Ontario and a member of the Court for Arbitration in
Sport. "In the future, people will be able to alter genes any way they want -
improve their deficiencies, improve their strengths. I think this one can get
away from us. You're looking at modifying nature, modifying the body you have."



    Virtually everyone involved in athletic training recognizes that athletes
have a genetic "limit" - a maximum size for a muscle, a maximum velocity on a
fastball, a maximum speed in the 40-yard dash.

    But techniques like gene splicing might lead to a way to produce "super"
athletes, ones who have overcome their genetic limitations in certain areas.

    "There's a very select number of people who have the genetic disposition to
become Division I athletes from the very beginning ... because of genetics,"
said Sheldon Levine, a doctor and professional weightlifter.

    "If you don't have the right genes, well, they will be able to splice them
in. And how are you going to test for DNA?"

    These "designer" genes would become part of the athlete's body. There would
be no way to test for them - at least not yet.

    That's become the task of the agencies fighting against doping, both
worldwide and in an increasing number of countries.

    "(The World Anti Doping Agency) is committed to confronting the possible use
of gene-transfer therapy in sport," said Dick Pound, chairman of Montreal-based
WADA. "The same kinds of people who cheat in sport today will probably try to
find ways to misuse genetics tomorrow."

    One method WADA and national groups like the U.S. Anti Doping Agency are
using is simple - meeting with the scientists developing the cutting-edge
technologies.

    In March, anti-doping leaders joined scientists and researchers at the
Banbury Center of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York. They discussed
the potential for science - gene therapy will change the way many diseases are
treated and could cure a significant number - and the potential for abuse, as
well.

    "We've reached out to the researchers and said, 'Look, I know you're working
on this, these new drugs to help mankind,'" said Gary Wadler, a New York
physician and a member of WADA. "'But it would be very nice if you also began to
anticipate the abuse of these things by athletes.'"

    Following another conference in October, the U.S. Anti Doping Agency
announced it had a urine-based test for the use of recombinant erythropoietin,
also known as EPO, that would allow for extensive out-of-competition testing.

    Arne Ljunggvist, chairman of WADA's health, medical and research committee,
said he expected to have tests in place by the 2004 Olympics for many more kinds
of oxygen downloaders, which boost the volume or increase the efficiency of
oxygen-carrying hemoglobin in the blood.

    "We're getting the tests before the products are out there," said Frank
Shorter, chairman of the board of the U.S. Anti Doping Agency.



    ***



    In the case of some drugs, officials are getting out at least the rumors of
tests.

    Shorter said that during the Olympic Winter Games in February at Salt Lake
City, anti-doping officials started a rumor that they had developed a test for a
new type of EPO.

    EPO increases the number of red blood cells, improving stamina for athletes
competing in long-distance events.

    The actual test was still months away, but the rumor was enough to trick at
least one athlete into using an older version of EPO that could be detected in a
test.

    "Athletes aren't that smart," said Shorter, who was a two-time Olympic
medalist in the marathon. "And the people who are managing them are greedier
than they are smart."

    Some observers, including Jon Entine, who has written extensively on issues
of ethics and sports, note that issues involving genetic manipulation aren't
always simply black-and-white.

    "The whole business of doping vs. nature is a very slippery slope," he said.
"In fact, it's a nonsensical slope."

    While authorities seek ways to limit some forms of genetic manipulation, he
said, other forms are becoming part of modern sports science and training.

    "We use drugs that have been genetically manufactured all the time," he
said. "If they improve performances, why aren't they banned, as well?"

    Entine has made the argument that elite athletes are mutants, genetically
endowed with a greater-than-normal skill in the same way as someone with an IQ
of 180.

    "We don't have a level playing field right now because we have these
mutants," he said. "Genetic manipulation might make sports more fair. People
would be able to catch up with the mutants."

    Mike Paul, an expert in the field of crisis management for athletes, argues
in the opposite direction.

    "Do we really want sports where a guy could take a drug that would let him
make every basket he shot?" he said. "Would anyone want to see that?

    "I think we want to watch athletes who are doing the best they can, but 110
percent natural."

    Scientists are working on ways to detect the use of supplements like human
growth hormone, which produces muscle-building results like anabolic steroids
but cannot be detected with current tests.

    As the tests are developed, they are administered with regularity. Any
athletes subject to WADA or USADA testing - those involved in Olympic sports -
must be available 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.

    Tests are frequent - U.S. sprinter Maurice Greene said he is checked "three
or four times a month" - but the problem is that many major sports
organizations, from Major League Baseball to European soccer leagues, have
little or no testing.

    People inside and outside sports see the next few years as critical in the
battle against doping.

    "If the WADA movement and the national anti-doping agency movement lose the
opportunity to fix this problem now, it'll never be fixed," Wadler said. "This
is the last chance the international sports movement has to correct a problem
that is going to grow enormously because of the number of new products on the
market."

    The issue is simple - fairness.

    "I believe it's important to be on an even playing field," Greene said. "If
I won the 100 meters on steroids, it would be tainted."

    dking@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: LAST IN A FOUR-PART SERIES ; graphic: David King : The Legal
Issues

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2002


                             1082 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 25, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY...

LENGTH: 841 words

BODY:

   So here, without further fondue, are the 15 most memorable baseball moments
-- the corrected version. An earlier version, seen on TV before Game 4 of the
World Series, dimwittedly displayed laughable oversights, plus even more
laughable inclusions.

    A Nolan Ryan no-hitter and Cal Ripken's amazing habit of showing up for work
made the Top 10, but Maz's homer, Joe Carter's homer, Bobby Thomson's homer,
Babe Ruth's called shot, and Lee Mazzilli poster day did not.

    Such were the results of fan balloting, but as Howard Cosell once yipped
while giving blow by blow on a heavyweight fight, "Don't listen to the crowd;
they know nothing."

    Here is the bulk of what is stuck at least in my memory, beginning with my
early days as a 19th century Kansas farm boy.


    1888 -- Ernest L. Thayer, writing humor for the San Francisco Examiner,
beats a June deadline by composing "Casey at the Bat." "A straggling few got up
to go in deep despair, the rest/clung to that hope which springs eternal within
the human breast." The game's first really, really clutch hit.

    1935 -- Babe Ruth's final three homers, coming within nine Sunday innings at
Forbes Field.

    1939 -- Bud Abbott says to Lou Costello on "The Kate Smith Show," "You know,
they give ballplayers peculiar names nowadays." Ya don't say.

    1949 -- First baseman Eddie Waitkus, visiting the hotel room of a woman who
says she's a friend of acquaintances in Waitkus' native Massachusetts, is shot
through the stomach by Ruth Steinhagen. A decorated World War II veteran who saw
vicious fighting in the Pacific theater, Waitkus comes closer to death in
Chicago's Park Sheridan Hotel. Steinhagen, who loved Waitkus too much to bear
the thought of another woman having him and therefore decided to kill him,
nearly got it done. She went to an insane asylum; he to the 1950 World Series.
They don't write 'em like this anymore, except in the new book "Eddie Waitkus,
Baseball's Natural" by John Theodore.

    1960 -- Oct. 13. In the penultimate baseball David and Goliath climax, Bill
Mazer-oski jacks Ralph Terry's 1-0 fastball over the wall in left to beat the
Damn Yankees. The all-time No. 1, no matter what anybody says.

    1965 -- Mets broadcaster Lindsey Nelson, doing play by play from
Philadelphia, after warning that Phillies slugger Richie Allen could end things
with one swing as Allen stepped to the plate in the bottom of ninth of a tied
game, says, "Here's the pitch; Allen swings and we'll be back with the final
totals and recap after this."

    1974 -- Ten-cent beer night in Cleveland. Completely self-explanatory, save
for the trivia mavens who remember that 25,134 on hand drank more than 60,000
brews. Lost in the ensuing riot was the irony that the fans who made it so
memorable can't remember it.

    1977 -- A very Reggie World Series. Reggie Jackson, deciding game, three
homers on three consecutive pitches off three different pitchers wearing Hated
Dodger Blue.

    1978 -- Myron Cope, in a press tent at a golf tournament of all things, upon
hearing through his bad ear the news that Pope Paul I is dead, squawks, "Boog
Powell is dead?"

    1979 -- Baltimore Orioles Manager Earl Weaver, explaining the process of
setting up his pitching rotation for the World Series against the Pirates, makes
this comment about the possible impact of bad weather:

    "If it bleepin' rains, we're bleepin' bleeped." It's a World Series record
that still stands: Most 'f' words deployed in a seven-word sentence.

    1980 -- Pete Rose and teammate Ron Reid nearly come to blows on a Phillies
charter flight to Houston. As a callow beat man for the Philadelphia Journal and
a guest on the charter, I ask veteran Philadelphia Daily News baseball writer
Bill Conlin if I can write about it. He takes me aside and puts his arm around
my shoulders and says, "Son, you're right; you're their guest. You can't write
this. The best you can do is put it in your mental file, and if there is ever a
similar instance that might have a negative impact on team chemistry down the
line, then you can pull it out." I thanked him profusely for that sage guidance.
The next day, the Rose-Reid dustup is all over the Philadelphia Daily News. Let
that be a lesson to me.

    1983 -- Chuck Tanner, the night after Pirates pitcher John Candelaria hit a
grounder to third and forgot to run (an incident so embarrassing the club issued
an official press release on the matter), making everything all right again by
telling reporters, "Don't worry, he's still the Candyman."

    1986 -- The ball going between Buck-ner's legs. One hundred percent
unforgettable.

    1987 -- Pirates third baseman Jim Morrison makes two errors on one play,
causing esteemed baseball writer Jayson Stark to ask, on the spot, "Yeah, Jim
Morrison -- Glove Me Two Times."

    1997 -- Tom Stinson, sitting in the Three Rivers Stadium press box typing
against a brutish Atlanta Constitution deadline, takes a foil-wrapped hot dog
shot from the Parrot's CO2 gun right off the forehead.

    That ever happen to Cal Ripken? Of course not.

NOTES:
NAMES & GAMES

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2002


                             1083 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   October 23, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BIOTECHNOLOGY; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: CRITICS HIT FDA MONITORING REVAMP FEAR AGENCY'S GOALS WILL NOT AMOUNT
TO GREATER OVERSIGHT

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration, which for decades has failed to comply with
a law requiring biannual inspections of drug factories, says an overhaul of its
manufacturing monitoring practices will maintain public safety while enabling
pharmaceutical and biotech companies to use innovative manufacturing techniques.

   But the agency's group in charge of the manufacturing oversight project isn't
getting any additional staff or funding to formulate its new regulatory
framework. Some wonder whether the agency's approach, begun in August, makes
scientific sense. And the doctor in charge of the program admits that those
factory inspections aren't going to get any more frequent.

      The disconnect between the program's sweeping goals and its shaky reality
has critics questioning whether the program amounts to a relaxation of important
regulatory oversight masquerading as a tough new approach to pharmaceutical
quality issues.

   "Consumers have a justifiable expectation that any medication they put in
their mouths or inject into their bodies has been manufactured according to the
best possible standards," said Peter Lurie, deputy director of the Health
Research Group at Public Citizen, the consumer watchdog group in Washington. "A
failure to adequately inspect facilities is an abdication of responsibility by
the government. The main thing I take out of this new plan is the FDA is
resigning themselves to the fact that Congress has not appropriated enough money
to the agency."

   Congress passed the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act in 1938, marking the
start of scientific oversight of the safety of the food supply and drugs.The
basic tenet was simple: Consumers shouldn't have to serve as guinea pigs for
unproven, adulterated, or unsafe products. A subsequent law further required
drug makers to use "current good manufacturing practices" in factories.

   The FDA's deputy commissioner, Lester M. Crawford, unveiled the new program
two months ago, saying it was time to update the agency's approach to monitoring
pharmaceutical manufacturing.

   Central to the new scheme is what the agency calls a "risk-based approach."
Over an unspecified period, the agency plans to identify the areas of greatest
risk in pharmaceutical manufacturing and focus regulatory efforts on those
areas, Crawford explained in a letter to FDA staff.

   But to read the agency's briefing materials on the manufacturing initiative,
the underlying problem is inadequate funding.

   "In order to provide the most effective public health protection, FDA must
match its level of effort against the magnitude of risk," said an agency paper
on the new program. "Resource limitations prevent uniformly intensive coverage
of all pharmaceutical products and production."

   Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,
which is charged with implementing the new methodology, said years of experience
have enabled the agency to better identify the specific manufacturing steps that
generate threats to consumers.

   "The previous orientation was more like, 'gee, we don't know what the risks
are, so we have to cover everything very intensely,' " said Woodcock. Going
forward, she said, some drug manufacturers will be scrutinized more than others.

   "Some companies have extremely good manufacturing records," she said. "The
risk of them making a poor product is lower than a company that has had a lot of
violations."

   But, when it comes to drugs, critics say it can't be certain that past
performance is an indication of future results. Woodcock acknowledged the agency
has yet to back up its contention with science. "That's something we want to
develop data on," she said.

   Some industry specialists contend that past experience in the drug industry
is a poor predictor of future risks because the drugs themselves are changing
dramatically. Traditional drug manufacturing was based on chemistry. Now,
bioengineered drugs are made by biologically-modified organisms. New treatments
such as gene therapy and cell treatments involve novel manufacturing methods
even further removed from old-style pill making.

   "The risk is much greater for a new drug than an old drug," said Jim Hall,
life sciences practice leader at PA Consulting Group of Cambridge, which advises
many large drug companies including AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and GlaxoSmithKline.
"The theory is they can target their audits to go where the need is. That
depends on whether you believe the FDA can create a system to identify the
risks. That's a huge if."

   Still, the new approach could generate some benefits. Current manufacturing
oversight requires companies to describe their production processes in precise
detail. Site inspections focus on whether those standard operating procedures
are followed to the letter.

   But that insistence on procedure can stifle innovation, say some observers.
Moreover, some think the new approach will be tougher than critics charge.

   "If you listen to the industry, their concern is the FDA is reacting to the
public pressure on them by demonstrating how cautious they are on drug
applications and manufacturing issues," said Kenneth Kaitin, director of the
Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development. "The cost to a company of a
closure or a holdup over good manufacturing practices is staggeringly enormous.
The companies are very edgy over this plan."

   As to those biannual inspections required by the law, Woodcock said they
aren't likely to start any time soon.

   "We're certainly aware of it and we'd try to meet that requirement," she
said, "but it's not feasible. We don't have enough people to go around every two
years."

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.  SIDEBAR: FEWER
INSPECTIONS

   DESPITE FUNDING INCREASES, THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION IS INSPECTING
TWO-THIRDS FEWER MANUFACTURING FACILITIES THAN IT DID IN 1980.

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, The FDA plans to identify areas of greatest risk in
pharmaceutical manufacturing. / GLOBE FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1084 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   OCTOBER 23, 2002, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BYLINE: Henry Norr, Bernadette Tansey

BODY:
Microsoft to buy Net mapping firm Vicinity

    Microsoft Corp. said Tuesday that it will acquire Vicinity Corp., a
Sunnyvale developer of location software and services, for $96 million.
Vicinity's Location Server technology enables companies to deliver maps and
driving directions, tailored to a customer's location, over the Web or wireless
devices.

    Microsoft plans to incorporate Vicinity into its MapPoint business unit,
which develops retail mapping products and provides location services to other
companies over the Internet.

    Under the terms of the deal, Vicinity shareholders will receive $3.33 in
cash for each share -- a 49 percent premium compared with the shares' closing
price of $2.24 on Tuesday. Subject to regulatory and Vicinity shareholder
approval, the deal is expected to close by the end of the first quarter of 2003.

    Vicinity has 120 employees. It recorded a net loss of $11.5 million on
revenue of $16.3 million in its 2002 fiscal year, which was shortened by a month
in connection with a change in the company's calendar. Chuck Berger, its
president and chief executive, said his own future role has not been determined,
but "most customer-facing and engineering and technical people" will keep their
jobs.

    -- Henry Norr

   -----------------------------------


    Avigen cuts workforce to conserve cash

    Avigen Inc., an Alameda firm that develops gene therapy techniques, said
Tuesday that it cut its workforce by 28 percent.

    The firm said the elimination of 42 positions and other cutbacks will allow
it to maintain its research program and stretch its financial resources for four
to five years without outside funds. The company has no products or revenue but
is running early clinical trials on gene therapy methods for hemophilia and
preclinical studies on Parkinson's disease.

    Avigen, which will release third quarter results on Oct. 30, said it expects
to limit recurring expenses in 2003 to $25 million. The company reported $132
million in cash reserves June 30.

    Avigen shares closed Tuesday at $5.96, down $1.42 for the day.

    -- Bernadette Tansey

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1085 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          October 23, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1524 words

HEADLINE: Better off dead? Experimental procedures on dying patients raise
questions

BYLINE: Sheryl Gay Stolberg; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 PHILADELPHIA -- On the day his doctors disconnected his artificial heart,
ending his life, James Quinn gave them one final scare.

   It was Aug. 26, nearly nine months after Dr. Louis E. Samuels, a transplant
surgeon at Hahnemann University Hospital here, removed Quinn's diseased heart
and replaced it with a mechanical one, turning the 52-year-old retired baker
into a research pioneer.  Now, with his patient brain dead after a stroke,
Samuels was presiding over the unplugging of the device that had kept Quinn
alive longer than anybody dared hope -- perhaps, both he and his surgeon
thought, too long.

   Quinn's room on the eighth-floor cardiac intensive care unit was crowded with
family members and medical people by the time Samuels arrived.  A minister spoke
briefly.  When Quinn's wife, Irene, said, "It's time," Samuels motioned to his
nurse practitioner, who deprogrammed the external console that powered the
heart.

   Without warning, Quinn bolted upright, arms extended, as if reaching toward
the heavens, then crossed his hands and lay back down.  The scientist in Samuels
recognized it as an involuntary reflex, yet he could not help wondering if
Quinn, a deeply spiritual man, was "reaching out to God." Irene Quinn was
horrified.

   "You're killing him!" she remembers shrieking.  "He wasn't ready!"

   Quinn's final gesture marked the last, awful moments in an experiment that
ethicists say raises serious questions about the participation of dying patients
in medical research.  By the standards of the Food and Drug Administration,
which oversee the trial, the experiment was a success -- Quinn survived more
than 60 days with his new heart, more than twice as long as he was expected to
live when he received it.

   But his quality of life was poor.  In an interview shortly before the stroke
that killed him, Quinn said that if he had to do it all over, he would stick
with his natural heart.

   "This is nothing, nothing like I thought it would be," he said.  "If I had to
do it over again, I wouldn't do it.  No ma'am. I would take my chances on life."

   When doctors experiment at the frontiers of medicine, no one can say at the
outset how the research will end.  Doctors may warn patients of debilitating
side effects and even death, but nonetheless, experts say, patients often fall
prey to "the therapeutic misconception," the idea that if a doctor offers a
treatment, it must have therapeutic value.

   "These people get to the point where they are willing to try anything," said
Judith P. Swazey, a medical historian who has done extensive research on the
artificial heart.  "When they are in that position, I'm not sure how informed
informed consent can be."

   Quinn's experience, pieced together from interviews with him and his family,
his doctors, his patient advocate and officials at Abiomed, the Danvers, Mass.,
company that made the heart, provides a rare glimpse inside the choices made by
a dying patient and his physician.  It also provides a peek behind the scenes of
the highly publicized artificial heart experiment, which has enrolled seven
patients since July 2001.

   Of the seven, the only one still alive is Tom Christerson of Central City,
Ky., who on Sept. 13 celebrated his one-year anniversary with the Abiomed heart.
He is living at home, relatively normally, his doctors say.  But experts who
have studied a previous artificial heart experiment, the Jarvik-7, say
Christerson is an exception.  Quinn, they say, is more the rule.

   "The artificial heart has always been a device treated as kind of a miracle
machine," says Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the
University of Pennsylvania.  "So there has been a pattern of hope and
disappointment, hype and almost battling between subjects, families and
researchers."

   In the case of Quinn, known as Butch, Samuels wound up searching his soul for
"some solace, some reason to believe it was still worthwhile." Ed Berger, the
spokesman for Abiomed, acknowledges Quinn did not meet the company's goal: "six
months of reasonable quality of life."

   And Quinn, who said at the outset that all he wanted was to spend more time
with his wife and grandchildren, was deeply frustrated that he never got well
enough to leave the hospital for home.  Months before his death, he hired a
lawyer, thinking he might sue.

   Ethicists say an artificial heart experiment is different from any other.  As
Caplan said, "You are going on a voyage where a core right -- the right to
withdraw from the experiment -- requires the researcher to end your life."

   To navigate these complex waters, Abiomed created a council of independent
ethicists to advise the company and serve as patient advocates.  The Quinns'
advocate was Dr. David Casarett, a geriatrician at the University of
Pennsylvania.  He sat in when Samuels went over the trial's informed consent
form, a 14-page document that bluntly outlined the experiment's risks, from
death on the operating table to "pressure from the media" -- a problem the
company remedied by imposing a 30-day news blackout after each surgery.

   Irene Quinn recalls that she and her husband were intent on saving his life.
"It was like a do-or-die situation," she said.  "The device could save your
life, or you die."

   Medical ethicists -- along with the Quinns' lawyer, Alan Milstein -- say the
Quinns' situation is a classic example of the "therapeutic misconception."
George Annas, a professor of health law at Boston University, argues dying
patients are "coerced by their disease" into participating in the research.

   But E. Haavi Morreim, a University of Tennessee bioethicist who is chairman
of Abiomed's ethics council, disagrees.  "To assume that no one who is facing
mortality is capable of thinking reasonably," Morreim said, "is an insult."

   On Nov. 5, 2001, Quinn became the world's fifth recipient of an AbioCor
heart.  By Thanksgiving, he was not only walking, but riding a stationary bike.
"We were astonished," Berger said. but on New Year's Eve he suffered a small
stroke, a complication that Abiomed later said might have been cause by blood
clots forming on struts in the device.  The company subsequently redesigned the
heart.

   By mid-January, Quinn was well enough to leave Hahnemann -- not for home, but
for a nearby hotel, the Hawthorn Suites, where two rooms had been set up to
resemble the intensive care unit.  The move was intended to help Quinn make the
transition from hospital to home.  But it would prove a turning point, both
physically and psychologically, for the couple.

   Quinn developed lung problems, was readmitted to the hospital and placed on a
breathing machine.  He was weary of being poked and prodded, he later said, and
at times felt "excruciating pain." Sheldon Zink, a medical anthropologist who
had been chronicling the case, says the setback left Quinn feeling vulnerable.

   Irene Quinn, frustrated and exhausted, grew angry that Hahnemann had not
provided around-the-clock nursing care at the hotel.  She was also worried about
money.  Hahnemann kept sending her bills.  They were sent in error, hospital
officials said, but she feared she would have to pay them.  "I didn't have
anybody to talk to," she said.  "I didn't trust anybody."

   Annas of Boston University said Irene Quinn's despair was not unique.  "This
is an experiment on the family," he said.  "There are a lot of lessons we should
have learned from the Jarvik, and I don't think Abiomed and their doctors
learned them very well."

   In March, the Quinns hired Milstein, the lawyer, who had come to prominence
when he represented the family of Jesse Gelsinger, a teen-ager who died in a
gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   By August, Quinn began making occasional visits home, which lifted his
spirits greatly.

   "I want to come home and stay home, come home and be with my grandchildren,
with my wife," he said.  "They say there's possibilities, that the pump works so
good, I could maybe live another 20 years if the rest of my body holds up."

   Eight days later, Quinn suffered a massive stroke.  Two days after that, he
was declared brain dead.

   Berger said Abiomed was grateful to Quinn, who helped demonstrate the heart's
reliability.  He said the company hoped to enroll eight more patients in the
artificial heart trial by the end of this year and intended to ask the FDA to
permit "limited commercial distribution" of the heart in 2004.

   "You can say, 'Look what we achieved, it's positive,' " Berger said.  "That
is something you feel very good about.  On the other hand, we want our patients
to do well, and to feel that they are doing well." In that regard, he said,
Quinn's story "is distressing."

   Irene Quinn remains angry.  "He would have been better off dead," she said.
"He wouldn't have suffered."

   During Quinn's autopsy, the artificial heart was removed and sent back to
Abiomed for an examination.  Irene Quinn, aware of this, made a request of
Samuels, one that he says he fulfilled.  She asked the surgeon to find whatever
was left of Quinn's original heart, and to put it back inside his chest.

   In death, she wanted her husband to have a human heart.


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 2. New York Times; 1. James Quinn was kept alive by an
artificial heart for more than 60 days. 2. James Quinn, recipient of the Abiomed
heart, is shown here two months before his death, with Dr. Louis Samuels
(center), his surgeon, and Elena Holmes, who supervised his care. Quinn survived
more than 60 days with the artificial heart. (F-4)

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2002


                             1086 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 22, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-5

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: STANLEY CROOKE

BODY:
 Age: 57

   Title: Founder and chief executive.

   Organization: Isis Pharmaceuticals, a Carlsbad biotechnology company that is
developing a new kind of medicine -- antisense.  Unlike most traditional drugs,
which act on proteins that cause diseases, antisense drugs, made of snippets of
synthetic genetic material, are designed to block the proteins before they are
formed.

   Isis has several antisense drugs in development, including a lung cancer drug
and a drug for Crohn's disease that are in final-stage, Phase 3 patient studies.

   Why does your company exist?  I founded Isis because I felt that to make a
dramatic improvement in the quality of drug therapy, a quantum increase in the
specificity of drugs was needed.  And I felt that the productivity of the
industry was declining and would continue to as long as investments in new drug
discovery methods were limited.  I felt that antisense might be the platform
that could meet both needs.

   What about your job keeps you up at night?  The sad fact that drug
development is an exercise in failure -- most new drugs fail, and we have so
little understanding of the factors that contribute to success or failure --
that most of the time we can exercise very little real control.  So I fear the
outcome of clinical trials because I know that we can do everything as well as
can be done and still fail.

   What aspects of your job do you brag about?  We have had the courage to
answer the tough questions even when we know that in the answers there might be
real risk to the technology and the company.  We've persevered, and along the
way, we've built a great organization in which many people have grown.

   Antisense is a novel way to approach the treatment of disease, much like gene
therapy or the use of monoclonal antibodies.  What has been the biggest
challenge in trying to pioneer a new class of drugs?  To explain the technology
and integrate the data into coherent simplified answers that can be understood
easily.  There is no simple answer to the question of "how do you know antisense
works?"

   Tell us something interesting about yourself.  I have the last basketball
Bobby Knight autographed as coach of Indiana University.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; STANLEY CROOKE

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             1087 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      October 21, 2002 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 02G

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy studies should continue ;
Gene therapy studies should continue, panel says

BYLINE: SHERYL GAY STOLBERG New York Times

BODY:

   Gaithersburg, Md. -- Despite new evidence that a French gene therapy
experiment caused a 3-year-old boy to develop an illness similar to leukemia, a
government advisory panel has recommended similar studies proceed, with some
restrictions, because they offer hope to children with fatal immune
deficiencies.

   In making its recommendation, the panel of outside scientific experts urged
the Food and Drug Administration to reinstate three experiments that have been
suspended since September, when the child became sick. The FDA typically follows
its expert panels' advice.

   "This was an absolutely clear, serious adverse event, and all of us are
scared about it," said Daniel R. Salomon, the panel's chairman and a gene
therapy expert at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego. But, he said, "It
is not enough to advise the FDA to put all of these programs on hold."

   Until the child fell ill, the French clinical trial was gene therapy's only
unequivocal success. The experiment was intended to cure severe combined immune
deficiency, or SCID, an extremely rare disorder that leaves babies without
functioning immune systems and is generally fatal within the first year.

   Gene therapy involves using viruses to introduce healthy genes into cells;
the French experiment employed a retrovirus, a type of virus that changes the
communication within cells that governs how they behave.

   The expert panel said all gene therapy patients receiving retroviruses now
must be informed, in simple language, that such a virus had apparently caused
cancer in a child. They suggested all patients receiving retroviruses be closely
monitored.

   The recommendations, made after an all-day emergency hearing, were another
turn in the troubled field of gene therapy, which is still reeling from the
death of a patient, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, in 1999.

   Gelsinger's father, Paul, appeared at the hearing, and summed up the panel's
dilemma this way: "You are in a quandary now, because you have an ethical
concern that you may be creating a problem in these kids that they didn't have
before. But you have also given them a viable treatment."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             1088 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2002 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                            October 20, 2002 Sunday
                               STATEWIDE EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: GENE MAY STOP BREAST CANCER IN ITS TRACKS;
RESEARCHER SEES `LOT OF POTENTIAL' FOR TREATMENT; SIMILAR TESTS PLANNED FOR LUNG
CANCER

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists have identified a gene that is missing in a high percentage of
breast and lung cancer cells, a finding that may lead to new techniques to
detect and treat the majority of such cancer cases.

   When the missing gene -- DBC2 for ``deleted in breast cancer'' -- is
restored, it stops the growth of breast cancer cells in the laboratory,
researchers at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and Washington University report.
Their findings are in the Oct. 15 issue of Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences.

   Similar tests with lung cancer cells are planned, researchers say.

   ``This has a lot of potential for treatment, but we are at the very
beginning,'' says Masaaki Hamaguchi, assistant professor at Cold Spring Harbor
and lead author of the study.

   Scientists found working copies of the tumor-suppressing gene in all tissue
samples of cancer free-subjects, but the gene was inactivated or missing in 58
percent of breast-cancer samples and in 50 percent of lung-cancer samples.

   The scientists also found the gene was missing in other kinds of cancers,
though at a much lower rate.

   ``This is a big deal,'' says David Stern, professor at pathology at Yale
School of Medicine and co-director of the breast cancer research program at the
Yale Cancer Center. ``The nice thing is that they have done the difficult work
and now thousands of biologists can follow it up. They've seeded a whole new
area of research.''

   In order to take root, cancer must evade the body's defenses, which eradicate
damaged cells. In a minority of cases, inherited mutations are to blame for the
failure of those defenses, but most cancers are sporadic, and damaged DNA --
mutations caused by aging or environmental factors -- is the culprit.

   Researchers say that the newly discovered gene, one of a number of
tumor-suppressing genes identified in recent years, could be a crucial mechanism
that helps keep at least breast and lung cancers in check.

   Stern says an understanding of DBC2 might one day help in the development of
new screening tests, but he also notes that the scientists found the gene was
missing only in cancer cells, not in normal tissue.

   By contrast, inherited forms of genetic abnormalities that predispose people
to breast cancer can be found in tissue before the onset of the disease. These
inherited genetic abnormalities, such as mutations of the BRCA genes, cause an
estimated 10 percent of breast cancer cases.

   Scientists also need to know if the loss of the DBC2 gene occurs early or
late in the disease process, says Dr. Patricia DeFusco, a medical oncologist at
Hartford Hospital.

   Hamaguchi says his team theorizes that random DNA mutation accounts for the
deletion of the gene, allowing tumor growth to occur.

   DBC2 offers a whole new target area for potential cancer therapies. In
theory, doctors could restore activity of the gene and then could stop tumor
growth, says Hamaguchi.

   ``It's exciting, but clinically where it will be useful remains to be seen,''
DeFusco says. ``But if we don't find these things, we won't know what to look
for in the future in terms of potential targets and therapies.''

   A version of this story first ran on Oct. 8.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2007


                             1089 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 19, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: Struggling Alliance delisted by Nasdaq

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Alliance Pharmaceutical was delisted yesterday by the Nasdaq stock exchange,
the latest biotechnology company to succumb to a feeble financial market and a
string of drug development failures.

   The San Diego company, which is developing an artificial blood substitute,
was the second local biotech to be delisted this week by the Nasdaq.  Shares of
Advanced Tissue Sciences, which filed last week for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, will
move to over-the-counter trading Monday.

   A third local biotech company, Carlsbad's Immune Response Corp., last week
initiated a 1-for-4 reverse stock split in an effort to boost its share price
and avoid a looming Nasdaq delisting.

   "A delisting is close to the kiss of death," said John McCamant, editor of
the Medical Technology Stock Letter, a Berkeley investment newsletter that
covers the biotech industry.  "It becomes expensive to conduct transactions in
penny stocks, and you lose your big investors.  It's a very difficult thing to
get over."

   The delistings, bankruptcy and some recent bargain mergers are also signs
that many money-losing biotechs, which burn through millions of dollars to
develop products that take years to win regulatory approval, are scrambling with
limited success to secure funding.

   The wobbly economy, along with a persistent lack of success among biotechs in
getting new drugs or products approved, has investors wary.  Biotechs that must
raise money in the current climate are giving up more stock for less money,
striking licensing deals with larger drug companies or merging with
better-funded companies to survive, biotech industry observers say.

   Though the situation is nothing like the funding drought biotechs suffered
from 1997 through 1999, when investors ditched the industry for Internet
companies, biotechs are beginning to feel the financial pinch.

   "With our companies, we are planning for an indefinite period of limited cash
-- we are cutting burn rates, cutting back on hiring," said Stan Fleming,
managing member of Forward Ventures, a San Diego venture-capital firm that
invests in biotech startups.  "Cash is very expensive these days in the private
market, and in the public markets in general there is no capital available at
any price.

   "There's a quote by the economist John Maynard Keynes that goes, 'The market
can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent.' If the strategy for a
biotech requires the market to come to its senses, that is a risky strategy."

   Among the hardest-pressed biotechs are those developing more speculative
products, such as gene therapies or therapeutic vaccines.  Last month,
financially troubled GenStar Therapeutics, which is developing a gene-based
treatment for hemophilia, merged with another gene-therapy company, Vascular
Genetics.

   Earlier this year, another cash-poor San Diego gene-therapy company,
Collateral Therapeutics, was acquired by its German research partner, Schering
AG.

   In the case of the now-delisted Alliance, the cash-starved company appears to
be at the end of its financial tether.  The company has been in a free fall
since January 2001, when it had to halt final, Phase 3 testing of its lead
blood-substitute product, Oxygent, because of safety concerns.

   Earlier this month, Alliance revealed that it borrowed $3 million at an
interest rate of 100 percent in a desperate effort to stay alive while it tries
to wangle more funding from a reluctant corporate partner, Baxter Healthcare.

   McCamant said Alliance has a long history of "overpromising and
underdelivering," and the tough financial market will serve to weed out the
weaker companies.

   But for those companies with solid technologies, the current bleak biotech
financial cycle has an upside.  This time around, there are many biotechs that
are sitting on a pile of cash, either raised during the investor frenzy over
genomics companies in 2000 or through revenue-generating products, McCamant
said.

   And these biotech "haves" are in a position to snap up the technologies of a
lot of their "have not" brethren, either through licensing deals, acquisitions
or mergers, he said.

   "There are companies with cash and no technology, and plenty of smaller
companies with decent technology and no cash," McCamant said.  "In these times
we get to see what management teams are made of, whether their egos are too big,
or they are too stupid, to go out and do something -- because good products will
get scooped up."

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             1090 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 19, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: Struggling Alliance delisted by Nasdaq

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Alliance Pharmaceutical was delisted yesterday by the Nasdaq stock exchange,
the latest biotechnology company to succumb to a feeble financial market and a
string of drug development failures. The San Diego company, which is developing
an artificial blood substitute, was the second local biotech to be delisted this
week by the Nasdaq.

   Shares of Advanced Tissue Sciences, which filed last week for Chapter 11
bankruptcy, will move to over-the-counter trading Monday. A third local biotech
company, Carlsbad's Immune Response Corp., last week initiated a 1-for-4 reverse
stock split in an effort to boost its share price and avoid a looming Nasdaq
delisting. "A delisting is close to the kiss of death," said John McCamant,
editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter, a Berkeley investment newsletter
that covers the biotech industry.

   "It becomes expensive to conduct transactions in penny stocks, and you lose
your big investors.

   It's a very difficult thing to get over." The delistings, bankruptcy and some
recent bargain mergers are also signs that many money-losing biotechs, which
burn through millions of dollars to develop products that take years to win
regulatory approval, are scrambling with limited success to secure funding. The
wobbly economy, along with a persistent lack of success among biotechs in
getting new drugs or products approved, has investors wary.

   Biotechs that must raise money in the current climate are giving up more
stock for less money, striking licensing deals with larger drug companies or
merging with better-funded companies to survive, biotech industry observers say.
Though the situation is nothing like the funding drought biotechs suffered from
1997 through 1999, when investors ditched the industry for Internet companies,
biotechs are beginning to feel the financial pinch. "With our companies, we are
planning for an indefinite period of limited cash -- we are cutting burn rates,
cutting back on hiring," said Stan Fleming, managing member of Forward Ventures,
a San Diego venture-capital firm that invests in biotech startups.

   "Cash is very expensive these days in the private market, and in the public
markets in general there is no capital available at any price. "There's a quote
by the economist John Maynard Keynes that goes, `The market can remain
irrational longer than you can remain solvent.' If the strategy for a biotech
requires the market to come to its senses, that is a risky strategy." Among the
hardest-pressed biotechs are those developing more speculative products, such as
gene therapies or therapeutic vaccines.

   Last month, financially troubled GenStar Therapeutics, which is developing a
gene-based treatment for hemophilia, merged with another gene-therapy company,
Vascular Genetics. Earlier this year, another cash-poor San Diego gene-therapy
company, Collateral Therapeutics, was acquired by its German research partner,
Schering AG. In the case of the now-delisted Alliance, the cash-starved company
appears to be at the end of its financial tether.

   The company has been in a free fall since January 2001, when it had to halt
final, Phase 3 testing of its lead blood-substitute product, Oxygent, because of
safety concerns. Earlier this month, Alliance revealed that it borrowed $3
million at an interest rate of 100 percent in a desperate effort to stay alive
while it tries to wangle more funding from a reluctant corporate partner, Baxter
Healthcare. McCamant said Alliance has a long history of "overpromising and
underdelivering," and the tough financial market will serve to weed out the
weaker companies. But for those companies with solid technologies, the current
bleak biotech financial cycle has an upside.

   This time around, there are many biotechs that are sitting on a pile of cash,
either raised during the investor frenzy over genomics companies in 2000 or
through revenue-generating products, McCamant said. And these biotech "haves"
are in a position to snap up the technologies of a lot of their "have not"
brethren, either through licensing deals, acquisitions or mergers, he said.
"There are companies with cash and no technology, and plenty of smaller
companies with decent technology and no cash," McCamant said.

   "In these times we get to see what management teams are made of, whether
their egos are too big, or they are too stupid, to go out and do something --
because good products will get scooped up." Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237;
penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1091 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 18, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 831 words

BODY:

   Many of us, particularly in the stinking media, claim some extended knowledge
of what Bill Cowher goes through in a typical week of preparing the Steelers for
60 minutes or more of raging violence.

    But the fact is, everything we know of the top jaw is way short of
everything there is to know. Who knew, for example, that a week ago today Cowher
was plotting to show the 1976 film "Network" at a team meeting the next night?
Much less that Peter Finch's signature line, "I'm mad as hell and I'm not going
to take it anymore," would serve as the emotional talisman of a chanting gang of
Bengal-slayers for the balance of last weekend?

    How Cowher arrived at that film quotation on that night for that particular
set of Steelers maladies is a story worthy of exposure, for it shows the breadth
of techniques the coach will deploy not just to get a victory, but to tailor pop
culture for his own highly specific purposes.

    Or something.

    Using the proven technique of, you know, making it up, I've been able to
piece together a good representation of how it all went down.

    By Friday of last week, Cowher knew he needed something elaborate from a
motivational standpoint for a team that was reeling. He faced a road game at
Cincinnati that had become inexplicably critical to his team's aspirations.
Remembering the Dustin Hoffman line to Tom Cruise in the 1988 film "Rain Man":
"I buy my boxer shorts at a Kmart in Cincinnati," Cowher knew that wasn't what
was needed, but it was a start.

    It could not be something so obvious and cliched as Schwarzenegger's "Hasta
la vista, baby," especially since that could well have been the Steelers'
situation had they lost Sunday, or Garland's "I've a feeling we're not in Kansas
anymore," since, in that case, well, most of the Steelers have never been to
Kansas. Not that it made sense in the context anyway.

    Further, the quotation had to be relatively short, something that could be
chanted, but it had to have considerable agitation within it. Thus Cowher
quickly eliminated Clifton Webb's famous quote from the 1946 film "The Razor's
Edge": "If I live to be 100, I shall never understand how any young man can come
to Paris without evening clothes."

    Cowher rained figurative spittle on Clifton Webb.

    The head coach didn't want to panic his players, who knew the importance of
the Bengals game, and he didn't want to telegraph any doubts he may have
harbored as to their fate in a season that opened with Super Bowl reservations.
And so he eliminated the Albert Brooks quote from 1985's "Lost in America":
"I've seen the future! It's a bald-headed man from New York!"

    He had to come up with something his team would be comfortable with, and it
occurred to him it should be something that sounded vaguely soothing and
familiar, perhaps like one of his famous malaprops or some tortured syntax.
Briefly then, he considered this trenchant Danny Kaye line from 1954's "White
Christmas": "When what's left of you gets around to what's left to be gotten,
what's left to be gotten won't be worth getting whatever it is you've got left."

    The coach liked it, as it seemed to have something to do with his team's
situation, but dismissed it when assistants carefully suggested it was
absolutely incomprehensible.

    It was getting late. A few hours until movie time at the Cincinnati Hyatt.
Also dismissed were "Mongo only pawn in game of life" from "Blazing Saddles",
"Well, Tillie, when the hell are we gonna get some dinner?" from "Guess Who's
Coming to Dinner", and, from "Mommy Dearest", "Tina! Bring me the ax!"

    Finally, Cowher remembered "Network", but couldn't recall the exact
quotation from Howard Beale, played by Finch. Whirling the tape backward and
forward through the hotel VCR, the head coached clicked on all manner of
seemingly significant dialogue. Finch's "We're in the boredom-killing business."
Ned Beatty's "Good morning, Mr. Beale. They tell me you're a madman." William
Holden, speaking of Faye Dunaway, with "I'm not sure she's capable of any real
feelings. She's television generation. She learned life from Bugs Bunny."

    The head coach knew none of them would work, although that last one might
have been good for Andy Rooney.

    Then, with just minutes remaining, Cowher's thumb hit the STOP button at
just this instant, "I want you to get up now," Finch said, "I want all of you to
get up out of your chairs. I want you to get up right now and go to the window.
Open it, and stick your head out, and yell, 'I'm mad as hell and I'm not going
to take it anymore.' "

    Steelers 34, Bengals 7.

    Now he needs something for a night game Monday against Indianapolis. Maybe
something that that speaks ominously of his perfect record on home Mondays.
Might I suggest this from 1941's "The Wolf Man."

    "Even a man who is pure in heart, and says his prayers by night, may become
a wolf when the wolfbane blooms, and the autumn moon is bright."

    All right, maybe not. Cowher's still got a couple of days.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             1092 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   October 17, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: CHIEF TO QUIT AGENCY ON MEDICAL TESTING HARVARD TEACHER KOSKI HAS BEEN
OVERSEEING RESEARCH ON HUMANS

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Greg Koski, the chief federal watchdog for human research subjects, said
yesterday he will step down to return to Harvard University and Massachusetts
General Hospital at the end of November.

   Koski, a cardiac anesthesiologist and former Partners HealthCare
administrator, took the federal job overseeing millions of participants in
medical experiments two years ago at a time when public confidence in scientific
research had been shattered by the death of a teenager in a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

       Under his tenure as director, the Office for Human Research Protections
doubled its staff, tripled its budget, and shifted its focus from policing to
prevention in an effort to improve the safety of experiments.

   Yesterday, in a surprise announcement, Koski said he has leaving not because
the job was done but because the pull of family and his desire to treat patients
once again were too strong to resist. His two-year leave from an associate
professorship at Harvard was about to expire, he said, and he no longer wanted
to be separated from his wife and children, who had remained in Holliston.

   "There was no pressure on me to leave my position," he said. "There is
nothing political in my departure at this time. This is a personal decision."

   Koski said it would take another three to five years to fully accomplish his
goals of transforming the system and restoring public confidence in medical
research, but he added he had set out a blueprint that others could follow. He
pointed to a report issued two weeks ago by the Institute of Medicine that he
said validated his approach. That report said research institutions still needed
to make fundamental changes in the way they conduct experiments.

   Dr. Daniel Federman, the Harvard professor who oversaw the institute's
report, yesterday praised Koski for his "very strong principled stance in favor
of protections for the participants in research. He accomplished a lot in a
short period of time, but the whole domain is a very hard one to move because
there are so many people, institutions, and conflicting interests."

   "He took a leadership role and deserves credit for discharging his
responsibilities with courage and fortitude," added Dr. David Blumenthal,
director of MGH's Institute for Health Policy.

   But some observers said Koski had not pushed hard enough for change.

   "You can't change the system by creating accreditation and education," said
Vera Sharav, president of the Alliance for Human Research Protection. "What was
needed was a sweep."

   George Annas, chairman of the Health Law Department at Boston University,
said Koski "was more of a caretaker, which may have been all that was possible
in the Bush administration. Short of the closing down of Johns Hopkins, which
was spectacular, it's hard to put your finger on anything concrete that's
changed."

   Koski's office temporarily shut down all research last year at Johns Hopkins
University, the leading recipient of federal research grants among medical
schools, after a healthy volunteer was killed in an experiment.

   But Koski said he was prouder of the office's increased monitoring of
institutions where there were no reported problems and of efforts to accredit
researchers and research institutions to establish ethical standards.

   He also said he hoped to issue formal policy on how researchers could avoid
financial conflicts of interest before he steps down next month.

   Koski, who had headed the research protection offices at MGH and then at
Partners before joining the federal government, will return to teaching at
Harvard Medical School and practicing medicine in the MGH anesthesiology
department. His chairman, Dr. Warren Zapol, said that living apart from his wife
and teenage children had been a great sacrifice for Koski.

   When he returns to Boston, Koski said, he would look for ways to continue
working on research protection issues, perhaps in the international arena.

   Alice Dembner can be reached at Dembner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             1093 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                 October 17, 2002 Thursday CITY-D-EAST EDITION

SECTION: Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1186 words

HEADLINE: Widow sues artificial-heart maker;
The suit alleges negligence and fraud, saying James Quinn was not well informed
of the ordeal he faced.

BYLINE: Stacey Burling Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   The widow of artificial-heart recipient James Quinn yesterday sued the maker
of the device, the hospital where it was implanted, and the patient advocate who
helped Quinn decide to have the surgery. The suit contends the informed-consent
process was flawed and alleges fraud, negligence, and "intentional assault and
battery."

   Quinn, who was 51 when he received the heart Nov. 5, came to regret his
decision after an initially remarkable recovery was followed by months in the
hospital. He died Aug. 25 after suffering a stroke.

   After receiving the mechanical heart, the suit says, Quinn had "no quality of
life and his essential human dignity had been taken from him."

   Irene Quinn said yesterday that she and her husband did not know what they
were getting into when they joined the clinical trial. They thought the machine
would save his life, she said. She said they should have been told more about
what earlier patients had experienced and that it should have been made more
clear just how experimental the device was.

   Louis Samuels, the Hahnemann University Hospital surgeon who implanted the
artificial heart in Quinn and who was in charge of the trial in Philadelphia,
was not named in the suit.

   "We believed that Dr. Samuels is a good man with a good heart," said Alan
Milstein, the Pennsauken attorney who is representing Irene Quinn and her
husband's estate. "The problems that occurred here had more to do with the
design of the trial and the flaws in the consent process... that controlled
whether the Quinns would agree to participate in this trial."

   Irene Quinn said her husband and Samuels became friends. "Butch liked Dr.
Samuels," she said. "He loved him."

   Quinn was the fifth patient to receive the device, which differed from its
predecessors because it could be implanted totally into the chest. Of the seven
men who have received the artificial heart, only one - Tom Christerson of
Kentucky, is still alive. He has lived with the heart more than a year and has
been home since April.

   The suit filed yesterday in Philadelphia Common Pleas Court named as
defendants Abiomed Inc., the Danvers, Mass., company that made the heart; Tenet
Healthcare Corp., which owns Hahnemann; Hahnemann; Drexel University, which
supplies physicians who work at the hospital; and David Casarett, an assistant
professor in the University of Pennsylvania's geriatrics division and a member
of the Center for Bioethics. Casarett was assigned to help the Quinns understand
the consent process. In a novel step designed to improve the consent process,
Abiomed helped set up an independent panel of advocates to advise patients.
Casarett was part of that group until the Quinns fired him in June.

   Milstein said he believes he is the first lawyer to sue a patient advocate.
The lawsuit accuses Casarett of "patient advocate malpractice." It contends
Casarett failed to "protect the interests" of the Quinns and that during
meetings to discuss the clinical trial "advocated no position for the Quinns and
asked them only whether they had any questions."

   The suit calls for damages "in excess of $100,000," but Milstein said that
number is meaningless because juries determine the amount of awards.

   Most defendants in the lawsuit, who had not seen the complaint, declined to
comment yesterday.

   Drexel University College of Medicine issued a statement: "We reviewed the
decisions that were made and the steps taken in caring for Mr. Quinn and are
confident that everyone here did an outstanding job... . In these days when
physicians are being driven out of their practices by this type of lawsuit,
organizations like ours will find it difficult to participate in providing
cutting-edge care to critically ill patients like Mr. Quinn.

   "We donated thousands of hours to Mr. Quinn's care, and we did so with
pride."

   The statement noted that Quinn was willing to "face the unknown" and got
extra months of life because of the surgery.

   Milstein, who also represented the family of Jesse Gelsinger in a
much-publicized suit involving a fatal gene-therapy experiment at the University
of Pennsylvania, maintains that the Quinns agreed to test the artificial heart
because of "therapeutic misconception" - the idea that, as a man who would soon
die of heart failure, James Quinn had no other medical options open to him.

   It should have been made clear to Quinn, Milstein said, that the device,
which had never been tested in humans before this trial, was not a "therapeutic
option." The only reason to participate at that stage of the heart's
development, Milstein said, was to be willing to be a "martyr for science."

   Because of the lack of informed consent, the suit claims, "Quinn was caused
to sustain serious, disabling and permanent physical and emotional injuries."
These constituted intentional assault and battery, the suit said.

   In addition to problems with the informed-consent process, Milstein said
clinical-trial organizers did not prepare well for Quinn to go home and
subjected Irene Quinn to a "terrible financial hardship" by sending her bills
for her husband's care. The hospital and university have both said that the
bills were a mistake and that Irene Quinn does not have to pay them.

   George Annas, a lawyer and bioethicist who chairs the health law department
at Boston University School of Public Health, said leaving Samuels out of the
suit makes it unlikely to succeed.

   "The only person who has an obligation to get informed consent is the doctor
who does the procedure," he said.

   Milstein said that is not true in this type of experiment.

   Lawsuits over clinical trials have become more common in the last three or
four years, with Milstein being the lawyer most visible in their proliferation,
said Dennis DeRosia, a physician assistant who is chairman of the board of the
Association of Clinical Research Professionals.

   "More lawsuits will definitely have a chilling effect, and we are concerned
about that," he said.

   He said he does not buy the argument that dying people are unable to make
good decisions. They are expected to make important personal and legal
decisions, and many decline to enter trials even when no other treatment is
available.

   Robert Levine, a physician and ethicist at Yale University, said researchers
have struggled for years with the problems inherent in offering experimental
treatments to extremely sick people. "I think that when people are faced with
death, it puts limits on their ability to understand, to appreciate," he said.
"It has a tendency to make them somewhat, with rare exceptions, desperate to try
whatever they can try."

   Although he believes researchers are doing their best to inform people of
risks, he said, many patients forget what they are told or fail to realize that
making a good decision about whether to participate has nothing to do with how
things turn out later.

   Milstein hopes the suit makes researchers more careful when seeking consent.
"The point is not to stop these trials, but to make them ethical," he said.

   Contact Stacey Burling at 215-854-4944 or sburling@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             1094 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   October 16, 2002 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: PITT RESEARCHERS USE GENE THERAPY TO TREAT CANCER PAIN

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, POST-GAZETTE SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

   University of Pittsburgh researchers report success in using gene therapy to
treat pain associated with bone cancer in mice and say they hope to test the
treatment in human cancer patients next year.

    The gene therapy boosts production of proenkephalin, a protein that the body
uses to make a morphine-like painkiller called enkephalin.

    Based on a study in mice, recently published online by the journal Annals of
Neurology, the therapy appears to significantly reduce pain for weeks at a time.
In patients, the therapy may work synergistically with morphine and could be
repeated every few weeks, as needed, said Joseph Glorioso, chairman of molecular
genetics and biochemistry.

    Clinical trials still must be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and Pitt's own institutional review board. Researchers hope to
administer the therapy to terminal cancer patients whose tumors have spread to
the bone, which can cause excruciating pain.

    The therapy uses a highly modified version of the herpes simplex virus --
the virus that causes cold sores and genital herpes -- to infect nerve cells
with a gene that produces proenkephalin. The modifed viruses, called vectors,
are injected underneath the skin; the vectors infect nerve cells and then move
up the long, thin nerve fibers to the base of the cell at the spinal cord.

    The extra proenkephalin produced by the infected cells help block pain
transmitted to that portion of the spinal cord. The gene therapy thus can be
used to provide pain relief only for those portions of the body that need it,
said James Goss, a research assistant professor of neurology.

    Three years ago, a mouse study by the Pitt researchers showed that this
approach could be used to increase resistance to pain caused by heat. In the new
study, they injected tumor cells into one leg of each mouse. They later injected
the legs of about a dozen mice with vectors carrying the proenkephalin gene and
an equal number of mice with a vector that did not have the proenkephalin gene.

    A week later, the mice that received the proenkephalin genes showed no sign
of pain, while the other group of mice acted as if their legs hurt. Two weeks
later, the first group of mice also exhibited pain, but still about 60 percent
less than that suffered by the nonproenkephalin mice, who had high levels of
pain.

    Goss, principal author of the study, said further studies in higher animals
is not planned. "Pain research, in and of itself, is difficult," he explained.
"Pain is very subjective; you can't ask an animal how it feels." In mice, pain
can be evaluated by the animal's behavior -- ranging from simply favoring a sore
leg to experiencing pain so great the animal holds the leg up in the air.

    The same studies can't be done in nonhuman primates, such as monkeys,
because of the ethical concerns with inflicting pain and because monkeys have
much more complex behavior than rodents, making it difficult to assess their
pain, Goss said. Human trials thus are the next step in the research.

    A human trial would be one of the first for the herpes vector, which has
been under development in Glorioso's lab for 15 years. One version, designed to
replicate only in tumors, already is being clinically tested for treating brain
and liver cancers. Another version, which doesn't replicate at all, will be used
both for the pain trial and for a trial in brain cancer patients undergoing
gamma knife radiation treatment. Both of these latter trials are planned for
next year, said Glorioso, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.

    The herpes vector is suitable for the pain trial, he noted, because it can
be used repeatedly if additional pain relief is needed. Most viral vectors can
be used only once before the body's immune system develops a defense against
them.

NOTES:
Byron Spice can be reached at bspice@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1578.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2002


                             1095 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   October 16, 2002 Wednesday REGION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: PITT RESEARCHERS USE GENE THERAPY TO TREAT CANCER PAIN

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, POST-GAZETTE SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

   University of Pittsburgh researchers report success in using gene therapy to
treat pain associated with bone cancer in mice and say they hope to test the
treatment in human cancer patients next year.

    The gene therapy boosts production of proenkephalin, a protein that the body
uses to make a morphine-like painkiller called enkephalin.

    Based on a study in mice, recently published online by the journal Annals of
Neurology, the therapy appears to significantly reduce pain for weeks at a time.
In patients, the therapy may work synergistically with morphine and could be
repeated every few weeks, as needed, said Joseph Glorioso, chairman of molecular
genetics and biochemistry.

    Clinical trials still must be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and Pitt's own institutional review board. Researchers hope to
administer the therapy to terminal cancer patients whose tumors have spread to
the bone, which can cause excruciating pain.

    The therapy uses a highly modified version of the herpes simplex virus --
the virus that causes cold sores and genital herpes -- to infect nerve cells
with a gene that produces proenkephalin. The modifed viruses, called vectors,
are injected underneath the skin; the vectors infect nerve cells and then move
up the long, thin nerve fibers to the base of the cell at the spinal cord.

    The extra proenkephalin produced by the infected cells help block pain
transmitted to that portion of the spinal cord. The gene therapy thus can be
used to provide pain relief only for those portions of the body that need it,
said James Goss, a research assistant professor of neurology.

    Three years ago, a mouse study by the Pitt researchers showed that this
approach could be used to increase resistance to pain caused by heat. In the new
study, they injected tumor cells into one leg of each mouse. They later injected
the legs of about a dozen mice with vectors carrying the proenkephalin gene and
an equal number of mice with a vector that did not have the proenkephalin gene.

    A week later, the mice that received the proenkephalin genes showed no sign
of pain, while the other group of mice acted as if their legs hurt. Two weeks
later, the first group of mice also exhibited pain, but still about 60 percent
less than that suffered by the nonproenkephalin mice, who had high levels of
pain.

    Goss, principal author of the study, said further studies in higher animals
is not planned. "Pain research, in and of itself, is difficult," he explained.
"Pain is very subjective; you can't ask an animal how it feels." In mice, pain
can be evaluated by the animal's behavior -- ranging from simply favoring a sore
leg to experiencing pain so great the animal holds the leg up in the air.

    The same studies can't be done in nonhuman primates, such as monkeys,
because of the ethical concerns with inflicting pain and because monkeys have
much more complex behavior than rodents, making it difficult to assess their
pain, Goss said. Human trials thus are the next step in the research.

    A human trial would be one of the first for the herpes vector, which has
been under development in Glorioso's lab for 15 years. One version, designed to
replicate only in tumors, already is being clinically tested for treating brain
and liver cancers. Another version, which doesn't replicate at all, will be used
both for the pain trial and for a trial in brain cancer patients undergoing
gamma knife radiation treatment. Both of these latter trials are planned for
next year, said Glorioso, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.

    The herpes vector is suitable for the pain trial, he noted, because it can
be used repeatedly if additional pain relief is needed. Most viral vectors can
be used only once before the body's immune system develops a defense against
them.

NOTES:
Byron Spice can be reached at bspice@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1578.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2002


                             1096 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                  October 15, 2002 Tuesday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS - SCIENCE; SCIENCE; Biology & Science; Pg. 07A

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY HAS ENCOUNTERED MANY UNEXPECTED OBSTACLES

BYLINE: David Lore, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Twenty months ago, scientists announced the mapping of the human genome, an
achievement heralded as one of the greatest in science.

   Now comes the hangover from this supernova of optimism.

   The Council for Responsible Genetics this month called for a moratorium on
gene-therapy experimentation because of the death of an 18-year-old Pennsylvania
patient three years ago and the recent case of a 3-year-old French toddler who
developed leukemia after treatment.

   "Biological characteristics or traits usually depend on interactions among
many genes, and more importantly, the activity of genes is affected by various
processes that occur both inside the organism and in its surroundings," said the
council. "This means that scientists cannot predict the full effect that any
gene modification will have on the traits of people or other organisms."

   A governmental advisory committee last week came out against such a
moratorium, but it's clear that concerns are growing.

   There's nothing inevitable about gene therapy or other aspects of the
so-called gene revolution, said Philip Bereano, a council board member, during a
forum on designer genes earlier this month at COSI Columbus.

   "There is no (one) future," he said. "The future depends on public and
private choices."

   Gene therapy ranks low in terms of public-health needs, but is being pushed
by profit motivations and the ambition of top scientists to win a Nobel Prize,
said Bereano, a professor of engineering technology at the University of
Washington.

   Bioethicist Erik Juengst from Case Western Reserve University, the other
member of the panel, thinks both gene testing and gene therapy have been
oversold to desperate patients and their families.

   "There's not a great track record yet on gene therapy," he said. "It's turned
out to be more complicated than once thought."

   Juengst wishes that people would stop looking at genetic testing as a crystal
ball.

   "These tests are more like a TV weather map, a forecasting tool we don't put
a lot of stock in. It's not the future, it's just information we can use or not
use."

   But don't look for genetic testing to go away, he said, despite concerns
about genetic discrimination by insurance companies or employers.

   "These tests will come along because the people who can pay for them will do
so," he said.

   David Lore is science reporter for The Dispatch.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2002


                             1097 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 14, 2002, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 561 words

HEADLINE: Site-specific technique could boost the success of gene therapy

BYLINE: Elizabeth Weise

BODY:
A new gene therapy technique devised by researchers at Stanford University
Medical Center could eliminate the flaw that caused a French toddler receiving
gene therapy to develop cancer.

   In gene therapy, doctors insert a healthy copy of a gene into a cell where it
can take over for the patient's faulty one. In the French case, seemingly
successful gene therapy had cured a 3-year-old boy of the often-fatal "bubble
boy" syndrome in which children are born without the ability to produce
disease-fighting immune cells.


   However, two years after the treatment, the boy developed a leukemia-like
illness. Doctors estimate there was a 90% chance that his cancer was caused by
the gene therapy accidentally "turning on" a cancer-promoting gene. French
authorities immediately suspended the experiment.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's scientific advisory committee decided
in an emergency meeting last week to allow three gene therapy experiments in the
USA to continue.

   Many patients in those trials do not have the option of a well-matched bone
marrow transplant, the only other potential treatment for their condition,
according to the FDA.

   The Stanford technique might address the flaw in the French researchers'
method for administering gene therapy, based on the way the genes are delivered.


   "Up until now, when you introduced genes into cells, they either didn't
become part of the chromosome or, if they did, they would just go in at random,"
says Michele Calos, a genetics professor at Stanford's medical school and senior
author of a paper published today in Nature Biotechnology.

   Stanford researchers used a tiny bacteria-infecting virus called a
bacteriophage. The bacteriophage produces a protein called integrase that allows
the virus to insert its DNA into a specific site in patients' chromosomes.

   Previous methods, which used regular viruses, inserted the genes randomly --
sometimes next to an oncogene, a cellular "switch" that, when turned on, causes
the patient to develop cancer.

   Calos' team inserted genes into mice with hemophilia that allowed the mice to
produce their own Factor IX, the clotting protein that is missing in
hemophiliacs. Within a week, the mice that had received the therapy were making
12 times more Factor IX than their littermates.

   More important, rather than inserting randomly into any of 53 possible sites,
the Factor IX gene went to only two locations, one more frequently than the
other.

   The Calos technique also allows scientists to insert genes that are too large
to fit into a viral package, such as the gene for one form of muscular
dystrophy.

   Daniel Salomon of the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., a
chairman of an FDA advisory committee on gene therapy, called it a good
conceptual first step.

   But Salomon cautioned that the technique must be further refined to deliver
new genes to the correct sites every time, and "they are far from that."

   "A very important objective for gene therapy is to control the integration of
new genes into the host in order to prevent integration into sites that might
cause cancer or turn off an important gene that a cell needed to survive," he
says. "But from a conceptual point of view, the type of approach that this group
has taken is excellent, timely and 100% appropriate."

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2002


                             1098 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      October 13, 2002 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 037

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; Eastern Bank names Paula Bishop a vice president

BYLINE: By Shaun Bean

BODY:

   Eastern Bank, of Boston, appointed Paula Bishop vice president and business
development officer in its small business banking unit.

   Michael F. Davidson, of Weymouth, was promoted to vice president of marketing
by Barclay Water Management Inc., of Watertown.

   The Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (MSPCC),
of Boston, hired Brian Condron, of Hingham, as director of public policy and
governmental affairs.

   Payette Associates, of Boston, hired Peter G. Longley as the firm's new
director of building technology and Robert C. Ritger as director of information
technology.

   Keith J. Champney was added to the staff of Beverly Hospital Hunt Center, of
Beverly, in the geriatric care unit.

   Transkaryotic Therapies, Inc., of Cambridge, appointed John B. Edwards as
vice president of marketing, promoted William E. Aliski to vice president of
commercial operations, and named Linda H. Pettingell vice president, human
resources.

   Fidelity Bank, of Fitchburg, named Lee Thompson vice president-commercial
credit officer.

   Anni H. Autio, an environmental engineer with CDM in Cambridge, was elected
as director for district 2 of the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).

   Joseph L. Kociubes, of Newton, was named president of the Boston Bar
Association (BBA). His term runs through Aug. 31, 2003.

   The Credit Network (TCN), a national mortgage credit reporting service in
Framingham, appointed Joseph T. Porpora and James E. Markland to its management
team.

   Western New England College announced the following elections of officers to
its executive committee for the alumni association: Jan Casey, of Wilbraham;
Jonathan Luke, of Feeding Hills; Ray Meyers, of Springfield; Stephanie Sule, of
Springfield; and Nicholas Wolkowicz, of Ware.

   Matt Grant, of Quincy, was named account executive at Bay Copy, a digital
document solutions provider in Rockland.

   Therion Biologics, of Cambridge, made the following appointments: George A.
Eldridge, chief financial officer; Suman Patel, vice president, quality; Erin E.
Quinn, vice president, human resources.

   Christopher M. Giordano was named assistant dean of students at Suffolk
University. Christina McKenna accepted a visiting professor faculty position.

   Jonathan Black, of Malden, has joined Brown Rudnick Berlack Israels, of
Boston, as a partner in the real estate department.

   Eastern Bank, of Boston, named Glenn Rosengard, of Needham, vice president
and manager of its new Boston branch at 265 Franklin Street.

   Commonwealth Hematology-Oncology's Pedro Sanz-Altamira, the director of the
cancer program at Lawrence General Hospital, has been named cancer liaison
physician by the American College of Surgeon's Commission on Cancer.

   Invensys, an energy services provider in Boston, has appointed Jim Menton to
a senior-level regional post in its newly formed Commercial & Industrial
Property market-segment business.

   Citizens Bank, of Boston, named Richard Hamilton, of Plainville, and Lynn
Motta, of New Bedford, small business relationship managers for southeastern
Massachusetts.

   Robert W. Ramsdell, founder of FreshPond Education, of Cambridge, has been
named senior director of PBS TeacherLine, a Web-based professional development
initiative focused on improving teaching practices in schools nationwide.

   Fred C. Church Insurance, of Lowell, has added three new employees: Ellen
DiNicola, of Woburn, a personal lines customer service representative;
Bernadette Duchesneau, a commercial lines senior account representative; and
Sharon Milburn, of Andover, a receptionist providing general office support.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, Sunday Business People, attn. Shaun
Bean, One Herald Square, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to 617-619-6388. No
phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2002


                             1099 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     October 13, 2002 Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg.A1

LENGTH: 2353 words

HEADLINE: HUNTER'S HELP;
 JIM AND JILL KELLY'S SON, WHO HAS KRABBE DISEASE, IS THE FOCAL POINT OF AN
EXTRAORDINARY FUND-RAISING EFFORT THAT'S GIVING THE NEXT GENERATION OF KRABBE
KIDS A SHOT AT HEALTHIER LIVES

BYLINE: GENE WARNER; News Staff Reporter

BODY:

   The world knows Hunter James Kelly as a disabled little boy, a battler who
inspired his father, Jim, to call him the toughest little guy he has ever met.

    Few know Hunter for what he already has accomplished in his 5 1/2 years on
earth.

    Thanks to increased public awareness and medical research developed with the
help of money raised by his foundation, he's helping younger kids blindsided by
a rare neurological disease -- Krabbe disease -- to have a shot at a long,
active, normal life.

    And he has done it without ever walking a step, saying a word or flashing a
young boy's laugh.

    There's no hiding how devastating Krabbe's can be. It's an inherited,
degenerative disorder that eats away at the central and peripheral nervous
systems, usually taking the child's life within a couple of years.

    Many don't reach their first birthdays.

    Hunter Kelly has been more fortunate than most.

    He's 5 1/2 now, surrounded by a house full of love and stuffed animals in
Orchard Park, staying alert and stimulated by 14 hours of therapy and schooling
every week. With the blink of an eye, he communicates with his loved ones and
teachers, choosing the next video, book or toy.

    Hunter's disease, at one point, progressed very rapidly, but it has
plateaued since then. No one knows for sure, but his family believes all the
stimulation, intensive therapy, education and love have helped him live so long.

    But no one's blind to the discomfort and pain he faces each day, or to the
tough prognosis presented by his disease.

    This is a story about a disabled child who has raised public awareness --
and millions of dollars -- to battle a disease few had heard of before he was
born.

    The money, the increasing awareness, the breakthroughs in medical research
will make it possible for many of the next generation of Hunter Kellys to have a
chance at a long, active life.

    Seven Krabbe infants in North America, kids diagnosed at an earlier age than
Hunter, already have received therapeutic blood transfusions and are thriving as
a result.

    Kids like Gina Rugari of suburban Cincinnati, who received a transplant when
she was 37 days old. At age 2 1/2, she now matches colors and shapes, sits up
briefly on her own, crawls, talks, laughs and blows kisses. Someday, she
probably will walk.

    Hunter's prospects aren't as promising. Yet he's more than just a symbol.
He's a living, breathing 5-year-old with wants and needs, likes and dislikes.

    Blue is his favorite color. Horses are his favorite animal. He loves toy
race cars, Jacuzzi baths, watching videos, blowing on a feather, cruising around
the house in his KidKart and wiggling his toes.

    "He's the toughest little boy I've ever met in my life," Jim Kelly said of
his son. "I see what he goes through every day. I see when he struggles for an
extra breath, but he does things we never imagined he would do."

    And no matter how long he lives, Hunter's Hope will be his legacy.


    A transplant success



    Gina Rugari wouldn't be alive today, wouldn't be talking and blowing kisses
at her family, if her older brother, Nicholas, hadn't died of Krabbe (pronounced
crab-AYY) disease.

    Nicholas was born in 1986 and diagnosed at age 7 months, at a time when his
parents were told the disease struck 1 in 5 million newborns. His disease
progressed rapidly, and he lived for one year and three days.

    Because Nicholas had Krabbe's, any brothers or sisters would have a 25
percent chance of inheriting the disease. So after Gina was born, on Dec. 23,
1999, she was tested for it.

    Days later, her mother, Anne, was alone when she got the news. Gina had
tested positive.

    "I got down on my hands and knees and said: 'Why Gina? Why does this have to
happen to her? Why does she have to die?' "

    Gina didn't receive a death sentence. Instead, she received a cord-blood
transplant -- a transfusion of blood from a newborn's umbilical cord. Cord blood
contains stem cells that help rebuild the blood and immune systems, helping
restore the enzyme missing in Krabbe kids.

    Why can't all Krabbe kids benefit from such a transplant?

    Because it should be done in the first two months of life, and Krabbe
symptoms usually don't become obvious that soon. Newborn screening for Krabbe's
still remains too expensive, roughly $200 to $400 per child, for a disease that
strikes fewer than 1 in 40,000 babies.

    "It's a huge Catch-22," said Micki Gartzke, director of education for the
Hunter's Hope Foundation. "We have an effective treatment, but we don't have the
newborn screening available to identify the children."

    Gina Rugari, who lives in Edgewood, Ky., outside Cincinnati, is one of the
seven Krabbe children in North America to receive such a transplant as infants.

    All are thriving. At least two are running. One goes to a regular school.
And all either talk or laugh or walk.

    "They're not going to be Olympic runners, but they will run, and maybe
they'll find the cure for their own disease," said Lisa Donato, a marketing
assistant for Hunter's Hope.

    The catch is that all were diagnosed early, because they had older siblings
with the disease.

    Older brothers and sisters had to die for these kids to have a chance to
live.

    "Right now, that's probably the only way they can be identified early
enough," said Gartzke, who lives in a Milwaukee suburb and lost her daughter Lea
to the disease at age 2.


    A risky transplant



    Anne Rugari and her husband, Philip, wasted little time after Gina was
diagnosed. A few days later, they drove to the Duke University Medical Center in
North Carolina for tests. Then came the dilemma, whether to opt for a very risky
transplant or watch their daughter die, probably in a year, from a quickly
progressing disease.

    They chose the cord-blood transplant, which was given to Gina only 37 days
after she was born. That followed nine days of chemotherapy, to wipe out her
immune system so it wouldn't attack the new stem cells.

    Thirteen days after the transplant, the stem cells started generating new
blood cells. She remained in the hospital for seven weeks, then stayed in the
area as an outpatient for another three months. Eventually the missing enzyme,
called GALC, began moving into her central nervous system, allowing her body to
produce myelin, the protective covering in the nervous system.

    Because her disease had progressed into the areas of the brain affecting her
trunk and legs, her speech is delayed, and she hasn't walked yet; with continued
therapy, doctors remain optimistic she will walk.

    Gina is very bright. Like any 2 1/2-year-old girl, she plays with dolls,
loves to hug her parents and older brother Philip, and orders french fries and
root beer when she feels like it.

    "I looked at Gina today in the car, eating Froot Loops out of a little box,"
her mother said last week. "She looked beautiful and wonderful and healthy and
normal. I looked at her and said: 'You are so beautiful. You have been through
so much.' I can't imagine life without her."

    Gina also looks at photos of her late brother Nicholas.

    "She looks at his picture all the time and kisses it," her mother said.
"Nicky gave his life, and we have Gina because of it."


    The blink of an eye



    At first, doctors thought the infant Hunter was suffering from colic. That
would explain his irritability, his frequent screaming.

    But the symptoms got worse: The stiffening of his arms and legs. The
seizures. The difficulty in swallowing. The failure to achieve normal
milestones.

    On June 23, 1997, four months and nine days after the Valentine's Day baby
was born, Hunter Kelly was diagnosed with Krabbe's.

    The prognosis was horrible. Children with infantile Krabbe's had an average
life expectancy of about 14 months.

    The family was told the only available treatments or transplants were too
experimental to consider.

    Jim and Jill Kelly had one goal: to keep their Hunter comfortable for as
long as he lived.

    When he celebrated his first birthday, the strategy became much more
aggressive. Instead of dealing with a dying child, loved ones treated him like a
living child with a disease.

    "There's really only a small group of people who understand that Hunter is a
normal, thinking human being who needs to be treated like a little boy," said
his grandmother Jacque Waggoner. "He's just a 5-year-old boy, with a very
powerful spirit, who wants to play, who wants attention, who wants Mommy to hold
him."

    His family put him on a new diet and bombarded him with all kinds of therapy
and education. Teachers and therapists know his signals: A single blink of his
eyes means yes. A squint means he's concentrating. When he's happy, he relaxes
his hands. They read his moods through facial expressions and the movement in
his eyebrows.

    Kristin Jaskolka, a speech pathologist with United Cerebral Palsy of Western
New York, recently read Hunter a pumpkin story.

    "We're going to find a pumpkin on this page," she told Hunter. "Is this the
pumpkin?"

    His eyes followed her finger onto the picture of the pumpkin. Seconds ticked
by.

    "Is this a pumpkin? Is this a pumpkin?" she asked. "You're looking. You're
looking."

    Finally, Hunter blinked.

    "I'd love to know what he's thinking, just for a minute," Waggoner said
later. "I'd love to know what's going through his little mind."


    Hunter's hope



    The irony of Hunter's life is that he has done so much to help the next
generation of Krabbe kids, many of whom will live long, near-normal lives, yet
he was diagnosed too late in infancy to take advantage of a cord-blood
transplant.

    "I am so thankful to the Kelly family and to Hunter," Anne Rugari said.
"Without a spokesman to raise awareness and raise money, there would still be
families like ours out there saying, 'Why am I the only one?' "

    When Hunter was 8 months old, Jill Kelly, a key figure in the Hunter's Hope
Foundation, went to Duke University Medical Center to consult with Dr. Joanne
Kurtzberg, director of the pediatric stem cell program.

    Hunter was too old, his disease too far advanced, to make him a transplant
candidate. Ideally it should be done in the first two months. And doctors
doubted whether he'd survive the transplant process.

    Jim Kelly admits that makes him a little sad. But when you spend any time
talking with the Hunter's Hope people, you realize they spend little time
looking back; they're always barging ahead, to the next challenge.

    "Hey, that's life," Kelly said about the lack of a transplant. "We're
blessed that we have a wonderful special-needs child, and we're blessed with
what we've been able to accomplish through Hunter's Hope."

    The Hunter's Hope Foundation already has awarded $3 million in grants to
attack Krabbe disease from many angles, including gene therapy research, newborn
screening tests and cord-blood transplants.

    Hunter's Hope has a long list of priorities. No. 1 may be finding a better,
cheaper newborn screening test, then pushing states to make it mandatory.

    "We need to have a cost-effective test that can be done quickly and in large
quantities," said Gartzke, the education director.

    Other priorities, besides supporting Krabbe families, include:

    Building a Ronald McDonald-type house at Duke University, for families like
the Rugaris who spend four to six months there after a transplant.

    Developing a better medical protocol for doctors treating Krabbe's, so each
family doesn't have to reinvent the wheel.

    Building a Krabbe research center in Western New York someday.

    Attacking other related diseases once Krabbe's is cured. The disease is one
of 16 known leukodystrophies, as well as a lysosomal storage disorder.

    The goals are ambitious, the needs great, the challenges immense.

    "It takes so much money," Waggoner said. "It takes millions and millions and
millions."

    The foundation will hold its big fund-raiser, its third annual candlelight
ball, Nov. 15 in the Adam's Mark Hotel.

    The dream is that Hunter's Hope will remain vital for decades, even
generations, long after Hunter and long after Krabbe disease is cured.

    "People will forget who Jim Kelly is," said Waggoner, his mother-in-law.
"They will not forget Hunter's Hope, because there will always be a family we
can help."


    A family's faith



    Feb. 2, the day before the Super Bowl, Jim Kelly learned he had been elected
to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

    One of his first calls was to Hunter. He had someone hold the phone to the
boy's ear so the proud father could share the moment with his son.

    "He's blinking, he's blinking," Kelly was told, in one of those special
father-son moments.

    "He was as proud of his daddy as I was of him conquering the tough times
he's had," Kelly said.

    Pride, not sympathy, surrounds the life of Hunter Kelly.

    And faith.

    That explains why Jill and Jim Kelly agreed to have a third child.

    The odds weren't great. When both parents carry the Krabbe defect in their
genes, as the Kellys do, a newborn has a 25 percent chance of getting the
disease, a 50 percent chance of being a carrier and a 25 percent chance of being
unaffected.

    Jim Kelly, the big, tough quarterback, admits he was scared. But he and his
wife relied on their faith.

    "For us, it was a chance we took," he explained. "We totally left it in
God's hands."

    Camryn, born in June 1999, is fine, although she carries the gene for the
disease. Her older sister, Erin, 7, does not.

    The Kellys feel blessed about all three children. But their voyage with
Hunter has been special.

    "Because of Hunter's illness, we have searched very deeply for a purpose and
taken a look at our faith, what it was and what it means," Waggoner said.
"Hunter has brought so many people . . . closer to knowing God. That brought us
so much peace and purpose. That's even more important than Hunter's Hope."

    No one knows how long Hunter will live. That's not the point.

    "My goal for Hunter each day," Waggoner said, "is giving him the best
quality of life he can have and thanking God each morning that he is here again
today."

    e-mail: gwarner@buffnews.com

GRAPHIC: Photos by HARRY SCULL JR./Buffalo News Speech pathologist Kristin
Jaskolka reads a story to Hunter Kelly. He blinked to let her know he spotted a
pumpkin on a page.  Jacque Waggoner, Hunter's grandmother.  Krabbe's sufferer
Gina Rugari is thriving after a cord-blood transplant given early in her
infancy. Someday, the 2 1/2-year-old may even walk.  Graphic- What is Krabbe
disease?

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2002


                             1100 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            October 13, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1445 words

HEADLINE: 10 outstanding people to receive annual award;
Tickets available for black-tie gala

BODY:

   Outstanding achievements through volunteer, charitable and civic service will
be honored when Family Service of Greater New Orleans sponsors its annual Ten
Outstanding Persons Awards and Gala on Oct. 24 at the Pavilion of the Two
Sisters in City Park.

   Tickets to the black-tie gala are $125, with the money going to Family
Service, which has offered parent-education groups, community support services,
employee assistance and counseling programs since 1896, Ticket information is
available from Stacey Woods at 822-0800, ext. 226.

   This year's honorees are:
   -- A. Vernon Brinson is owner of the Royal Oldsmobile, Mazda and Honda
franchises. In 1975, two years after he became sole owner of Royal Oldsmobile,
he was recognized as the Louisiana Automobile Dealer of the Year and received
Time magazine's Quality Dealer Award for outstanding dealer performance and
community service. Brinson, who moved to New Orleans in 1964, has been an active
member of the community, serving on the Sugar Bowl Committee for more than 30
years in positions including president and chairman. He is on the board of the
United Way, the Chamber of Commerce, Boy Scouts, YPO and YPO 49ers.

   -- Barbara Bush is an active community leader. She is secretary of the
Make-A-Wish Foundation of Louisiana, the recording secretary of the Women's
Exchange and the treasurer of the Women of the Church at St. Charles Avenue
Presbyterian Church. She volunteers at the Hermann Grima/Gallier Historic
Houses. Bush has served on the board of directors of the Arts Council of New
Orleans, Isidore Newman School, Volunteer and Information Agency and Youth
Alternatives Inc. She was an advisory board committee member with the Greater
New Orleans Foundation, East Jefferson Women's Center and Parkway Partners. And
she has been chairwoman of events benefiting the Audubon Institute, Children's
Hospital, Longue Vue House and Gardens, the March of Dimes and Orleans Dollars
for Scholars.

   -- Donna D. Fraiche is a nationally known health-care attorney who has been
involved in community and board leadership at the local and state level for many
years. Currently president-elect of the World Trade Center of New Orleans, she
is chairwoman of the board of Loyola University and heads the Council of Board
Presidents for all Jesuit universities in the Delta-Heartland Conference. She is
a past national president of the American Health Lawyers Association and past
founder and chairwoman of the board of the New Orleans Regional Medical Center,
a consortium of the downtown medical, educational and research facilities. She
is chairwoman of the Division of Women Rainmakers for the American Bar
Association Law Practice Management Section, where she serves on its national
council. And she has headed the Louisiana Health Care Commission for the past
six years, studying and recommending policies to address the needs of the
800,000 uninsured people in Louisiana.

   -- William H. Hines is chairman of the MetroVision Economic Development
Partnership and is a board member of the New Orleans Regional Chamber of
Commerce. He also is co-chairman of the Economic Development Task Force for the
Committee for a Better New Orleans, and he serves in leadership positions with
Project Top 10 by 2010, the New Orleans Regional Leadership Institute, the World
Trade Center of New Orleans, the New Orleans Board of Trade, the French-American
Chamber of Commerce, the New Orleans Business Council and the Foreign Relations
Association. As MetroVision chairman, Hines played a role in the coalition that
helped New Orleans keep the Saints and brought the Hornets basketball team to
the city. Hines is a member of the executive committee of the law firm Jones,
Walker, Waechter, Poitevent, Carrere and Denegre, where he is head of the
general business and energy section.

   -- Sister Adele Lambert, CSJ, began her social service career following a
26-year career as an educator and principal in the Catholic school system. While
she was executive director of the Archdiocese of New Orleans' Office of the
Social Apostolate, from 1992 through 2001, the office began new initiatives for
feeding, educating and empowering the poor. Concurrently, she was executive
director of the Archbishop's Community Appeal and diocesan director of the
Catholic Campaign for Human Development. As president of Second Harvesters Food
Bank of Greater New Orleans from 1999 through 2001, she helped facilitate the
growth of the KIDS Cafe, a dining and food-service training program for urban
youth. She is a member of the Congregation of Sisters of Saint Joseph of
Medaille.

   -- Salvador G. Longoria, a native of Cuba and a partner in the law firm of
Gaudin and Longoria, has contributed numerous hours and efforts to many
organizations and charities, and has served on committees for Volunteers of
America, the United Way and the Metropolitan Area Committee. He served on the
board of the New Orleans Pro Bono Project and has done pro bono work for
prisoners and Immigration and Naturalization Service detainees for many years.
He is a supervising attorney for Tulane Law School's Cuban Detainee Clinical
Project. He is an appointee to the Louisiana State Advisory Committee and the
U.S. Civil Rights Commission, and is chairman of the Advisory Committee on the
Hispanic Population for the U.S. Department of Commerce.

   -- Sally Ann Roberts co-anchors the highly rated local morning newscast
Eyewitness Morning News and also is host of "Our Generation," a Saturday morning
teen talk show that gives young people a platform for their thoughts and
creativity. During her 24 years at WWL-TV, Roberts has received numerous
first-place awards in reporting excellence. She is the author of two books,
"Going Live: An Anchorwoman Reports Good News," an expression of one woman's
spiritual journey, and "Angelvision," an inspirational novel. Proceeds from the
books are donated to Each One Save One, a nonprofit mentoring network Roberts
co-founded. As an inspirational and motivational speaker, Roberts often is asked
to visit community organizations, school groups and churches.

   -- Virgil Robinson Jr., president and chief executive of Dryades Savings
Bank, has more than 27 years of experience in commercial lending, operations and
banking management. Robinson spent his first few years after graduating from
Grambling State University as a professional football player for the Green Bay
Packers, New Orleans Saints and the World Football League's Shreveport Steamers.
Robinson serves on numerous boards, including the Louisiana State Board of
Regents, the Downtown Development District Board of Commissioners, Friends of
NORD, the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana board of directors, U.S. Small
Business Administration National Advisory Council and the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Board of Commissioners.

   -- P.K. Scheerle is a registered nurse with a past clinical specialty in
pediatric intensive care. For the past 20 years, she has been president and
chief executive of New Orleans-based American Nursing Services, which staffs
more than 500 intensive-care units across the United States with registered
nurses on an "as needed" basis. Scheerle is active in community philanthropic
endeavors. She serves on the University of New Orleans Foundation board of
directors and on the executive committee of the Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center Foundation. She is a member of International Women's
Forum, an association of women leaders from 18 countries whose programs focus on
leadership development, and Legatus, an organization for top-ranking Catholic
business leaders.

   -- Betty Wisdom's history of board and commission membership is long, varied
and tenacious. She has been a member of the League of Women Voters of New
Orleans for almost 40 years. Currently, Wisdom is on the boards of Agenda for
Children, Alliance for Affordable Energy, Amistad Research Center and New
Orleans Video Access Center, as well as being chairwoman of the University of
New Orleans College of Education's Dean's Advisory Board. Wisdom also is a
trustee for two local foundations: Mary Freeman Wisdom and RosaMary. Wisdom was
active in the effort to integrate the New Orleans public schools through her
work with SOS (Save Our Schools), the League of Women Voters, IWO and VISTA; as
the secretary of the Louisiana Civil Rights Committee under President Lyndon
Johnson; and as a member of the City Human Relations Committee under Mayor Moon
Landrieu. As a kind of culmination of her years of volunteerism, Wisdom won the
1994 Times-Picayune Loving Cup. Wisdom recently bequeathed her large personal
library to Dillard University.

GRAPHIC: A. Vernon Brinson Recipient of Time magazine's Quality Dealer Award
Barbara Bush Secretary of the Make-A-Wish Foundation of Louisiana Donna D.
Fraiche Nationally known health-care attorney William H. Hines Chairman of
MetroVision Economic Development Partnership Sister Adele Lambert CSJ Former
president of Second Harvesters Food Bank Salvador G. Longoria Supervising
attorney for Tulane Law School's Cuban Detainee Clinical Project Sally Ann
Roberts Co-anchors Eyewitness Morning News on WWL-TV Virgil Robinson Jr.
President and chief executive of Dryades Savings Bank P.K. Scheerle President
and chief executive of American Nursing Services Betty Wisdom Trustee for Mary
Freeman Wisdom and RosaMary foundations

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2002


                             1101 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 11, 2002, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 812 words

HEADLINE: GENE TRIAL ADVISED DESPITE ILLNESS PANEL PROPOSES WORK CONTINUE
BECAUSE OF RESULTS IN OTHER CASES

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   GAITHERSBURG, Md. - Gene therapy almost certainly caused an illness
resembling leukemia in a 3-year-old French boy with "Bubble Boy" disease who had
previously been considered one of the few gene therapy successes, scientists and
federal officials concluded yesterday.

   But because gene therapy appears to have cured nine other French children of
the same deadly immune disease, an advisory committee yesterday urged the Food
and Drug Administration to allow the resumption of three similar experiments in
the United States.

      They said that new patients must be told of the potential side effect and
be closely monitored. The FDA had halted trials last month after learning of the
serious complication in the experiment. Leukemia is a blood cancer in which
white blood cells proliferate dangerously.

   "All the scientific information we have at this point says [the gene therapy]
did it," said Dr. Daniel Salomon of the Scripps Research Institute, who led the
committee meeting. "All of us are scared about it, and it has implications for
the safety of this whole enterprise. However, one serious adverse event doesn't
pull the trigger on all these trials."

   The FDA typically follows the advice of its advisory committees. At the end
of the daylong meeting, Philip Noguchi, the FDA official who oversees gene
therapy, said that the leukemia-like symptoms were clearly related to the gene
therapy and that the FDA would proceed slowly in deciding its next steps.

   The 17-member committee of doctors, scientists, and patient advocates also
advised the FDA to disclose the new complications to participants in about 150
other experiments that used the same gene-therapy technique. The experiments,
which have involved an estimated 3,000 patients over the last 12 years, all used
a specific type of virus, called a retrovirus, to deliver new genes into the
body to replace missing or defective genes.

   Noguchi said that the FDA has found no evidence of leukemia or lymphoma in
other gene-therapy participants, but that officials are still reviewing old
reports of side effects.

   The latest problems were discovered just as the field of gene therapy was re
covering from the 1999 death of a teenager enrolled in an experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania. Jesse Gelsinger died of a massive immune reaction to
the cold virus used to deliver the gene. A different virus caused the French
boy's white blood cells to multiply out of control.

   Only this spring, French scientists reported the first real success in gene
therapy, an apparent cure of four boys with severe combined immuno deficiency,
the formal name for the "Bubble Boy syndrome" that had forced them to live in a
completely sterile environment. Yesterday, a scientist collaborating with the
French said that 9 of the 11 boys treated have developed immune systems.

   But one child developed the leukemia-like illness. That boy, who received
gene therapy at 1 month old and initially developed the hoped-for immunity, was
discovered to have problems at 30 months. After receiving chemotherapy, his cell
counts are back to normal and he is doing well, according to Dr. Alain Fischer
of Necker Hospital in Paris, who leads the French experiment.

   Reviewing blood and DNA samples, scientists discovered that the abnormal
multiplication of white blood cells began 13 months after the initial gene
therapy. They said the virus inserted the replacement gene close to a gene that
regulates cell growth. But they said there were probably other factors that
contributed to his new illness.

   "There might be other genetic damage in the child," said Dr. Christof von
Kalle of the University of Cincinnati Medical School, who presented data he had
reviewed for Fischer.

   Kalle also said the child's bout with chickenpox, his family history of
cancer, and his young age at transplant might have contributed.

   Because studies in mice had indicated that gene therapy might cause cancer,
patients in experiments have long been informed of the possible risk. But this
is the first confirmed case.

   Patient advocates were divided about how the FDA should proceed. The Council
for Responsible Genetics of Cambridge called for a moratorium on all
gene-therapy experiments. And Abbey Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders, said, "If there is other treatment, then maybe
children shouldn't be exposed to this risk."

   But the grandmother of an immune-deficient boy who had failed other
treatments urged the FDA to "consider the risk of no treatment." And Paul
Gelsinger, Jesse's father, praised the FDA for its open discussion of the
problems.

   "Bubble Boy" syndrome and similar severe immune deficiencies have been
successfully treated with bone marrow transplants if an exact match can be
found. In cases where there isn't an exact match, the transplants fail in 25 to
40 percent of cases.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1102 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 11, 2002, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy promising for Parkinson's

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Genes that make a vital neurochemical will be injected into the
brains of 12 Parkinson's disease patients in the first use of gene therapy to
treat the devastating brain disorder. Researchers say the treatment may calm
tremors and slow progression of the disease.

   The Food and Drug Administration approved a Phase 1 clinical trial based in
part on the results of a laboratory study to be published today in the journal
Science, according to researchers, who said the trial could start before the end
of the year.

   Dr. Michael G. Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College
of Cornell University in New York, said the experiment will involve patients who
have exhausted standard therapy and are in late stages of the disease.

   Kaplitt and Dr. Matthew J. During of the University of Auckland in New
Zealand are the senior authors of the Science study, in which they demonstrated
in laboratory rats that transferring the brain chemical gene could greatly
improve Parkinson's symptoms and slow progression of the disease. The
researchers said the technique has been tried in monkeys with encouraging
results.

   Other brain researchers said the gene-transfer technique was a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials would be needed before it proves itself
ready for treatment of Parkinson's patients in general.

   "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Dr. Christopher A. Ross,
a professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine in Baltimore. "If they see the same results in humans, it
will be an important new approach to therapy."

   In the study, the researchers placed into a benign virus a gene that makes a
brain chemical called GABA. This chemical works in a part of the brain called
the subtahlamic nucleus, or STN, to calm or inhibit the motor movements of the
body.

   The STN in Parkinson's patients has very little GABA. This causes tremors, a
halting walk and the tendency to suddenly "freeze" while in motion.

   Using rats with chemically induced Parkinson's, researchers injected the
manipulated virus into the animals' brains. The injected virus delivered the
GABA gene to the brain cells, causing them to produce GABA.

   During said movement in all the rats got better, "but for 50 percent of them
there was a remarkable improvement."

   Kaplitt said the experiment has been performed on Rhesus monkeys, but the
results are not published, and neither researcher would detail the findings.

   "There is nothing in the primate study that would discourage us," said
Kaplitt.

   Parkinson's disease is a brain-degeneration disorder diagnosed in thousands
of patients annually. It occurs in about 1 percent of everyone over the age of
60 but also can strike at a younger age. About 25 percent of the 1.4 million
patients in the United States were diagnosed before the age of 40.

   Besides the movement symptoms, some Parkinson's patients develop depression
and the loss of memory and cognition.

   The hallmark of Parkinson's is the destruction of neurons that make a brain
chemical called dopamine. Dopamine acts as a signal messenger within the brain's
network of neurons. One function of dopamine is to signal production of GABA
from one part of the brain. GABA then moves to the STN and helps control
movement.

   Some drugs are used to restore production of dopamine and slow progression of
the disease, but the effects wear out over time.

   There are suggestions in the study that while relieving the Parkinson's
symptoms, the GABA gene therapy also slows the destructive pace of the disease.


LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2002


                             1103 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     October 11, 2002 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03A

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: 1st gene therapy for Parkinson's;
Clinical trial will involve injections to the brain

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- Genes that make a vital neurochemical will be injected into the
brains of 12 Parkinson's disease patients in the first use of gene therapy to
treat the devastating brain disorder. Researchers say the treatment may calm
tremors and slow progression of the disease.

   The Food and Drug Administration approved a Phase 1 clinical trial based in
part on the results of a laboratory study to be published today in the journal
Science, according to researchers, who said the trial could start before the end
of the year.

   Michael G. Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College of
Cornell University in New York, said the experiment would involve patients who
have exhausted standard therapy and are in a late stage of the disease.

   Kaplitt and Matthew J. During of the University of Auckland in New Zealand
are the senior authors of the Science study, in which they demonstrated in
laboratory rats that transferring the brain chemical gene could greatly improve
Parkinson's symptoms and slow progression of the disease. The researchers said
the technique also had been tried in monkeys with encouraging results.

   Other brain researchers said the gene transfer technique was a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials would be needed before it proves itself
ready for treatment of Parkinson's patients in general.

   "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Christopher A. Ross, a
professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine in Baltimore. "If they see the same results in humans, it will be an
important new approach to therapy."

   In the study, the researchers placed into a benign virus a gene that makes a
brain chemical called GABA. This chemical works in a part of the brain called
the subthalamic nucleus, or STN, to calm or inhibit the motor movements of the
body.

   The STN in Parkinson's patients has very little GABA. This causes the
characteristic disease symptoms of tremors, a halting walk and the tendency to
suddenly "freeze" while in motion.

   Using rats that have chemically induced Parkinson's, the researchers injected
the manipulated virus into the animals' brains. The injected virus delivered the
GABA gene to the brain cells, causing them to produce GABA.

   During said movement in all the rats got better, "but for 50 percent of them
there was a remarkable improvement."

   ------------

   National Parkinson's Foundation: www.parkinson.org/ National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke: www.ninds.nih.gov/

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1104 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 968 words

HEADLINE: Panel Advises Resuming Gene Studies

BYLINE:  By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: GAITHERSBURG, Md., Oct. 10

BODY:

   Despite new evidence that a French gene therapy experiment caused a
3-year-old boy to develop an illness similar to leukemia, a government advisory
panel recommended today that similar studies proceed, with some restrictions,
because they offer hope to children with fatal immune deficiencies.

        In making its recommendation, the panel of experts urged the Food and
Drug Administration to reinstate three experiments that have been suspended
since September, when the child became sick. The trials remain on hold, but the
food and drug agency typically follows the advice of its expert panels.

    "This was an absolutely clear, serious adverse event and all of us are
scared about it," said Dr. Daniel R. Salomon, the panel's chairman and a gene
therapy expert at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego. But, Dr. Salomon
said, "It is not enough to advise the F.D.A. to put all of these programs on
hold."

   Until the boy fell ill, the French clinical trial was gene therapy's only
unequivocal success. The experiment was intended to cure severe combined immune
deficiency, or S.C.I.D., an extremely rare disorder that leaves babies without
functioning immune systems and is generally fatal within the first year.

   Gene therapy involves using viruses to introduce healthy genes into cells;
the French experiment employed a retrovirus. The expert panel said all gene
therapy patients receiving retroviruses must now be informed, in simple
language, that such a virus had apparently caused cancer in a child. They also
suggested all patients receiving retroviruses be closely monitored.

   The recommendations, made after an all-day emergency hearing, were another
turn in the troubled field of gene therapy, which is still reeling from the 1999
death of an 18-year-old patient, Jesse Gelsinger.

   Mr. Gelsinger's father, Paul, appeared at today's hearing, and summed up the
panel's dilemma this way: "You are in a quandary now, because you have an
ethical concern that you may be creating a problem in these kids that they
didn't have before. But you have also given them a viable treatment."

   He added, "Imagine these children as your own."

   As the experts tried to weigh the benefits of gene therapy against its risks,
relatives of patients pleaded for the research to proceed. The standard
treatment, bone marrow transplants, helps only about 75 percent of all children.

   One woman told how her 10-year-old grandson had had four bone marrow
transplants, none of them successful. "When you consider the risk to the patient
of the treatment, you also must consider the risk to the patient of no
treatment," said the grandmother, who declined to give her name. "That's the
other side of this coin."

   In the French experiment, Dr. Alain Fischer of the Necker children's hospital
in Paris treated 11 boys -- 10 infants and a teenager with a partial immune
deficiency -- who suffered from a form of S.C.I.D. that involves a defective
X-chromosome. Of the 11 patients, 9 were cured after receiving an infusion of
healthy genes, tucked inside a retrovirus.

   Roughly half of all 300 gene therapy experiments that have been conducted in
the United States have used retroviruses, said Dr. Philip Noguchi, the F.D.A.
official who oversees gene therapy. Among them are the three suspended
experiments: one at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles, which has enrolled four
children, and two others in which no youngsters have been enrolled.

   Scientists have long known that retroviruses pose a risk because they can
lodge in or near a cancer-causing gene. At today's meeting, one of Dr. Fischer's
collaborators, Dr. Christof von Kalle of Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, presented evidence showing that, in the sick toddler, that is precisely
what happened.

   Dr. von Kalle said the healthy genes had inserted themselves, backward,
inside a gene known to cause leukemia. Dr. Noguchi said the presentation
provided "definitive" evidence that the gene therapy made the boy sick. Other
experts agreed.

   "If you have an animal with stripes, you think it's a zebra," said Dr. Stuart
Orkin of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute. "To insert into a known leukemia gene
and get leukemia -- it seems related."

   Experts said the retrovirus was probably not the sole factor in the boy's
illness. The family has a history of cancer, and the boy had developed chicken
pox shortly before his doctors noticed he was showing a symptom of leukemia, too
many white blood cells.

   Still, at least one member of the panel, Abbey S. Meyers, an advocate for
patients with rare disorders, argued that all gene therapy experiments involving
retroviruses should be put on hold.

   "It's not enough just to put the clinical trials for S.C.I.D. on hold," Ms.
Meyers said in an interview. "Other patients should not be enrolled into
retroviral studies until there is a clearer picture here."

   But other panel members said the risk was acceptable, given how sick S.C.I.D.
children are. Dr. Crystal Mackall, an immunologist at the National Cancer
Institute, said as many as 5 percent of cancer patients develop leukemia as a
result of their treatment.

   "This isn't unique to gene therapy," she said. "If we throw out every therapy
in cancer that could cause cancer, we would get rid of our most effective
therapies."

   Today's meeting drew praise from gene therapy's critics, including Mr.
Gelsinger. After Jesse Gelsinger's death, federal regulators and gene therapy
scientists were harshly criticized for failing to document and share information
about risks to patients.

   But some of that criticism persisted today. Despite a directive from
Congress, issued in 1994, to create a registry of all gene therapy patients, the
F.D.A. has yet to do so. Dr. Noguchi told the committee that the idea of a
registry is "absolutely solid." But, he said, "We don't have it yet."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1105 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Clears Study to Inject Gene in Parkinson's Patients

BYLINE:  AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10

BODY:

   Genes that make a vital brain chemical will be injected into the brains of 12
patients with Parkinson's disease in a first effort to assess the safety of a
treatment intended to slow the progression of the disease and ease its symptoms.

        The Food and Drug Administration this week approved a Phase 1 clinical
trial of the gene therapy, basing its decision in part on the results of a study
in laboratory rats, scheduled to be published on Friday in the journal Science.

    The experiment, to begin this year, will involve patients who have exhausted
standard therapy and are in a late stage of the disease, said an author of the
study, Dr. Michael G. Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical
College of Cornell University in New York.

   Other brain researchers said the gene transfer technique was a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials would be needed.

   "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Dr. Christopher A. Ross,
a professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine. "If they see the same results in humans, it will be an
important new approach to therapy."

   Other gene therapies that have worked in animals, including fetal cell
implants, have failed when tested in humans. Gene therapy in humans has had
setbacks, including the death of a teenager at the University of Pennsylvania
three years ago and the halting of a trial in France this month when a
3-year-old patient contracted a leukemialike disease.

   In the Parkinson's study, the researchers placed into a benign virus a gene
that makes GABA, a brain chemical that is deficient in Parkinson's patients.
Lack of the chemical causes tremors, a halting walk and a tendency to freeze
while in motion.

   Using rats with chemically induced Parkinson's, the researchers injected the
manipulated virus into the animals' brains.

   A co-author of the study, Dr. Matthew J. During of the University of Auckland
in New Zealand, said that movement in all the rats improved, "but for 50 percent
of them there was a remarkable improvement."

   Both authors are paid consultants for Neurologix, a private company that owns
the patent rights to the techniques used in the experimental gene therapy. The
researchers said their connection with Neurologix complied with their
universities' conflict-of-interest policies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1106 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     October 11, 2002 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. A08

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy trial may aid Parkinson's patients

BYLINE: Faye Flam Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A new form of gene therapy offers hope of easing - perhaps even reversing -
the debilitating symptoms of Parkinson's disease, researchers at Thomas
Jefferson University Hospital have found.

   The scientists demonstrated the technique in rats and have received Food and
Drug Administration approval to start human trials at Cornell University this
year. The trial will include 12 patients who have had severe Parkinson's disease
for at least five years and do not respond to existing therapies.

   About a million Americans suffer from Parkinson's disease, including former
Attorney General Janet Reno and actor Michael J. Fox.

   The experimental therapy, which involves the injection of a foreign gene
directly into the brain, could provide a new option for those whose rigidity,
tremors and other symptoms do not respond to drugs.

   The research team headed by Matthew During, who was formerly at Jefferson and
is now associated with the University of Auckland in New Zealand, published the
results of its work on rats in today's issue of the journal Science.

   During said he was trying to devise a less invasive way to duplicate the
effects of another procedure, deep brain stimulation, in which doctors implant a
pacemakerlike electrical device in part of the brain. Thousands of patients
around the world have been implanted with the device, and some have reported
dramatic improvements in their ability to move normally.

   Scientists are still trying to understand what causes Parkinson's disease and
why the implants seem to work. The hallmark of the disease is a massive die-off
of neurons that normally produce the brain-signaling chemical dopamine. That
happens mainly in an almond-shaped structure called the substantia nigra.

   More recently, scientists have found trouble in an adjoining structure,
called the subthalamic nucleus, where they see a misfiring of the neurons,
creating abnormal signaling that may in turn cause more deaths of the
dopamine-making neurons.

   The implant, which goes into the subthalamic nucleus, seems to calm down the
abnormal signaling, possibly shutting off a kind of feedback loop.

   In the gene-therapy procedure, the researchers would use surgery to inject
the subthalamic nucleus with a gene that alters the inner workings of the cells,
causing them to produce a chemical called GABA.

   GABA has an inhibitory effect, calming overactivity. "GABA is the brain's
brake pedal," During said.

   In rats dosed with a neurotoxin to mimic Parkinson's disease, During and
colleagues were able to stop the misfiring of the subthalamic nucleus, which in
turn appeared to protect the dopamine-making neurons in the neighboring
substantia nigra. They also tried the procedure in monkeys.

   "It's a very interesting approach," said Matthew Stern, who heads the
Parkinson's disease program at the University of Pennsylvania. Although there is
a drug, levodopa, that has helped many people, he said that for many patients,
the benefits were erratic.

   Howard Hurtig, who heads the Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders
Center at Pennsylvania Hospital, urged caution in pinning hopes on the
gene-therapy trial. No matter how well the trial might have worked in rats, he
said, the prospect that it will help patients is still "very speculative."

   Some scientists, including John Trojanowski at Penn, suspect a more global
brain degeneration behind Parkinson's.

   "Now we think it's an accumulation of proteins that should be disposed of
that's at the heart of Parkinson's disease," he said. The proteins attack many
areas of the brain and seem to spread slowly but relentlessly regardless of
treatment.

   "What the most successful therapies do is try to trick the brain to perform
better even though it's still degenerating," he said.

   During said he believed the potential benefits of the gene therapy would far
outweigh the risks involved. The technique, he said, is different from the one
that led to the death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in 1999. In that experiment,
University of Pennsylvania scientists infused patients with relatively high
doses of a virus, called adenovirus, which was modified to serve as a vehicle to
carry a therapeutic gene into cells.

   Researchers believe Gelsinger died because his immune system responded as
though it were being attacked, creating massive inflammation.

   During said he was using a different virus, called adeno-associated virus,
which appears to be safer.

   During said he had a financial interest in the Delaware-based company,
Neurologics, that will manufacture the gene-based treatment. He said he had been
open about that conflict of interest.

   Contact Faye Flam at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1107 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 11, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY...

LENGTH: 776 words

BODY:

   Stopped by the ESPN Web site early yesterday, proving still again that I have
absolutely positively nothing to do, and was startled by this little blue
headline -- Rooney: No point to female sideline reporters.

    Oooh, Dan; that's a little crass, I thought. Why would Dan Rooney even offer
an opinion on female sideline reporters, much less something intemperate like
that?

    It's sure not what's expected of the president of the Pittsburgh Steelers,
especially since his hair-raising July flight out of Latrobe. You're more likely
to see something like this -- Rooney: "No point to landing gear, I'm puttin'
this baby down!"

    Turned out this slap at sideline babes came not from any of your local
Rooneys, but from noted CBS crank Andy Rooney.

    "The only thing that really bugs me about television's coverage is those
damn women they have down on the sidelines who don't know what the hell they're
talking about," Andy told former NFL quarterback and Miss America host Boomer
Esiason on MSG Network's acutely fascinating "The Boomer Esiason Show."

    "I mean, I'm not a sexist person, but a woman has no business down there
trying to make some comment about a football game."

    I found these observations helpful, at least to the extent that they
dissuaded me from my assumption that Andy Rooney was dead. Though I have to
admit to enjoying him in the years after he first appeared on "60 Minutes" in
1928, I'd stopped paying attention about the time CBS suspended him for
intemperate comments about blacks. Or was it gays? Or Native Americans?
Evangelists? No, Greek Americans. Whatever, Andy's backhanded them all in his
day.

    In this case, Andy broadsided a burgeoning platoon of journalists employed
on the electronic sideline beat, pointless though it may be. It was just
unfortunate that Andy didn't illuminate the larger problem, namely the shocking
number of male football commentators who don't know what the hell they're
talking about. According to a recent report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
the Male Football Commentators Who Don't Know What The Hell They're Talking
About union is now the 15th largest in the United States.

    Apparently, Andy's too old to have his feet held to the fire by CBS, which
produces "60 Minutes" and didn't at first make any of its noted female
commentators available for reaction. Implied in Andy's statements, at least as I
read them, is that he could do a better job on the sideline than, say, Melissa
Stark.

    I'm having a hard time imagining Andy doing sideline reports, but
regrettably, not a hard enough time.

    Al Michaels along with John Madden and quickly we go down to sideline
reporter Andy Rooney. Andy?

    I'm tired. You ever notice how late these Monday night games go? What is it,
midnight? And there are still eight minutes and 43 seconds to go. I'd like to
maybe get a cup of soup. I asked Ravens Coach Brian Billick if he was tired and
he said, 'Andy, go screw yourself.' Back to you guys.

    So the Steelers, hanging on to a 10-9 lead here in Cincinnati at the start
of the fourth, watch Jerome Bettis limp to the sideline. Let's go down to Andy
Rooney. Andy?

    Boy it's chilly down here. Ever notice that? I asked Steelers Coach Bill
Cowher if Bettis was all right, and he told me he wasn't going to discuss the
condition of any player. I asked him if he wasn't going to discuss that, would
he mind discussing the future of NATO. And that's when he spit on me. That
doesn't seem right. Back to you.

    Dolphins and Broncos going right down to crunch time and Andy Rooney's got a
interview for us. Andy, who are you with?

    I'm with Sabrina. Or I was a second ago. She's one of the Dolphins
cheerleaders. I asked her if she wasn't cold in that little halter top. She
giggled at that. Then I asked her if those were her real breasts. I don't think
she liked that. Maybe she just slapped me for the hell of it. Some people say I
could use a slap. That's not nice. Back to you.

    That's one of Jacksonville's trainers running out onto the field; looks like
he's going to cut the tape off Brunell's ankle for some reason. Let's go down to
Andy Rooney. Andy?

    That's right he ran out there and cut that tape off, and then he ran back.
Did you see that? I talked to the young man and asked him, 'Am I seeing things,
or did you just run with scissors? Twice. You don't run with scissors.' And then
he stabbed me. That's not right. It's bad when employees of the teams cut the
sideline commentator, even if he doesn't know what the hell he's talking about.
Back upstairs -- is it really upstairs, or more likely a short elevator ride? I
don't know. Should I be bleeding this much?


NOTES:
NAME & GAMES

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1108 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 11, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-4

LENGTH: 341 words

HEADLINE: 12 PARKINSON'S PATIENTS TO GET GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Genes that make a vital neurochemical will be injected into the brains of 12
Parkinson's disease patients in the first use of gene therapy to treat the
devastating brain disorder. Researchers say the treatment may calm tremors and
slow progression of the disease.

    The Food and Drug Administration approved a Phase 1 clinical trial based in
part on the results of a laboratory study to be published today in the journal
Science, according to researchers, who said the trial could start before the end
of the year.

    Dr. Michael G. Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical
College of Cornell University in New York, said the experiment will involve
patients who have exhausted standard therapy and are in a late stage of the
disease.

    Kaplitt and Dr. Matthew J. During of the University of Auckland in New
Zealand are the senior authors of the Science study, in which they demonstrated
in laboratory rats that transferring the brain chemical gene could greatly
improve Parkinson's symptoms and slow progression of the disease. The
researchers said the technique also has been tried in monkeys with encouraging
results.

    Other brain researchers said the gene transfer technique was a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials would be needed before it proves itself
ready for treatment of Parkinson's patients in general.

    "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Dr. Christopher A. Ross,
a professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine in Baltimore. "If they see the same results in humans, it
will be an important new approach to therapy."

    Parkinson's disease is a brain degeneration disorder diagnosed in thousands
of patients annually. It occurs in about 1 percent of everyone over the age of
60 but also can strike at a younger age. About 25 percent of the 1.4 million
patients in the United States were diagnosed before the age of 40.

    Besides the movement symptoms, some Parkinson's patients develop depression
and the loss of memory and cognition.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2002


                             1109 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 11, 2002, Friday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy trial OK'd in fight against Parkinson's

BYLINE: Paul Recer; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- Genes that make a vital neurochemical will be injected into the
brains of 12 Parkinson's disease patients in the first use of gene therapy to
treat the devastating brain disorder.

   Researchers say the treatment may calm tremors and slow progression of the
disease.

   The Food and Drug Administration approved a Phase 1 clinical trial based in
part on the results of a laboratory study to be published today in the journal
Science, according to researchers, who said the trial could start before the end
of the year.

   Dr. Michael Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College of
Cornell University in New York, said the experiment will involve patients who
have exhausted standard therapy and are in a late stage of the disease.

   Kaplitt and Dr. Matthew During of the University of Auckland in New Zealand
are the senior authors of the Science study, in which they demonstrated in
laboratory rats that transferring the brain chemical gene could greatly improve
Parkinson's symptoms and slow progression of the disease.  The researchers said
the technique also has been tried in monkeys with encouraging results.

   Other brain researchers said the gene transfer technique was a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials would be needed before it proves itself
ready for treatment of Parkinson's patients in general.

   "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Dr. Christopher Ross, a
professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine in Baltimore.  "If they see the same results in humans, it will be
an important new approach to therapy."

   In the study, the researchers placed into a benign virus a gene that makes a
brain chemical called GABA. This chemical works in a part of the brain called
the subthalamic nucleus, or STN, to calm or inhibit the motor movements of the
body.

   The STN in Parkinson's patients has very little GABA. This causes the
characteristic disease symptoms of tremors, a halting walk and the tendency to
suddenly "freeze" while in motion.

   Using rats that have chemically induced Parkinson's, the researchers injected
the manipulated virus into the animals' brains.  The injected virus delivered
the GABA gene to the brain cells, causing them to produce GABA.

   Parkinson's disease is a brain degeneration disorder diagnosed in thousands
of patients annually.  It occurs in about 1 percent of everyone over the age of
60 but also can strike at a younger age.  About 25 percent of the 1.4 million
patients in the United States were diagnosed before the age of 40.

   Besides the movement symptoms, some Parkinson's patients develop depression
and the loss of memory and cognition.

   The hallmark of Parkinson's is the destruction of neurons that make a brain
chemical called dopamine.  This chemical acts as signal messenger within the
brain's network of neurons.  One of the actions of dopamine is to signal
production of GABA from one part of the brain.  GABA then moves to the STN where
it helps control movement.


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2002


                             1110 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 October 11, 2002 Friday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY INJECTIONS WILL BE TESTED ON 12 LATE-STAGE PARKINSON'S
PATIENTS;
 LAB SUCCESS LIFTS HOPE IT CAN CALM TREMORS, SLOW PROGRESSION

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Genes that make a vital neurochemical will be injected into the brains of 12
Parkinson's disease patients in the first use of gene therapy to treat the
devastating brain disorder. Researchers say the treatment may calm tremors and
slow progression of the disease.

   The Food and Drug Administration approved a Phase 1 clinical trial based in
part on the results of a laboratory study to be published today in the journal
Science, according to researchers, who said the trial could start before year's
end.

   Dr. Michael G. Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College
of Cornell University in New York, said the experiment will involve patients who
have exhausted standard therapy and are in a late stage of the disease.

   Kaplitt and Dr. Matthew J. During of the University of Auckland in New
Zealand are the senior authors of the Science study, in which they demonstrated
in laboratory rats that transferring the brain chemical gene could combat
Parkinson's symptoms and slow the disease's progression. The researchers said
the technique also has been tried in monkeys with encouraging results.

   Other brain researchers said the gene transfer technique was a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials would be needed before it proves itself
ready for treatment of Parkinson's patients in general.

   In the study, the researchers placed into a benign virus a gene that makes a
brain chemical called GABA. This chemical works in a part of the brain called
the subtahlamic nucleus, or STN, to calm or inhibit the motor movements of the
body.

   The STN in Parkinson's patients has very little GABA. This causes the
characteristic disease symptoms of tremors, a halting walk and the tendency to
suddenly "freeze" while in motion.

   Using rats who have chemically induced Parkinson's, the researchers injected
the manipulated virus into the animals' brains. The injected virus delivered the
GABA gene to the brain cells, causing them to produce GABA.

   During said movement in all the rats got better, "but for 50 percent of them
there was a remarkable improvement."

   Parkinson's disease is a brain degeneration disorder diagnosed in thousands
of patients annually. It occurs in about 1 percent of people over age 60 but
also can strike at a younger age. Besides the movement symptoms, some
Parkinson's patients develop depression and the loss of memory and cognition.

   Kaplitt and During are paid consultants for Neurologix Inc., a privately held
company that owns the patent rights to the techniques used in the experimental
gene therapy. The researchers said their connection with Neurologix is in
compliance with the conflict-of-interest policies of their universities.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1111 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            October 11, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: Resumption of Gene Therapy Urged;
Advisory Panel Backs Restrictions After Treatment Triggered French Boy's Illness

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    New tests offer overwhelming evidence that a leukemia-like disease diagnosed
in a 3-year-old boy in France was triggered by the experimental gene therapy he
received as a baby, the first proof that the nascent and troubled field of
medicine can cause cancer.

    Nonetheless, because of the treatment's track record of having apparently
cured several children and because the risk of cancer so far appears to be
modest, a federal advisory committee yesterday recommended that the Food and
Drug Administration reverse its recent suspension of such studies and allow them
to continue with new restrictions and protections in place.

    "All of us are scared about it and are aware that this has implications,"
said Daniel R. Salomon, chairman of the FDA's Biological Response Modifiers
Advisory Committee, which met in an emergency session yesterday at a hotel in
Gaithersburg. "However, one adverse event, serious as it is in the context of
the whole field, . . . is not enough to advise the FDA to put all these programs
on hold."

    The FDA in September halted the three U.S. gene therapy studies that most
closely resembled the French experiment, including one that had already treated
four children and two that had not yet recruited volunteers. The studies involve
infusions of engineered retroviruses to deliver healthy genes into patients with
life-threatening immune system deficiencies. Yesterday's meeting was to help the
FDA decide whether to reverse, continue or expand that clinical hold.

   In public testimony before the advisory committee, some called for a
full-blown moratorium on gene therapy while others, including relatives of
patients, begged the FDA to allow studies to go forward.

    The panel's recommendations give a partial reprieve to a field of
experimental medicine that has been plagued by failure for a dozen years and
that came under extreme criticism after Arizona teen Jesse Gelsinger died in a
1999 experiment. At the same time, however, the latest crisis brought to light
the little-noticed fact that, eight years after Congress first urged the FDA to
create a registry of all gene therapy participants, the agency has yet to do so.
That is complicating efforts, now underway, to get in touch with volunteers who
may be at increased risk of cancer from their gene treatments.

    "FDA currently has no system in place to locate all patients who were
enrolled in clinical trials involving retroviruses," wrote Sen. Richard J.
Durbin (D-Ill.) in an angry letter sent to Lester M. Crawford, FDA deputy
commissioner, yesterday morning. Durbin first encouraged the FDA to create such
a database in 1994 and 1995, and renewed his push after Gelsinger's death.

    The agency is working to create such a roster, said Philip D. Noguchi,
acting director of the FDA office that regulates gene therapy. But Noguchi
conceded that without that system in place, the agency has not been able to
determine the number of FDA-approved gene therapy studies that have used
retroviruses or the number of patients involved in those studies. He estimated
that about half of the approximately 300 gene therapy experiments approved by
the FDA since 1990 have involved retroviruses for a variety of diseases.

    Retroviruses have been popular in gene therapy studies because they can
efficiently inject therapeutic genes into patients' cells. But scientists have
also long known that in theory, at least, they can also disrupt patients' normal
genes, prompting cells to become cancerous. That's apparently what happened to
the boy in France.

    Christof von Kalle, a University of Cincinnati scientist, examined blood
cells from the boy, who was born with X-linked severe combined immune deficiency
(SCID). He showed the committee how a retrovirus had delivered its therapeutic
payload directly into a gene called LMO2 in one of the boy's blood cells. The
gene plays a role in cell division and, when disrupted, can lead to blood
cancer.

    The evidence that the treatment helped trigger the cancer is definitive,
Noguchi said. "What we see is that it surely is not a coincidence."

    At least one additional trigger -- perhaps the bout of chicken pox suffered
by the boy just before he was diagnosed with his leukemia syndrome -- probably
built on the initial gene injury and ultimately caused the cancer.

    The boy's sister and another relative also have had cancer, a pattern that
complicates the job of measuring the risk of the therapy itself. And it's
difficult to weigh the risk of therapeutic alternatives. Bone marrow transplants
are almost always curative in the small fraction of SCID cases in which a
perfectly matched donor is available, but transplants fail 25 percent to 50
percent of the time when matched donors are not available. Only patients without
access to matched marrow are eligible for gene therapy.

    Unable to measure those risks accurately and inspired by gene therapy's
ongoing potential, the FDA panel recommended that all past and future
participants in gene therapy tests involving retroviruses be informed of the new
evidence of added risk. The panel also recommended that blood specimens from
participants be checked periodically for early evidence of cancer.

    Alain Fischer, who led the French study at the Necker Hospital in Paris,
yesterday said that chemotherapy has reduced the boy's white blood cell levels
back to normal, and the team is now considering how to follow up that treatment.
He did not give a prognosis for the boy.

    Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, offered FDA officials poignant advice as
they prepared to craft specific language for the newly agreed-upon protections:
"Imagine these children as your own," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1112 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 9, 2002 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 154 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF / BIOTECH;
Transkaryotic Warns of More FDA Concerns

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. Chief Executive Richard Selden said U.S.
regulators might have more extensive concerns about its experimental Replagal
medicine for Fabry disease than the company indicated last week.

   The biotechnology company is trying to win U.S. clearance of Replagal for
conditions related to a rare genetic disorder that destroys major organs and
causes severe pain. Transkaryotic has said the Food and Drug Administration
found the company's pain-reduction study results insufficient to support
approval.

   The company said last week that it would pursue Replagal clearance based on
research evaluating whether the drug helps protect kidney and heart function, a
secondary goal of its studies. Selden said Tuesday that the FDA disagrees with
Transkaryotic's interpretation of those findings, though the company expects to
have a chance to persuade regulators at an FDA panel hearing this year or early
2003.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2002


                             1113 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 8, 2002 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF / PHARMACEUTICALS;
Firm Knew of FDA Concerns in Advance

BYLINE: Reuters

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it knew about concerns held by the Food and
Drug Administration with its lead drug, Replagal, before Sept. 27--at least
three days before it released the news to the public.

   The company did not reveal that the regulatory agency had raised doubts that
the drug significantly reduced pain in patients with Fabry's disease, a rare and
often fatal genetic disorder.

   Transkaryotic shares fell 31 cents to $12.40 on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2002


                             1114 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 5; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3035 words

HEADLINE: On Medicine's Frontier: The Last Journey of James Quinn

BYLINE:  By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   On the day his doctors disconnected his artificial heart, ending his life,
James Quinn gave them one final scare.

        It was Aug. 26, nearly nine months after Dr. Louis E. Samuels, a
transplant surgeon at Hahnemann University Hospital here, removed Mr. Quinn's
diseased heart and replaced it with a mechanical one, turning the 52-year-old
retired baker into a research pioneer. Now, with his patient brain dead after a
stroke, Dr. Samuels was presiding over the unplugging of the device that had
kept Mr. Quinn alive longer than anybody dared hope -- perhaps, both he and his
surgeon thought, too long.

    Mr. Quinn's room on the eighth-floor cardiac intensive care unit was crowded
with family members and medical people by the time Dr. Samuels arrived. A cousin
sang the Lord's Prayer. A minister spoke briefly. When Mr. Quinn's wife, Irene,
said, "It's time," Dr. Samuels motioned to his nurse practitioner, who
deprogrammed the external console that powered the heart.

   Without warning, Mr. Quinn bolted upright, arms extended, as if reaching
toward the heavens, then crossed his hands and lay back down. The scientist in
Dr. Samuels recognized it as an involuntary reflex, yet he could not help
wondering if Mr. Quinn, a deeply spiritual man, was "reaching out to God." Irene
Quinn was horrified.

   "You're killing him!" she remembers shrieking. "He wasn't ready!"

   Mr. Quinn's final gesture marked the last, awful moments in an experiment
that ethicists say raises serious questions about the participation of dying
patients in medical research. By the standards of the Food and Drug
Administration, which oversees the trial, the experiment was a success -- Mr.
Quinn survived more than 60 days with his new heart, more than twice as long as
he was expected to live when he received it.

   But his quality of life was poor. In an interview shortly before the stroke
that killed him, Mr. Quinn, known as Butch, said that if he had to do it all
over, he would stick with his natural heart.

   "This is nothing, nothing like I thought it would be," he said. "If I had to
do it over again, I wouldn't do it. No ma'am. I would take my chances on life."

   When doctors experiment at the frontiers of medicine, no one can say at the
outset how the research will end. Doctors may warn patients of debilitating side
effects and even death, but nonetheless, experts say, patients often fall prey
to "the therapeutic misconception," the idea that if a doctor offers a
treatment, it must have therapeutic value.

   "These people get to the point where they are willing to try anything," said
Dr. Judith P. Swazey, a medical historian who has done extensive research on the
artificial heart. "When they are in that position, I'm not sure how informed
informed consent can be."

   Mr. Quinn's experience, pieced together from interviews with him and his
family, his doctors, his patient advocate and officials at Abiomed, the
Danvers., Mass., manufacturer of the heart, provides a rare glimpse inside the
choices made by a dying patient and his physician. It also provides a peek
behind the scenes of the highly publicized artificial heart experiment, which
has enrolled seven patients since July 2001.

   Of the seven, the only one still alive is Tom Christerson of Central City,
Ky., who on Sept. 13 celebrated his first anniversary with the Abiomed heart. He
is living at home, relatively normally, his doctors say. But experts who have
studied a previous artificial heart experiment, the Jarvik-7, say Mr.
Christerson is an exception. Mr. Quinn, they say, is more the rule.

   "The artificial heart has always been a device treated as kind of a miracle
machine," says Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the
University of Pennsylvania. "So there has been a pattern of hope and
disappointment, hype and almost battling between subjects, families and
researchers."

   In Mr. Quinn's case, Dr. Samuels wound up searching for "some solace, some
reason to believe it was still worthwhile."

   Ed Berger, the spokesman for Abiomed, acknowledges Mr. Quinn did not meet the
company's goal: "six months of reasonable quality of life."

   And Mr. Quinn, who said he only wanted more time with his wife and
grandchildren, was deeply frustrated that he never got well enough to leave the
hospital for home. Months before his death, he hired a lawyer, thinking he might
sue.

   This is the story of Mr. Quinn's second chance. It is the story of the
conflicted bond between a surgeon seeking to "offer people without hope some
hope" and a patient caught up in what Dr. Caplan calls "the conspiracy of
optimism" that surrounds medical research.

The Technology
Mission to Build A Better Heart

   Lou Samuels has always been fascinated by technology. Growing up on Long
Island, he said, he collected newspaper accounts of the landing on the moon. As
a college student in the early 1980's, he followed with awe as Dr. Barney Clark,
a Seattle dentist, became the first person ever to receive an artificial heart,
the Jarvik-7. Now 40 and a professor at the Drexel College of Medicine, Dr.
Samuels describes himself as "absolutely bitten by the bug of the beating heart
and the correction of its maladies."

   Unlike the cumbersome Jarvik, which relied on an external power console the
size of a small refrigerator, the Abiomed heart, called AbioCor, is a
grapefruit-size machine that is entirely implanted in the body. The patient
wears an external battery pack, about the size of a videotape; the heart also
has an internal battery that lasts from 10 to 30 minutes. An external power
console can be used as backup. With human hearts in scant supply for
transplants, as many as 10,000 Americans each year could benefit from such a
device, officials at the National Institutes of Health estimate.

   The AbioCor grows out of a directive from Congress, which in the 1960's
ordered the N.I.H. to work on a replacement heart. Agency officials say they
have given Abiomed $12 million to $15 million in grant money since 1981. The
company's president, Dr. David Lederman, has said the heart fulfills "a national
mission."

   Dr. Samuels has been preparing to join that mission since the mid-1990's, he
said, but financial troubles at Hahnemann, culminating with a bankruptcy filing
in 1998, prevented him from participating in the early animal research. When the
hospital was taken over by Tenet Health Systems, a for-profit company, he was
permitted to proceed.

   By the time Butch and Irene Quinn turned up in Dr. Samuels's office one year
ago, the surgeon had perfected implanting the AbioCor in pigs, and his
transplant team was looking for eligible patients. They would need someone
within 30 days of death, too old or too sick to qualify for a transplant, with a
chest big enough to house the AbioCor.

   Though only 51, Mr. Quinn's nine-year history of heart disease was
complicated by irreversible high blood pressure; he was tethered to an
intravenous device that pumped heart drugs into his blood.

   A tall, strapping man with deep eyes and a hearty laugh, he had served in
Vietnam and later became deeply committed to Christianity. His wife, slender and
small-boned, worked as a nurse's aide and helped him meet the trial's
requirement for good family support.

   Dr. Samuels showed the couple a video that depicted the artificial heart
pumping water, a scene Mr. Quinn recalled before he died. "I said, 'My goodness,
if this is pumping this way in water, when it gets in me and pumps blood, it's
really going to be something.' "

   Mr. Quinn liked the idea of being a research pioneer. "That was my way of
contributing," he said, "to put my name in the book of life, with Jesus Christ."
Still, he worried about giving up his human heart. "I asked my wife, 'Am I going
to feel the same things that I feel now? Am I going to feel that I love you with
all my heart?' "

The Choice
A Family Gets A Chance at Hope

   Ethicists say an artificial heart experiment is different from any other. As
Dr. Caplan said, "You are going on a voyage where a core right -- the right to
withdraw from the experiment -- requires the researcher to end your life."

   To navigate these complex waters, Abiomed created a council of independent
ethicists to advise the company and serve as patient advocates. The Quinns'
advocate was Dr. David Casarett, a geriatrician at the University of
Pennsylvania. He sat in when Dr. Samuels went over the trial's informed consent
form, a 14-page document that bluntly outlined the experiment's risks, from
death on the operating table to "pressure from the media" -- a problem the
company remedied by imposing a 30-day news blackout after each surgery.

   Dr. Casarett declined to be interviewed, citing the council's rule against
speaking to the press. But Dr. Samuels says he was clear.

   "I presented a very balanced picture," he said. "This is something that we
didn't have before. We don't know how it is going to work out." Still, he
remembers Mr. Quinn "lighting up at the idea that there was some hope."

   Mrs. Quinn recalls that she and her husband were intent on saving his life.
"It was like a do-or-die situation," she said. "The device could save your life,
or you die."

   Medical ethicists -- along with the Quinns' lawyer, Alan Milstein -- say the
Quinns' situation is a classic example of the "therapeutic misconception." Dr.
George Annas, a professor of health law at Boston University, argues dying
patients are "coerced by their disease" into participating in research.

   But Dr. E. Haavi Morreim, a University of Tennessee bioethicist who is
chairman of Abiomed's ethics council, disagrees. "To assume that no one who is
facing mortality is capable of thinking reasonably," Dr. Morreim said, "is an
insult."

The Recovery
Some Success, Some Setbacks

   On Nov. 5, 2001, Mr. Quinn became the world's fifth recipient of an AbioCor
heart. The 10-hour surgery, led by Dr. Samuels, involved a 30-member team of
doctors, nurses, scientists and engineers. When it was over, doctors put up
side-by-side X-rays of Mr. Quinn with his old heart and his new one.

   "The entire place got totally quiet," said Dr. Sheldon Zink, a medical
anthropologist who had been chronicling the trial. "It was like, 'Oh my God. He
has an artificial heart.' "

   Right away, though, Mr. Quinn suffered a serious complication: his lungs
filled with fluid, and doctors, fearing he would die, placed him on an external
oxygen machine. The problem, which cleared up, was an important test for the
heart, which "worked and kept working," said Mr. Berger, the Abiomed spokesman.

   Inside the hospital, the Quinns -- their identities still unknown to the
public -- were celebrities. Dr. Samuels, describing himself as "very
overprotective," slept in the intensive care unit and installed a baby monitor
in Mr. Quinn's room; he later likened the experiment to giving birth. A private
living room, with a sofa and love seat, was set up to create a homelike
environment.

   By Thanksgiving, Mr. Quinn was not only walking, but also riding a stationary
bike. "We were astonished," Mr. Berger said. Elena Holmes, the nurse
practitioner who supervised Mr. Quinn's care and rarely left his side, cooked a
big turkey. Dr. Samuels wrote the couple a note, thanking them for changing his
life.

   On Dec. 6, Dr. Samuels introduced his patient to the press. In the middle of
the news conference, Mr. Quinn's young grandson ran onstage to give his
grandfather a hug. "I couldn't have staged it better if I was a Hollywood
producer," Dr. Samuels said. "It was just so beautiful. And he looked
fantastic."

   On New Year's Eve, Dr. Samuels said, he brought a bottle of Champagne to the
hospital. Instead of celebrating, Mr. Quinn suffered a small stroke, a
complication that Abiomed later said might have been caused by blood clots
forming on struts in the device. The company subsequently redesigned the heart.
Mr. Quinn, meanwhile, was given a higher dose of blood thinners to prevent the
formation of clots.

   By mid-January, Mr. Quinn was well enough to leave Hahnemann -- not for home,
but for a nearby hotel, the Hawthorn Suites, where two rooms had been set up to
resemble the intensive care unit. Abiomed technicians were on hand during the
day to respond if the heart's battery malfunctioned or the console issued an
alarm. Ms. Holmes, the nurse practitioner, stayed with the Quinns at night.

   The move was intended to help Mr. Quinn make the transition from hospital to
home. But it would prove a turning point, both physically and psychologically,
for the couple.

   Mr. Quinn developed lung problems, was readmitted to the hospital on Feb. 3
and went on a breathing machine. He was weary of being poked and prodded, he
later said, and at times felt "excruciating pain." Dr. Zink, the medical
anthropologist, says the setback left Mr. Quinn feeling vulnerable.

   "He was fearful," she said, "that when he took a downward spiral, he wasn't
going to be the poster boy for Abiomed anymore."

   Mrs. Quinn, frustrated and exhausted, grew angry that Hahnemann had not
provided around-the-clock nursing care at the hotel. She was also worried about
money. Hahnemann kept sending her bills. They were sent in error, hospital
officials said, but she feared she would have to pay them. "I didn't have
anybody to talk to," she said. "I didn't trust anybody."

   As her husband grew ever more dependent on her, Mrs. Quinn said, she quit her
job. Some nights, she stayed in the hospital, her tiny body curled up on the
window seat in Mr. Quinn's room. "I'm crying all the time," she said in August.
"I feel like my life isn't mine any more, like his life isn't his."

   Dr. Annas of Boston University said Mrs. Quinn's despair was not unique.
Barney Clark's wife, he said, also suffered greatly. "This is an experiment on
the family," Dr. Annas said. "There are a lot of lessons we should have learned
from the Jarvik, and I don't think Abiomed and their doctors learned them very
well."

   In March, the Quinns hired Mr. Milstein, the lawyer, who had come to
prominence when he represented the family of Jesse Gelsinger, a teenager who
died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania. In June,
with Mr. Quinn increasingly eager to go home, Mrs. Quinn asked Dr. Zink to
become the couple's new patient advocate -- independent of the Abiomed board.

   Getting Mr. Quinn home, Dr. Zink says, was her highest priority. "Lou was
openly saying, 'We are not doing anything for him clinically in the hospital,' "
she said, referring to Dr. Samuels. "So why couldn't he leave?"

   The answer, in part, lay in the Quinns' home, in a forlorn section of West
Philadelphia. The couple had no living room furniture, so Dr. Samuels made a
gift of the sofa and love seat they had used in the hospital, delivering them
himself one weekend afternoon. There was no air-conditioner, Dr. Zink said, and
the wiring was faulty. "Here's a guy who has an artificial heart; the internal
battery lasts 11 minutes," Dr. Zink said. "That's a scary thing."

   Dr. Michael Berman, the F.D.A. official overseeing the trial, says the agency
strongly urged Abiomed to require home environmental reviews before patients
left the hospital. But Mr. Berger of Abiomed said company officials "did not do
an enormous amount of preparation or preplanning," in part because they did not
really expect the first patients to go home.

   Also at issue was who would pay for Mr. Quinn's home nursing care. But, Mr.
Berger said, the financial agreement between Abiomed and Hahnemann did not
address who should pay -- an omission that Dr. Zink said infuriated her.

   By August, Abiomed had agreed to absorb the cost "for a certain period of
time," Mr. Berger said. Ms. Holmes was trying to train new help. Mr. Quinn began
making occasional visits home, which lifted his spirits greatly. On Aug. 15, he
sat in his living room, on the new couches Dr. Samuels had brought, and nibbled
on a cheese steak sandwich prepared by his wife.

   "I want to come home and stay home, come home and be with my grandchildren,
with my wife," he said. "They say there's possibilities, that the pump works so
good, I could maybe live another 20 years if the rest of my body holds up."

   Eight days later, Mr. Quinn suffered a massive stroke. Two days after that,
he was declared brain dead.

The Aftermath
Lingering Anger Over Suffering

   Butch Quinn's funeral took place just after Labor Day in the brick-and-stone
church he and his wife had attended for years. Dr. Samuels and Ms. Holmes were
there; although the surgeon wanted to deliver a eulogy, Irene Quinn politely
turned him down. A military honor guard played taps, and presented Mrs. Quinn
with the flag draped over her husband's coffin. The minister praised Mr. Quinn's
faith. The altar was decorated with huge sprays of flowers from Hahnemann and
Abiomed. Yet in nearly two hours of song and prayer, the words "artificial
heart" were never spoken.

   Mr. Berger said Abiomed was grateful to Mr. Quinn, who helped demonstrate the
heart's reliability. He said the company hoped to enroll eight more patients in
the artificial heart trial by the end of this year and intended to ask the
F.D.A. to permit "limited commercial distribution" of the heart in 2004.

   "You can say, 'Look what we achieved, it's positive,' " Mr. Berger said.
"That is something you feel very good about. On the other hand, we want our
patients to do well, and to feel that they are doing well." In that regard, he
said, Mr. Quinn's story "is distressing."

   Dr. Samuels is not certain whether he will have another artificial heart
patient. On the day he ordered Mr. Quinn's heart stopped, he said, he tried to
focus on their good times -- the Thanksgiving turkey dinner, the grandson who
ran onstage for a hug. "All I could think," the surgeon said, "was that at least
I had a chance to see him at home, to interact with his grandchildren and
family."

   Irene Quinn remains angry. Of her husband, she said, "He would have been
better off dead. He wouldn't have suffered."

   During Mr. Quinn's autopsy, the artificial heart was removed and sent back to
Abiomed for an examination. Mrs. Quinn, aware of this, made a request of Dr.
Samuels, one that he says he fulfilled. She asked the surgeon to find whatever
was left of Mr. Quinn's original heart, and to put it back inside his chest.

   In death, she wanted her husband to have a human heart.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Quinn on June 30, his 52nd birthday, with Dr. Louis E.
Samuels, his surgeon, and Elena Holmes, who supervised his care. (Business
Wire)(pg. F1); Irene Quinn, right, the wife of the artificial heart recipient
James Quinn, with Dr. Sheldon Zink, the family's patient advocate, at the
Quinns' West Philadelphia home. (Tim Shaffer for The New York Times); (The New
York Times; Photograph by Agence France-Presse)(pg. F4) Chart: "Life With an
Artificial Heart"JULY 2001 -- Ambiomed begins enrolling patients in a clinical
trial of its AbioCor artificial heart, the first fully implantable replacement
for a human heart. OCTOBER -- James Quinn, desperately ill with heart failure,
makes his first visit to Dr. Louis E. Samuels, who discusses the experiment.
NOV. 5 -- In a 10-hour operation, Mr. Quinn becomes the fifth recipient of an
AbioCor heart. He develops a serious complication, fluid in his lungs, but the
heart performs well and the problem resolves quickly. NOV. 22 -- Mr. Quinn, who
by now is walking and riding a stationary bike, enjoys a Thanksgiving turkey
dinner. DEC. 6 -- Mr. Quinn, his identify revealed for the first time, meets the
press. Mr. Quinn says his new heart beats like a normal heart. DEC. 31 -- Dr.
Samuels brings Champagne to the hospital to celebrate the New Year with his
patient, but Mr. Quinn suffers a mild stroke. JAN. 14, 2002 -- Mr. Quinn leaves
the hospital for a specially equipped suite at a nearby hotel, a move intended
to help him make the transition to his home. FEB. 3 -- Mr. Quinn is readmitted
to the hospital with breathing difficulties, the first of a series of problems
that will keep him in the hospital until his death. MARCH 6 -- Mr. Quinn needs a
ventilator to breathe. AUG. 23 -- Mr. Quinn suffers a massive stroke. AUG. 25 --
Neurologists confirm brain death. AUG. 26 -- Dr. Samuels orders the AbioCor
heart to be programmed to turn off in conjunction with Mr. Quinn's ventilator.
When the ventilator is removed, the heart stops beating. SEPT. 4 -- Mr. Quinn's
funeral; an honor guard plays taps. SEPT. 13 -- Tom Christerson of Central City,
Ky., celebrates his one-year anniversary with the AbioCor heart. He is the only
one of the seven original recipients still alive. (pg. F1) Chart: "A Pump in
Place of a HeartThe AbioCor artificial heart was the first to be implanted
entirely within the body, with no wires or tubes through the skin. ENERGY
TRANSMISSIONPower transferred from external battery through patches on skin to
pump controller. (Sources: Abiomed Inc.; Jewish Hospital Louisville, Ky. ;
University of Louisville; C. Hirn drawings)(pg. F4)

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2002


                             1115 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      October 7, 2002 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 022

LENGTH: 895 words

HEADLINE: CAPITAL FOCUS; Biotechs are kept waiting by missed appointments

BYLINE: By Ted Bunker

BODY:

   Today, Congress gets a chance to cut through the political gridlock that has
gummed up the biotechnology industry and threatens to derail an engine vital to
the Massachusetts economy.

   This afternoon, a Senate panel led by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) will
consider Dr. Mark B. McClellan's nomination to head the federal Food and Drug
Administration. Kennedy's hearing comes more than a year after he blocked
Michael Astrue, a Cambridge biotech executive, from being nominated to lead the
FDA.

   Biotech insiders say that since then, the gatekeeping agency has entangled
innovations with procedural moves, kept important new drugs away from people who
need them and thrown a scare into already stressed capital markets. And that has
hurt local firms.

   "I think it is a widely held view across the industry now that without a head
of the FDA, there has been . . . a slowdown, and ever-changing requirements of
what they are asking companies to do to get a drug approved," said James Mullen,
chairman and chief executive of Cambridge's Biogen Inc., a major biotech firm.

   On Sept. 20, the FDA put off reviews of two Fabry disease drugs developed by
Genzyme Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., both in Cambridge. Last week,
investors pounded Transkaryotic shares on fears that its Europe-approved Fabry
drug, Replagel, might not win the FDA's nod.

   Earlier this year, the agency delayed action on Biogen's psoriasis medicine,
Amevive, dealing Mullen's company a blow.

   But smaller biotech firms have been hit harder by the situation at the FDA,
Mullen and others said on Friday. For one thing, Mullen said, investors lack
"confidence that these small companies, that they can get drugs approved."

   At an industry investment conference last week, the effect of a leaderless
FDA was apparent to Craig C. Taylor, a 20-year veteran biotech investor with
Alloy Ventures in Palo Alto, Calif. "I spoke with one public fund investor who
said that they are not committing any funds that are subject to the
capriciousness of the FDA," Taylor said on Friday.

   Smaller biotechs, in particular, have suffered, he added. "It's pretty clear
they have been impacted by what is perceived as an impasse at the FDA, which
would sort of relate to the fact that they haven't had a direction."

   With more than 200 small biotech firms, Massachusetts is more vulnerable than
most states to this situation. Mullen said the fallout can be seen here already.

   "Right now it is almost impossible (for small companies) to get money out of
the market," Mullen said. As a result, he added, smaller companies in
Massachusetts and elsewhere are cutting back on operations and jobs.

   Longtime industry watcher G. Steven Burrill, chief executive of merchant bank
Burrill & Co. in San Francisco, last week reported a sharp downturn in venture
investments in the industry. As a whole, biotechs raised just $ 560 million from
venture investors in the three months that ended Sept. 30, down 37 percent from
$ 889 million in the spring quarter, Burrill said.

   "The private markets obviously are tougher today," Burrill said on Friday.
"They're tougher than they have been in 10 years."

   Along with all the factors that have depressed the stock markets, Burrill
said biotech also suffers from a leaderless FDA.

   "You've got a risk-averse agency," Burrill observed. The people running the
drug review and approval processes get nothing for saying yes to new medicines,
he and others said.

   "There's no reason to own any risk, so you say no," Burrill said.

   Even if an FDA chief is sworn in by week's end, that may not change the
agency's go-slow approach, warns Dr. Henry I. Miller, a one-time FDA official
whose agency group approved the first biotech medicine to reach the market 20
years ago. With few political appointees and a lot of autonomy among agency
groups, Miller said, FDA staffers can easily resist reformers.

   Even so, having a permanent leader would help, most agree. And today,
Kennedy's Senate panel can take a step toward ending the impasse by moving
McClellan's nomination to the floor. Jim Manley, a spokesman for the state's
senior senator, said the powerful committee chairman hopes to do just that.

   At the same time, Manley defended Kennedy, who some say has blocked other
potential nominees since last year.

   "Senator Kennedy was very clear throughout this process, and he made his
views known very early to the White House," Manley said. "No one with industry
ties has led this agency, and now is no time to start."

   Manley also said that some potential nominees were shot down by conservative
Republican senators. Burrill noted that among the "litmus tests" that potential
nominees had to pass were stands on stem cell research and abortion rights.

   McClellan, a Bush administration economic adviser, has taught at Stanford
University and served in the Clinton administration's Treasury Department.
Though the Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology graduate has
practiced medicine, he has none of the industry ties that Kennedy rejects.

   "We had a good meeting this week," Manley said, referring to McClellan. As a
result, Manley said, Kennedy "is moving with somewhat unusual speed to get him
confirmed."

   Giving the FDA a leader will no doubt help its bureaucrats say "yes" and
unlock the biotech capital market. And that will be good for Massachusetts.


LOAD-DATE: October 07, 2002


                             1116 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      October 7, 2002 Monday Late Edition

SECTION: TEMPO; Fit Bits; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: fit bits

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell, STAFF

BODY:

   Ways to stay active and healthy

   By Peggy O'Farrell

   RESEARCH

   Sweet news: Aerobic exercise and weight training can ease the double-whammy
diabetes and high blood pressure pose to heart health, according to researchers
at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions.

   Regular aerobic and weight-lifting activities control blood sugar and lower
blood pressure while providing heart benefits. Diabetes and hypertension can
damage the heart and blood vessels.

   "There's a great focus on the search for genetic methods of treating diabetes
and other chronic conditions, but although gene therapy is not yet available for
diabetics, 'gym therapy' is," says Dr. Kerry J. Stewart, director of clinical
exercise physiology at Hopkins. "The benefits of exercise go way beyond
controlling blood sugar. Physicians should urge their patients to become more
active."

   His study is in the Oct. 2 issue of the Journal of the American Medical
Association.

   The American College of Sports Medicine and the American Diabetes Association
recommend patients with Type 2 diabetes get aerobic exercise (walking, cycling,
swimming, etc.) 45 minutes per session and three sessions a week. They also
recommend resistance training at least twice a week.

   TIPS

   Downhill run: Planning on hitting the ski trails this winter? The experts at
the American Council on Exercise say it's time to start training so you won't be
stuck on the bunny slopes. Their suggestions:

   Include sports-specific exercises in your regular routine. For skiing, try
wall sits to build up isometric strength you'll need for the tuck position.
Squats and lunges will build up lower body strength and crunches will strengthen
the abdomen and add to your "core" stability. Try plyometric movements, like
hopping from side to side, to develop power and strength and improve agility.

   Work the circuit: Set up a ski-specific circuit training routine and set a
time limit for each exercise. Try using the slide for lateral training,
one-legged squats for balance and strength. Bounce two tennis balls
simultaneously to improve coordination and make your own slalom by running
between cones.

   HOT NEWS

   Risk factors: Middle-aged men with a "spare tire" are vulnerable to a host of
metabolic disorders, according to researchers in Italy.

   In fact, waist circumference can be a better indicator of blood pressure
andthan body mass index athan nd the waist-to-hip ratio currently favored.
Measuring a patient's waist can be an inexpensive first step toon detecting
metabolic syndrome and heart disease risks.

   Metabolic syndrome, also known as Syndrome X or insulin resistance syndrome,
is a cluster of medical abnormalities blamed on inactivity, genetics and
overeating. People with diabetes and insulin resistance, hypertension and some
heart attack survivors are at risk for metabolic syndrome.

   Researchers analyzed data from 768 men in Pozzuoli and Marcinise, Italy.

   The study was published in the September's issue of the American Journal of
Hypertension.

   Contact Peggy O'Farrell by phone, 768-8510;  fax, 768-8330; , e-mail,
pofarrell@ enquirer.com

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2002


                             1117 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      October 7, 2002 Monday, Final / All

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: Patience with gene therapy

BYLINE: The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   News that a 3-year-old French boy's gene therapy treatment may have gone awry
is disappointing. It is not surprising, though. Nor should it be seen as
throwing cold water on every effort to treat disease by altering or replacing
human genes.

   The field of genetic treatment of illnesses is so new and so complex that
unintended consequences are a certainty. Bad things will happen on the way to
learning how to cure people through genetics.

   It is important that doctors and researchers react swiftly and candidly to
setbacks like last week's diagnosis of a leukemia-like disease in the French
youngster, who was being treated for a severe immune deficiency. Mistakes and
missteps build medical knowledge no less than do successes, and news of every
advancement and every retreat should be immediate, widespread and detailed.

   In this case, one of the results has been the interruption of three U.S. gene
therapy trials. That seems a wise course until more is known about the French
patient's situation.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2002


                             1118 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             October 6, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 57 words

HEADLINE: Sept. 29-Oct. 5: NATIONAL;
FAILED THERAPY

BYLINE:  By Sheryl Gay Stolberg

BODY:

        Gene therapy suffered a serious setback when authorities in France and
the United States announced that the field's first and only successful
experiment may have given a 3-year-old boy an illness similar to leukemia.

   Four studies have been suspended. The Food and Drug Administration is
planning to investigate further.   Sheryl Gay Stolberg

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2002


                             1119 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             October 6, 2002 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 1171 words

HEADLINE: Lautenberg Replaces Torrice ...

BODY:

    Sen. Robert G. Torricelli (D-N.J.), his support eroding rapidly over his
ethics violations, unexpectedly pulled out of his race for reelection, clearing
the way for state officials to name former senator Frank R. Lautenberg the
candidate for what has become the Democrats' most imperiled Senate seat.

   Republicans immediately challenged replacing Torricelli, but the New Jersey
Supreme Court Wednesday night unanimously ordered that Lautenberg's name appear
on state ballots for the Nov. 5 election. Republicans then appealed to the U.S.
Supreme Court to keep Torricelli on the ballot.

    Lautenberg, 78, vowed to secure the Democrats' hold on a now-imperiled seat
in the party's battle to save its razor-thin majority in the Senate.

    Republican Doug Forrester, who entered the race as a long shot, gained
substantial ground on the incumbent by focusing on the issue of Torricelli's
ethics problems. Torricelli was "severely admonished" by the Senate last summer
for taking lavish gifts from a now-imprisoned businessman and contributor, David
Chang.

   "I will not be responsible for the loss of the Democratic majority in the
United States Senate," an emotional Torricelli said in announcing his withdrawal
at a packed news conference at the state capitol Monday. New Jersey law allows
parties to change nominees if a candidate withdraws at least 51 days before an
election -- a deadline that passed more than two weeks before Torricelli
withdrew.

    The seven New Jersey Supreme Court justices, six of them appointed by former
Republican governor Christine Todd Whitman, ruled that the principle of "a full
and fair ballot choice for the voters of New Jersey" dictated that Lautenberg's
name appear on the ballot as the Democratic Senate candidate.

    Federal immigration and aviation officials testified that they might have
been able to locate two of the Sept. 11 hijackers before the attacks on New York
and Washington if they had been given more information about a CIA alert in late
August 2001.

    The Immigration and Naturalization Service did not use its master database
to aggressively search for Sept. 11 hijackers Nawaf Alhazmi and Khalid Almihdhar
in the three weeks before the attacks because the agency was not told the case
was urgent, Joseph Greene, the agency's assistant commissioner for
investigations, told the House and Senate Intelligence committees Tuesday. Both
terror suspects were already in the United States.

    Similarly, aviation officials complained that they received no notice that
intelligence agencies were searching for the pair, because such information was
not routinely given to the Federal Aviation Agency at the time.

    "Had we had information that those two individuals presented a threat to
aviation or posed a great danger, we would have put them on the list and they
should have been picked up in the reservation process," Claudio Manno, a
Transportation Security Administration intelligence official, told the joint
committee. Both men bought tickets in their own names for the American Airlines
flight that slammed into the Pentagon.

    U.S. intelligence officials disputed the INS account, arguing that a Central
Intelligence Report that accompanied the Aug. 23 notice was marked "immediate"
and noted, "We recommend that these two individuals be watchlisted immediately
to be denied entry into the United States."

    Scientists have determined the complete genetic codes of the single-cell
parasite that causes malaria and of the mosquito that transmits it to people, a
feat they said would allow them to launch a high-tech assault on one of the
world's deadliest and most intractable scourges.

   Scientists say the accomplishment should speed development of new drugs and
vaccines that take aim at the parasite's most vulnerable genes, and could
facilitate the creation of environmentally benign insecticides.

    Moreover, malaria's genomic unveiling has revealed a host of new research
opportunities that could inspire a much-needed shot of international investment
in the faltering global war against the disease, researchers said. Malaria kills
more than 2 million people annually -- the vast majority of them children
younger than 5 -- and has spread in recent years as affordable drugs have lost
their effectiveness and mosquitoes have perfected their resistance to the most
widely used sprays.

    An experimental genetic therapy that had seemed to cure several infants born
with a life-threatening immune system disease has apparently caused a
leukemia-like syndrome in one of the treated children in France, prompting
health officials to suspend all such therapies for that disease in France and
the United States.

   Officials at the Food and Drug Administration said they had scheduled an
emergency meeting in Bethesda at which scientists involved in the study and
other experts will analyze the latest data. One goal is to help the FDA consider
whether a wider array of gene therapy studies needs to be scrutinized more
closely.

   The patient, a French boy almost 3, is being treated with chemotherapy in an
attempt to kill the blood cells that have begun to proliferate in his body, an
ironic twist for a child whose problem at birth was the absence of such cells.

   The incident is a blow to the fledgling field of gene therapy, which had only
recently begun to recover its image after the widely publicized death of an
Arizona teen in a 1999 experiment. The approach, which seeks to cure diseases by
giving patients healthy genes, has been fraught with failure. The French
treatment had recently been touted as having delivered the first real cures in
the field's 12-year history.

    The number of Americans who lack health coverage has begun to increase again
after a two-year decline, according to federal figures that suggest that the
faltering economy propelled another 1.4 million people last year into the ranks
of the uninsured.

    The most substantial drop in insurance during 2001 took place among people
who had been getting health benefits through their jobs, particularly in small
companies, the Census Bureau figures show. The pool of people with no outside
help in paying their medical bills -- 41.2 million last year -- would have been
even larger, except that government insurance programs absorbed more residents
who are poor.

    Insurance is widely considered a prerequisite of adequate medical care.

    A spectrum of health policy experts predicted the erosion of coverage in
2001 foreshadows a more dramatic drop-off this year and, perhaps, next. They
noted that the forces that are straining the availability of insurance all have
intensified in the past year. Those include rising unemployment, rapid medical
inflation, and a growing number of states in which public insurance programs are
outpacing budgets.

    A decade ago, the plight of the uninsured was a dominant political theme.
Recently, political debate over health care has focused mainly on narrower
questions, such as how to help elderly pay for prescription drugs and how to
protect patients in private health plans.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2002


                             1120 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     October 5, 2002 Saturday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 681 words

HEADLINE: Academy honors;
CWRU professor for aid to disabled

BYLINE: Brian E. Albrecht, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   About 200 people will be able to use once-paralyzed hands to give P. Hunter
Peckham an electrically powered salute as he is inducted into the National
Academy of Engineering tomorrow in Washington.

   The Case Western Reserve University professor of biomedical engineering and
orthopedics is being bestowed with the highest professional honors for an
engineer, for his work in functional electrical stimulation (FES) to restore
hand/arm control to quadriplegics.

   The National Academy of Engineering has 46 Ohio members and is part of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   National Academy of Engineering membership honors those who have made
"important contributions to engineering theory and practice."

   It also honors those who have demonstrated "unusual accomplishment in the
pioneering of new and developing fields of technology."

   Peckham's work includes research on the "Freehand" neuroprosthesis,
consisting of a pacemaker-type device implanted in the chest that sends
electrical impulses from an external controller and power source to electrodes
surgically implanted in muscles of the forearm and hand. Since 1997, the
Freehand system has been implanted in some 200 patients at nearly 30 medical
centers worldwide.

   Peckham said Freehand and subsequent FES systems "enable people with spinal
cord injuries to grasp and release common objects and thus perform everyday
activities such as eating, writing and grooming. These functions, which are
essential for independence and self-sufficiency, often lead to dramatic changes
in patients' lives."

   Peckham, 58, of Cleveland Heights, is a research scientist at the Department
of Veterans Affairs, and director of the Functional Electrical Stimulation
Center of Excellence, a consortium of CWRU, the Cleveland VA Medical Center and
MetroHealth Medical Center.

   His election in February with 74 others to the National Academy of
Engineering came as a total surprise, Peckham said, and was "an incredibly nice
honor."

   He said he has enjoyed his nearly 30 years' work in the field for several
reasons, the biggest being "helping people, the impact on people with a
disability."

   Damage to the central nervous system is the major cause of disability in the
United States, Peckham said, and FES research could conceivably benefit hundreds
of thousands of Americans with paralysis or mobility limitations due to spinal
cord or head injuries, stroke and disease.

   He also enjoys the work for its challenge. "You're talking about things that
have to last a lifetime within the body, maybe 50 years, and we have to be able
to envision how technology might change, because the things you're developing
now might be outdated by technological advances in a couple of decades."

   In a paper presented to the National Academy of Engineering on
"Re-engineering the Paralyzed Nervous System," Peckham listed several hurdles
that have to be overcome in using artificial means to replace the body's natural
transmission of nerve impulses.

   These include developing a system that will not harm or overly fatigue
muscles and will mimic normal muscle function, be durable enough to operate
within the body and yet still be accessible for repair and be easy and natural
to use.

   Peckham said future research will refine the hardware, expand potential
applications (such as bladder control), and work in conjunction with other
clinical approaches such as gene therapies, stem cell transplants and tissue
engineering to overcome nerve damage.

   "New [FES] devices will almost certainly address a wider range of problems
and benefit a growing number of individuals," he added.

   And for Peckham, that's the personal payoff of the work - seeing the results
on those who directly gain from FES research. "To see a person who has had a
very devastating spinal cord injury, who has the wherewithal to challenge
themselves to overcome that disability and gain independence, is phenomenal," he
said.

   "It's astounding, then, to realize that these type of things we do really
help."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   balbrecht@plaind.com, 216-999-4853

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2002


                             1121 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      October 4, 2002 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 763 words

HEADLINE: Stronger safeguards for human studies urged;
 Central registry to track all tests recommended

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   An expert panel yesterday urged stronger safeguards for people participating
in medical experiments, saying the public's confidence has been shaken by
several highly publicized deaths in recent years.

   The group, which was convened by the Institute of Medicine, recommended that
federal oversight be extended to studies done by drug companies and foundations,
and that a central registry be created to track all human studies.

   It also recommended that institutions compensate people for injuries they
suffer in research, even if negligence is not involved. The group also called
for a revamping of the review boards that oversee trials at medical centers so
they can focus primarily on ethics and safety.

   "It is understandable that the public has come to perceive that research
institutions put more emphasis on insulating themselves from liability than on
protecting people from harm," said Dr. Daniel Federman, a Harvard Medical School
dean who headed the committee that produced the report.

   "There is no single cause for the errors and mishaps that have resulted in
the deaths of some research participants in recent years," Federman said
yesterday at a briefing in Washington. Instead, he blamed "a combination of
stresses, weaknesses and lack of accountability."

   The Institute of Medicine is a private organization that advises the federal
government. It began its study at the request of the Department of Health and
Human Services after the death in 1999 of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a
participant in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The committee was already at work when Ellen Roche, a 24-year-old lab
technician from Reisterstown, died in June 2001 after inhaling a chemical in an
asthma experiment at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

   Finding widespread safety lapses at both institutions, the federal government
closed the gene therapy program at Penn and briefly shut down research at
Hopkins. It also forced Hopkins to overhaul its system of protecting volunteers.

   Two months ago, the federal Office for Human Research Protection released
Hopkins from all remaining restrictions, saying it had made vast improvements.

   Yesterday, Federman said that nobody knows how many human studies are
performed annually in the United States or how many deaths or illnesses occur in
the course of research. Nor does anybody have a clear idea of how many people
participate in such studies, saying estimates range from 2 million to 20
million.

   In part, the confusion arises from the fact that many privately-funded
studies fall outside federal jurisdiction. Studies receiving federal funding and
clinical trials of experimental drugs - many of which are conducted at academic
centers and community hospitals - are regulated by different agencies.

   The group recommended the creation of a central registry of all trials being
conducted in the United States. Also, safety regulations that govern federally
funded research would be extended to all studies, regardless of who runs or pays
for them.

   Timothy Jost, a panel member who is a law professor at Washington and Lee
University, said the group did not decide whether researchers funded by private
concerns should be required to report unexpected illnesses to the federal
government. At minimum, he said, they should be required to set up the same type
of review boards that are required of academic centers.

   Noting the growing burden facing review boards, the panel suggested they
focus primarily on ethical questions such as whether people have properly been
advised of risks and whether the risks are worth the potential benefits.
Separate committees would advise the review boards on scientific questions and
potential financial conflicts of researchers doing the research.

   Dr. Michael Klag, Hopkins' vice dean of clinical investigation, said the
school has long had a separate committee that weighs financial ties. But the
review boards consider both scientific and ethical issues, tapping the varied
expertise of its members.

   Since Roche's death, Hopkins expanded the number of review boards from two to
seven - including one operated by a private firm. This, he said, has helped the
institution cope with pressures of monitoring nearly 3,000 experiments annually.

   Though Hopkins reached a confidential settlement with the Roche family, Klag
said the school advises volunteers that it will not automatically compensate
them for health care should they get sick during a study.

   Jost said compensating victims should be considered part of "the cost of
doing research."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2002


                             1122 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 4, 2002, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: INVESTORS DUMP TKT SHARES STOCK FALLS MORE THAN 60 PERCENT ON FDA NEWS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Investors yesterday sold off nearly 23 million shares of Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., sending its stock down more than 60 percent, after the Cambridge
firm said regulators had decided that a portion of its data would not support
approval of its drug to treat the rare, inherited Fabry disease.

   The announcement made Wednesday after the close of markets sparked fierce
speculation about the drug's prospects for ever winning US approval, and left
some investors questioning whether the company's management had been as
forthcoming about the regulatory concerns as it should have been.

      "The confidence they were relaying doesn't seem to have been justified,"
said Robert LeBoyer, senior biotech analyst with InvestBio in New York. "You
don't want to be holding a stock with this amount of uncertainty. And the fact
that many people feel management misled them is at least as bad as the news
itself."

   Even as the stock plummeted yesterday, Richard Selden, chief executive of
Transkaryotic Therapies, or TKT, said he remains confident in the drug,
Replagal, and believes the company's application for approval is "compelling."
Calling the development a "moderate change in strategy," Selden said, the
company agreed to set aside its data on the reduction of pain - the primary goal
of the clinical studies - because the Food and Drug Administration considered
them "uninterpret able."

   But, Selden said, the agency agreed to consider other data collected in the
studies that show improvements in patients' kidney and cardiac function as well
as reductions in the buildup of fatty lipids in their kidneys. Fabry patients
lack an enzyme that breaks down certain fatty lipids. As the lipids build up,
they clog the kidney, heart, and other organs, killing most people with the
disease by age 40.

   "Replagal is benefiting a large number of patients in Europe, and I look
forward to the day when I can say the same thing about the United States,"
Selden said.

   Selden, who owns more than 500,000 shares of TKT, according to the company's
latest public filings, saw the value of his holdings fall more than $10 million
yesterday, to $6.5 million.

   Both Replagal and a similar drug, Fabrazyme, being developed by another
Cambridge company, Genzyme Corp., are approved in Europe. The review process for
both drugs, however, has dragged on for more than two years in the United
States. Complicating the situation is the fact that FDA rules require that only
one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such as Fabry, which affects only a
few thousand people worldwide.

   The "orphan drug" act gives a company seven years to sell its drug unhindered
by competition in exchange for being the first to develop a drug to treat a rare
disease. The rule seems to turn the race for approval into a winner-take-all
proposition. Both companies submitted applications to the FDA in June 2000, and
analysts say the regulatory agency has never before been faced with two
applications submitted within weeks of each other for nearly identical drugs to
treat the same rare disease.

   Shares in TKT fell $20.50 yesterday to $12.75 as nearly two-thirds of the
company's outstanding shares traded hands. Meanwhile, Genzyme shares rose $1.45
to $22.45. Both are traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   Speculation among Wall Street analysts on how TKT's change in strategy would
affect the outcome of the closely watched review process for both drugs ran the
gamut. Some lined up behind Genzyme, predicting the company would emerge as the
sole provider of a drug to treat Fabry in the United States, blocking TKT from
the market altogether. Others continued to favor TKT.

   But most hedged their bets, saying just about anything was possible.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.  SIDEBAR: STEEP DROP CHART ON
PAGE E1

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1123 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 4, 2002, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: PANEL URGES CHANGES IN RESEARCH ON HUMANS INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE
WORRIES THAT PUBLIC TRUST IS THREATENED BY DEATHS

BYLINE: By Michael Kranish, and Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Medical research institutions should make "fundamental changes"
in the way they conduct experiments on human beings in order to stop a string of
accidental deaths, an influential advisory panel said yesterday.

   The Institute of Medicine panel also recommended that federal oversight of
human research include privately funded experiments; currently, the government
regulates federally financed experiments and those conducted at institutions
that receive federal dollars. The panel also said a no-fault insurance program
should be established to compensate people who are harmed during the
experiments.

      But some critics said the report failed to address what they called the
fundamental conflict of interest inherent in much medical research - the fact
that universities and hospitals set up boards to review their own experiments.

   In making the recommendations, the Institute of Medicine, or IOM, said that
public trust in medical research is endangered because of deaths at high-profile
universities and the lack of uniform oversight of the experiments. Between 2
million and 20 million people participate in such research, the panel said,
acknowledging that the government has no solid estimate of how many volunteers
are involved.

   "It is understandable that the public has come to perceive that research
institutions put more emphasis on insulating themselves from liability than on
protecting people from harm," said Dr. Daniel Federman, senior dean of clinical
teaching at Harvard Medical School, who chaired a committee that produced the
report. "A combination of stresses, weaknesses, and lack of accountability have
strained the current hodgepodge of protections to the point that fundamental
changes are needed to protect all participants and keep public trust from being
irrevocably eroded."

   Three recent deaths have focused attention on the dangers of human research:
Jesse Gelsinger died during a 1999 gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania; last year Ellen Roche died during an asthma experiment at Johns
Hopkins University, and retired nurse Elaine Holden-Able died during a
methionine experiment at a hospital affiliated with Case Western University.

   Human research is a major business in Boston, with thousands of experiments
performed at local institutions, including Harvard, Boston University, and the
teaching hospitals. Boston institutions receive more federal research dollars
than those in any other US city.

   Under the current system of human research protection, a university, hospital
or company sets up an institutional review board to review experiments involving
human beings. The over-arching change urged yesterday was that universities and
hospitals conduct separate reviews on ethics and patient safety, conflict of
interest, and scientific merit. Patients would receive a clearer explanation of
potential dangers and research would be monitored more closely by experts and
the federal government.

   The report did not satisfy some longtime observers.

   "The IOM committee, headed by a Harvard University dean, disingenuously
recommended entrusting 'the responsibility for ensuring that protective rules
are followed' to 'the leadership of the organization doing the study,' Vera
Hassner Sharav, president of the Alliance for Human Research Protection, said in
a statement. "That is an example of conflicts of interest."

   George Annas, chairman of the health law department at Boston University's
School of Public Health, said "We need a lot more reform than the IOM seems to
recognize. This is but another voice crying in the wilderness. All their major
recommendations have been made over and over again."

   But Dr. Michael Kagel, who oversees institutional review boards at Johns
Hopkins University, said the recommendations were reasonable. A board composed
entirely of outsiders "may not understand the special needs and concerns of the
community where research is done," Kagel said.

   The release of the report comes as Congress this year has failed to come to
an agreement on legislation to tighten protection in human experiments.

   The Institute of Medicine is part of the National Academy of Sciences, an
independent organization set up by Congress to advise the government.

   Michael Kranish can be reached at kranish@globe.com; Alice Dembner can be
reached at dembner@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1124 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 04, 2002, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: Scientists halt gene therapy studies

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Scientists have suspended studies of the first gene therapy ever
to work - a treatment that appears to cure a rare immune disorder called "bubble
boy disease" - as they scramble to tell whether the therapy gave a French
toddler a leukemia-like side effect.

   It's unclear whether the gene therapy caused the boy's illness, although
there are clues that a virus used in the treatment may be to blame.

   No other children given gene therapy for the disease - severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID - have shown such a side effect.

   The French boy's gene therapy, performed in October 1999, was successful,
giving him a strong immune system.

   But in late summer, doctors discovered his body had far overproduced a type
of white blood cell, a disorder they call leukemia-like. Now 3, he is responding
well to chemotherapy, scientists said Thursday.

   France and the United States suspended further studies of gene therapy for
SCID while they evaluate what happened and notify parents of previous gene
therapy recipients of the possible risk.

   Advisers to the Food and Drug Administration will consult with French
scientists and meet Thursday to debate what steps are needed before the U.S.
studies could resume, said Dr. Phil Noguchi, FDA's director of gene therapy.

   The highly publicized moves were unusual - in studies of regular drugs, many
people typically become ill before research is put on hold or generates public
debate.

   But gene therapy has been a publicly charged topic since the 1999 death of
Jesse Gelsinger, 18, who was given a different type of gene therapy for another
disease. Many scientists now believe that openly discussing potential risks as
they're discovered is important to educate people about the new technology.

   SCID gene therapy "has been a spectacularly successful endeavor up to this
point," said Savio Woo of the American Society of Gene Therapy. If it truly
poses a risk of leukemia, "then we have discovered a new enemy."

   SCID is a very rare inherited disease, occurring in about 1 in 75,000 births,
in which patients' bodies don't make certain proteins crucial to developing
disease-fighting immune cells. Without treatment they die very young. The
best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a
germ-proof enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The most severe form, X-SCID, afflicts only boys. Those given a bone marrow
transplant from a genetically compatible brother or sister are likely to be
cured - but only 20 percent of X-SCID patients have a sibling who's a good
match.

   When boys without a good match undergo a transplant anyway, a quarter die,
said Dr. Donald Kohn of Children's Hospital in Los Angeles.

   Hence the excitement when gene therapy worked in nine of the 10 X-SCID
patients treated so far at Paris' Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades.


LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2002


                             1125 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1148 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
;
Child 'Cured' by Gene Therapy Develops Cancer;
Science: Leukemia-like illness is found in French toddler, who was treated for
'bubble-boy' disease. The FDA halts three trials, including two in L.A.

BYLINE: AARON ZITNER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A French boy who had been considered one of the few people cured by gene
therapy has developed a leukemia-like disease, prompting the Food and Drug
Administration to halt three gene-therapy trials in the United States. Two of
the trials are run by researchers at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   It is unclear whether the gene-replacement technique caused the boy's new
illness. Still, the incident threatens to further dampen hopes for gene therapy,
which has been under intense scrutiny since the 1999 death of a teenager in a
University of Pennsylvania experiment.

   In gene therapy, healthy genes are placed in a patient's cells in an attempt
to compensate for the faulty genes that cause disease. The technique is
considered one of the most exciting ideas to emerge from the explosion of
information about human genes, with prospects for treating cancer, hemophilia,
AIDS and other ailments.

   The French boy, now 3, had undergone the process as an infant to control
"bubble-boy" disease, a rare immune system disorder that is fatal if untreated.
The boy's immune system rebounded, and he was able to leave a sterile hospital
environment--or "bubble"--and live at home. He was one of four boys included in
a French study, published this spring, that is considered the only definitive
proof that gene therapy can work.

   In August, however, doctors found that the boy had developed cancer in his
blood, similar to leukemia. The boy is now being treated with chemotherapy. It
was the first time the illness appeared in any of the 32 or so patients treated
worldwide by gene therapy for the immune-system disease, including nine other
children in the French study.

   Still, FDA officials revealed Thursday that they had halted three U.S.
gene-therapy trials last month, days after learning that French authorities had
stopped trials run by Dr. Alain Fischer and colleagues at the Necker Hospital
for Children in Paris, where the boy had been treated.

   Authorities said the incident was not made public until Thursday to give
French researchers time to talk with patients before the news hit the media.

   Dr. Phillip Noguchi, director of the FDA's Division of Cellular and Gene
Therapies, said 150 or so gene-therapy trials are underway in the United States.
The three suspended trials and the French trial all target the same disease:
severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. Only one of the trials had begun to
treat patients.

   Noguchi said the FDA did not halt other gene-therapy trials because "what
we've seen so far would say the potential benefits still outweigh the potential
risks in those other trials."

   An FDA advisory panel will discuss the issue at a public meeting next
Thursday. Noguchi said the agency had also asked researchers to talk with
patients in several past gene-therapy trials "so that they are aware of the
latest knowledge."

   Researchers said it would take more study to determine whether the blood
disease was truly a side effect of gene therapy, and how common a problem it
might be. Scientists in touch with Fischer, the French researcher, said some
preliminary evidence had begun to emerge linking the therapy and the new
disease.

   In SCID, which has several causes and occurs in 1 in 75,000 births, the
patient's body contains a faulty gene and fails to make proteins needed to
produce immune cells. Immune cells, in turn, fight disease.

   For many patients, the only treatment is a bone-marrow transplant. However,
80% of patients cannot find a donor with cells that function well in the
patient's body, said Dr. Donald Kohn of Childrens Hospital Los Angeles,
principal researcher in one of the suspended studies.

   A quarter or more of those patients will die, he said, even after receiving
bone-marrow transplants from parents, unrelated people or siblings who are not a
close match.

   Researchers want to restore the gene that goes awry in SCID. The process
involves removing some of the patient's bone-marrow cells, inserting a healthy
gene and returning the cells to the body in hopes that they will produce healthy
disease-fighting cells.

   In the French experiment, a mouse virus was used to carry the new gene into
the DNA of the bone-marrow cells. The process worked in nine out of the 10 boys
treated so far, say researchers familiar with the French study.

   Many researchers suspect that the virus may have caused a problem when it
carried the new gene into the bone-marrow cells. It may have turned on a gene
that causes cells to proliferate, or turned off a gene that prevents cells from
growing out of control.

   W. French Anderson, who in 1990 performed the first authorized gene-therapy
experiment, said researchers have long feared that adding a gene would cause
problems, because there is no way to control where in the DNA the new gene will
land.

   "It is not unexpected. We knew it would happen sooner or later," said
Anderson, now with the University of Southern California's Keck School of
Medicine. "It's what we've been saying for 30 years now: Gene therapy should
only be used in the treatment of serious diseases, because there are risks."

   Kohn said that preliminary research on the French boy's cells showed that the
new gene landed near another gene involved in leukemia. "But drawing a causal
link requires more study," said Kohn, who is also president-elect of the
American Society of Gene Therapy.

   Fischer's team analyzed the gene that had been inserted into the cells, "and
it looks perfect," suggesting that the new gene itself was not the source of the
problem, Kohn said.

   Dr. Mark Kay, a professor of pediatrics and genetics at Stanford University,
said researchers would also have to consider the fact that bone-marrow cells in
the patient had been given the task of producing a large number of immune cells,
"and we know that multiple cell divisions are one of the factors that could lead
to cancer. As the cells divide, there's always the risk of a random mutation
occurring" that results in cancer.

   In other words, he speculated, the very task assigned to the modified
bone-marrow cells may have raised the odds of contracting leukemia. "But there
are so many unknown factors that right now, it's hard to know," he said.

   Kay said Fischer's work on SCID patients had been "the first study where it
looked like there was substantial clinical benefit from gene therapy. It was
unequivocal. These kids did better. That's why it was a highly cited trial."

   Kohn said four patients had been treated so far in his study. All had all
been examined in recent weeks, he said, and none showed any leukemia-like
symptoms. That study included patients with a type of the immune disease called
SCID-ADA.

   A second Childrens Hospital Los Angeles study, as well as one at the National
Institutes of Health, plans to include only patients with a second form of the
disease, called X-linked SCID. The French study also focused on X-SCID, which
affects only boys.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1126 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      October 4, 2002 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 06A

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy study halted over side effect;
Treatment for immune disorder may be tied to other illness

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- Scientists have suspended studies of the first gene therapy
ever to work -- a treatment that appears to cure a rare immune disorder called
"bubble boy disease" -- as they scramble to tell whether the therapy gave a
French toddler a leukemia-like side effect.

   It's unclear if the gene therapy actually caused the boy's illness, although
there are clues that a virus used in the treatment may be to blame. No other
children given gene therapy for the disease -- severe combined immunodeficiency,
or SCID -- have shown such a side effect.

   The French boy's gene therapy, performed in October 1999, was successful,
giving him a strong immune system. But in late summer, doctors discovered his
body had far overproduced a type of white blood cell, a disorder they say is
like leukemia. Now 3, he is responding well to chemotherapy, scientists said
Thursday.

   France and the United States suspended further studies of gene therapy for
SCID while they evaluate what happened and notify parents of previous gene
therapy recipients of the possible risk.

   Advisers to the Food and Drug Administration will consult with French
scientists and meet next Thursday to debate what steps are needed before the
U.S. studies could resume, said Phil Noguchi, FDA's director of gene therapy.

   The highly publicized moves were unusual -- in studies of regular drugs, many
people typically become ill before research is put on hold or generates public
debate. But gene therapy has been a publicly charged topic since the 1999 death
of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, who was given a different type of gene therapy
for another disease. Many scientists now believe that openly discussing
potential risks as they're discovered is important to educate people about the
new technology.

   SCID gene therapy "has been a spectacularly successful endeavor up to this
point," said Savio Woo of the American Society of Gene Therapy. If it truly
poses a risk of leukemia, "then we have discovered a new enemy. Once we know the
enemy, then the experts in the field will . . . be able to come up with
strategies of how to deal with it."

   SCID is a very rare inherited disease, occurring in about 1 in 75,000 births,
in which patients' bodies don't make certain proteins crucial to developing
disease-fighting immune cells. Without treatment they die very young. The
best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a
germ-proof enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The most severe form, X-SCID, afflicts only boys. Those given a bone marrow
transplant from a genetically compatible brother or sister are likely to be
cured -- but only 20% of X-SCID patients have a sibling who's a good match. When
boys without a good match undergo a transplant anyway, a quarter die, said
Donald Kohn of Children's Hospital in Los Angeles.

   Hence the excitement when gene therapy worked in nine of the 10 X-SCID
patients treated so far at Paris' Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades.

   Alain Fischer drew bone marrow from the boys and culled immune cell-creating
stem cells from it. He mixed in a virus containing a gene that makes the
immune-system protein the boys' bodies lacked. Injected back into the boys, the
stem cells worked properly.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1127 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: Biotechnology Company's Shares Plummet 62%

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies plunged 62 percent yesterday after it
revealed that the Food and Drug Administration did not agree with the main data
that the company was presenting in an effort to win approval for its first drug.

        Transkaryotic, known as TKT, had hoped to show that Replagal, its
experimental drug, reduced the pain in patients with Fabry disease, a rare
inherited disorder. But the company revealed late Wednesday that the F.D.A. had
found the company's pain data uninterpretable and not adequate for approval of
the drug.

    Transkaryotic, a biotechnology company based in Cambridge, Mass., said it
still expected to receive approval for the drug in the first half of 2003 based
on other data. But its announcement raised questions about whether it had been
totally forthcoming in the past in describing its interactions with regulators.

   During a conference call late Wednesday, analysts and institutional
investors, surprised and in some cases angry, repeatedly asked when management
had known that the pain data would not be acceptable. One investor asked whether
the company had been contacted by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Yesterday, the shares plummeted to $12.75, a drop of $20.50.

   Richard F. Selden, the company's chief executive, said during the call and in
a subsequent interview that the company had been "forthright and open in our
responses" to investors. He said the company had learned of the problem with the
pain data in recent conversations with the regulators, though he would not be
more specific than that. He would not respond to questions about the S.E.C. but
said the company would disclose anything that needed to be disclosed.

   Some analysts compared the situation to that of ImClone Systems, which had
told investors late last year that its cancer drug Erbitux was on track for
approval, only to have it summarily rejected, leading to shareholder lawsuits
and federal investigations.

   "Because of the ImClone incident investors have far less patience for
management not being extremely explicit about what is going on at the F.D.A."
said Dennis R. Harp, an analyst with Deutsche Bank Securities, who downgraded
TKT stock to "hold" from "buy." Since the F.D.A. does not usually talk about
drugs it is evaluating, investors usually have to rely on companies for
information about the regulatory status of drugs.

   The setback for TKT could help rival Genzyme General, which is also seeking
approval of a drug for Fabry disease. Genzyme shares were up $1.45, or 7 percent
yesterday, to $22.45.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1128 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   Antitrust Chief Is Leaving For Job at ChevronTexaco
Charles A. James, the Justice Department antitrust chief who drew praise and
scorn for his handling of the Microsoft lawsuit, is resigning to become a vice
president and general counsel at ChevronTexaco. His announcement came after a
15-month tenure dominated by his decision to settle an antitrust suit with
Microsoft and abandon tougher penalties.

        Officials said it was too early to begin discussing possible successors,
although the names of several people -- including Timothy J. Muris, chairman of
the Federal Trade Commission; and Michael K. Powell, chairman of the Federal
Communications Commission -- had been mentioned.  Page C6.


   Wendt Quits as Conseco Chief
Gary C. Wendt, left, the former General Electric executive who was hailed as a
savior when he was hired to run Conseco, is stepping down as chief executive of
the troubled financial services company. But he said he wouldstay on as
chairman. Mr. Wendt's hiring in 2000 cheered investors, even though his contract
was among the most valuable ever given to a new chief executive.  C2.

Push to Finish Inquiries of Brokers
Scrambling to restore investor confidence in Wall Street, the nation's top
securities regulators and the New York attorney general said they were working
to swiftly conclude their investigations of brokerage firms.  C7.

Forbes Closes Technology Magazine
The Forbes family, which owns Forbes magazine, announced that it was closing
Forbes ASAP, a magazine founded in 1992 to cover the digital economy.  C6.

3 Advertisers Leave Their Agencies
The fourth quarter, typically a make-or-break time for advertisers, is getting
under way with three marketers -- Gateway, Lands' End and Avaya -- deciding to
break up with their agencies. Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  C6.

In Egypt, a Battle Over Patent Laws
As an Egyptian delegation visits Washington to discuss increasing American
direct investment in Egypt and bolstering the $3.1 billion in trade, a battle is
raging in Egypt over an intellectual property rights law, which the United
States said was a prerequisite for a free-trade agreement.  World Business,
Section W.

Online Magazine Removes Article
Saying a crucial piece of information could not be verified, the online magazine
Salon has removed an article accusing Thomas E. White, secretary of the Army, of
participating in accounting practices that led to the collapse of Enron while he
was vice chairman of Enron Energy Services. Paul Krugman, the economics
columnist for the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, said that he erred in citing
the Salon information on Sept. 17, because it was unsubstantiated.  A24.

Transkaryotic Falls on Drug Delay
Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies fell sharply amid concern that regulators
would not approve its lead drug because of faulty clinical data. The company
said that the Food and Drug Administration was not satisfied that the drug
significantly reduced pain associated with Fabry Disease, a genetic disorder.
C6.

Buyout Firm Weighs Selling Stake
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company, the buyout firm, is considering the sale of a
stake to investors. The firm is seeking money to buy companies while values are
depressed.  C6.

Shares Again Tumble After Rally
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 38 points, at 7,717.61. The Nasdaq
index fell 21.74, to 1,165.56. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index dropped
8.96 points, to 818.95.  C7.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 7,717.61 down 38.00Nasdaq
composite -- 1,165.56 down 21.7410-yr. Treasury yield -- 3.68% up 0.01The euro
-- $0.9866 up 0.0011The dollar -- 122.65 yen down 0.29 Graph: "TODAY" shows
unemployment figures since March 2002.September figures due at 8:30 a.m. Eastern
time.Expected: 5.9% Graph shows Transkaryotic Therapies share prices for the
week.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1129 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1293 words

HEADLINE: TRIALS ARE HALTED ON A GENE THERAPY

BYLINE:  By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3

BODY:

   Officials in the United States and France said today that they had suspended
four gene therapy experiments because the treatment, which cured a 3-year-old
boy of a fatal immune deficiency, may have given him an illness similar to
leukemia.

        Scientists conducting the research said it was not clear whether the
boy, who was treated as an infant in France, was made sick by the therapy. But
officials at the Food and Drug Administration said they suspected that the
experiment, which until now had been hailed as the only unequivocal gene therapy
success, was responsible.

    "It is not absolutely a definitive thing, but the preliminary data that we
have leads us to suspect that it surely isn't a coincidence," said Dr. Philip
Noguchi, the agency official who oversees gene therapy research. "It's a
sobering experience, but we are doing what should be done."

   The experiments -- one in France, three in the United States -- were
suspended in early September. But the news was not made public until today,
authorities said, to give the researchers time to notify the families of 14
children enrolled in the trials.

   The move is yet another major setback for the fledgling field of gene therapy
, which involves using viruses to introduce healthy genes into cells. The field
is still reeling from the death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, who lost his life three
years ago while undergoing gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Scientists have long theorized that retroviruses, which were used in the
suspended experiments, could trigger cancer. The risk was that the virus, which
integrates itself into the patient's DNA, would lodge in or near a
cancer-causing gene.

   But researchers said they had never seen this before, either in animals or
humans, even though hundreds of people have received retroviruses in gene
therapy experiments for a number of diseases. Experts said it was too soon to
tell whether other children treated for immune deficiency were at risk.

   "This has been a spectacularly successful endeavor up to this point," said
Dr. Savio Woo, former president of the American Society of Gene Therapy. "This
is a new enemy that we have discovered. We know that there is a theoretical
possibility, but it has never been seen before."

   The suspended trials sought to cure severe combined immune deficiency, a
disorder that leaves infants without working immune systems. Abbreviated as
SCID, but commonly called "bubble boy disease," it is extremely rare and is
fatal in the first year of life if left untreated.

   In the most severe form, the disease affects boys who have faulty
X-chromosomes. The only treatment is bone marrow transplant. But the transplants
fail in as many as 40 percent of all children who lack a perfect donor match, so
scientists looked to gene therapy as an alternative.

   In April 2000, Dr. Alain Fischer and his colleagues at the Necker children's
hospital in Paris announced that they had used gene therapy to successfully
insert corrective genes into the bone marrow stem cells of three babies with
X-linked SCID. Coming on the heels of Mr. Gelsinger's death, Dr. Fischer's study
was hailed as long-sought proof that gene therapy could work.

   Dr. Fischer went on to treat six more babies and a teenager, who survived
because he had a partial immune deficiency. "Up until now, all these patients,
more than three and a half years after treatment, are doing well," he said. All
had "close to normal immune functions," he said.

   But last spring, Dr. Fischer said, one of the boys showed elevated levels of
a particular type of white blood cell, known as a T-lymphocyte, though he had no
symptoms. Subsequently, though, the boy developed chickenpox. By August, Dr.
Fischer said, he had a "significant increase" in the white cell counts, as well
as an enlarged spleen, anemia and a drop in platelets.

   When scientists examined the child's cells, Dr. Fischer said, they could see
that the genetic material of the retrovirus had inserted into a particular gene
on the 11th chromosome that controls the proliferation of cells. But he said he
was not yet convinced the gene therapy was entirely to blame.

   Other factors, including the chickenpox infection and a family history of
cancer, could also be at work, Dr. Fischer said. But Dr. W. French Anderson, a
professor at the University of Southern California who was among the first
scientists to use gene therapy to treat SCID, said the gene therapy was likely
responsible.

   "We knew it would happen sooner or later," he said. But even if it turns out
that gene therapy causes the disease, Dr. Anderson and other experts said gene
therapy might still be used to treat SCID because the illness was so
devastating.

   The child does not have leukemia per se, Dr. Fischer said. There is no name
for his proliferation of cells because scientists have never seen it before, so
Dr. Fischer is calling it "lymphoproliferation."

   The boy is being treated with chemotherapy and is responding, Dr. Fischer
said. But the abnormal cells have not disappeared, he said.

   Dr. Fischer said he notified French authorities, as well as the F.D.A. and
his colleagues in the field, right after Labor Day, as soon as he knew the
problem was serious.

   The food and drug agency immediately put what it calls "a clinical hold" on
three trials in the United States, two at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles and
one at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. The N.I.H. study, and
one of the Los Angeles studies, have yet to enroll any patients, he said.

   The other Los Angeles study is being run by Dr. Donald Kohn, president-elect
of the American Society of Gene Therapy. The four children Dr. Kohn and his
collaborators have treated all have a form of SCID that is not the X-linked
type. But Dr. Kohn said the F.D.A. was correct in suspending his research. "The
clinical hold, I think, is the only ethical and responsible course of action
until we have more answers," he said.

   The F.D.A. will convene a meeting of outside experts next week to discuss the
trials, Dr. Noguchi said. He added that other SCID trials had been going on in
England and Germany. The German studies have been suspended, but the British
research is continuing, he said.

   At Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, researchers said they were
collaborating with Dr. Fischer to try to determine what, if anything, went wrong
in the study.

   But Dr. Christof von Kalle, who is leading the effort, said it could take
months, if not years, for a definitive determination.

   Today's announcement came as a panel of independent experts released a study
of the safety of clinical trials that was prompted by Mr. Gelsinger's death. The
panel, at the Institute of Medicine, called for major reforms, including a
federal law that would require all research organizations to develop patient
protection programs.

   Dr. Daniel Federman, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School who
was chairman of the panel, said the panel was especially concerned about
financial conflicts of interest in research. He spoke of a "hodgepodge of
protections" that was so haphazard it was impossible to catalog how many
Americans were enrolled in research experiments, and how many had been harmed by
them.

   "At the present time, a lot of people are trying to do a good job, and almost
certainly are," Dr. Federman said. "What we are trying to do is raise the level
of the system as a whole."

   Mr. Gelsinger's father, Paul, who has become an advocate for patient
protection and reviewed the study in advance of its publication, applauded the
work.

   "I have always felt like what happened to Jesse blew the lid off the can of
worms of medical research," Mr. Gelsinger said. "The system needs to be looked
at, it needs to be unraveled. This study goes a long way toward doing that."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1130 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1076 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:

        INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

U.S. Shifts Policy To Protect Colombian Oil
Oil Pipeline bombings by guerrillas cost the Colombian government nearly $500
million last year. American troops will begin training Colombian Army soldiers
in counterinsurgency tactics in a policy shift that shows America's new emphasis
on reducing dependence on Middle Eastern oil.   A1

Brazilian Election Debate
With the latest polls in Brazil showing the main opposition candidate for
president, the leftist labor leader Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, close to a first
round victory, Brazilians are focusing on a final, possibly decisive televised
debate.   A6


   Colombia Tries I.R.A. Members
Three members of the Irish Republican Army charged with teaching bomb-making
techniques to Colombian rebels go to trial in a case that has become an
embarrassment to the I.R.A.'s political wing, Sinn Fein, during a difficult
stretch in the Northern Ireland peace effort.   A5

Palestinian Calls for Defiance
Marwan Barghouti, a rising Palestinian leader on trial in Israel for terrorism
charges, called on Palestinians in the West Bank to defy Israeli curfews, as a
newspaper reported an operation to deport the current leader, Yasir Arafat. Mr.
Barghouti has denied the charges against him and has rejected Israel's authority
to try him.   A12

Afghan Factions Clashing
Fighting has flared again in northern Afghanistan despite United Nations-led
efforts for a cease-fire. Three people were killed and six wounded as fighting
broke out in the second clash in the region within a week.   A14

Weapons Inspectors Will Wait
The United Nations weapons inspections teams, under pressure from the United
States and Britain, said they would delay a return to Iraq until they have new
instructions to guide them. Security Council members moved toward an agreement
that they should toughen rules governing inspections but were no closer to an
authorization of military force.   A13

NATIONAL   A18-25

Congress Begins Process Of Approving Iraq Action
Congress began its push toward granting President Bush the authority to use
force against Iraq. A determined group of Democrats and some Republicans tried
to buck the bipartisan sentiment to give Mr. Bush broad discretion to
unilaterally initiate military operations against Saddam Hussein.   A1

Texans Face Insurance Crisis
Hundreds of thousands of homeowners in Texas are expected to lose their
insurance coverage while other rate payers are seeing huge increases in premiums
in a crisis that could harm the state's economy and has already become a central
issue in the governor's race.   A1

5 Killed In Maryland
Five people were murdered randomly on quiet streets in separate attacks, by what
Maryland police described as a gunman who fired only one shot each time. The
gunman was still at large despite an intense manhunt.   A1

Gene Therapy Tests Halted
Officials in the United States and France said they have suspended four gene
therapy experiments because the treatment, which cured a 3-year-old boy of a
fatal immune deficiency, may have given him a leukemia-like illness.   A1

Buffett Pledges Support
Warren E. Buffett said he had decided to give a Washington-based group, $2.5
million to help reduce the threat posed by nuclear and other unconventional
weapons.   A25

Salon Magazine Pulls Article
The online magazine Salon removed an article charging Thomas E. White, the
secretary of the army, with participating in accounting practices that led to
Enron's collapse while he was vice chairman of its energy services.   A24

6 Finalists Picked for Memorial
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers announced that the contest to design a memorial
to the victims of the Sept. 11 attack on the Pentagon has been narrowed to six
finalists.   A17

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Priests Form Group To Defend Rights
Venting feelings of anger, betrayal and sadness, Roman Catholic priests from
across the metropolitan region have started a group to assert their rights in
the face of new sexual abuse policies by the nation's bishops.   B1

Columbia Leader Inaugurated
At Lee C. Bollinger's inauguration as president of Columbia University, he spoke
of the value of affirmative action in college admissions and Columbia's need to
expand physically and pressed for Columbia's greater engagement with the local
community and the world.   B3

Ex-Official Pleads Guilty
Robert C. Janiszewski, one of New Jersey's top Democrats until he abruptly
resigned the Hudson County executive's office last year and disappeared,
resurfaced in a federal courtroom in Newark to plead guilty to extortion and
confirmed rumors that he had been a government informer in other investigations.
B1

Sex Columnists Thriving
Natalie Krinsky, a 20-year-old junior at Yale, is one of a growing number of sex
columnists at college papers nation-wide who are reflecting a striking openness
among undergraduates when it comes to discussing sex.   B1

WEEKEND   E1-28; E29-38

SPORTS   D1-7

Cardinals And Braves Win
The Saint Louis Cardinals beat the Arizona Diamondbacks 2-1 taking a two game
lead and the Atlanta Braves beat the San Francisco Giants 7-3 to even their
series at one game each.   D1

OBITUARIES   C20-21

Norman Brown
An erudite and playful philosopher whose attempt to psychoanalyze history itself
entranced intellectuals, beguiled New Age seekers and sold many books was 89.
C20

BUSINESS DAY   C1-20; 22

Head of S.E.C. Reconsiders
The Securities and Exchange Commission chairman is backing away from the man he
had favored to head the new accounting oversight board. Industry executives and
at least one Republican lawmaker have complained that John H. Biggs is too tough
on the industry.   C1

Martha Stewart Off Exchange
Martha Stewart, under increasing scrutiny over the trade of her ImClone stock,
resigned from the Board of the New York Stock Exchange prompting analysts to
question if she will also quit as chief executive of Martha Stewart Living
Omnimedia.   C1

Merrill Examined in Enron Deal
After months of Congressional criticism of an array of financial institutions
for their dealings with Enron, Merrill Lynch is the only investment firm linked
to a transaction that prosecutors now contend was illegal.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

ESCAPES   F1-11

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: Impasse over homeland security; AIDS as a threat to global
stability; New Jersey's poet dilemma; Andres Martinez on tech fatigue.

Columns: Nicholas D. Kristof, Paul Krugman.

Crossword   E25
TV Listings   E24
Public Lives   B4
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1131 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     October 4, 2002 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. A04

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: Gene studies halted as cancer develops

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In another setback to the experimental field of gene therapy, scientists have
suspended tests in France and the United States of a promising treatment - one
that appears to cure the rare immune disorder dubbed "bubble boy disease" -
because a French patient has developed a cancer resembling leukemia.

   It is unclear whether the gene therapy caused the boy's new illness and, if
so, how often such a side effect would occur. But researchers have long
theorized that this type of genetic manipulation might trigger cancer.

   The boy, 3, received gene therapy in his first month of life. It was a
surprising success, enabling him to fight off an infection last spring that
otherwise could have been life-threatening. But in late summer his body suddenly
began overproducing white blood cells, a symptom of leukemia. He is responding
well to chemotherapy, scientists said yesterday.

   Nine other children who were given the same gene therapy by Alain Fischer's
team at Paris' Necker Hospital are doing well, and no other children worldwide
in trials to treat this disease - severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID -
have shown such a side effect.

   However, authorities in Germany halted trials there this year after
scientists found the therapy caused leukemia-like symptoms in mice.

   Yesterday, France's public health agency announced that all the families had
been notified about the possible risk.

   U.S. regulatory officials have put on hold three SCID clinical trials, one
that had treated four children and two others that were to start soon. Several
U.S. patients enrolled in similar gene-therapy studies over the last decade have
been informed as well, said Phil Noguchi of the Food and Drug Administration.

   The news was a fresh blow for the field of gene therapy, which has come under
intense scrutiny and criticism since the 1999 death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger in a University of Pennsylvania study that used gene therapy to treat
a rare liver disorder. Philadelphia had been one of the leading centers in the
country for gene therapy until the death prompted regulators to severely
restrict trials at Penn.

   The latest case involves a different disease and different type of
gene-therapy treatment. All SCID studies use a particular virus to carry the
altered genes into the cells of the body. Scientists have long theorized, and
warned study participants, that cancer might occur if that virus lodged near an
"oncogene," a gene that promotes uncontrolled cell growth, said Donald Kohn of
Children's Hospital in Los Angeles, the leader of one of the gene-therapy
studies now on hold.

   "There is a chance that insertion would lead to [unintended] genetic changes.
It is a concern in all such studies," said pediatrician Christof von Kalle, a
gene-therapy expert at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center who is
helping the French team figure out what happened.

   On the other hand, Kalle said, children with SCID are inherently prone to
develop certain cancers because of their defective immune systems.

   Determining what went wrong is critical, because the gene-insertion technique
is also being used to treat other childhood immune defects and several inherited
blood disorders, he said.

   Next week, the FDA's scientific advisers will evaluate the latest setback, in
consultation with the scientists from Paris, to determine what additional
research or precautions are needed before the studies can resume.

   "Although this is a sobering event," the FDA's Noguchi said, airing potential
side effects very publicly is good for the still-evolving field of gene therapy.

   SCID is an inherited disease that occurs in about 1 in 75,000 births.
Patients' bodies do not make certain proteins crucial to developing
disease-fighting immune cells. The best-known patient was David, Houston's
famous bubble boy, who lived in a germ-proof enclosure until his death at age 12
in 1984.

   Without any treatment, SCID patients die young. For the most severe form, a
type called X-SCID that afflicts only boys, the only successful treatment is a
bone-marrow transplant from a genetically matched sibling.

   Inquirer staff writer Marie McCullough contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1132 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 4, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY...

LENGTH: 710 words

BODY:

   At least until Sunday afternoon and likely beyond, it shall remain virtually
illegal in Western Pennsylvania to engage in any form of public discourse that
is not directly related to Tommy Maddox.

    So, I'm not even going to tell you the number of brilliant topics I had
lined up for this essay (let's just say it was well toward, uh, two) before
puffs of white smoke drifted into the sky above the Fabulous South Side
University of Pitts-

    burgh Medical Center Sports Performance and Quarterback Controversy Complex
at midweek, signifying the dawn of a new quarterback era, or error, as the case
might be.

    We in the media have been pretty much All Tommy All The Time since then --
even health beat writers stopped worrying about Mad Cow to focus on localized
Mad Ox disease -- and it turns out there are easily enough interesting things
about Kordell Stewart's latest successor to keep us humming until Tommy starts 3
for 11 with two picks and a fumble inside the Louisiana Superdome.

    It's been a beauteous week for the former Hurst (Texas) Hotshot, the
nickname he likely never had at L.D. Bell High School, between Dallas and Fort
Worth, but should have. All the way back to Sunday, when he probably saved the
Steelers from the lethal designation that is 0-3, Maddox's capabilities have
been celebrated and not the least bit exaggerated.

    By yesterday, coastal Louisiana, site of Tommy's first NFL start in 10
years, had been buffeted by a Category 2 hurricane instead of the feared
Category 4 that Lili was carrying until she understood the gravity of screwing
up Pittsburgh's travel plans for the weekend. Talk about your great pocket
presence.

    But right from the start, the Tommy Maddox Story had a certain destiny about
it, and since it could all be over in a matter of days, perhaps we ought to give
the whole quirky plot a decent airing.

    Don't try to stop me.

    Maddox was a history major at UCLA, and though it would have been hard to
get a degree in the two years he spent there, his love for the subject has
surely been augmented by the random strains of connected history attending his
career, starting with those college eligible days in Hollywood.

    In 1946, for example, though Hollywood had long established itself the film
capital of the world, the first Cannes Film Festival was held on the French
Riviera. Later that year, an obscure Chicago Cardinals quarterback named Elmar
Angsman threw a pass in an NFL game at the tender age of 21. Forty-six years
later, Thomas Alfred Maddox would become the youngest person to throw a pass in
the NFL since Elmar Angsman.

    Oh it's eerie, all right.

    How 'bout this one?

    In 1971, Tommy Maddox was born in Shreveport, La. That same year, a little
endeavor they called Disney World opened just across the Gulf of Mexico. And do
you know what many Steelers fans now expect Tommy Maddox to say after his final
pass of this season? Right. "I'm goin' to Disney World!"

    Of course, we don't like to get ahead of ourselves, especially about a guy
whose total time spent quarterbacking NFL teams is still shorter than a
Yankees-Angles playoff game. It could prove inconvenient for the Steelers'
prospects this year, don't you suppose, that if Tommy Maddox's career were a pop
quiz, the first part would be to match the year he was released with the team
that released him:

    1. 1996 ... A. St. Louis Rams

    2. 1995 ... B. Atlanta Falcons

    3. 1997 ... C. New York Giants

    Answers: 1-C, 2-A, 3-B

    As for Part II, that would be multiple choice.

    According to the Pittsburgh Steelers 2002 Media Guide, Tommy Maddox was
"arguably the biggest surprise of training camp" in 2001. What surprise was
arguably bigger?

    A. That "Live Girls," the nudie place on adjacent Route 30, added a brunch
shift.

    B. That no one got arrested.

    C. That one veteran player arrived in a vehicle capable of going more than
11 miles on a gallon of gas.

    D. All of the above.

    Answer: B

    And the essay question:

    Which would you rather be: the former MVP of the XFL, a former CEO of IBM or
a former BMOC at IUP, and why?

    Eyes on your own paper now.

    While you do that, I'll just sit here researching whether the Steelers have
ever won a game quarterbacked by a one-time Fort Worth insurance man.

NOTES:
NAMES & GAMES Gene Collier can be reached at gcollier@post-gazette.com or
412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1133 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 4, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-4

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: BOY'S ILLNESS TRIGGERS GENE THERAPY SUSPENSION

BODY:

   An experimental genetic therapy that had seemed to cure several infants born
with a life-threatening immune system disease has apparently caused a
leukemia-like syndrome in one of the treated children in France, prompting
health officials to suspend all such therapies for that disease in France and
the United States.

    Officials at the Food and Drug Administration said yesterday they'd
scheduled an emergency meeting in Bethesda, Md., next week, at which scientists
involved in the study and other experts will analyze the latest data. One goal
is to help the FDA consider whether a wider array of gene therapy studies needs
to be scrutinized.

    The ill patient, a French boy almost 3 years old, is now being treated with
chemotherapy in an attempt to kill the blood cells that have begun to
proliferate in his body, an ironic twist for a child whose problem at birth was
the absence of such cells.

    The incident is a blow to the fledgling field of gene therapy, which had
only recently begun to recover its image after the widely publicized death of an
Arizona teen in a 1999 experiment. The approach, which seeks to cure diseases by
giving patients healthy genes, has been fraught with failure. The French
treatment had recently been touted as having delivered the first real cures in
the field's 12-year history.

    Despite the setback, scientists said yesterday they suspected that the
complication may prove to have been caused by a molecular fluke so unlikely to
reoccur that the treatment's benefits will ultimately prove greater than its
risks.

    The French treatment still looks "exceedingly promising," said Joseph
Glorioso, director of the Pittsburgh Human Gene Therapy Center and president of
the American Society of Gene Therapy. "The field of gene therapy remains
vigorous and robust."

    Alain Fisher, the project's lead researcher at the Necker Hospital in Paris,
said he held out hope that the boy would recover and said the family was being
very understanding.

    The boy was born with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency disease,
sometimes known as the "bubble boy" disease, caused by a defect in one of the
body's roughly 40,000 genes. Lacking that gene, children cannot produce the
white blood cells crucial to fighting off infections. Most die in the first year
or so of life.

    About 2 1/2 years ago, when he was 2 months old, the boy became one of a
handful of infants enrolled in a new gene therapy study. The experiment involved
the use of genetically engineered viruses to deliver copies of the missing gene
to young patients' bone marrow cells. This summer he was one of five children
described in a landmark New England Journal of Medicine article as having been
apparently cured.

    A total of 11 children from five countries have been treated with the
technique, Fisher said. All except the boy are doing well and show signs of
having normal immunity.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2002


                             1134 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 4, 2002, Friday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy halted after toddler develops leukemia-like side effect;
Scientists to evaluate illness, notify recipients

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- Scientists have suspended studies of the first gene therapy ever
to work -- a treatment that appears to cure a rare immune disorder called
"bubble boy disease" -- as they scramble to tell whether the therapy gave a
French toddler a leukemia-like side effect.

   It's unclear if the gene therapy actually caused the boy's illness, although
there are clues that a virus used in the treatment may be to blame.  No other
children given gene therapy for the disease -- severe combined immunodeficiency,
or SCID -- have shown such a side effect.

   The French boy's gene therapy, performed in October 1999, was successful,
giving him a strong immune system.  But in late summer, doctors discovered his
body had far overproduced a type of white blood cell, a disorder they call
leukemia-like.  Now 3, he is responding well to chemotherapy, scientists said
yesterday.

   France and the United States suspended further studies of gene therapy for
SCID while they evaluate what happened and notify parents of previous gene
therapy recipients of the possible risk.

   Advisers to the Food and Drug Administration will consult with French
scientists and meet Thursday to debate what steps are needed before the U.S.
studies could resume, said Dr. Phil Noguchi, FDA's director of gene therapy.

   The highly publicized moves were unusual: In studies of regular drugs, many
people typically become ill before research is put on hold or generates public
debate.  But gene therapy has been a publicly charged topic since the 1999 death
of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, who was given a different type of gene therapy
for another disease.  Many scientists now believe that discussing potential
risks as they're discovered is important to educate people about the new
technology.

   SCID gene therapy "has been a spectacularly successful endeavor up to this
point," said Savio Woo of the American Society of Gene Therapy.  If it truly
poses a risk of leukemia, "then we have discovered a new enemy.  Once we know
the enemy, then the experts in the field will . . . be able to come up with
strategies of how to deal with it."

   SCID is a very rare inherited disease, occurring in about 1 in 75,000 births,
in which patients' bodies don't make certain proteins crucial to developing
disease-fighting immune cells.  Without treatment they die very young.  The
best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a
germ-proof enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The most severe form, X-SCID, afflicts only boys.  Those given a bone marrow
transplant from a genetically compatible brother or sister are likely to be
cured -- but only 20 percent of X-SCID patients have a sibling who's a good
match.  When boys without a good match undergo a transplant anyway, one-quarter
die, said Dr. Donald Kohn of Children's Hospital in Los Angeles.

   Hence the excitement when gene therapy worked in nine of the 10 X-SCID
patients treated so far at Paris' Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades.

   Dr. Alain Fischer drew bone marrow from the boys and culled immune
cell-creating stem cells from it.  He mixed in a virus containing a gene that
makes the immune-system protein the boys' bodies lacked.  Injected back into the
boys, the stem cells worked properly.

   Scientists long theorized -- and warned study participants -- that cancer
might occur if the therapy's virus lodged near certain genes that control cell
growth and affected them, too, Kohn said.

   But with a total of 13 X-SCID gene therapy recipients in France and Britain
and 19 U.S. and Italian children given gene therapy for a related illness called
SCID-ADA, the French case marks the first such side effect.


LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2002


                             1135 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    October 4, 2002 Friday Five Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IS HALTED OVER POSSIBLE LEUKEMIA-LIKE SIDE EFFECT

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have suspended studies of the first gene therapy ever to work - a
treatment that appears to cure a rare immune disorder called "bubble boy
disease" - as they scramble to find out whether the therapy gave a French
toddler a leukemia-like side effect.

   It's unclear whether the gene therapy actually caused the boy's illness,
although there are clues that a virus used in the treatment may be to blame. No
other children given gene therapy for the disease - severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID - have shown such a side effect.

   The French boy's gene therapy, performed in October 1999, was successful,
giving him a strong immune system. But this summer, doctors discovered that his
body had far overproduced a type of white blood cell, a disorder they call
leukemia-like. Now 3, he is responding well to chemotherapy, scientists said
Thursday.

   France and the United States suspended further studies of gene therapy for
SCID while they evaluate what happened and notify parents of previous gene
therapy recipients of the potential risk.

   Advisers to the Food and Drug Administration will consult with French
scientists and meet Thursday to debate what steps are needed before the U.S.
studies could resume, said Dr. Phil Noguchi, the FDA's director of gen e
therapy.

   The highly publicized moves were unusual - in studies of regular drugs, many
people typically become ill before research is put on hold or generates public
debate. But gene therapy has been a publicly charged topic since the 1999 death
of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, who was given a different type of gene therapy
for another disease. Many scientists now believe that openly discussing
potential risks as they're discovered is important to educate people about the
new technology.

   SCID gene therapy "has been a spectacularly successful endeavor up to this
point," said Savio Woo of the American Society of Gene Therapy. If it truly
poses a risk of leukemia, "then we have discovered a new enemy. Once we know the
enemy, then the experts in the field will ... be able to come up with strategies
of how to deal with it."

   SCID occurs in about one in 75,000 births. Patients' bodies don't make
certain proteins crucial to developing disease-fighting immune cells. Without
treatment they die very young. The best-known victim was David, Houston's famous
"bubble boy," who lived in a germ-proof enclosure until his death at age 12 in
1984.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1136 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: News Roundup

BODY:

   Pakistan test fires   medium-range missile    ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - With
border tensions between South Asia's nuclear neighbors running high, Pakistan
test fired a new surface-to-surface missile today, official media announced.
Uneasy neighbor India was given prior warning of the test, according to the
state-owned Associated Press of Pakistan.

   The missile is one in a series of medium-range missiles in Pakistan's
arsenal, all capable of carrying conventional and nuclear warheads.

   Both India and Pakistan conducted underground nuclear tests in 1998 and both
say they have introduced nuclear weapons in their arsenals, but neither has
specified the type or number of nuclear weapons. "This is a sort of routine
test," said Brig. Salat Raza, an army spokesman.

    'New' Brandenburg Gate

     marks reunified Germany

    BERLIN - Germany celebrated 12 years as a reunited nation yesterday with a
street party to open Berlin's restored Brandenburg Gate and a message of
friendship from President Bush after weeks of tension between the two countries
over Iraq.

    Bands played and vendors grilled sausages as tens of thousands turned out
for the reopening of the 18th-century gate, which stood ready for unveiling
under a white cover held together by a giant zipper.

   The 18th-century sandstone gate, a pre-World War II marker of German unity
that was restored to that symbolic role after the Berlin Wall fell on Nov. 9,
1989, was refurbished in a two-year, $3.8 million project.

     Bad side effect suspends

    bubble boy gene therapy

    WASHINGTON - Scientists have suspended studies of the first gene therapy
ever to work - a treatment that appears to cure a rare immune disorder called
"bubble boy disease" - as they scramble to tell whether the therapy gave a
French toddler a leukemia-like side effect.

   It's unclear if the gene therapy actually caused the boy's illness, although
there are clues that a virus used in the treatment may be to blame. No other
children given gene therapy for the disease - severe combined immunodeficiency,
or SCID - have shown such a side effect.

   The French boy's gene therapy, performed in October 1999, was successful,
giving him a strong immune system. But in late summer, doctors discovered that
his body had far overproduced a type of white blood cell, a disorder they call
leukemia-like. Now 3, he is responding well to chemotherapy, scientists said
yesterday.

   France and the United States suspended further studies of gene therapy for
SCID while they evaluate what happened and notify parents of previous gene
therapy recipients of the possible risk.

    Rebels in Ivory Coast

    agree to a cease-fire

    BOUAKE, Ivory Coast - Rebels agreed to a cease-fire yesterday in a
steamroller offensive that has taken half the country in just over two weeks,
West African mediators announced - saying the way was now clear for peace talks.

   "They have agreed to a cease-fire," negotiator Mohamed Ibn Chambas told
journalists after foreign ministers of five West African nations flew into the
heart of rebel-held territory to press for the cease-fire.

   Speaking in the central city of Bouake, where the talks took place, he said a
cease-fire deal would be signed in the nation's capital, Yamoussoukro, today.

   Chambas said he hoped the mediators would be able to discuss the rebels'
grievances after the agreement was signed. It was not clear how long the
cease-fire would last, or what, if any, conditions were attached to the deal.

   Ivory Coast has been plunged into crisis since a Sept. 19 uprising by
disgruntled soldiers, who have since captured Bouake and the northern opposition
stronghold of Korhogo, as well as most of the northern half of the country.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             1137 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             October 4, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 1109 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Apparently Leads to New Illness in Boy;
Health Officials in U.S., France Suspend Treatments Recently Hailed as Cure for
Immune Disorder

BYLINE: a Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   An experimental genetic therapy that had seemed to cure several infants born
with a life-threatening immune system disease has apparently caused a
leukemia-like syndrome in one of the treated children in France, prompting
health officials to suspend all such therapies for that disease in France and
the United States.

   Officials at the Food and Drug Administration said yesterday they had
scheduled an emergency meeting in Bethesda next week, at which scientists
involved in the study and other experts will analyze the latest data. One goal
is to help the FDA consider whether a wider array of gene therapy studies need
to be scrutinized more closely.

   The ill patient, a French boy almost 3 years old, is now being treated with
chemotherapy in an attempt to kill the blood cells that have begun to
proliferate in his body, an ironic twist for a child whose problem at birth was
the absence of such cells.

   The incident is a blow to the fledgling field of gene therapy, which had only
recently begun to recover its image after the widely publicized death of an
Arizona teen in a 1999 experiment. The approach, which seeks to cure diseases by
giving patients healthy genes, has been fraught with failure. The French
treatment had recently been promoted as having delivered the first real cures in
the field's 12-year history.

   Despite the setback, scientists yesterday said they suspected that the
complication may prove to have been caused by a molecular fluke so unlikely to
reoccur that the treatment's benefits will ultimately prove greater than its
risks.

   The French treatment still looks "exceedingly promising," said Joseph
Glorioso, director of the Pittsburgh Human Gene Therapy Center and president of
the American Society of Gene Therapy. "The field of gene therapy remains
vigorous and robust."

   Alain Fisher, the project's lead researcher at the Necker Hospital in Paris,
said he held out hope that the boy would recover, and said the family was being
very understanding.

   "They are extremely intelligent and courageous. They are very kind people,"
Fisher said. "They understood that this was experimental, and they accepted it.
I admire them."

    The boy was born with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency disease,
sometimes known as the "bubble boy" disease, caused by a defect in one of the
body's roughly 40,000 genes. Lacking that gene, children cannot produce the
white blood cells crucial to fighting off infections. Most die in the first year
or so of life.

   About 2 1/2 years ago, when he was 2 months old, the boy became one of a few
infants enrolled in a new gene therapy study. The experiment involved the use of
genetically engineered viruses to deliver copies of the missing gene to young
patients' bone marrow cells. This summer, he was one of five children described
in a landmark New England Journal of Medicine article as having been apparently
cured.

   A total of 11 children from five countries have been treated with the
technique, Fisher said. All except the boy are doing well and show signs of
having normal immunity.

   Fisher said problems first became apparent in the boy in August, when routine
tests indicated that his white blood cell count had climbed not just to normal
but to abnormally high levels. After a second test indicated even more of a
rise, additional tests were done.

   Using sophisticated molecular probes, the research team found that the
engineered virus, which delivers its genetic payload at random locations within
a cell's DNA, had in at least one cell delivered the curative gene in an awkward
location: immediately adjacent to a gene called lmo2 that controls cell division
and proliferation.

   The team believes that the newly arrived immunity gene disrupted that
regulatory gene, predisposing the cell to divide uncontrollably. A second insult
-- perhaps a viral infection a year or two after the therapy -- was probably
needed to trigger that division process, Fisher said.

   The team notified French authorities about three weeks ago, and then
contacted all the families of children they had treated. It's uncertain how
likely such an event is to occur again, Fisher said.

   But as a precautionary move, France's public health agency and the FDA have
placed all retroviral-mediated treatments for this immunodeficiency disease on
"clinical hold," a status that precludes further recruitment into trials until
the problem is better understood. The hold affects one study underway in London
and two that were about to begin in Los Angeles and at the National Institutes
of Health in Bethesda.

   An FDA official said it would be premature to put a hold on all gene therapy
studies involving retroviruses; many of those studies involve terminal cancer
patients getting cancer-fighting genes.

   Molecular glitches like the one that apparently occurred in the French boy
have been considered a theoretical risk of gene therapy since the first such
experiments were contemplated in the late 1980s. The first gene therapy
experiment took place in September 1990 at the NIH. Since then, thousands of
patients have been treated with gene therapy for a wide range of ailments --
most of them with retroviruses but increasingly with other gene delivery
systems. None has resulted in a case of cancer that experts believed was linked
to the treatment, but FDA officials said they are now asking scientists to
review their data to see if they may have overlooked such a connection.

   Fisher said he remains hopeful that, overall, his treatment will turn out to
help more than harm. The only other therapy available for the disease is a bone
marrow transplant from a close relative. Unless that transplant is from a
perfectly matched sibling (available in only 20 percent of cases), the failure
rate is 25 percent, more than twice as high as the complication rate shown so
far in the first 11 patients, he noted.

   Moreover, Fisher said, the quality of life for bone marrow recipients is not
as good as it has been for the children who got new genes.

   Yesterday's announcement of the French complication coincided with the
release of a new report on human medical experimentation produced by the
Institute of Medicine -- a report prompted in large part in response to the
death of Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona teen who died in 1999.

    The report calls for increased federal oversight of research involving human
subjects, including unprecedented federal oversight of privately funded studies;
a revamping of the nation's ethics review boards that judge proposed
experiments; compensation for people harmed in experiments; and the creation of
a new federal advisory body to consider issues relating to experimentation on
humans.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1138 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 3, 2002 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   Rate decision is put on hold

   State regulators delayed yesterday making a decision on new Medicaid
reimbursement rates for pharmacists. Several pharmacies, including major chains
had threatened to pull out of the program because of planned cuts. Those cuts
were put on hold while regulators gathered more information. A decision could be
reached by the division of Health Care Finance and Policy today. - STAFF

   Dow plummets

   NEW YORK - Wall Street retreated yesterday as wary investors followed a
now-familiar pattern of locking in profits after a huge rally. The Dow Jones
industrials had their eighth straight triple-digit move, falling more than 180
points and wiping out more than half their gain of the previous session. - AP

   Kohl's to add stores

   Kohl's Department Stores, of Menomonee Falls, Wisc., said yesterday that it
will open stores at Danvers' Liberty Tree Mall and at Shoppers World in
Framingham on Oct. 10. Kohl's said the two stores will employ about 300 workers.
- STAFF

   Transkaryotic shares dip

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shares plunged $ 14.85, or 45 percent, to $
18.40 in after-market trading yesterday, after the Cambridge company announced a
delay in the U.S Food and Drug Administration review of its drug for Fabry's
disease. -STAFF

   Casino poll: No dice

   HARTFORD, Conn. - Two public opinion polls released yesterday show strong
opposition to a third casino in Connecticut. But residents also believe casino
gambling plays an important role in the state's economy and the majority said
Foxwoods Resort Casino and Mohegan Sun have been good for the state, according
to one of the polls. - AP

   Buildings for sale

   PROVIDENCE - Providence's skyline is going to have some new owners.
FleetBoston Financial Corp. is selling three downtown buildings in the capital
city, including the signature "Superman" building. The buildings went on the
market on Monday. - AP

   Hospitals face cutbacks

   BOSTON - Massachusetts teaching hospitals face a $ 50 million cut next year
under a new Medicare cutback, adding to fiscal pressures that hospitals say
already threaten their ability to train doctors. - AP

   Nortel sued for $ 14M

   NEW YORK - Nortel Networks Corp. is being sued for $ 14 million by a unit of
Genuity Inc., a wholesaler of high-speed Internet access. Genuity Solutions Inc.
says in a federal lawsuit filed yesterday that Brampton, Ont.-based Nortel
violated a contract requiring it to make a $ 6 million payment on Sept. 30 and
another $ 8 million payment by year's end. Genuity has said it may seek
bankruptcy protection. - BLOOMBERG


LOAD-DATE: October 03, 2002


                             1139 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 3, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: FDA HITS SOME TKT DRUG DATA CEO STILL EXPECTS REPLAGAL APPROVAL BUT
SHARES FALL

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. yesterday said that regulators had deemed its
data on the reduction of pain - the main goal of the clinical studies supporting
its drug Replagal, to treat the rare inherited Fabry disease -
"uninterpretable."

   The announcement came less than two weeks after the Food and Drug
Administration delayed a meeting to review Cambridge-based TKT's bid, as well as
one from its crosstown rival, Genzyme Corp., to be the first and perhaps sole
supplier of a drug to treat the disorder.

      In a conference call yesterday after the markets closed, TKT's chief
executive, Dr. Richard Selden, said the company and the FDA have "agreed to
disagree." The company, he said, will put aside the data on pain and base its
request for approval on other data collected during clinical studies.

   "Our enthusiasm is not tempered," Selden said. "But a delay - even if it's a
day or a week - means a delay for patients who need the drug. That's the most
difficult part of all of this, so we will keep working hard with the FDA."

   Selden said he still believes the FDA will approve Replagal.

   But investors were more than a little shaken by the news. Shares in the
company tumbled to $15.64 in after-hours trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market
after closing yesterday at $33.25.

   The controversial review process for TKT's Replagal and Genzyme's Fabrazyme
has lasted more than two years. The delay in the panel reviews, originally set
for Sept. 26 and Sept. 27, likely means a decision about approval will be
further postponed. TKT said it expects the panel meetings to be rescheduled for
late this year or early next year.

   Yesterday's news, however, casts doubt on whether Replagal will reach the
market in the United States. The drug is approved in 24 countries. But FDA rules
require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such as Fabry,
which affects only a few thousand people worldwide, attacking first the kidney,
then the heart. The "orphan drug" act gives a company seven years to sell its
drug unhindered by competition, in exchange for being the first to develop a
drug to treat a rare disease.

   The rule seems to turn the race for approval into a winner-take-all
proposition for one of the Cambridge companies. Both firms submitted
applications to the FDA in June 2000, and analysts say the regulatory agency has
never before been faced with two applications submitted within weeks of each
other for nearly identical drugs to treat the same rare disease.

   During the hourlong conference call, several analysts asked TKT's Selden if
this development gives Genzyme an edge in the orphan-drug battle that could
ultimately block Replagal from coming to market. Genzyme said yesterday that it
is confident about its application and is urging the FDA to convene a panel
review as quickly as possible. "Patients are waiting," said Genzyme spokesman Bo
Piela.

   Selden said TKT is also eager for a panel review and is prepared to address
the FDA's concerns.

   In an unrelated development, Selden told investors that third-quarter sales
of Replagal outside the United States were softer than expected. Sales fell from
the previous three-month period, and full-year revenue will be between $30
million and $35 million, down from an earlier forecast of $35 million to $42
million.

   "It's a double dose of bad news," said Bill Tanner, an analyst with Leerink
Swann & Co. "Any scenario is possible now. The real question is, if they end up
second, how are they going to break the orphan drug status? To break it, they
would have to show clinical superiority or safety. And that's just not something
that we're seeing now."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             1140 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 3, 2002 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic Shares Plunge

BYLINE: DENISE GELLENE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. disclosed Wednesday that the Food and Drug
Administration was sharply critical of its data on an experimental treatment for
Fabry's disease, stunning investors who thought Replagal was on track for
approval.

   The Cambridge, Mass., company also slashed its third-quarter earnings
projections, citing slower sales of Replagal in Europe. The news drove the
company's shares down about 45% to $18.40 on Nasdaq amid questions about the
firm's previous disclosures.

   Chief Executive Richard Selden, in a conference call with analysts, would not
say when the company learned that the FDA had problems with its data,
particularly on pain. Analysts said the data were in briefing documents that
Transkaryotic received about a month ago from the FDA in preparation for an
advisory panel meeting. The advisory meeting had been set for last week but was
canceled.

   "I feel we have been forthcoming in our statements about the FDA and am quite
comfortable with how we have conducted ourselves," Selden said. However, he did
not respond directly when an analyst asked if Transkaryotic had been contacted
by the Securities and Exchange Commission.

   Transkaryotic told analysts that the FDA said its pain data were
"uninterpretable" and "did not support approval." The firm had expected that the
drug would be approved on the basis of its pain relief data.

   Selden said the firm was in talks with the FDA about using other findings
from clinical trials to support drug approval. He said he believed that Replagal
would be approved, possibly by early next year.

   But analysts said that it now appeared that Transkaryotic's rival Genzyme
Corp. was ahead in the race to market a drug for Fabry's disease, a rare
disorder that affects no more than 2,000 Americans. The winner stands to receive
from the FDA an exclusive license to market its drug for seven years.

   The drugs are genetically engineered copies of an enzyme lacking in Fabry's
patients. Without it, fatty substances build up in the kidneys, and that can
lead to organ failure.

   "We thought TKT had the lead for getting approval for Replagal, and now it
looks like that has totally evaporated," said William Tanner, an analyst with
Leerink Swann & Co. in Boston. " ... We were sort of led to believe that things
maybe were OK."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2002


                             1141 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   OCTOBER 2, 2002, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firms go prospecting for venture capital;

Despite tight economy, CEOs parade their goals at investors' conference

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
Like a flock of starving sparrows crowding around a feeder. That was how one
venture capitalist described the scene at a biotech financial conference in San
Francisco on Tuesday.

    The event, called BioVenture 2002, brought about 135 biotech CEOs face to
face with several hundred early-stage investors at a time when the overall
financial climate is grim.

    The two-day event, which ends today, was designed to give each firm 10
minutes to explain itself to potential investors.

    "It's all about networking," said Roland Scollay, chief executive of
Genteric, an Alameda firm that is trying to prove that DNA can be put into a
pill and swallowed, providing an oral form of gene therapy to treat various
illnesses.

    Scollay said Genteric still has about 18 months' worth of cash left at its
current rate of expense, but it will eventually need another round of venture
financing to maintain its 35-person payroll.

    "That's why we're here," he said. "You've got to keep your name out there."

    On the other side of the equation, veteran venture capitalist Craig Taylor
of Alloy Ventures said he was doing more looking than investing this year.
Because the financial outlook is so bleak, he said, he and his partners are
spending most of their time managing their last set of startups. That cuts into
their ability to create new companies.

    "Your current children have priority over your future children," Taylor
said.

    Scott Morrison, biotech consultant for Ernst & Young in Palo Alto, said
despite the generally gloomy mood, he thinks 2002 could turn out to be a good
year for early-stage biotech.

    He said in the first three quarters of 2002, the biotech industry raised
about $3 billion in venture funding. With one quarter still to go, those results
compare favorably with the record $4.3 billion in venture capital raised in
2000, he said.

    Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, one of
the sponsors of the event, said he was encouraged by the Bush administration's
recent appointment of former Stanford economist Mark McClellan to fill the
long-vacant post of commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

    The FDA must review and approve all new drugs and medical devices, making it
the arbiter of the fortunes of young biotech firms. Feldbaum said the Senate is
expected to begin hearings on McClellan's nomination Monday.

    "We're hopeful we'll have a commissioner soon," he said.E-mail Tom Abate at
tabate@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2002


                             1142 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    September 29, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. A01

LENGTH: 4525 words

HEADLINE: Life, but at What Cost?

BYLINE: Stacey Burling Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Last December, James "Butch" Quinn walked into a Philadelphia news
conference, a thankful, smiling testament to the wonders of technology.

   Just 32 days after his diseased heart had been replaced by a machine, he
talked of the beauty he saw in the simplest things, of his deep gratitude to his
doctors and to God, of new and blessed hope.

   He talked about something else, too, something that would become an obsession
as he and his doctors struggled to make man and machine work together. He said:
"I want to go home."

   *

   Nine months later, Butch Quinn's body, minus the plastic and titanium heart,
lay in a flag-draped casket in a packed North Philadelphia church. A woman sang
a gospel song picked by Quinn's widow, Irene:

   "I ask a question, Lord,

   Why so much pain?

   But he knows what's best for me,

   Although my weary eyes, they can't see,

   So I'll just say, thank you Lord,

   I won't complain."

   Irene, a tiny woman dressed in black and for once looking all of her 55
years, cried quietly. She had cried almost every day for 10 months, regretting
their choice to exchange a certain, simple death for the unknown life of a
medical pioneer. But now she felt at peace. Her husband would suffer no more.

   She was surrounded by people who remembered Quinn as a warm, outgoing man who
reveled in his grandchildren. They barely mentioned the device that had made him
front-page news.

   But others at the funeral would never have known Butch if not for his
experimental heart. Drawn by the man and his wife into an emotional odyssey,
they found themselves grappling with profound questions: Can desperate, dying
people make sound decisions? What makes a life worth living?

   Sheldon Zink, 40, a medical anthropologist and ethicist from the University
of Pennsylvania who became the couple's advocate at Hahnemann University
Hospital, sat just two pews back. She had been so busy helping Irene that this
was her first chance to grieve. She said of her months immersed in the Quinns'
lives: "I had moments of euphoria, and I had moments when I felt like I was
really traumatized."

   In a rear pew was Elena Holmes, 34, a nurse practitioner who had cared
unceasingly for Quinn. During the first month, she left the hospital only twice.
It was her job, on his final day, to turn off the heart.

   Beside her, dark circles under his eyes, his skin ashen, was Louis Samuels,
39, the heart surgeon who fulfilled a boyhood dream when he put the AbioCor
artificial heart in Quinn's chest. Like Quinn, he was religious and emotionally
open. He had never grown so close to a patient. "You can parallel me with him,"
Samuels would say. "When he was at his best, I was at my best. I felt everything
he felt: the anguish, the disappointment, the desperation, the pain." Now, he
was trying to remember the good times that, in his mind, outweighed the bad.

   A few feet away sat a man who had met Butch Quinn just twice, but who had
been an important, if nearly invisible, presence for months: Alan Milstein,
Irene Quinn's lawyer. Milstein is carving out a new legal specialty - suing
people and institutions who perform clinical trials. He questions whether the
dying can make truly "informed" decisions. He believes they should be told in
the baldest terms they will be part of an "experiment" and should proceed only
if they want to be a "martyr for science."

   'Going into an unknown'

   As Samuels, the Drexel University surgeon, would tell it, this was a story
with many layers. It was news because of the untried machine. But even the
doctor, a man who lobbied for years to be among the first to try the device,
knew early on what made this experience special. It was the very humanity of it,
the mix of good people and good intentions, faith and hope and sacrifice and
fear, disappointment and that most primal of animal desires - sheer will to
live. Ultimately, it was about the collision of dreams with reality.

   "It was an amazing story from the very beginning to the very end," Samuels
said.

   Near death from heart failure, Butch Quinn last November became part of the
decades-old quest for an artificial heart that would allow people to resume
normal lives.

   Abiomed Inc., a Danvers, Mass., company, had created a fully implantable
device, that, before that summer, had been tested only in cows and pigs.
Usually, the first people to get something this new are on the verge of death
and out of other options.

   Of the seven patients who received the artificial heart, only one is alive.
Tom Christerson, of Kentucky, who got the heart more than a year ago, went home
in April. Three others survived two to five months. The remainder died in
surgery or soon afterward.

   In trials of new medical devices, it is typical to learn from the first
patients who is likely to do well and who should not be a candidate, said heart
surgeon Bud Frazier of the Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal
Hospital in Houston. Frazier, who is involved in this trial and has worked on
development of the heart for years, will no longer give the device to patients
who, like Quinn, have cardiac cachexia, an advanced stage of disease
characterized by emaciation and wasting.

   It is also typical, he said, that many of the first patients die, that no one
can predict how patients will do. "When you're going into an unknown," he said,
"it's just that."

   Zink, an expert on the effect of medical devices, has heard the arguments
about the inevitability of deaths as new treatments are being perfected.

   Researchers tend to see scientific growth and forget the human price, she
said.

   "I think that it's certainly healthy to pause every once in a while and, if
you can, look at one man's life, like Butch's, and say, 'Is this actually worth
it for the person that's doing it?' "

   Committed to life, love

   Butch Quinn entered the hospital an ordinary, if exceptionally likable, man.
He was a 51-year-old former baker and Vietnam veteran disabled by post-traumatic
stress disorder. He had been a cocaine addict and, 10 years earlier, had been so
dispirited that he had prayed for his own death.

   He emerged from his trials with a strong faith, an appreciation for the
simple pleasure of sitting in a plastic chair on his porch in West Philadelphia
or teaching his toddler grandson to sing "Bad to the Bone." He had an endearing
willingness to talk about how much he loved Irene and their family. He once sat
through Grease four times to please his daughter and her friends. He liked
crabcakes and Emeril Lagasse, bingo and pool. He had a glorious laugh.

   "I never heard him say a bad word about anybody," said Elena Holmes, the
nurse practitioner. "He was easy to like and easy to take care of."

   Samuels, the surgeon, found much to admire: "I liked his honesty... . I liked
his courage... . I liked his idealism, his altruism, his sincerity. I liked his
capacity to push himself... . This guy was a survivor. I very much liked his
profound sense of faith and belief in God because, deep down, I feel the same
way."

   "I felt really lucky that they had chosen somebody so extraordinary," said
Zink, who often talked with Quinn late into the night. She was newly married,
and he often chastised her for spending so much time away from her husband, Tim.
So she started bringing Tim to the hospital. She was impressed by Quinn's
sociability and by his hunger for life.

   "He really wanted to live more than any person I'd ever seen in my whole
life."

   By all accounts, Butch and Irene Quinn, married 23 years, had a strong
relationship. "She's more than my better half," he would whisper from his
hospital bed.

   "They were just intensely dependent on each other," Zink said. "They had a
long history..., the way people get really deeply entwined in each other's lives
when they've had a lot of hardship and a lot of good times. It had been a long
time since I had seen two people that were that committed to each other."

   They 'danced in jubilation'

   The Quinns wound up in Lou Samuels' office at Hahnemann in October after
Butch's cardiologist told him there was nothing more she could do.

   Samuels, who had been preparing for the artificial heart trial since 1995,
was looking for his first patient. While Elena Holmes observed, Samuels
explained the device and the trial to the Quinns. Holmes was impressed with the
quality of their questions.

   There was some concern about whether Quinn's chest would be large enough for
the machine. He would have to be measured. There would be more visits to
evaluate him medically and discuss the risks with an independent patient
advocate, an unprecedented feature of this trial. The Quinns would sign an
11-page informed consent document. Four men had had the surgery so far. None had
left the hospital.

   When they learned Butch had been chosen for the trial, the Quinns danced in
jubilation.

   The surgery was set for mid-November, but early that month the Quinns came
back to Samuels' office, fearing he wouldn't live until the scheduled date. "If
you're going to do anything, let's do it now, because I can't wait," Butch Quinn
said. Samuels agreed. He moved the date up to Nov. 5.

   Quinn later described the 10-hour operation as a religious experience. "I
felt like I met God," he said. He felt the many people praying for him and the
doctors and nurses were working as one. "It was like one hand," he said. "This
hand, every time I slipped into darkness and could feel nothing but darkness
around me, this hand pulled me back into the light."

   Immediately after the surgery, Quinn began having serious lung problems. At
one point, it took eight people just to run the machines that were keeping him
alive. It was touch and go for much of that first week. Samuels, a Conservative
Jew, also felt a spiritual presence. "There have been times when he could have
gone and he didn't and I don't have an explanation from all my knowledge of why
he didn't go," he said.

   Finally, Quinn awakened. They'd made it over the first hump. Samuels and
Quinn had a long talk one evening about life and how glad they were to be alive,
and Samuels was hit with the full impact of what he had done. He'd done many
heart transplants, but this felt different, uncomfortable and unsettling.

   "In some respects, it's creating life," he thought. "This is almost too
powerful for somebody, some human being, to do."

   When they finished talking, Samuels, filled with joy and wonder and
gratitude, walked into a nearby room. He sat in the dark and sobbed.

   *

   Irene Quinn remembers the first time she saw her husband after the surgery.
He was in intensive care, surrounded by wires and tubes and machines. He looked
like a monster.

   At that moment, she knew they'd made a mistake. "Oh, my God," she thought.
"What the hell have I done?"

   *

   When Butch Quinn first walked into the public eye, he seemed a happy man. He
had been improving so quickly that the staff was having trouble keeping up with
him. He had eaten Thanksgiving dinner with his family. He was eager to visit his
church, and Samuels had promised to go with him. For the first time in the
trial, a hospital was thinking of sending a patient home.

   Irene, a nurse's aide who is quieter and less comfortable in the limelight,
said it was a miracle to see him so alive. She had come to view the medical
staff as friends. "They make us feel so good, just being in their presence,
feeling the vibes," she said, her voice cracking.

   Butch Quinn said the choice to enter the trial was an easy one: "There
actually wasn't much of a decision to make. To me, it was either do or die.

   "... I understood that I would be a pioneer. The most important thing that
did come to mind to me was, if this thing works or if it didn't work, I would be
giving something to mankind."

   Irene Quinn says now that she and Butch were saying what they thought
everyone wanted to hear.

   'All I know is to move forward'

   On the morning of New Year's Eve, Butch Quinn had a small stroke that left
him with blurred vision and balance problems. But three weeks later, though
obviously frail, he was well enough to become the first patient in the trial to
be discharged from the hospital.

   He and Irene moved to the Hawthorn Suites, a hotel near Hahnemann. Elena
Holmes stayed in an adjoining room at night. A clinical specialist from Abiomed
was with them during the day.

   Quinn had visited his church the Sunday before Christmas. He had gone out to
eat, seen Will Smith in Ali, played bingo, played with the grandchildren.

   Samuels believed Quinn's quality of life was already better than it had been
before the surgery. He felt "unbelievably proud" when Quinn was able to leave
the hospital.

   On the day late in January when the Quinns talked with reporters at their new
home, Irene said she was "really, really happy."

   What she did not say is that she was upset that they had not been given a
nurse, round-the-clock. Samuels said that wasn't necessary.

   Butch Quinn, suffering then from a slight cold, downplayed the stroke.

   "All I know is to move forward," he said. "This is training I attribute to
the military. You always advance. You never retreat... . I suffer things on a
daily basis, but nothing I will let hold me back, keep me back from getting back
to my home, to my life."

   A wife disgusted and upset

   Butch's stay at the Hawthorn lasted only three weeks. Then he was back in the
hospital with pneumonia, especially dangerous for a man with emphysema and
pulmonary hypertension. The infection began a downward spiral that would keep
him on a ventilator for months, plagued by one medical problem after another.
The biggest issue was that the blood thinners he took to prevent blood clots
were causing bleeding in his lungs and gastrointestinal tract.

   One day, Irene walked in and saw that his eyes were filled with blood, the
whites turned red by broken blood vessels. "Have you ever seen a Dracula movie?"
she asked, disgust still showing on her face.

   It was wrenching to watch his pain. She felt his suffering to her core. And
she felt helpless to make it better. "I can't do anything to help him. When he
was home, if he got sick, I can hold him and hug him and rock him like a little
baby, give him some medicine, my concoctions. Here I can't give him aspirin."

   Irene was coping with a life totally changed. She had lost her job, because
Butch feared being alone at the hospital at night. They had no privacy; the
hospital had become her life.

   Though hospital officials had promised her all the expenses would be taken
care of, she began receiving bills at home. She also began to question whether
the medical staff was telling her everything about Butch's condition. And she
didn't trust her advocate to fight for her rights.

   In March, crying uncontrollably, she suffered what she called a "nervous
breakdown." She spent a few days in the hospital herself to rest.

   When Irene Quinn got out, she told her husband about Milstein, a lawyer she
had found on the Internet. He had made news by successfully suing the University
of Pennsylvania's gene therapy program. She says Butch Quinn made the call.

   Samuels remembers spring as a difficult period, as well. "I told [Irene] we
got spoiled because he looked so good at one and two months," he said in March.
"Now I think we're confronting the realities of his condition... . It's hard.
It's incredibly hard."

   In April, he was shocked to see her quoted in Time magazine saying her
husband was often in such pain that "death would have been better."

   He had not realized how upset she was. He and others at the hospital had
asked if they could help, but she had stoically said she was fine. They thought
she was getting the support she needed from her family and church.

   But she was at the hospital so much that it cut her off from her friends. She
was lonely and isolated, afraid to complain to the people who were responsible
for her husband's care.

   "I was fighting this thing all by myself," she said. "I didn't have a
shoulder to cry on."

   She felt she had to hide her tears from Butch. "I never let him know how I
felt and what I was thinking and what I was feeling because I was his strength,"
she said. "If I'm weak, then I couldn't help him. I had to stay strong for him."

   A birthday in the hospital

   By June, the Quinns had fired their first advocate and chosen Zink, who had
been observing the trial, as his replacement. There were more bills, mostly from
Drexel University School of Medicine's physicians, who work at Hahnemann. Irene
Quinn was furious and worried because she had lost her health insurance with her
job.

   (Officials from Hahnemann and Drexel say the Quinns should not have gotten
any bills and are not responsible for paying anything.)

   Butch Quinn's medical condition was improving gradually. He was desperate to
go home. Because he was still so sick, that would require skilled nursing. And
there would need to be changes to his house, such as air-conditioning and a
wheelchair lift.

   Zink tried to speed up the process, but found it surprisingly difficult. The
three entities that had agreed to fund the trial - Abiomed, Hahnemann and Drexel
- had not worked out who would pay for care if Quinn went home. They continued,
she said, to argue about who should pay for various things the Quinns would need
through the last week of Butch Quinn's life.

   The money debates frustrated everyone. Butch Quinn told her, "The only thing
I've ever asked them for is to go home, and I'm still in the hospital."

   In July, Quinn, who had celebrated his 52d birthday June 30, was still in the
hospital bed, improving at a snail's pace. He had come off the ventilator.
Because of the bleeding problems, Samuels and Quinn had decided to stop the
blood thinners and take their chances on a stroke.

   "The situation we have now is a thousand percent better than it was even a
month ago," Samuels said. Nothing was keeping Quinn from home, he said, except
for the complications of arranging full-time nursing.

   Around this time, Irene Quinn was getting letters from a collection agency
about anesthesiology bills. Nine - totaling $13,544 - arrived on one day in
August.

   Butch Quinn, exhausted from months of illness and bored with being cooped up
in the hospital for months, said he was still fighting to live, but he
questioned his decision to enter the trial. "I don't believe I would do it again
simply because it's too much afterwards, you know," he said in a raspy, barely
audible voice from his hospital bed. "I've gone through more than any man can
stand or bear."

   Seeing Irene's pain was one reason he wished he hadn't tried the heart.

   "I can see the breakdown in her eyes," he said. "I know she's unhappy... . I
feel it all the way through me."

   Irene says they never expected this. They had thought he might die quickly
after the surgery, or recover and live another 10 or 20 years, not get stuck in
this medical purgatory.

   She thought Samuels had seemed confident the machine would work. When she
asked him about sex, she says he told her, much to her husband's interest,
"You'll have to take aerobics to keep up with him."

   Samuels said he made the risks very clear.

   Good times, then a stroke

   Holmes made six trips home with Butch in August. Samuels came on several of
them. On the couple's anniversary Aug. 11, Quinn spent the day with family and
friends, reminiscing and laughing more than he had in months. The next day, the
Quinns went out to dinner and a comedy club.

   "Those times were great," Samuels said. "We were thinking, 'This is going to
be good.' "

   Veterans Affairs paid for modifications to his house. The hospital continued
working on getting 24-hour nursing.

   Butch Quinn's spirits improved markedly, and so did Irene's. Zink wondered
whether he had changed his mind about the heart. "One of the last conversations
I had with him, he said he wouldn't tell anyone to do it," she said. "If it was
going to save his son's life, he would say no. That's a big testament from a guy
who really wanted to live."

   Zink, Samuels and Holmes were all confident that he would finally get his
wish to go home. Samuels thought it could happen soon after Labor Day.

   But Irene Quinn said her husband was skeptical that the trial sponsors would
ever fund the nursing he needed. "They'd rather kill me than pay for
round-the-clock nursing," she said he told her.

   Before she left for a business trip Aug. 22, Holmes promised to take Quinn
home every day the following week.

   But, at 7 the next morning, a nurse called to tell Samuels that Quinn had had
another stroke, a bad one. Samuels and Irene decided to try TPA, a clot-busting
drug. Quinn got a little better. Later that night, though, a CT scan showed a
small bleed in his brain. Soon, his condition was plummeting.

   Samuels knew it was over. He felt exhausted, nauseated, numb.

   The next day, Aug. 25, Quinn was declared brain dead. Irene decided to wait
another day to turn off the machines so more family members could be there.
Samuels was dreading it, but he had made a promise to be with them to the end.

   'Therapeutic misconception'

   Milstein, who will not talk about whether he plans to file suit on Irene
Quinn's behalf, believes it's extremely difficult get truly informed consent
from dying people such as Butch Quinn. They feel the drug or device being tested
is their only hope. He calls it the "therapeutic misconception," the idea that
people enter a trial to get well, when the true purpose is to test the device.

   The Quinns, he said, "chose life over death. That's why they went into it...
.But that isn't the reason to get the artificial heart and they [trial
organizers] know that."

   The couple, he said, should have been given more information about the bad
things that could happen, including a detailed description of what went wrong
when Barney Clark got a different version of the heart 20 years ago.

   Potential patients, he said, should be told they will be subjects in an
experiment, that the goal is not therapy, but altruism. It should not then come
as a surprise in the end that, "you, the subject, have sacrificed your body,
your last days, for their company, for the future of mankind."

   Abiomed has always said it wanted this clinical trial to show not only if the
machine worked but if it could improve quality of life.

   Butch Quinn signed a lengthy informed consent document that called the trial
an "initial feasibility clinical study." It warned of possible death, bleeding,
blood clots, breathing problems and infection. Unlike a model consent form
produced by Abiomed, it did not say, "This Study is Experimental."

   David Casarett, the Quinns' first advocate, declined to comment.
Nevertheless, in an essay last year in Newsday after the death of Robert Tools,
the first patient, he wrote: "There were substantial risks of participation in
this study, and the subjects knew all of them. The enrollment process was
careful and deliberative, and each patient met with an advocate who helped him
make what was, whatever his desperation, a difficult choice. Neither Tools nor
Quinn, nor their fellow subjects, were fools."

   Edward Berger, Abiomed's vice president for strategic policy and planning,
said Irene Quinn's feelings about the trial are "understandable and at the core
of human nature."

   "When things go well, patients and their families are going to be
extraordinarily happy," he said. "When things don't go well, it is absolutely
understandable that patients or their family are going to be distressed."

   He, Samuels, Holmes and hospital officials said there was little they could
have done to improve the trial or the Quinns' experience. Berger said the
funders had not prepared in advance for the possibility of a patient going home
while still needing intensive nursing, but had agreed on who would pay by
summer.

   'He wasn't ready'

   Butch Quinn was already dead when his family gathered in his hospital room
for a peculiarly modern rite - turning off the machines that were making his
heart pump and his chest rise and fall.

   Encircling the bed and holding hands were Irene and other family members,
Zink, Samuels and Holmes. Holmes, who had worked so long to keep Quinn alive,
was worried she would fumble the procedure for turning his heart off.

   A cousin, who looked strikingly like a younger, healthier Quinn, sang the
Lord's Prayer. Irene Quinn broke the circle and stepped aside, the signal that
she was ready.

   Struggling to maintain his composure, Samuels gave the order to disconnect
the ventilator and the heart simultaneously. Holmes scrolled through the
commands, and hit the three buttons that would turn off the heart and override
its internal, backup battery.

   The room was silent for a second and then, in an alarming involuntary reflex
that doctors say sometimes occurs in brain-dead patients, Quinn sat up, raised
his arms with fists clenched, crossed them and fell back again.

   Irene Quinn cried, "He wasn't ready," and sank, sobbing into Samuels' arms.
She was sure Butch could not have been brain dead.

   'He's in my heart and my soul'

   Zink is now feeling "very reserved" about how far we can push the melding of
man and machinery.

   What she learned is that no one could have been fully prepared for what
happened in this case. She does not believe the lack of advance planning for a
possible discharge stemmed from a cynical view that that would never happen.
"Everybody focused on saving his life... . Then it was kind of like, 'Then
what?' "

   She thought his medical care was excellent, but the hospital could have done
more to support the Quinns emotionally. Samuels, whom she called a "role model,"
also needed more help. "Lou was just extraordinary in his dedication to them,
his dedication as a surgeon and how accessible he was to them. He was their
friend. He was their doctor. He was the case manager. He was everything."

   Samuels hasn't gotten used to life without the man who consumed his thoughts
for 10 months.

   "I keep looking for him," he said. "I keep gravitating to Bed 18. There is
definitely a sense of emptiness."

   Would he go through it again? "I think, if the circumstances presented
themselves with an appropriate situation and patient, I would very strongly
consider it," he said, but he said it flatly, without enthusiasm.

   Holmes says it's all too fresh. "You can't just say, "All right... Next? It's
not like that."

   Irene Quinn has put the gold urn containing Butch's ashes into an old, empty
aquarium, where they're safe from the grandchildren and her rambunctious kitten.
The urn is flanked by other mementos, including several presents from Samuels.

   She prays every day that the Lord will take her anger away, but it hasn't
happened yet.

   "I'm angry. I'm mad. I'm pissed off. I don't even know how to say that I have
so much anger and hurt," she said.

   Their love is still with her and she wants it to stay, no matter how much it
hurts.

   "I love him so much. He's in my heart and my soul and my mind... . I look at
[his] picture every day and I kiss it every day and I talk to him and hold it to
my heart."

   Contact Stacey Burling at 215-854-4944 or sburling@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2002


                             1143 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 29, 2002, Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH;Pg. 4

LENGTH: 944 words

HEADLINE: HELP FOR THE HEART; Newest technologies to treat disease developed in
San Diego

BYLINE: Leonard Novarro

BODY:
 Genetic- and device-based technologies developed in San Diego are converging to
offer new hope for thousands of patients with heart disease, including heart
failure.

   Ideas being studied include:

   [] Recognizing the distress signal for heart failure so that treatment can
begin immediately.

   [] Injecting a modified gene to block a faulty gene that causes heart
failure.

   [] Using radiation through a catheter to control scar tissue from forming
around the heart.

   [] Closing a hole between the two chambers of the heart through a thread in
the leg.

   A quick new test, made by Biosite of San Diego, can detect distress by
measuring a hormone released by weak muscle cells as the heart tries to cope
with rising blood pressure and volume -- clarions of a heart attack.

   Detecting heart distress allows a patient having trouble breathing in a
hospital emergency room to be treated almost immediately for a heart problem.

   Dr. Alan Maisel, director of the coronary care unit at the VA San Diego
Healthcare System in La Jolla, calls it "the most important advancement in
diagnosis of congestive heart failure in more than 20 years, since the advent of
echocardiography."

   About the time that test was announced earlier this year, Dr. Ken Chien,
director of the University of California San Diego Institute of Molecular
Medicine, and his colleagues announced a new gene therapy that targets
malfunctioning heart muscle cells.

   It was known that the function of phospholamban protein in humans was high
and interfering with the calcium pumping activity of the heart.  Calcium is
needed for the heart muscle to expand and retract.

   Using that protein, Chien five years ago developed a genetically based mice
model for heart failure.  Then, three years ago, he and his colleagues -- John
Ross, Masa Hoshijima and Yasu Hiro Ikeda -- showed that inhibiting the
phospholamban gene prevented heart failure in mice.  Mice with the diseased gene
passed it on to their progeny; mice with the altered gene remained disease-free.

   This year, by applying the same gene therapy to hamsters, the scientists were
able to inhibit the function of the phospholamban gene by injecting a modified
version of it and significantly affect the progression of heart failure.

   The next step is to see if it works on pigs, whose hearts closely match those
of humans.  Chien said the gene needs to be injected via an improved version of
the catheter used on mice.

   "What we can't say yet is that it will work on pigs," he said.

   But once that is done, human clinical trials could begin in 18 to 24 months.

   While such injections may not replace mechanical heart transplants and
devices such as pacemakers, they will become more of an alternative, Chien said.
He also sees the use of a catheter to deliver a gene as one example of how
mechanical and molecular technology are converging.

   "Our work will require new catheters," Chien said.

   At Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, where 20 clinical trials are in progress, Dr.
Paul Teirstein, director of interventional cardiology, heads up several studies,
including the use of radiation to halt the spread of scar tissue that builds up
after balloon angioplasty.

   The stainless steel mesh wrapped around the angioplasty balloon to prop it up
when it expands is called a stent.  Teirstein also has found that coating the
stent with an anti-inflammatory drug such as Sirolimus produces the same effect.

   "This is very exciting because the impact to patients will be radical,"
Teirstein said.  "I predict that bypass surgery will be needed a lot less
frequently."

   In the past, the only way to seal a hole or channel between the chambers of
the heart was open-heart surgery.

   However, in recent years, researchers at Scripps and elsewhere have developed
a much less invasive procedure by using a catheter threaded to the heart from a
vein in the leg.  Done under local anesthesia, the patient walks a few hours
later and is home the next day.

   Patients with extensive blockage are not candidates for stent angioplasty
because the wiring cannot penetrate.  Bypass surgery is not an option, either,
because the artery leading to the heart is so damaged.  In these cases, the
alternative may be angiogenesis, a procedure being examined at Scripps.

   "We are investigating new therapies designed to stimulate growth of new blood
vessels," Teirstein said.  "These therapies use gene therapy to release proteins
that promote growth of new blood vessels."

   An option for treating heart disease is being researched at Scripps Memorial
Hospital in La Jolla under the direction of Dr. Richard Fortuna, cardiac surgeon
for Kaiser Permanente in San Diego and director of catheterization and head of
intervention cardiology at Scripps Memorial Hospital.

   A procedure to open the clogged artery and clean it out with surgery is being
tested among 1,000 heart patients in clinical trials through Kaiser Permanente
in Mission Valley.  The object of the study, Fortuna said, is to see whether
coated stenting should be used.

   Repairing aortic aneurisms with endografts instead of open repair is a
procedure being investigated at Kaiser.  One way of doing it is to open the
stomach to repair a bulge in the aorta, the main artery, but that can lead to
complications.  A less invasive way is to make the repair through the legs.  The
result is minimal blood loss and release from the hospital the next day.

   "That's something we've been doing for a year and a half," Fortuna said.

   "The promise for the future is less and less invasive and early detection.
Compared to what we do now, what we could do for people a few short years ago
was in the Dark Ages."


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING | 1 PIC; 1. Jennifer Hewitson 2. Nancee E. Lewis /
Union-Tribune; 2. Dr. Ken Chien, director of the University of California San
Diego Institute of Molecular Medicine, in his lab with postdoctorate fellows
Jonathan Lu (left) and Xianjin Zhou, has conducted research to develop a new
gene therapy that targets malfunctioning heart muscle cells in mice.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2002


                             1144 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 29, 2002, Sunday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH;Pg. 12

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: CLEAR VISION; Artificial retinas in development for treatment of eye
diseases

BYLINE: Eilene Zimmerman

BODY:
 For 10 years, ophthalmologists have been working to develop an artificial,
electronic retina that can be implanted in the eyes to restore lost vision.

   Dr. William R. Freeman, professor of ophthalmology and director of the Joan
and Irwin Jacobs Retina Center at the University of California San Diego, said
research there and elsewhere is promising, but much work lies ahead.

   "The retina is an extremely complicated, sophisticated cornea connected to
the brain by between 1 (million) and 2 million fibers that would have to be
hooked up correctly for the retina to function properly," Freeman said.

   That is why a workable electronic retina is probably 10 to 15 years away,
Freeman said.

   If and when an electronic retina is available, it could provide an effective
treatment for many eye diseases, including macular degeneration -- an
increasingly common disease causing gradual blindness among those 50 and older.
It also would help treat retinal detachment and glaucoma.

   All of these diseases involve destruction of cells within the retina, which
is a multilayered, sensory membrane that lines a large chamber in the back of
the eye.  It takes the image formed by the lens and converts it into chemical
and nervous signals that reach the brain via the optic nerve.

   If retina research is successful, Freeman said it would be like "having an
artificial eye."

   Scientists are making progress in gene therapy to help restore sight.

   "We've been able to introduce genes into retinas that are sick but not dead,
with the hope that the gene will force the retina to make a protein, hormone or
enzyme that will fix what is wrong," Freeman said.

   Such experiments have been done successfully in animals, and Freeman said
they are close to being tried in humans.

   A new treatment is being developed for cataracts.  It involves replacing a
person's natural lens with an artificial one.

   The natural lens in the eye loses its effectiveness with age if it becomes
filmy and opaque, largely from protein buildup.

   Although the artificial lens was first developed in the 1980s, only now is it
in clinical trials.

   Researchers hope the technique also may solve a problem many people face as
they enter their 40s: farsightedness, which develops as the lens becomes less
flexible in focusing.

   For glaucoma, treatment has remained the same for more than 100 years, said
Dr. Robert N. Weinreb, UCSD professor of ophthalmology and director of the
Hamilton Glaucoma Center.

   But research is under way at UCSD and elsewhere in the United States to
regrow the damaged optic nerve, thought to be the cause of glaucoma.

   Patients usually are tested for glaucoma -- one of the two most common causes
of blindness in the country -- by looking for high pressure in their eyes, and
doctors prescribed medicine to reduce the pressure.

   Recent advances show that high pressure does not necessarily indicate
glaucoma.  The only way to obtain an accurate diagnosis of glaucoma is to check
the optic nerve for dying fibers, Weinreb said.  When 30 percent to 40 percent
of the nerve fibers are lost, vision impairment begins.

   "If you are losing fibers because they are dying, there is the potential of
stimulating nerve cells that remain to grow," Weinreb said.  "Or grafting nerve
cells from the lab onto the nerve."

   Perhaps the most talked-about treatment for vision problems, keratorefractive
surgery, or LASIK, is still being improved.

   With LASIK, doctors use a laser to create a flap on the cornea and remove
some corneal tissue in order to reshape it.

   Scientists have developed a better laser tracking system, which means better
results for the patient.

   "Because the laser spot size is very small, it's critical that the surgeon
keep that beam centered on the eye, said Dr. David J. Schanzlin, chief of
keratorefractive surgery at UCSD's Shiley Eye Center.  "With this new
technology, lasers lock on to an image of the eye and the beam is automatically
corrected if it moves slightly."

   Inaccurate placement of the beam was one reason for problems with LASIK
surgery.  In the past, patients with larger-than-average pupils sometimes ended
up with glare.

   A variation on LASIK, known as LASEK, has been available locally for 18
months.  LASEK is for patients whose corneas were previously deemed too thin for
LASIK surgery.

   With LASEK, the surface layer of the cornea is peeled back, but without
making a flap.  The procedure uses the same lasers as LASIK, but a different
method.


CORRECTION-DATE: November 1, 2002

CORRECTION:

    In a health section story Sept. 29 about the development of artificial
retinas for the treatment of eye disease, Dr.  William R. Freeman, a professor
of ophthalmology and director of the Joan and Irwin Jacobs Retina Center at
UCSD, was misquoted as describing the retina as a "cornea." In fact, he
described it as a camera. Also, the story incorrectly said artificial lenses for
implantation in the eye to treat cataracts are now in clinical trials.  In fact,
the first artificial lens was implanted in the late 1940s. The article should
have said the lens now in clinical trials is a flexible, or accommodative, lens.
The Union-Tribune regrets the errors.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING | 1 PIC; 1. Jennifer Hewitson 2. Nelvin Cepeda /
Union-Tribune; 2. Dr. William R. Freeman (left) and Dirk-Uwe Bartsch reviewed
retina scans that are digitally stored on a computer. Freeman, a professor of
ophthalmology, said a workable electronic retina is probably 10 to 15 years
away.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2002


                             1145 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 29, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: CLEAR VISION;
Artificial retinas in development for treatment of eye diseases

BYLINE: Eilene Zimmerman

BODY:

   For 10 years, ophthalmologists have been working to develop an artificial,
electronic retina that can be implanted in the eyes to restore lost vision. Dr.
William R. Freeman, professor of ophthalmology and director of the Joan and
Irwin Jacobs Retina Center at the University of California San Diego, said
research there and elsewhere is promising, but much work lies ahead. "The retina
is an extremely complicated, sophisticated cornea connected to the brain by
between 1 (million) and 2 million fibers that would have to be hooked up
correctly for the retina to function properly," Freeman said. That is why a
workable electronic retina is probably 10 to 15 years away, Freeman said. If and
when an electronic retina is available, it could provide an effective treatment
for many eye diseases, including macular degeneration -- an increasingly common
disease causing gradual blindness among those 50 and older.

   It also would help treat retinal detachment and glaucoma. All of these
diseases involve destruction of cells within the retina, which is a
multilayered, sensory membrane that lines a large chamber in the back of the
eye.

   It takes the image formed by the lens and converts it into chemical and
nervous signals that reach the brain via the optic nerve. If retina research is
successful, Freeman said it would be like "having an artificial eye." Scientists
are making progress in gene therapy to help restore sight. "We've been able to
introduce genes into retinas that are sick but not dead, with the hope that the
gene will force the retina to make a protein, hormone or enzyme that will fix
what is wrong," Freeman said. Such experiments have been done successfully in
animals, and Freeman said they are close to being tried in humans. A new
treatment is being developed for cataracts.

   It involves replacing a person's natural lens with an artificial one. The
natural lens in the eye loses its effectiveness with age if it becomes filmy and
opaque, largely from protein buildup. Although the artificial lens was first
developed in the 1980s, only now is it in clinical trials. Researchers hope the
technique also may solve a problem many people face as they enter their 40s:
farsightedness, which develops as the lens becomes less flexible in focusing.
For glaucoma, treatment has remained the same for more than 100 years, said Dr.
Robert N. Weinreb, UCSD professor of ophthalmology and director of the Hamilton
Glaucoma Center. But research is under way at UCSD and elsewhere in the United
States to regrow the damaged optic nerve, thought to be the cause of glaucoma.
Patients usually are tested for glaucoma -- one of the two most common causes of
blindness in the country -- by looking for high pressure in their eyes, and
doctors prescribed medicine to reduce the pressure. Recent advances show that
high pressure does not necessarily indicate glaucoma.

   The only way to obtain an accurate diagnosis of glaucoma is to check the
optic nerve for dying fibers, Weinreb said.

   When 30 percent to 40 percent of the nerve fibers are lost, vision impairment
begins. "If you are losing fibers because they are dying, there is the potential
of stimulating nerve cells that remain to grow," Weinreb said.

   "Or grafting nerve cells from the lab onto the nerve." Perhaps the most
talked-about treatment for vision problems, keratorefractive surgery, or LASIK,
is still being improved. With LASIK, doctors use a laser to create a flap on the
cornea and remove some corneal tissue in order to reshape it. Scientists have
developed a better laser tracking system, which means better results for the
patient. "Because the laser spot size is very small, it's critical that the
surgeon keep that beam centered on the eye, said Dr. David J. Schanzlin, chief
of keratorefractive surgery at UCSD's Shiley Eye Center.

   "With this new technology, lasers lock on to an image of the eye and the beam
is automatically corrected if it moves slightly." Inaccurate placement of the
beam was one reason for problems with LASIK surgery.

   In the past, patients with larger-than-average pupils sometimes ended up with
glare. A variation on LASIK, known as LASEK, has been available locally for 18
months.

   LASEK is for patients whose corneas were previously deemed too thin for LASIK
surgery. With LASEK, the surface layer of the cornea is peeled back, but without
making a flap.

   The procedure uses the same lasers as LASIK, but a different method.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: 2. Dr. William R. Freeman (left) and
Dirk-Uwe Bartsch reviewed retina scans that are digitally stored on a computer.
Freeman, a professor of ophthalmology, said a workable electronic retina is
probably 10 to 15 years away.; PHOTOBY: 1. Jennifer Hewitson 2. Nelvin Cepeda /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1146 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 29, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 930 words

HEADLINE: HELP FOR THE HEART;
Newest technologies to treat disease developed in San Diego

BYLINE: Leonard Novarro

BODY:

   Genetic- and device-based technologies developed in San Diego are converging
to offer new hope for thousands of patients with heart disease, including heart
failure. Ideas being studied include: [] Recognizing the distress signal for
heart failure so that treatment can begin immediately. [] Injecting a modified
gene to block a faulty gene that causes heart failure. [] Using radiation
through a catheter to control scar tissue from forming around the heart.

   [] Closing a hole between the two chambers of the heart through a thread in
the leg. A quick new test, made by Biosite of San Diego, can detect distress by
measuring a hormone released by weak muscle cells as the heart tries to cope
with rising blood pressure and volume -- clarions of a heart attack. Detecting
heart distress allows a patient having trouble breathing in a hospital emergency
room to be treated almost immediately for a heart problem. Dr. Alan Maisel,
director of the coronary care unit at the VA San Diego Healthcare System in La
Jolla, calls it "the most important advancement in diagnosis of congestive heart
failure in more than 20 years, since the advent of echocardiography." About the
time that test was announced earlier this year, Dr. Ken Chien, director of the
University of California San Diego Institute of Molecular Medicine, and his
colleagues announced a new gene therapy that targets malfunctioning heart muscle
cells. It was known that the function of phospholamban protein in humans was
high and interfering with the calcium pumping activity of the heart.

   Calcium is needed for the heart muscle to expand and retract. Using that
protein, Chien five years ago developed a genetically based mice model for heart
failure.

   Then, three years ago, he and his colleagues -- John Ross, Masa Hoshijima and
Yasu Hiro Ikeda -- showed that inhibiting the phospholamban gene prevented heart
failure in mice.

   Mice with the diseased gene passed it on to their progeny; mice with the
altered gene remained disease-free. This year, by applying the same gene therapy
to hamsters, the scientists were able to inhibit the function of the
phospholamban gene by injecting a modified version of it and significantly
affect the progression of heart failure. The next step is to see if it works on
pigs, whose hearts closely match those of humans.

   Chien said the gene needs to be injected via an improved version of the
catheter used on mice. "What we can't say yet is that it will work on pigs," he
said. But once that is done, human clinical trials could begin in 18 to 24
months. While such injections may not replace mechanical heart transplants and
devices such as pacemakers, they will become more of an alternative, Chien said.

   He also sees the use of a catheter to deliver a gene as one example of how
mechanical and molecular technology are converging. "Our work will require new
catheters," Chien said. At Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, where 20 clinical trials
are in progress, Dr. Paul Teirstein, director of interventional cardiology,
heads up several studies, including the use of radiation to halt the spread of
scar tissue that builds up after balloon angioplasty. The stainless steel mesh
wrapped around the angioplasty balloon to prop it up when it expands is called a
stent.

   Teirstein also has found that coating the stent with an anti-inflammatory
drug such as Sirolimus produces the same effect. "This is very exciting because
the impact to patients will be radical," Teirstein said.

   "I predict that bypass surgery will be needed a lot less frequently." In the
past, the only way to seal a hole or channel between the chambers of the heart
was open-heart surgery. However, in recent years, researchers at Scripps and
elsewhere have developed a much less invasive procedure by using a catheter
threaded to the heart from a vein in the leg.

   Done under local anesthesia, the patient walks a few hours later and is home
the next day. Patients with extensive blockage are not candidates for stent
angioplasty because the wiring cannot penetrate.

   Bypass surgery is not an option, either, because the artery leading to the
heart is so damaged.

   In these cases, the alternative may be angiogenesis, a procedure being
examined at Scripps. "We are investigating new therapies designed to stimulate
growth of new blood vessels," Teirstein said.

   "These therapies use gene therapy to release proteins that promote growth of
new blood vessels." An option for treating heart disease is being researched at
Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla under the direction of Dr. Richard
Fortuna, cardiac surgeon for Kaiser Permanente in San Diego and director of
catheterization and head of intervention cardiology at Scripps Memorial
Hospital. A procedure to open the clogged artery and clean it out with surgery
is being tested among 1,000 heart patients in clinical trials through Kaiser
Permanente in Mission Valley.

   The object of the study, Fortuna said, is to see whether coated stenting
should be used. Repairing aortic aneurisms with endografts instead of open
repair is a procedure being investigated at Kaiser.

   One way of doing it is to open the stomach to repair a bulge in the aorta,
the main artery, but that can lead to complications.

   A less invasive way is to make the repair through the legs.

   The result is minimal blood loss and release from the hospital the next day.
"That's something we've been doing for a year and a half," Fortuna said. "The
promise for the future is less and less invasive and early detection. Compared
to what we do now, what we could do for people a few short years ago was in the
Dark Ages."

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: 2. Dr. Ken Chien, director of the
University of California San Diego Institute of Molecular Medicine, in his lab
with postdoctorate fellows Jonathan Lu (left) and Xianjin Zhou, has conducted
research to develop a new gene therapy that targets malfunctioning heart muscle
cells in mice.; PHOTOBY: 1. Jennifer Hewitson 2. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1147 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    September 27, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 722 words

BODY:

   Just in case there is not enough Randy Moss criticism in the national media
today, here's another slap: His Web site sucks, OK?

    I stopped by there yesterday, hoping to hit upon, oh I don't know, the
difference in sentencing protocols between careless driving and felonious
assault, for example.

    Nothing.

    About all I could glean for this vacuous outpost of cyberspace was that
randymoss.com is "the official Web site for all things Randy."

    Yeah, do I make you randy, baby?

    The only point-and-click option presented on the Randy home page was a
"click here to enter the cyber store" come-on for Randy gear, but being
disinclined to vaporize $100 or more for a Vikings No. 84 jersey and even more
disinclined to spring for a bong or some roach clips, I didn't stay long.

    Now ya hate to pile on with Randy, because he has just had a dreadful week.
Screamed at by Vikings quarterback Dante Culpepper on the sideline Sunday,
jailed by the Minneapolis police overnight Wednesday, I mean, talk about your
bad luck. Don't ya hate it when you're pushing one of those traffic control
officers with your Lexus and they fall down after only half a block? Who hasn't
been there, right?

    But look, the most important thing for Randy now is to get his Web site in
shape. I've never designed anyone's home page before, but here at no charge are
a couple of ideas.

    Instead of trying to steer every visitor to Randy Gear, post this list of
options concerning all things Randy.

    *Misunderstandings

    *Incarcerations

    *Verbal Abuse

    *Stats and more

    *Things I Can't Believe I Said

    *Things I Can't Believe I Didn't Say

    *Excuses by Me

    *Excuses 4 Me

    *Chat if you must

    Maybe with a tiny football to click on next to each one? I don't know. I'm
more of a content provider, so let's start with some of that.

    *Misunderstandings -- Well, this latest one ranks right up there.
Apparently, Minneapolis traffic control officer Amy Zaccardi needed a ride down
the street Moss had allegedly turned onto illegally and Randy simply offered the
hood of his car for that purpose. Who hasn't misinterpreted the international
palms-forward signal for STOP! to mean FLIP ME ONTO YOUR HOOD BIG GUY!? Randy
couldn't help it if she fell, after all. Just tryin' to be nice.

    Or how 'bout this: Randy thought it was his night to drive the Purple Pride
Patrol, the Vikings vehicle that cruises local neighborhoods and hands out
prizes to folks wearing purple. Yo traffic babe, no purple, no prize.

    In either case, it's the biggest misunderstanding since Randy thought an NFL
official standing silently on the sideline said, "Hey 84, squirt me with a water
bottle."

    *Incarcerations -- Counting Wednesday night, just three. Did 30 days on a
battery charge for attacking a student at his high school in 1995. Also did a
month for a probation violation after testing positive for weed. Sentenced to a
year for that, but it was reduced to a month of time served.

    *Stats and more -- Dollars per game under his new contract: $523,438.

    Passes caught per game since signing his new contract: 7.

    Cost per reception so far: $74,777.

    Postseason record of Vikings since taking Moss in first round of 1998 draft:
2-3.

    Conference championship games: 1.

    Points scored in that game: 0.

    Opposition points scored: 41.

    Moss receptions in that game vs. New York Giants: 2.

    Yards on Moss receptions in that game: 18.

    Minutes Randy has to work on Sunday to pay the $2,000 in fines this week's
misdemeanors could bring: 4.8.

    *Things I Can't Believe I Said: "I play when I want to play," which carried
with it the clear implication that that was not necessarily Sundays. Also, "It
was a tragedy, but it wasn't nothin' big," in reference to the 1970 plane crash
that wiped out the football team at Marshall University, Randy's alma mater.

    *Thing I Can't Believe I Didn't Say: One word -- "Sorry."

    *Excuses by Me: On this week's discovery of a small amount of marijuana in
the Lexus: Got five cars. Got four drivers. Wasn't mine.

    *Excuses 4 Me: "He's just playful to a fault." That's from Marshall Coach
Bob Pruett. "Nobody's perfect." That's from too many people.

    Two minutes out of jail this time, Randy reported that it wasn't so terrible
an experience.

    "They respected me," he said.

    He didn't say for what.

NOTES:
Gene Collier can be reached at gcollier@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2002


                             1148 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 27, 2002, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 891 words

HEADLINE: Discovery may provide clue to surviving HIV

SOURCE: Chronicle Medical Writer

BYLINE: Sabin Russell

BODY:
Renowned New York AIDS researcher David Ho laid claim Thursday to solving a
riddle that has stumped rival scientists for 16 years -- the identity of an
elusive factor in the blood of long-term survivors that keeps their HIV
infections permanently at bay.

    But Dr. Jay A. Levy, the UCSF virologist who started the quest for the
mysterious antiviral molecule in 1986, believes that Ho is simply mistaken and
that his finding is the result of laboratory error.

    Regardless, the report released Thursday in the online issue of the journal
Science is certain to focus additional research on the factor, which is believed
to have kept a rare group of HIV-infected people perfectly healthy for as long
as a quarter-century.

    Finding how to duplicate the apparent natural immunity of these lucky few is
a crucial goal of AIDS research. It may hold the key to a vaccine or drug
therapy that could give all AIDS patients hopes for normal life spans.

    "Many labs around the country are retooling, as we speak, to jump into this
field," said Carl Dieffenbach, an AIDS research specialist at the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

    In a telephone briefing with reporters, Ho stressed that it would still take
years of research to convert his findings into useful therapies. He cautioned
that the factor he found has chemical traits that would make it difficult to
manufacture, make into a vaccine, or use for gene therapy.

    "This is not going to be the ultimate solution, but it is another weapon we
can use in our arsenal against HIV," said Ho, who was named Time magazine's Man
of the Year in 1996 for his work developing drug combinations that dramatically
reduced AIDS deaths.

    FREMONT FIRM COULD BENEFIT

    If the findings are confirmed by other researchers, Ho's paper also will
represent a major coup for Ciphergen Biosystems Inc., a Fremont company that
made the sophisticated laboratory tools used to solve the problem. Ciphergen
scientists co-wrote the paper with Ho and his colleagues at the Aaron Diamond
AIDS Research Center in New York.

    Ho's team believes that the long-sought factor is, in fact, a trio of tiny
proteins called "defensins." The big surprise to biologists is that defensins
are relatively well-known and relatively common.

    Discovered in 1984, they are chemical weapons used by a class of white blood
cells that kill and eat bacteria. Their activity against viruses was thought to
be limited.

    Linqui Zhang, a Rockefeller University professor and scientist in Ho's lab,
thought up the idea of using Ciphergen's new technology to find the elusive
antiviral factor. The machine can detect distinct chemical signatures for each
protein component in a sample of cells. Zhang decided to analyze CD-8 cells,
specialized white blood cells that Levy had shown in 1986 produced the
mysterious protective factor, which he called CAF.

    Zhang compared blood cells from subjects who were infected with HIV but were
otherwise healthy with those of other HIV patients who had developed AIDS.

    The machine detected a small but distinct difference in the blood cells that
came from members of the healthy group, who are called "long-term
non-progressors" because their infection does not develop into AIDS.

    When members of Ho's group analyzed that signature -- three small spikes on
a graph -- they realized it was identical to the signature produced by three
different defensins. Using multiple tests, they confirmed that defensins were
indeed the protein that was detected in the healthy subjects' blood.

    "We completed the circle," Ho said. ". . . The most gratifying thing is
solving a big part of this mystery. I don't think we want to claim we solved
everything."

    PURITY OF CELLS DISPUTED

    But UCSF's Levy, an acclaimed virologist who was one of the first to isolate
the AIDS virus, said he thinks Ho has made a fundamental blunder.

    Levy discovered in 1986 that long-term non-progressors were protected from
HIV by a class of white blood cells called CD-8s. He coined the term CAF, or
"CD-8 Antiviral Factor," for the unknown chemical produced by CD-8s that was
fending off the virus.

    Ho's experiment, he said, has certainly pinpointed defensins. But Levy said
he believes those proteins may have come from different blood cells used in the
preparation of the experiment -- in short, laboratory contamination.

    "If this is CD-8 antiviral factor, we need to know it is made by CD-8
cells," Levy said. It could have come from other white blood cells that make
lots of defensins and are used in the lab to help grow CD-8s.

    UC Irvine pathologist Dr. Michael Selsted, an expert in defensins, shares
similar concerns. Proving that the defensins came from CD-8s, he said, "is a
simple, one-afternoon experiment," and he is puzzled that such sophisticated
researchers didn't include it in their paper.

    But according to Zhang, the issue of contamination was addressed in a
subsequent experiment. Although the results of that experiment are unpublished,
Zhang said they confirmed that CD-8 cells were producing defensins.

    Other scientists are taking a wait-and-see attitude: "David (Ho) did all the
right experiments. Whether or not this turns out to be the exact thing Jay
(Levy) is looking for will come out in the wash," Dieffenbach said.E-mail Sabin
Russell at srussell@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2002


                             1149 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 27, 2002, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 891 words

HEADLINE: Discovery may provide clue to surviving HIV

SOURCE: Chronicle Medical Writer

BYLINE: Sabin Russell

BODY:
Renowned New York AIDS researcher David Ho laid claim Thursday to solving a
riddle that has stumped rival scientists for 16 years -- the identity of an
elusive factor in the blood of long-term survivors that keeps their HIV
infections permanently at bay.

    But Dr. Jay A. Levy, the UCSF virologist who started the quest for the
mysterious antiviral molecule in 1986, believes that Ho is simply mistaken and
that his finding is the result of laboratory error.

    Regardless, the report released Thursday in the online issue of the journal
Science is certain to focus additional research on the factor, which is believed
to have kept a rare group of HIV-infected people perfectly healthy for as long
as a quarter-century.

    Finding how to duplicate the apparent natural immunity of these lucky few is
a crucial goal of AIDS research. It may hold the key to a vaccine or drug
therapy that could give all AIDS patients hopes for normal life spans.

    "Many labs around the country are retooling, as we speak, to jump into this
field," said Carl Dieffenbach, an AIDS research specialist at the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

    In a telephone briefing with reporters, Ho stressed that it would still take
years of research to convert his findings into useful therapies. He cautioned
that the factor he found has chemical traits that would make it difficult to
manufacture, make into a vaccine, or use for gene therapy.

    "This is not going to be the ultimate solution, but it is another weapon we
can use in our arsenal against HIV," said Ho, who was named Time magazine's Man
of the Year in 1996 for his work developing drug combinations that dramatically
reduced AIDS deaths.

    FREMONT FIRM COULD BENEFIT

    If the findings are confirmed by other researchers, Ho's paper also will
represent a major coup for Ciphergen Biosystems Inc., a Fremont company that
made the sophisticated laboratory tools used to solve the problem. Ciphergen
scientists co-wrote the paper with Ho and his colleagues at the Aaron Diamond
AIDS Research Center in New York.

    Ho's team believes that the long-sought factor is, in fact, a trio of tiny
proteins called "defensins." The big surprise to biologists is that defensins
are relatively well-known and relatively common.

    Discovered in 1984, they are chemical weapons used by a class of white blood
cells that kill and eat bacteria. Their activity against viruses was thought to
be limited.

    Linqui Zhang, a Rockefeller University professor and scientist in Ho's lab,
thought up the idea of using Ciphergen's new technology to find the elusive
antiviral factor. The machine can detect distinct chemical signatures for each
protein component in a sample of cells. Zhang decided to analyze CD-8 cells,
specialized white blood cells that Levy had shown in 1986 produced the
mysterious protective factor, which he called CAF.

    Zhang compared blood cells from subjects who were infected with HIV but were
otherwise healthy with those of other HIV patients who had developed AIDS.

    The machine detected a small but distinct difference in the blood cells that
came from members of the healthy group, who are called "long-term
non-progressors" because their infection does not develop into AIDS.

    When members of Ho's group analyzed that signature -- three small spikes on
a graph -- they realized it was identical to the signature produced by three
different defensins. Using multiple tests, they confirmed that defensins were
indeed the protein that was detected in the healthy subjects' blood.

    "We completed the circle," Ho said. ". . . The most gratifying thing is
solving a big part of this mystery. I don't think we want to claim we solved
everything."

    PURITY OF CELLS DISPUTED

    But UCSF's Levy, an acclaimed virologist who was one of the first to isolate
the AIDS virus, said he thinks Ho has made a fundamental blunder.

    Levy discovered in 1986 that long-term non-progressors were protected from
HIV by a class of white blood cells called CD-8s. He coined the term CAF, or
"CD-8 Antiviral Factor," for the unknown chemical produced by CD-8s that was
fending off the virus.

    Ho's experiment, he said, has certainly pinpointed defensins. But Levy said
he believes those proteins may have come from different blood cells used in the
preparation of the experiment -- in short, laboratory contamination.

    "If this is CD-8 antiviral factor, we need to know it is made by CD-8
cells," Levy said. It could have come from other white blood cells that make
lots of defensins and are used in the lab to help grow CD-8s.

    UC Irvine pathologist Dr. Michael Selsted, an expert in defensins, shares
similar concerns. Proving that the defensins came from CD-8s, he said, "is a
simple, one-afternoon experiment," and he is puzzled that such sophisticated
researchers didn't include it in their paper.

    But according to Zhang, the issue of contamination was addressed in a
subsequent experiment. Although the results of that experiment are unpublished,
Zhang said they confirmed that CD-8 cells were producing defensins.

    Other scientists are taking a wait-and-see attitude: "David (Ho) did all the
right experiments. Whether or not this turns out to be the exact thing Jay
(Levy) is looking for will come out in the wash," Dieffenbach said.E-mail Sabin
Russell at srussell@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             1150 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 26, 2002 Thursday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1558 words

HEADLINE: New CEO at Osiris toiling as clock ticks;
 Achievements: They abound in William H. Pursley's resume, and now he hopes to
compile another by reviving Osiris Therapeutics Inc.

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   William H. Pursley,  William H. Pursley has enjoyed considerable success as a
biotech executive. Now he faces a raft of challenges as the new chief executive
officer of Osiris Therapeutics Inc.

   The Baltimore-based company, which develops treatments designed to renew
injured connective tissue such as muscle and bone, has its third CEO this year
and fourth since 1994, when Maryland officials used a $3.1 million state-backed
loan and a $500,000 equity investment to lure it from Cleveland.

   Morale has suffered as management turnover has eclipsed Osiris' scientific
achievements, including discoveries that could one day promote the regeneration
of cardiac muscle damaged by heart attacks.

   What's more, the company's co-founder and its lead investor are embroiled in
a court battle. Osiris has yet to put a product on the market, and it is seeking
new sources of cash as the stock market hunkers down. Pursley has asked for
forbearance from lead investor Peter Friedli, but the venture capitalist isn't
known for infinite patience.

   A breakthrough is needed, and the clock is ticking.

   Pursley is wasting no time. By the end of his first sleep-deprived week at
the job, he had met with key employees, outlined a clinical development plan for
Osiris' experimental products, hired a chief medical officer and promoted one of
the company's key scientists to head its research efforts. He also had adopted a
quiet resolve.

   "There are some long-term and special scientists here," he said in an
interview in his Fells Point office, where moving boxes lined a shelf. "They
deserve to get managed across the goal line."

   Whether Pursley, 49, can lead Osiris to getting a product on the market
remains to be seen. But he has demonstrated repeatedly that he can identify a
good product and sell it, a trait that should come in handy as Osiris attempts
to sell investors on the company's promise.

   The company's 70 employees aren't the only ones with an economic interest in
its success. State officials long have considered Osiris one key to establishing
a meaningful hub of biotechnology companies in Baltimore.

   While Pursley acknowledges the pressure, he also feels a sense of deja vu.

   "This reminded me of what Genentech looked like in the early days," he said
of Osiris.

   Pursley was one of the first 20 salespeople at Genentech Inc., a South San
Francisco biotech pioneer. It was his job to overcome doctors' early skepticism
about Genentech's genetically engineered drug.

   He did, outselling nearly all of his colleagues.
Success at Genzyme

   He went on to organize and lead the first biopharmaceutical marketing team at
Genzyme Corp., helping position the Cambridge, Mass., company to become one of
the nation's largest biotech companies.

   As head of commercial operations at tiny, Cambridge-based Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., he forsook the usual marketing partnership with a big
pharmaceutical company when it came time to sell the company's first drug - a
niche-market remedy for the rare disorder Fabry disease - in Europe. Instead, he
championed setting up a majority-owned marketing business, ensuring that
Transkaryotic could keep more profits.

   "He's fearless," said Matthew W. Emmens, who hired Pursley for his first
sales job at Merck, Sharp & Dohme in 1979 and is now a division president at
Merck KGaA, a German company. "Whenever there was a new process, a new sales
technique, Bill raised his hand and said, 'I want to try it.'"
Former teacher

   Pursley, the third son of a Louisville, Ky., life insurance salesman and a
homemaker who worked a variety of jobs, began his career as a high school
science teacher.

   He lacked a firm career plan, but he was smart and had a knack for
recognizing opportunities. He would work at them with the same discipline he
demonstrated in his youth as a member of the Plantation Swim Club, where he
spent hours each day practicing his sport before and after school.

   "There's no doubt it had a tremendous impact on self-discipline," said
Pursley, who swam on teams for 16 years.

   While a brother, Dennis, went on to direct the U.S. national swim team, Bill
Pursley settled on teaching high school science after getting a biology degree
from the University of Louisville.

   When he lost that job in a busing-inspired reorganization of Louisville's
schools, Pursley had no money, $300 in credit card debt and the science
background that Merck was looking for in sales representatives.
Confident, effective

   He exuded a confidence that bordered on cockiness in his job interview, then
sold enough muscle relaxers and other drugs to earn Merck's highest performance
rating every year before moving into sales management. Emmens wasn't surprised
when Pursley made the "smart move" to join Genentech on the cutting edge.

   His job was to sell one of the world's first genetically engineered drugs.
The product was a $15,000-to- $20,000-a-year growth hormone for children to
prevent dwarfism. Insurance companies and doctors were initially skittish. But
Pursley did his homework, gained the confidence of physicians and excelled, said
Gary A. Lyons, who hired him for the job.

   Pursley joined Genzyme in a bet that its new enzyme-replacement therapy for
the rare disorder Gaucher disease would be approved and that he could assemble a
team to sell it. He was right, playing a key role in the success of Ceredase, a
drug that is "the cornerstone on which Genzyme was built," said Dr. Norman W.
Barton, the scientist who developed it at the National Institutes of Health.
Transkaryotic

   More recently, Pursley bet on Transkaryotic, taking a job as its commercial
operations vice president because he believed in its ability to develop and sell
new gene therapies and human proteins as drugs. Its first drug was approved in
Europe last year. U.S. approval is pending.

   Now, Pursley's bet is on Osiris.

   "There are two building blocks you can't invent in this business: the
technology and the protection of the technology," Pursley said, referring to key
discoveries and the patents that protect them. "And that makes Osiris a clear
leader."

   Pursley became intrigued by Osiris this year after getting a call from a
headhunter. At the time, Osiris CEO Annemarie B. Moseley had just been replaced
by interim CEO Alfred Seidel. Though management had turned over, Osiris'
scientists had made plenty of progress.

   Here was a company that had discovered how to take stem cells from adult bone
marrow and coax them to grow into different kinds of connective tissue - muscle,
bone, cartilage, even the stroma that provides the matrix in which blood cells
grow up in bone marrow. It was a "superplatform technology" unlike any that
Pursley had ever seen.

   The company was testing uses for the cells: growing new cartilage cushions
for the knee joint in goats; implanting the cells in pig heart muscle to
regenerate damaged portions after a heart attack; using them in a clinical trial
to build up stroma in bone-marrow transplant patients.

   The company's scientists had conducted tests in animals and people that
provided early indications that adult stem cells extracted from an unrelated
donor could be implanted in another without causing the recipient's immune
system to reject them. The discovery, if confirmed, meant Osiris might be able
to mass produce a "universal cell" that could be made in the same way every time
and stored.

   But Pursley also worried. Would Osiris' adult stem cells be swept up in the
controversies over embryonic ones, impeding fund raising or marketing? Would he
be able to raise money in a down market? Could he be a good CEO? He called his
old Genentech boss, Lyons, now CEO at Neurocrine Biosciences Inc. in San Diego,
to talk it over.

   "I encouraged him to do it," Lyons said, adding that Pursley was "long
overdue" for a bigger challenge.

   Once he decided to accept, Pursley attacked. He worked 20-hour days even
before arriving for his first day on the job Sept. 9, then cut back the hours to
a more manageable 5 a.m. to 7 p.m. His plan calls for the company to first raise
money from investors in small, private rounds, providing enough to get the
scientific results that would allow it to conduct a significantly larger private
or public round in 18 months or so.

   "The financing markets right now stink," he said, acknowledging that venture
capitalists probably will get more stock in the company per dollar invested now
than they would in a bull market. He added, however, that "we will get through
because of our leadership in stem-cell technology."
'A great choice'

   He plans to have at least three Osiris products in human testing next year.
He hired Barton, the former NIH scientist who developed the Gaucher disease
therapy, as chief medical officer. Barton was chief medical officer at
Bio-Technology General Corp., an Iselin, N.J., company where Pursley headed
commercial development before joining Transkaryotic.

   Mark F. Pittenger, the Osiris stem cell expert Pursley promoted to vice
president of research, said Pursley is a "great choice." Pursley's having been
at successful companies builds confidence, he said.

   But scientists await results.

   "They're saying, 'OK, we've got a new CEO,'" Pittenger said of longtime
Osiris scientists. They're saying, "'He's got good ideas. He's got good
experience. Let's see what he can do.'"

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. During his first week as CEO of Osiris Therapeutics Inc.,
William H. Pursley takes a moment to share his vision for the struggling
biotechnology company.; 2. Baltimore's Osiris Therapeutics has endured assorted
difficulties, but it also has made important scientific discoveries and yearns
to get a product on the market.; 1. AMY DAVIS : SUN STAFF; 2. GENE SWEENEY : SUN
STAFF

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2002


                             1151 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  September 26, 2002, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 27 Metfront

LENGTH: 852 words

HEADLINE: Report tackles conflicts within medical research;
M.D. Anderson faced related flap

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Less than three months after the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center came under fire for not disclosing its president's financial stake in an
experimental drug it tested, a national medical advisory body has issued new
guidelines to eliminate institutional conflicts of interest.

   The Association of American Medical Colleges report, begun before the M.D.
Anderson controversy, discourages institutions from participating in clinical
trials when the school or a school official stands to benefit financially from
treatments being tested. The report stops short, however, of prohibiting the
practice. It says full disclosure of an institution's financial stake isn't
enough.

   "The presumption is, such research shouldn't be done," said David Korn,
senior vice president of the association. "But that presumption may be rebutted
if an institution can offer compelling reasons why the treatment needs to be
tested at the institution and if it has implemented an effective management
plan."

   Korn said a compelling reason might be that a surgical device was being
developed through a long discovery process and that no other surgeon was
pursuing the technique. He said a special committee would have to closely manage
such research.

   The report notes that as research institutions increasingly invest in the
commercial development of drugs or therapeutic devices, the growing perception
that some studies are tainted by financial conflicts of interest threatens to
weaken public support. It says legislators and policymakers justifiably expect
heightened accountability from these institutions.

   M.D. Anderson caused such controversy in July when it was reported that its
president, Dr. John Mendelsohn, hadn't told participants in a trial of the drug
Erbitux that he owned large amounts of stock in the company sponsoring its
development. Mendelsohn made $ 6 million on the sale of 90,000, or 20 percent,
of his shares last November.

   The company, ImClone Systems, has been investigated by congressional and
financial bodies because of stock trades by executives shortly before the Food
and Drug Administration rejected the company's fast-track application for
Erbitux's approval. The company's collapse the next month cost investors
millions.

   M.D. Anderson adopted a policy requiring full disclosure to patients in 2001,
after the Erbitux study's conclusion. A few days after the story broke,
Mendelsohn apologized for the failure to tell patients of his stake earlier,
saying he took full responsibility for the omission.

   Recommendations in the report are not binding but are expected to carry
weight with the nation's medical schools, most of which belong to the
association and look to it for advice. Report authors said they were less
confident of the effect it would have at hospitals, the category M.D. Anderson
falls into even though it has teaching functions.

   Mendelsohn was not available for comment Wednesday, but an M.D. Anderson
official said the report's recommendations likely will result in changes there.
He said discussions already ongoing at the institution parallel items mentioned
in the report.

   "I disagree with the report's broad presumption against research trials in
which the institution has a financial interest," said Dr. Paul Mansfield, a past
chairman of M.D. Anderson's conflict of interest committee. "I think you can
build in safeguards that protect patients. But I expect you will see us farming
some trials out to other institutions in the future."

   Mansfield said M.D. Anderson already has policies recommended in the report,
such as separation of the research process and financial decisions involving
stock holdings or equity.

   Most institutions have long had policies limiting researchers who have
developed treatments and have financial interests, such as consulting
relationships or stock ownership, with drug companies. Such researchers are
usually prohibited from acting as investigators in clinical trials involving the
company. But until recently, few schools had policies regarding "institutional
conflicts of interest" - conflicts arising from the school itself or one of its
top administrators owning holdings.

   The most prominent recent case involved a gene-therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania in which a teenager died. The researchers and the
school itself had significant financial stakes in the study. And reports that
researchers ignored danger signs that should have kept the teenager out of the
study were later cited by investigators who noted an apparent zeal to enroll
patients.

   The association's report said conflicts of interest involving an officer or
administrator with holdings in a treatment's stock might be managed by having
that person formally recuse himself or herself from decisions involving the
research. It said patients must be informed about any potential conflict before
they consent to participate in research.

   The report expands upon conflict-of-interest recommendations made in a 2001
report. The new report focuses more on institutional conflicts, the 2001 report
on individual conflicts.

   z

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2002


                             1152 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           September 24, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: Panel Targets Conflicts In Medical Research;
Schools' Financial Relationships Cited

BYLINE: Justin Gillis, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    The nation's medical schools should adopt strong new guidelines to ensure
that research on patients is conducted free of conflicts of interest involving a
school's stock holdings or other financial relationships, an advisory panel said
yesterday.

    Public confidence in the nation's research universities is threatened by a
growing perception that some medical studies are tainted by financial conflicts,
said a report from the task force, appointed by the Association of American
Medical Colleges.

    The report called for a near-ban on several categories of medical research
at institutions that have a financial conflict of interest, such as an
arrangement to receive a future share of profit from the drug or device being
tested. Exceptions should be permitted only in "compelling" circumstances, the
panel said. For instance, a faculty's unique expertise might make an institution
the best place in the world to test a drug or device despite the financial
conflict.

    If the conflict of interest involved holdings by an officer or administrator
of the medical school, it might be managed by allowing that person to formally
recuse himself or herself from decisions involving the research, the task force
added. In all cases, the group said, patients must be informed about any
potential conflicts before they consent to participate in research.

    Recommendations from the task force are not binding, but they are likely to
carry weight with the nation's medical schools, most of which belong to the AAMC
and depend on it for advice. Assuming the recommendations are widely adopted, "I
think there will be research that will not be done in institutions that would
have been done" previously, said David Korn, senior vice president of the AAMC.

    For 20 years, American medical schools have been struggling to manage
potential conflicts of interest involving individual faculty members, who
sometimes have consulting relationships with drug companies, hold stock or have
other financial ties that might influence the advice they give to patients. At
most universities, elaborate procedures are in place to require disclosure and
management of such conflicts.

    The new report deals with a more recently recognized problem of
"institutional conflict of interest." This is a circumstance in which the
conflict arises from financial holdings of the medical school itself, or from
the holdings of one of its senior administrators. Ethicists have said that in
these circumstances, safeguards meant to protect the patients involved in
research can sometimes break down.

    The most prominent case in recent years involved Jesse Gelsinger, a teenager
from Arizona who died in a gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania. Investigative reports later found that researchers had ignored
several danger signs that should have kept Gelsinger out of the experiment. Both
the researchers and the school itself had significant financial stakes in the
outcome of the studies, and the investigations cited an apparent over-eagerness
to enroll patients.

    More recently, The Washington Post reported that the M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, one of the nation's largest cancer hospitals, enrolled 195 patients in
tests of a drug without informing them that its president, John Mendelsohn, held
a large financial stake in the company sponsoring the research. Mendelsohn
apologized after the report, and the cancer center has adopted policies
requiring full disclosure to patients.

    The new report calls on medical schools to expand their procedures to pick
up on institutional, not just individual, conflicts of interest well before a
research study begins.

    If certain types of conflicts are found, a school's review committee "should
apply a rebuttable presumption against conduct of the human subjects research at
or under the auspices of the institution," the task force said.

    A committee might choose to permit research, despite a possible conflict, if
the institution "is uniquely qualified, by virtue of its attributes (e.g.,
special facilities or equipment, unique patient population) and the experience
and expertise of its investigators, to conduct the research and safeguard the
welfare of the human subjects involved," the task force said.

    The report should lead to tighter standards at medical schools over the next
few years, Korn said. "I think if the committees do their job well and are
rigorous and have high standards, it will change the landscape," he added.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2002


                             1153 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2002 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           September 23, 2002, Monday

SECTION: Metro; Pg. 025

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: GENE BREAKTHROUGH FOR ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: Post Wire Services

BODY:

   Scientists say they may soon be able to use gene therapy to beat
osteoarthritis.

   Currently, there is no cure or effective treatment for the degenerative form
of the joint disease.

   The only things that help are anti-inflammatory drugs, which alleviate
symptoms but do not affect disease progression.

   But many people can't tolerate the drugs because of side-effects,
particularly stomach problems.

   Now, a team of scientists from Manchester University's School of Biological
Science in England believe they can develop a targeted gene therapy in the next
five years.

   Gene therapy centers on replacing the faulty gene responsible for the disease
with another that should work normally.

   "Obviously, we are still very much at the research stage, but if all our lab
experiments work out, then we hope to translate the results directly into
clinical practice," said Dr. Gillian Wallis, a senior lecturer in medicine.

   "We're confident that we will find effective target genes, which we then plan
to introduce into joints using carrier viruses."

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2002


                             1154 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 22, 2002 Sunday TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg.A-8

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: COMMITTEES REMODELED PANELS TO FIT BUSH'S IDEAS

BYLINE: RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Bush administration has begun a broad restructuring of the scientific
advisory committees that guide federal policy in areas such as patient rights
and public health, eliminating some committees that were coming to conclusions
at odds with the president's views and in other cases replacing members with
handpicked choices.

    In the past few weeks, the Department of Health and Human Services has
retired two expert committees before their work was complete. One had
recommended that the Food and Drug Administration expand its regulation of the
increasingly lucrative genetic testing industry, which has so far been free of
such oversight. The other committee, which was rethinking federal protections
for human research subjects, had drawn the ire of administration supporters on
the religious right, according to government sources.

    A third committee, which had been assessing the effects of environmental
chemicals on human health, has been told that nearly all of its members will be
replaced -- in several instances by people with links to the industries that
make those chemicals. One new member is a California scientist who helped defend
Pacific Gas & Electric against the real-life Erin Brockovich.

    The changes are among the first in a gradual restructuring of the system
that funnels expert advice to Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy G.
Thompson. That system includes more than 250 committees, each composed of people
with scientific, legal or academic expertise who volunteer their services over
multiyear terms. The committees typically toil in near anonymity, but they are
important because their interpretation of scientific data can sway an agency's
approach to health risk and regulation.

    The overhaul is rattling some HHS employees, some of whom said they have not
seen such a political makeover of the department since Ronald Reagan took office
in 1981. HHS spokesman William Pierce said he could not provide a tally of the
number of committees that had been eliminated or changed so far, but he denied
that the degree of change was out of the ordinary for the first years after a
change of administration. He acknowledged that Thompson has irritated some HHS
veterans with his "top down" approach to reshaping the department, but he
defended Thompson's prerogative to hear preferentially from experts who share
the president's philosophical sensibilities.

    "No one should be surprised when an administration makes changes like this,"
Pierce said. "I don't think there is anything going on here that has not gone on
with each and every administration since George Washington."

    Routine or not, the restructuring offers a view into how tomorrow's science
policies are being constructed -- and how the previous administration's
influence is being quietly dismantled.

    One example of the recent changes is the National Human Research Protections
Advisory Committee, created under President Bill Clinton after a series of
government reports found serious deficiencies in the federal system for
protecting human subjects in research. The call from HHS to disband "came out of
the blue," said committee chair Mary Faith Marshall, a professor of medicine and
bioethics at the University of Kansas in Kansas City.

    Some sources suggested the committee had angered the pharmaceutical industry
or other research enterprises because of its recommendations to tighten
up-conflict-of interest rules and impose new restrictions on research involving
the mentally ill.

    "It's very frustrating," said Paul Gelsinger, who became a member of the
committee after his son, Jesse, died in a Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment
that was later found to have broken basic safety rules. "It's always been my
view that money is running the research show," he said. "So with this
administration's ties to industry, I'm not surprised" to see the committee
killed.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2002


                             1155 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    September 20, 2002 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. E12

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: TV Today

BODY:

   What I Like About You (8-8:30 p.m., Ch. 17) - The WB launches a new Friday
prime-time lineup with this show. Valerie Tyler (Jennie Garth) is making a good
life for herself in New York. She's just landed a great job, and her new beau
looks like The One. But then her father moves to Japan and she has to take care
of her 16-year-old firecracker of a sister (Amanda Bynes). WB

   Firefly (8-9 p.m., Ch. 29) - Series premiere. Five hundred years from now,
man has moved his penchant for violence and war to the stars. Capt. Malcolm
Reynolds and his crew navigate the dangers of these times, transporting both
legal goods and contraband. With no allegiance to any particular planet, the
ship has a crew of loners full of ulterior motives. Fox

   Set It Off(8-10 p.m., Ch. 57) - In this 1996 movie, four L.A. women are tired
of the obstacles that come with being poor. They pull off a series of bank
robberies, only to find out they have robbed themselves of much more. UPN

   Dateline NBC (9-10 p.m., Ch. 10) - In 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger
volunteered for a gene therapy program at the University of Pennsylvania that
was seeking a cure for his type of genetic disorder. His death while
participating raised a number of questions about the ethics, the laws, and the
medical community regarding clinical trials. NBC

   Cable

   CN8 Presents (8-9 p.m., CN8) - An excellent combination of musical styles
awaits viewers of this program. The Neptunes (a.k.a. N.E.R.D.) take to the stage
with their own brand of hip-hop. The Swedish group the Hives brings up the rear
with its modern punk-rock sound. Don't let the matching outfits fool you - these
guys rock hard.

   How to Live Large (8-9 p.m., MTV) - How can you be a "playa" without the
"dope crib" and the "bling-bling" of ice around your neck and "all up in your
grill"? In other words, can you be cool without a nice house, the sparkle of a
jeweled chain, and a large number of platinum or gold caps on your teeth? MTV
provides a number of lessons on this high-profile world of the younger
generation.

   Contact Rob Watson at 215-854-5608 or rwatson@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2002


                             1156 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    September 20, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 787 words

BODY:

   Good morning and welcome to Steel City No Game, the big annual open week show
that's gotta fill the infinitesimal void in your football life -- pardon the
redundancy -- that is somehow left by Steel City Pregame, Steel City PostGame,
Steel City End Game, Steel City Blame Game, Steelers Game Day, Steelers Sunday,
Steelers Monday, Steelers Tuesday-thru-Saturday, Steelers May Day, Steelers Flag
Day, and the borderline twisted Steelers Groundhog Day.

    Let's get right to our hosts, Jim Colony, Bill Hillgrove, Mike Tomczak,
Myron Cope, Merril Hoge, Meryl Streep, Bob Smizik, Tunch Ilkin, Ed Bouchette,
Craig Wolfley, Gerry Dulac, Stan Savran, Guy Junker, Pat Parris, Bob Labriola,
Rob King, B.B. King, Jack Ham, Jerome Bettis, Mark Madden, Tim Benz, Josh
Miller, Hines Ward, Bob "Pomp" Pompeani, Bruce "Pomp" Pompeani, SpongeBob
Squarepants, Edmund Nelson, Nelson Mandela, Henry Cannon, Ellis Cannon, Billy
Cannon, Cannonball Adderly, and Conan the Profoundly Troubled Emergency
Broadcast System Administrator.

    "Go ahead, caller."

    "Um, hey guys. Is it me or do we not get quite enough Stillers coverage in
'is tahn?"

    We interrupt this program to dispel that very question.

    The nature of the philosophy behind Steelers coverage by the local media is
essentially this: If you're not getting too much, you're not getting enough.

    Here in One of America's Great Sports Sections, the home of the Best Damn
Steelers Coverage, Period, which I only say because it's true (never mind my
$700,000 salary), we're always looking around to see if too much isn't enough.
That's why in addition to enough annual Steelers coverage to fell the Allegheny
National Forest, we sometimes offer supplemental coverage on our free Web site,
and even supplementaller coverage on our not-so-free premium service called
Black & Gold Insider.

    Last night during Black & Gold Thursday, one of 2,496 local bar promotions
linked weekly to the Steelers, I began to wonder if life was worth living as
pretty much a Black & Gold Outsider. I'm no football expert, but I can still
talk a decent game. I can lament the fact that the Oakland Raiders threw 65
passes the other night, and the fact that I don't much like it, because if I
want to see somebody throw the ball 65 times, I'll watch Jimmy Anderson work an
inning and two-thirds for your Buccos.

    Still, with Steelers analysis having joined strip clubs as the only growth
industries in Western Pennsylvania, I'm envisioning a future that's not terribly
inviting around here. We've lost the steel industry and we're losing the young
people, and I fear a day not terribly far down the road when Pittsburgh will be
demographically reduced to three or four TV weathermen and 298 Steelers
analysts.

    I've got to be one of those 298, so, to whomever it might concern, here are
a few shows that haven't been thought of yet for which I can be the host.

    The Chukwunweze Sonume Okobi-Mathias Fru Nkwenti Show.

    For those of you who don't own a concise 400-plus page 2002 Steelers Media
Guide, those are the real and regal names of offensive linemen Chukky Okobi and
Mathias Nkwenti, both highly thought of young blockers who somehow still haven't
cracked local showbiz. Our first show might include Nkwenti's father Ignathus,
the diplomatic representative of Cameroon to the United States. We'd get to the
bottom of just where the heck that is, and we'd probably ask Chukky if he knows
whatever happened to Tamaurice Nigel Martin, the former backup quarterback known
not surprisingly as Tee.

    The Todd Peterson Jewelry Hour

    Couldn't help but notice in Matt Freed's excellent Post-Gazette photo of
Oakland's Terry Kirby returning a kickoff 96 yards for a touchdown the other
night, that Steelers kicker Todd Peterson attempted a lunging last-chance tackle
with a wedding ring on his left hand. We'd interview NFL historians to see if
any can remember a critical tackle being made by someone wearing a wedding ring.
C'mon; it's football! Sure you can wear stunning earrings and lovely necklaces,
sweet tails and do rags, but take that ring off for a few hours, OK?

    The Chet Fuhrman Show

    There's just no way I couldn't fill an hour, say live from some local
restaurant (LeMont?), chatting up Chet, whose been the Steelers conditioning
coach during the entire Cowher Administration.

    "Chet," I would say over watercress, "does it mean anything that there are
now more Steelers who weigh 300 or more than weigh 200 or less."

    "No," he'd say. Or perhaps, "what?"

    Then the wine would come and that would be that.

    I'll wait by the phone.

    We now join Steel City Extreme Pre-PreGame, or Seventy-Two Hours Until
How-Sorry-Do-You-Feel-For-the-Browns Week, already in progress.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2002


                             1157 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 19, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: Phase 3 results poor for Vical cancer drug

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 One of San Diego's oldest gene therapy companies is headed back to the drawing
board after its lead cancer treatment failed to meet the goals of a final-stage
patient study.

   Vical announced yesterday that data from the Phase 3 trial of its therapeutic
skin cancer vaccine, Allovectin-7, shows the drug is not effective at low doses.
Phase 3 is the last test of a drug in humans before a company can seek
regulatory approval to market it.

   Vical now will focus on a midstage, Phase 2 clinical trial of the same
therapy that will give patients doses that are 200 times more potent than those
given in the failed study.  The company hopes the results will justify putting
the revamped therapy into new Phase 3 studies down the road.

   Wall Street's mood swung erratically as it digested the news.  Shares of
Vical, which had eroded steadily over the last month, fell as much as 24 percent
to $3.70 in early trading.  The stock ended the day at $4.60, down 25 cents, or
5 percent.  The stock is down 67 percent from its 52-week high of $14.

   Vical, which went public in 1991, has spent $62 million developing
experimental gene therapies and has never turned a profit.

   Last year, poor clinical trial results prompted Vical to halt development of
a second therapy, Leuvectin, for kidney cancer.  Yesterday, the company said it
also will stop development of Leuvectin as a treatment for prostate cancer.

   Investor response to Vical's news yesterday was relatively muted, in part
because the company has another shot at the melanoma therapy, a relatively
healthy $123 million cash balance, and several licensing deals with large drug
companies that use Vical's so-called naked DNA technology to develop other
drugs.

   Vical's technology consists of a ring of therapeutic DNA, encased in a fatty,
protective coating, that is injected directly into a cancer patient's tumor.
Once there, the gene mixture alerts the immune system to recognize and kill
diseased cells.

   Other companies are incorporating Vical's technology into experimental drugs
to treat everything from heart disease to AIDS.

   Drug giant Merck uses Vical's DNA vaccine technology in its experimental HIV
vaccine program, and is testing it in two human clinical trials.  Vical's share
of royalties from the potential HIV vaccine would be in the high single digits
if it makes it to market.

   Vijay Samant, Vical's chief executive, said the company has learned important
lessons from its failed Phase 3 study, which ended in September 2001 after
running for three years.  A consultant hired by the company to review the data
concluded the therapy's benefits were not statistically significant.

   Vical also learned from experiences with its technology in other clinical
trials that the size of the DNA dose influences immune responses, Samant said.

   "Our technology platform has matured and improved, and it's been shown to
work in the field of vaccines," Samant said.  "With this (new) trial, we'll get
good answers."

   The new Phase 2 study will test the Vical cancer vaccine as a stand-alone
therapy at much higher doses, with multiple injections to as many as five tumor
sites.  The old study allowed for only limited injections in a single lesion.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2002


                             1158 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 19, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: Phase 3 results poor for Vical cancer drug

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   One of San Diego's oldest gene therapy companies is headed back to the
drawing board after its lead cancer treatment failed to meet the goals of a
final-stage patient study. Vical announced yesterday that data from the Phase 3
trial of its therapeutic skin cancer vaccine, Allovectin-7, shows the drug is
not effective at low doses.

   Phase 3 is the last test of a drug in humans before a company can seek
regulatory approval to market it. Vical now will focus on a midstage, Phase 2
clinical trial of the same therapy that will give patients doses that are 200
times more potent than those given in the failed study.

   The company hopes the results will justify putting the revamped therapy into
new Phase 3 studies down the road. Wall Street's mood swung erratically as it
digested the news.

   Shares of Vical, which had eroded steadily over the last month, fell as much
as 24 percent to $3.70 in early trading.

   The stock ended the day at $4.60, down 25 cents, or 5 percent.

   The stock is down 67 percent from its 52-week high of $14. Vical, which went
public in 1991, has spent $62 million developing experimental gene therapies and
has never turned a profit. Last year, poor clinical trial results prompted Vical
to halt development of a second therapy, Leuvectin, for kidney cancer.

   Yesterday, the company said it also will stop development of Leuvectin as a
treatment for prostate cancer. Investor response to Vical's news yesterday was
relatively muted, in part because the company has another shot at the melanoma
therapy, a relatively healthy $123 million cash balance, and several licensing
deals with large drug companies that use Vical's so-called naked DNA technology
to develop other drugs. Vical's technology consists of a ring of therapeutic
DNA, encased in a fatty, protective coating, that is injected directly into a
cancer patient's tumor.

   Once there, the gene mixture alerts the immune system to recognize and kill
diseased cells. Other companies are incorporating Vical's technology into
experimental drugs to treat everything from heart disease to AIDS. Drug giant
Merck uses Vical's DNA vaccine technology in its experimental HIV vaccine
program, and is testing it in two human clinical trials. Vical's share of
royalties from the potential HIV vaccine would be in the high single digits if
it makes it to market. Vijay Samant, Vical's chief executive, said the company
has learned important lessons from its failed Phase 3 study, which ended in
September 2001 after running for three years.

   A consultant hired by the company to review the data concluded the therapy's
benefits were not statistically significant. Vical also learned from experiences
with its technology in other clinical trials that the size of the DNA dose
influences immune responses, Samant said. "Our technology platform has matured
and improved, and it's been shown to work in the field of vaccines," Samant
said.

   "With this (new) trial, we'll get good answers." The new Phase 2 study will
test the Vical cancer vaccine as a stand-alone therapy at much higher doses,
with multiple injections to as many as five tumor sites.

   The old study allowed for only limited injections in a single lesion. Penni
Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1159 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 17, 2002, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy helps mice with muscular dystrophy

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: PAUL RECER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The crippling effects of muscular dystrophy were partially
corrected in laboratory mice by the insertion of a new gene that restored to the
muscles a protein lacking in victims of the fatal disease.

   Researchers at the University of Washington, Seattle, fused a gene that makes
a muscle chemical with a modified virus and injected the combination into the
hind leg muscles of mice that have a disorder that mimics Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   Within a month, the test mice had a 40 percent improvement in muscle action
compared to muscular dystrophy mice that received no injection, said Christiana
DelloRusso, lead author of the study that appears in this week's Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   "We measured the force produced before and after the muscle is stretched and
it was much better with the mice that were injected compared to the ones that
weren't," DelloRusso said Monday.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a muscle-wasting disease caused by the
mutation of the gene that produces a muscle protein called dystrophin. The
disorder, linked to the X chromosome, is inherited in about one of every 3,500
males born in the United States, and about 12,000 patients are now living with
the disease.

   The disease originates from a gene that fails to produce dystrophin, a
protein that helps the muscles stretch and contract normally. Without this
protein, the muscles tear faster than the body can repair them, a process called
contraction injury. Over time, the muscles waste away.

   Patients generally are diagnosed by age 4, and they usually are using a
wheelchair by age 12. Most die in their 20s, although improved care has allowed
some patients to live until their early 30s. Muscles in the heart and pulmonary
system are affected, generally leading to death from respiratory or heart
failure.

   To control the disease, researchers are trying to replace the flawed gene
with a normal gene that would produce dystrophin.

   In the University of Washington study, researchers engineered a virus, called
an adenovirus, so that it lacked the genes to make viral particles. The viral
genes were replaced by the gene that makes dystrophin. When injected, the virus
infects cells and inserts the new gene into the DNA of the target muscle cells.

   The researchers injected the virus-gene combination into the hind legs
muscles of MDX mice, laboratory animals that develop Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   One month after injection, the legs of the test mice were about 40 percent
more resistant to contraction injury than were the other animals' legs.


LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2002


                             1160 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 17, 2002 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: GENE HELPS MICE WITH MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY;
 RESTORATION OF PROTEIN MISSING FROM MUSCLES IMPROVES MOVEMENT

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The crippling effects of muscular dystrophy were partially corrected in
laboratory mice by the addition of a new gene that restored to the muscles a
protein lacking in victims of the fatal disease.

   Researchers at the University of Washington at Seattle fused a gene that
makes a muscle chemical with a modified virus and injected the combination into
the hind leg muscles of mice that have a disorder that mimics Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   Within a month, the test mice had a 40 percent improvement in muscle action
compared to muscular dystrophy mice that received no injection, said Christiana
DelloRusso, lead author of the study.

   "We measured the force produced before and after the muscle is stretched, and
it was much better with the mice that were injected compared to the ones that
weren't," DelloRusso said Monday. The study appears in this week's Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a muscle-wasting disease caused by the
mutation of the gene that produces a muscle protein called dystrophin. The
disorder, linked to the X chromosome, is inherited in about one of every 3,500
males born in the United States, and about 12,000 patients are now living with
the disease.

   The disease originates from a gene that fails to produce dystrophin, a
protein that helps the muscles stretch and contract normally. Without this
protein, the muscles tear faster than the body can repair them, a process called
contraction injury. Over time, the muscles waste away.

   Patients generally are diagnosed by age 4, and they usually are using a
wheelchair by age 12. Most die in their 20s, although improved care has allowed
some patients to live until their early 30s. Muscles in the heart and pulmonary
system are affected, generally leading to death from respiratory or heart
failure.

   To control the disease, researchers are trying to replace the flawed gene
with a normal gene that would produce dystrophin.

   Sharon Hesterlee, director of research development at the Muscular Dystrophy
Association, said the report by DelloRusso and her colleagues "is an important
paper" because it showed the technique can improve the muscle action around the
injection site.

   But the disease will not be controlled until researchers find a way to
deliver the correct gene to muscles throughout the body, she said.

   "The major technical hurdle is that muscle makes up 40 to 50 percent of body
mass, and we don't have a good way yet to deliver these genes to all the
muscles," said Hesterlee, a neuroscientist. "The virus injected directly into a
muscle doesn't really travel very far. For this gene therapy to really be an
effective therapy, we're going to have to develop some sort of systemic
delivery. That's still a big problem."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2002


                             1161 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 17, 2002 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: Gene offers muscular dystrophy hope

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The crippling effects of muscular dystrophy were partially corrected in
laboratory mice by the insertion of a new gene that restored to the muscles a
protein lacking in victims of the fatal disease.

   Researchers at the University of Washington, Seattle, fused a gene that makes
a muscle chemical with a modified virus and injected the combination into the
hind leg muscles of mice that have a disorder that mimics Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   Within a month, the test mice had a 40 percent improvement in muscle action
compared with muscular dystrophy mice that received no injection, said
Christiana DelloRusso, lead author of the study that appears in this week's
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

    "We measured the force produced before and after the muscle is stretched,
and it was much better with the mice that were injected compared to the ones
that weren't," DelloRusso said yesterday.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a muscle-wasting disease caused by the
mutation of the gene that produces a muscle protein called dystrophin. The
disorder, linked to the X chromosome, is inherited in about one of every 3,500
males born in the United States, and about 12,000 patients are now living with
the disease.

   The disease originates from a gene that fails to produce dystrophin, a
protein that helps the muscles stretch and contract normally. Without this
protein, the muscles tear faster than the body can repair them, a process called
contraction injury. Over time, the muscles waste away.

   Patients generally are diagnosed by age 4, and they usually are using a
wheelchair by age 12. Most die in their 20s, although improved care has allowed
some patients to live until their early 30s. Muscles in the heart and pulmonary
system are affected, generally leading to death from respiratory or heart
failure.

   To control the disease, researchers are trying to replace the flawed gene
with a normal gene that would produce dystrophin.

   In the University of Washington study, researchers engineered a virus, called
an adenovirus, so that it lacked the genes to make viral particles. The viral
genes were replaced by the gene that makes dystrophin. When injected, the virus
infects cells and inserts the new gene into the DNA of the target muscle cells.

   The researchers injected the virus-gene combination into the hind legs
muscles of MDX mice, laboratory animals that develop Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. For comparison's sake, some mice received the gene therapy while
others received neutral injections.

   One month after injection, the legs of the test mice were about 40 percent
more resistant to contraction injury than were the other animals' legs.

   DelloRusso said an analysis of the muscle around the injection site showed
that the tissue was making dystrophin at a level 25 percent to 30 percent of
normal.

   Sharon Hesterlee, director of research development at the Muscular Dystrophy
Association, said the report by DelloRusso and her colleagues "is an important
paper" because it showed the technique can improve the muscle action around the
injection site.

   The disease will not be controlled, however, until researchers find a way to
deliver the correct gene to muscles throughout the body, she said.

   "The major technical hurdle is that muscle makes up 40 (percent) to 50
percent of body mass, and we don't have a good way yet to deliver these genes to
all the muscles," said Hesterlee, a neuroscientist. "The virus injected directly
into a muscle doesn't really travel very far. For this gene therapy to really be
an effective therapy, we're going to have to develop some sort of systemic
delivery. That's still a big problem."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             1162 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           September 17, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:

    The crippling effects of muscular dystrophy were partially corrected in
laboratory mice by the insertion of a new gene that restored to the muscles a
protein that victims of the fatal disease lack.

    Researchers at the University of Washington at Seattle fused a gene that
makes a muscle chemical with a modified virus and injected the combination into
the hind leg muscles of mice that have a disorder that mimics Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

    Within a month, the test mice had a 40 percent improvement in muscle action
compared with muscular dystrophy mice that received no injection, said
Christiana DelloRusso, lead author of the study that appears in this week's
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences released yesterday.

    Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a muscle-wasting disease caused by the
mutation of the gene that produces a muscle protein called dystrophin. The
disorder, linked to the X chromosome, is inherited in about one of every 3,500
male babies born in the United States, and about 12,000 patients are living with
the disease.

    The disease originates from a gene that fails to produce dystrophin, a
protein that helps the muscles stretch and contract normally. Without this
protein, the muscles tear faster than the body can repair them, a process called
contraction injury. Over time, the muscles waste away.

    Patients generally are diagnosed by age 4, and they usually are using a
wheelchair by age 12. Most die in their twenties, although improved care has
allowed some patients to live until their early thirties. Muscles in the heart
and pulmonary system are affected, generally leading to death from respiratory
or heart failure.

    To control the disease, researchers are trying to replace the flawed gene
with a normal gene that would produce dystrophin.

    In the University of Washington study, researchers engineered a virus,
called an adenovirus, so that it lacked the genes to make viral particles. The
viral genes were replaced by the gene that makes dystrophin. When injected, the
virus infects cells and inserts the new gene into the DNA of the target muscle
cells.

    The researchers injected the virus-gene combination into the hind legs
muscles of MDX mice, laboratory animals that develop Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. For comparison's sake, some mice received the gene therapy while
others received neutral injections.

   A gene known for its role in hardening arteries may also be one of the most
important genetic causes of inherited prostate cancer, researchers reported.

    They found mutations in the gene, called MSR1 (for Macrophage Scavenger
Receptor 1), in 4.4 percent of white men who had prostate cancer, compared with
0.8 percent without it, and in 12.5 percent of black prostate cancer patients,
compared with 1.82 percent of black men without prostate cancer.

    The men had different mutations of the gene, some of which were linked with
an aggressive form of cancer, the researchers report in the journal Nature
Medicine.

    Working with a team at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Xu and a large
group of colleagues looked at the DNA of 159 men with prostate cancer and their
families. They compared them with more than 300 men without prostate cancer.

    Different families had different mutations in the gene, the researchers
said.

    Just as there are a number of gene mutations associated with the inherited
risk of breast cancer, there are likely to be several genes involved in prostate
cancer, the researchers said.

   But, they added, MSR1 appears to be the strongest gene linked to inherited
prostate cancer risk yet found.

    -- Compiled from reports by the Associated Press and Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2002


                             1163 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           September 17, 2002 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1783 words

HEADLINE: HHS Seeks Science Advice to Match Bush Views

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    The Bush administration has begun a broad restructuring of the scientific
advisory committees that guide federal policy in areas such as patients' rights
and public health, eliminating some committees that were coming to conclusions
at odds with the president's views and in other cases replacing members with
handpicked choices.

    In the past few weeks, the Department of Health and Human Services has
retired two expert committees before their work was complete. One had
recommended that the Food and Drug Administration expand its regulation of the
increasingly lucrative genetic testing industry, which has so far been free of
such oversight. The other committee, which was rethinking federal protections
for human research subjects, had drawn the ire of administration supporters on
the religious right, according to government sources.

   A third committee, which had been assessing the effects of environmental
chemicals on human health, has been told that nearly all of its members will be
replaced -- in several instances by people with links to the industries that
make those chemicals. One new member is a California scientist who helped defend
Pacific Gas and Electric Co. against the real-life Erin Brockovich.

   The changes are among the first in a gradual restructuring of the system that
funnels expert advice to Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy G. Thompson.

   That system includes more than 250 committees, each composed of people with
scientific, legal or academic expertise who volunteer their services over
multiyear terms.

   The committees typically toil in near anonymity, but they are important
because their interpretation of scientific data can sway an agency's approach to
health risk and regulation.

   The overhaul is rattling some HHS employees, some of whom said they have not
seen such a political makeover of the department since Ronald Reagan took office
in 1981.

   HHS spokesman William Pierce said he could not provide a tally of the number
of committees that had been eliminated or changed so far, but he denied that the
degree of change was out of the ordinary for the first years after a change of
administration.

   He acknowledged that Thompson has irritated some HHS veterans with his "top
down" approach to reshaping the department, but he defended Thompson's
prerogative to hear preferentially from experts who share the president's
philosophical sensibilities.

   "No one should be surprised when an administration makes changes like this,"
Pierce said. "I don't think there is anything going on here that has not gone on
with each and every administration since George Washington."

   Routine or not, the restructuring offers a view into how tomorrow's science
policies are being constructed -- and how the previous administration's
influence is being quietly dismantled.

   One example of the recent changes is the Secretary's Advisory Committee on
Genetic Testing, created during the Clinton administration after a major federal
report concluded that the public was at risk of being harmed by the emerging
gene-testing industry.

   One of the first topics tackled by the committee was how to deal with the
proliferation of so-called home-brew genetic tests, which are offered by a
growing number of companies and doctors.

   The blood tests can detect DNA variations that may increase a person's odds
of getting a disease or affect a patient's response to medicines.

   The Food and Drug Administration has long asserted that it has the authority
to regulate these tests, but it has opted not to do so -- in part because of a
lack of resources. As a result, companies are free to market tests for genes
even if those genes have no proven role in disease susceptibility or any proven
usefulness at all. A growing number of companies are doing just that -- at no
small expense to consumers -- in some cases needlessly alarming people with
meaningless results and in other cases offering false reassurance.

   The committee convinced the FDA to use its authority to oversee the marketing
of these tests, and the agency was developing rules when the Bush administration
took over. Suddenly the FDA's stance changed: The agency was no longer certain
it had the regulatory authority in question. Oversight plans stalled. Today the
FDA is still mulling whether it has authority, Pierce said, and last week
members learned that the committee's charter, which just expired, will not be
renewed.

   "This is a real turnaround. It's bad. It's terrible," said Neil A. "Tony"
Holtzman, a Johns Hopkins University professor emeritus who chaired the HHS task
force that led to the committee's creation.

   Wylie Burke, who chairs the department of medical history and ethics at the
University of Washington and was a member of the committee, said gene-test
oversight is needed now more than ever because companies are starting to
advertise tests directly to consumers and are offering questionable services
over the Internet.

   "People need to know what they're getting," Burke said. "We were making real
headway with informed-consent issues and with categorizing levels of risk. It
would be a shame if that does not get completed."

   Pierce said the committee's demise had nothing to do with its recommendations
or regulatory approach. Rather, he said, HHS intends to create a new committee
that will deal with a broader range of genetic technologies. The department has
not said who will sit on that committee.

   Another example is the National Human Research Protections Advisory
Committee, created under President Bill Clinton after a series of government
reports found serious deficiencies in the federal system for protecting human
subjects in research. The call from HHS to disband "came out of the blue," said
committee chair Mary Faith Marshall, a professor of medicine and bioethics at
the University of Kansas in Kansas City.

   Some sources suggested the committee had angered the pharmaceutical industry
or other research enterprises because of its recommendations to tighten up
conflict-of-interest rules and impose new restrictions on research involving the
mentally ill.

   "It's very frustrating," said Paul Gelsinger, who became a member of the
committee after his son, Jesse, died in a Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment
that was later found to have broken basic safety rules. "It's always been my
view that money is running the research show," he said. "So with this
administration's ties to industry, I'm not surprised" to see the committee
killed.

    Other sources said the committee had run afoul of religious conservatives
when it failed to support an administration push to include fetuses under a
federal regulation pertaining to human research on newborns. Some within HHS
said they'd heard the department may reconstitute the committee with a purview
that includes research on human fetuses or even embryos -- a change seen by some
as part of a larger administration effort to bring rights to the unborn.

   Consistent with that possibility, HHS officials recently told committee
members they hope to name Mildred Jefferson to a reincarnated version of the
committee that the department hopes to create. Jefferson is a medical doctor who
helped found the National Right to Life Committee and who three times served as
that organization's president.

   Pierce said HHS had allowed the committee to expire not because of the
direction of its work but because, as with the genetic-testing committee, the
department wants to create a new panel with a broader, as yet undetermined,
charge. That committee has yet to be created or its members named.

   Yet another committee caught up in the recent upheaval is one that advises
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Center for
Environmental Health on a range of public health issues from pollution to
bioterrorism.

   Thomas Burke, the Johns Hopkins public health professor who has chaired the
committee for almost five years, recently learned that 15 of its 18 members are
to be replaced. In the past, he said, HHS had asked him to recommend new members
when there were openings. This time, he said, a list of names was imposed. He
was among those who were let go.

   Burke said he was not offended that his own membership, which was expiring,
was not renewed. "There's constant turnover on these boards," he said. "What's
of concern though is to see so much turnover at one time, especially at such a
critical time for the CDC."

   He mentioned another concern: One of the committee's major endeavors has been
to assess the health effects of low-level exposures to environmental chemicals,
yet as first reported by Science magazine last week, several of the new
appointees are well known for their connections to the chemical industry.

   They include Roger McClellan, former president of the Chemical Industry
Institute of Toxicology, a North Carolina research firm supported by chemical
company dues; Becky Norton Dunlop, a vice president of the Heritage Foundation
who, as Virginia's secretary of natural resources, fought against environmental
regulation; and Lois Swirsky Gold, a University of California risk-assessment
specialist who has made a career countering environmentalists' claims of links
between pollutants and cancer.

    The committee also includes Dennis Paustenbach, the California toxicologist
who served as an expert witness for Pacific Gas and Electric when the utility
was sued for allowing poisonous chromium to leach into groundwater. The case was
made famous in the movie "Erin Brockovich."

   "It's in the nation's interest to avoid any appearance of a conflict of
interest on these committees," said Burke, the former chairman. "To see friends
of the administration . . . clearly that's what we're seeing here. It's
wholesale change. The complexion has changed."

   HHS's Pierce said the committee remains balanced overall, and no prospective
member of any advisory committee is subjected to political screenings.

   "It's always a matter of qualifications first and foremost," Pierce said.
"There's no quotas on any of this stuff. There's no litmus test of any kind."

   At least one nationally renowned academic, who was recently called by an
administration official to talk about serving on an HHS advisory committee,
disagreed with that assessment. To the candidate's surprise, the official asked
for the professor's views on embryo cell research, cloning and
physician-assisted suicide. After that, the candidate said, the interviewer told
the candidate that the position would have to go to someone else because the
candidate's views did not match those of the administration.

   Asked to reconcile that experience with his previous assurance, Pierce said
of the interview questions: "Those are not litmus tests."

CORRECTION-DATE: September 24, 2002

CORRECTION:

   A Sept. 17 front-page article about advisory committees in the Department of
Health and Human Services said a University of California scientist, Lois
Swirsky Gold, was known for her "connections" to the chemical industry and that
she had "made a career of countering environmentalists' claims of links between
pollutants and cancer." The article should have made it clear that the chemical
industry had connected itself to Gold, not the reverse.  Gold has made a career
of developing risk analysis models.  The chemical industry had favored those
models, which generally support the conclusion that the human health risks posed
by many chemicals in the environment are relatively small.  Gold has received
compensation for her work on a committee funded largely by chemical companies.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2002


                             1164 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 16, 2002, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1409 words

HEADLINE: Stanford gene therapists land a big one

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
Fishing for tools to improve human gene therapy, two Stanford scientists may
have found a remarkably effective genetic hook hidden in the trout genome.

    In the current issue of Nature Biotechnology, Stanford geneticist Mark Kay
and researcher Stephen Yant show how they used a section of trout DNA called a
transposon to splice therapeutic genes into chromosomes.

    As Kay explains it, gene therapy is all about delivering a needed gene to
cells that are missing it. Hemophiliacs, for instance, lack one of two genes
critical to blood clotting.

    To get missing genes into cells, scientists often used viruses as delivery
vehicles. Viruses are good at breaking into cells. They make us sick because
once they get in, they often unload genetic cargo that can disrupt the cell.

    But gene therapists scoop the troublesome innards out of their delivery
viruses and install therapeutic genes instead. So when an altered virus breaks
into a cell, it delivers a gene that would, in Kay's experiments, make
blood-clotting proteins.

    But after a decade of experiments, scientists have learned that viral
delivery vehicles almost always drop off their therapeutic cargo short of the
ideal goal -- the chromosomes. Only when a missing gene gets into a chromosome
does it become part of the person's genetic makeup -- and permanently cure the
deficiency.

    "What we've found is that the integration frequency of the (gene) into the
chromosomes is very, very low," often less than a fraction of a percent, Kay
said.

    In their current paper, Kay and Yant boosted the integration of genes into
the chromosomes of mice by borrowing a transposon from a trout.

    Transposons are genetic sequences that can splice themselves into
chromosomes. In nature they're a nuisance because they can splice themselves
into the middle of a useful gene and muck it up. Therefore, most organisms
inactivate transposons -- in the same way our cells try to repel viruses.

    The transposon used in the Stanford experiment has its own tale. It was
awakened after millions of years by University of Minnesota scientist Perry
Hackett. In 1997, Hackett used genetic engineering to reactivate this transposon
-- dubbed "Sleeping Beauty" -- on the theory that it could help splice gene
therapies directly into chromosomes much more effectively than viruses.

    Kay and Yant used Sleeping Beauty as the middle component of a three-tiered
gene therapy. They used an adenovirus, the bug that causes colds, as the basic
delivery vehicle. Inside the neutered adenovirus, they placed Sleeping Beauty,
and inside the transposon, they placed the blood-clotting gene.

    When they delivered this triple-decker therapy into the liver cells of mice,
they found it was more than 100 times more effective than current adenoviral
systems.

    But even so, only 5 percent of the genes wound up in chromosomes, indicating
that much still needs to be done to improve integration.

    Transposon gene therapy is a hot area. Hackett and some University of
Minnesota colleagues have formed a company, Discovery Genomics Inc., to expand
on their work with Sleeping Beauty.

    James Merritt, chief medical officer of the Texas gene therapy firm
Introgen, called the transposon work "an exciting development" for the entire
field.

    FDA UPDATE: Capitol Hill sources say the Bush administration plans to
appoint former Stanford medical economist Mark McClellan to the long-vacant post
of commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

    But the appointment has been delayed because McClellan, who serves on Bush's
Council of Economic Advisers, has been a prime architect of the administration's
Medicare drug policy, and the White House hasn't wanted to weaken that effort by
moving him now.

    If McClellan can wrap up his Medicare work soon, Capitol insiders expect he
would prove acceptable to Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., whose objection had
nixed prior potential nominees.

    Kennedy has privately insisted that the new FDA commissioner not be tied to
industry and have a medical background. McClellan, 39, clears those hurdles and
more.

    His resume is an overachiever's dream. He has a master's in public health
from Harvard, an M.D. from Harvard and MIT, and a doctorate in economics from
MIT. He has held a variety of think tank and academic posts with a medical
policy bent. He also served briefly in the Clinton administration Treasury
Department.

    The current administration likes the fact that McClellan is a Texas boy with
the right political pedigree. His mother, Carole Keeton Rylander, is a former
Austin mayor who now serves as the state's elected comptroller. When Bush
appointed McClellan to his current post, Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, expressed his
delight, saying "Mark's mama is one of my closest political allies."

    But tea leaf readers on Capitol Hill think McClellan's FDA appointment may
be weeks away.

    If Bush does tap McClellan for the FDA job, his first task may be reining in
two deputies who have exercised considerable clout during the 19 month-plus
interregnum. Deputy FDA commissioner Lester Crawford, who was reportedly Health
and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson's choice for the top job, has been
large and in charge recently. And FDA general counsel Daniel Troy has been
nudging the FDA in a deregulatory direction.

    Industry people looking for clues about McClellan's thinking might peruse
the professor's curriculum vitae, which lists several articles with titles like
"The marginal cost-effectiveness of medical technology," indicating that the
potential FDA commish might balance economics and therapeutics in evaluating
novel technologies.

    SUPER SUNFLOWER: An Ohio State University ecologist has shown that
pesticidal genes bioengineered into sunflower plants can jump to wild relatives,
and furthermore, that when they do make the leap, these genes give the affected
wild plants an evolutionary edge over other unaffected sunflowers.

    Researchers such as UC Berkeley ecologist Ignacio Chapela, who did his
studies on corn, have already argued that genetic drift from bioengineered to
ordinary plants can occur.

    But the recent work by Ohio State Professor Allison Snow extends the genetic
drift debate by asserting that a genetically engineered trait that crosses over
to wild plants can enable them to thrive at the expense of their ordinary
rivals.

    Snow made a preliminary presentation of her findings at the August meeting
of the Ecological Society of America. She studied sunflowers that had been
bioengineered with a gene from the pest-killing bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis
(Bt).

    She found that the Bt gene jumped through cross-pollination to wild
sunflowers and helped them to outperform unaffected wild cousins. She did her
work in special plots where she set up the conditions for this gene flow and did
not observe the results on actual farms. The Bt sunflower she studied is not yet
in commercial use.

    Snow, who has submitted her work to scientific journals, is reluctant to
discuss the results until they have been reviewed and vetted by her scientific
peers.

    But in a brief phone interview, she said her work, if OKd by other
scientists, would show for the first time that genetic drift could affect
populations of wild plants of the same species.

    Snow said she doesn't want her findings to be blown out of proportion, given
the highly charged debate over genetically engineered foods. She said the
genetic drift she described could only take place between plants of the same
species, so that a GE sunflower could not pass its pest-resistant gene to a
dandelion, for instance.

    Nevertheless, should her work gain credence in scientific journals, it would
bolster the case of biotech critics who warn that GE crops that do have wild
cousins could pass traits into the wild and affect the development of their
species.

    Corn and soy, the two most widely planted biotech crops, don't raise these
concerns because they don't have wild cousins, Snow said. But bioengineered
canola, rice, squash and wheat, all crops that are either already in the field
or are being readied for commercial introduction, do have wild relatives and
could potentially raise the same issues as the sunflowers, she said.

    Snow's work was funded by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, as part of its
oversight mission to study the interplay of bioengineered and wild plants.E-mail
tabate@sfchronicle.com; fax (415) 543-2482 or call (415) 777-6213.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Stanford geneticist Mark Kay has developed a new delivery system
for gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2002


                             1165 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                     September 14, 2002 Saturday 0 EDITION

LENGTH: 764 words

HEADLINE: HEATHER NEWMAN: NEW USE FOR VEGETABLE OIL: It's like bleach, but
edible;
Teeny drops kill germs on people, places, food

BYLINE: HEATHER NEWMAN FREE PRESS COLUMNIST

BODY:

   It's the best ad slogan you'll never see: "Kills germs, not you."

   Consider what you could do with something that disinfects as thoroughly as
chlorine bleach but isn't poisonous. Factories that process cold food like lunch
meat could constantly clean equipment without risking the safety or taste of the
finished product. Apple cider could stay fresh and cold from the press to your
fridge, since the mill would no longer have to boil the juice to eliminate the
chance of botulism.

   That's the promise of a range of disinfecting creams, tonics and sprays being
developed by NanoBio Corp. in Ann Arbor, one of several technology firms created
in recent years out of research projects at the University of Michigan.

   NanoBio specializes in the use of nanotechnology -- specifically, small,
cell-sized particles -- to kill germs and deliver drugs or vaccines. Founded by
Dr. James R. Baker, director of U-M's Center for Biologic Nanotechnology, the
privately held firm began operations in March 2001. U-M licensed key technology
to the company and is one of its owners.

   The firm is looking for partners to market its unique germ-killing goop,
properly called antimicrobial nanoemulsions. That means incredibly tiny
micro-droplets of vegetable oil, surrounded by a trace amount of alcohol and
held suspended in water, which destroy microbes without being toxic or having
harmful residual effects.

   The folks at NanoBio are hoping a cream version of the stuff will be as
effective in large-scale trials as it is in the lab at getting rid of one tough
health problem: toenail infections.

   Right now, the only effective treatment for nail fungal disease is an oral
medication that can have bad side effects on the liver. NanoBio's cream could be
slathered on from the outside and wouldn't be toxic even if you ate it straight
from the tube.

   The company's product samples are in plastic bottles on the break room table
where the employees eat lunch. Chief executive Ted Annis nonchalantly
demonstrated the spray-on surface cleaner on the table and the hand lotion on
his hands. A thin version of the product looks like skim milk and can be used as
a nearly tasteless antibacterial mouthwash.

   In another room of the lab, dozens of Ziploc bags filled with cooked penne
pasta were laid out on a counter. The company was testing a version of the
product designed to inhibit mold in cooked foods. They had been there two weeks
and looked as if they had just been poured out of the pot.

   Try doing that with bleach.

   A 1999 test by Pfizer Inc. at U-M suggests that the emulsion might be an
effective ointment for cold sores. Other common ailments, big and small, may be
the next targets.

   Baker did a study spraying the stuff into the nostrils of mice. There it
stayed on the lining of the nose, killing airborne viruses and bacteria.

   There's hope, Annis said, that the product may someday become marketed as a
topical preventive treatment for the flu. That research is being expanded into
other areas, including HIV, tuberculosis and hepatitis B. The company has
trademarked 36 names for products ranging from spermicides to preservatives.

   NanoBio has become more famous over the last year for its antibioterrorism
agents, which include a slightly thicker (think whole milk) pump-bottle spray
for soldiers that can kill anthrax. Baker discovered the antimicrobial use for
the nanoemulsion while researching gene therapy. Its use was refined with a
grant from the Department of Defense.

   But for most people, NanoBio's other products will hit closer to home.

   While the materials that make up the company's sprays and creams are for the
most part perfectly ordinary, the process of making them isn't. A huge amount of
energy goes into dividing oils into droplets so small that 25 of them could fit
in the diameter of a human hair.

   The drops are the same size or smaller as the bacteria and viruses they
target. When they meet up with the microbes, the energy from the droplet-making
process is released, exploding the bad cells. The human digestive system turns
the drops back into their original substances, which is why NanoBio says the
stuff is harmless to ingest.

   "It's in minuscule amounts," Annis said. "It would be the equivalent of
putting a drop of vegetable oil in your drink."

   Baker says the ointment for cold sores may be in clinical trials by the end
of the year. The foot fungus cream may hit soon after. "We get unsolicited calls
from people, volunteering," he said.

   Contact HEATHER NEWMAN at 313-223-3336, newman@freepress.com or
www.freep.com/tech.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2002


                             1166 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                          September 14, 2002 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 148 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
SCIENCE / IN BRIEF;
Gene Therapy May Be Used to Treat Hair Loss;
BIOTECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:

   Mice whose fur glows green may be the first step to using gene therapy to
treat hair loss, baldness and perhaps even to permanently change hair color,
researchers say. They put jellyfish genes into the hair follicles of the mice,
which grew fur that glowed fluorescent green under the right light.

   "The hair now is glowing green because green fluorescent protein is in the
hair shaft," said Robert Hoffman of San Diego-based AntiCancer Inc., whose
company led the study. "We saw lots of green fluorescent hair."

   Writing in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Hoffman and
his colleagues said their experiment involved skin taken from a mouse, treated,
and then grafted to another mouse. They need to try it now directly on live
mice.

   "It's got a way to go before the market," said Hoffman, who worked with
scientists at MIT and Japan's Kitasato University School of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2002


                             1167 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                          September 14, 2002 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 101 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF / BIOTECH;
GenStar, Vascular Genetics to Merge

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   GenStar Therapeutics Corp. and closely held Vascular Genetics Inc. agreed to
merge, becoming a biotechnology company focused on gene therapy.

   Shareholders of each San Diego firm will own 50% of the new company, to be
named Autus Genetics Corp.

   Autus plans to focus on developing a gene therapy treatment for heart disease
developed by Human Genome Sciences Inc. Human Genome, which owns a 27% stake in
Vascular Genetics, will own 15% of the new company. Baxter International Inc.,
an investor in GenStar, will hold about 15% of Autus.

   GenStar shares rose 14 cents to 73 cents on the American Stock Exchange.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2002


                             1168 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 14, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: San Diego's GenStar to merge with startup

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 A struggling San Diego gene therapy company said yesterday it will merge with a
gene therapy startup that has a more promising experimental treatment in
development.

   GenStar Therapeutics, which has spent $42.6 million since 1996 trying to
develop a gene-based drug to treat hemophilia, will merge with privately held
Vascular Genetics, which is developing gene therapies to treat heart disease.

   The combined company will change its name to Autus Genetics Corp.
Headquarters will be at GenStar's San Diego facility, which employs 50.

   Autus' key focus will be the development of Vascular Genetics' therapy, which
utilizes a gene that promotes the growth of new blood vessels to repair heart
damage.  An advanced Phase 2 clinical trial is to launch next year -- if the
company can raise money from investors or corporate partners to fund it.

   The merger comes at a time when biotechnology stocks are out of favor, and
gene therapy companies -- after the high-profile death in 1999 of a clinical
trial patient and few success stories -- are a particularly hard sell.

   In March, another cash-poor San Diego gene therapy company, Collateral
Therapeutics, agreed to be acquired by its German research partner, Schering AG,
in a $140 million stock swap.

   "Companies are lowering burn rates and tightening the belt, and there will be
more combinations and mergers to come," said John McCamant, editor of the
Berkeley-based Medical Technology Stock Letter, an investment newsletter that
tracks the biotech industry.  "This is a tough financial environment, and
companies have to be creative."

   Robert Sobol, chief executive of GenStar, said the combination of GenStar and
Vascular Genetics will create a more powerful portfolio of experimental
therapies, a move that should make fund-raising easier.

   "To raise additional capital in this market with an early stage product was
going to be a daunting and challenging task," said Sobol, who will serve as
president of Autus.  "This repositions us as a later-stage product company, and
the prospects for financing become much brighter."

   GenStar, with about $10.4 million in cash on hand, has only enough money to
fund operations through mid-2003 and would have to raise more to continue
development of a hemophilia drug that is being tested in an early stage Phase I
clinical trial.

   The trial was halted last June when the first patient treated suffered side
effects.  The Food and Drug Administration later cleared GenStar to resume the
study, but no new patients have been enrolled.

   In contrast, Vascular Genetics, a two-employee Atlanta company created to
commercialize a gene therapy for heart disease developed by Human Genome
Sciences, has a product that has generated positive patient data and would serve
a larger, more lucrative market.

   GenStar, which trades on the American Stock Exchange, and Vascular Genetics
will exchange their outstanding shares for about 38 million newly issued GenStar
shares, valuing the company at about $22.4 million based on GenStar's closing
price Thursday of 59 cents.

   GenStar's shares closed yesterday at 73 cents, up 14 cents, or about 24
percent.  GenStar's stock will continue to trade until the merger is completed,
and then Autus shares will trade on the American Exchange.

   Shareholders of each of the merging companies will own 50 percent of the new
company.  Human Genome, which owns a 27 percent stake in Vascular Genetics, will
own 15 percent of the new company, while Baxter International, a stakeholder in
GenStar, will also hold 15 percent of Autus.

   Richard Otto, president and chief executive of Vascular Genetics, will lead
the new company as chief executive officer.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2002


                             1169 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 14, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: San Diego's GenStar to merge with startup

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A struggling San Diego gene therapy company said yesterday it will merge with
a gene therapy startup that has a more promising experimental treatment in
development. GenStar Therapeutics, which has spent $42.6 million since 1996
trying to develop a gene-based drug to treat hemophilia, will merge with
privately held Vascular Genetics, which is developing gene therapies to treat
heart disease. The combined company will change its name to Autus Genetics Corp.
Headquarters will be at GenStar's San Diego facility, which employs 50. Autus'
key focus will be the development of Vascular Genetics' therapy, which utilizes
a gene that promotes the growth of new blood vessels to repair heart damage.

   An advanced Phase 2 clinical trial is to launch next year -- if the company
can raise money from investors or corporate partners to fund it. The merger
comes at a time when biotechnology stocks are out of favor, and gene therapy
companies -- after the high-profile death in 1999 of a clinical trial patient
and few success stories -- are a particularly hard sell. In March, another
cash-poor San Diego gene therapy company, Collateral Therapeutics, agreed to be
acquired by its German research partner, Schering AG, in a $140 million stock
swap. "Companies are lowering burn rates and tightening the belt, and there will
be more combinations and mergers to come," said John McCamant, editor of the
Berkeley-based Medical Technology Stock Letter, an investment newsletter that
tracks the biotech industry.

   "This is a tough financial environment, and companies have to be creative."
Robert Sobol, chief executive of GenStar, said the combination of GenStar and
Vascular Genetics will create a more powerful portfolio of experimental
therapies, a move that should make fund-raising easier. "To raise additional
capital in this market with an early stage product was going to be a daunting
and challenging task," said Sobol, who will serve as president of Autus.

   "This repositions us as a later-stage product company, and the prospects for
financing become much brighter." GenStar, with about $10.4 million in cash on
hand, has only enough money to fund operations through mid-2003 and would have
to raise more to continue development of a hemophilia drug that is being tested
in an early stage Phase I clinical trial. The trial was halted last June when
the first patient treated suffered side effects.

   The Food and Drug Administration later cleared GenStar to resume the study,
but no new patients have been enrolled. In contrast, Vascular Genetics, a
two-employee Atlanta company created to commercialize a gene therapy for heart
disease developed by Human Genome Sciences, has a product that has generated
positive patient data and would serve a larger, more lucrative market. GenStar,
which trades on the American Stock Exchange, and Vascular Genetics will exchange
their outstanding shares for about 38 million newly issued GenStar shares,
valuing the company at about $22.4 million based on GenStar's closing price
Thursday of 59 cents. GenStar's shares closed yesterday at 73 cents, up 14
cents, or about 24 percent.

   GenStar's stock will continue to trade until the merger is completed, and
then Autus shares will trade on the American Exchange. Shareholders of each of
the merging companies will own 50 percent of the new company.

   Human Genome, which owns a 27 percent stake in Vascular Genetics, will own 15
percent of the new company, while Baxter International, a stakeholder in
GenStar, will also hold 15 percent of Autus. Richard Otto, president and chief
executive of Vascular Genetics, will lead the new company as chief executive
officer. Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1170 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                          September 14, 2002 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E02

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: August Wholesale Prices Flat

BODY:

    There was no inflation at the wholesale level last month despite a big jump
in energy prices, while retail sales rose a surprisingly strong 0.8 percent, the
government said. The Labor Department's producer price index, which measures
inflation before it reaches consumers, was unchanged in August after having
fallen 0.2 percent in July. The Commerce Department said retail sales rose after
a revised 1.1 percent July increase. Much of the August gain was the result of a
big jump in auto sales, caused by cut-rate financing offers, but sales went up
0.4 percent even without counting cars.

    Boeing, the world's biggest planemaker, avoided a strike by its machinists
that would have halted airliner production after the company's largest union
failed to muster the two-thirds support it needed for a walkout. While 62
percent of union members voted to reject Boeing's three-year contract offer, 61
percent supported a strike, leaders of the International Association of
Machinists said in Seattle. The union needed 66 percent of its members to
authorize a strike. The vote is a victory for Boeing, which gained new
job-flexibility rules it says will streamline manufacturing and got workers to
share in some of their health-care costs.

   The combined net worth of the people on Forbes magazine's 400 wealthiest
Americans list declined for the second straight year, to $ 872 billion from $
946 billion in 2001 and $ 1.2 trillion in 2000. Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates
again topped the list, with a net worth of $ 43 billion, down $ 11 billion from
last year.

   Global Crossing will file a bankruptcy reorganization plan Monday with the
federal bankruptcy court in New York, according to papers filed with the court.
Global Crossing is planning to emerge from Chapter 11 protection early in the
first quarter of 2003.

   United Airlines said it will put off amending its application for a federal
loan guarantee until Thursday, when the airline's unions said they will deliver
a cost-cutting plan. The world's second-largest airline has said it may have to
file for bankruptcy protection if it can't get concessions from workers,
vendors, creditors and aircraft-leasing companies. The unions have balked at the
amount of labor savings United has sought.

   AOL Time Warner said it hired former Entertainment Weekly publisher Michael
Kelly to run a marketing group created a year ago to increase advertising sales
in all of the company's units. Kelly, 45, replaces Myer Berlow, who stepped down
and became an adviser to AOL Time Warner this year.

   McDonald's said its U.S. franchisees have overwhelmingly approved its new
business plan, which calls for lower-priced food and an overhaul of older
restaurants. The fast-food chain hopes to jump-start stalled U.S. sales and a
declining stock price. The plan initially calls for selling the Big 'N' Tasty
and the McChicken sandwiches for $ 1 each next month.

   GenStar Therapeutics and Vascular Genetics agreed to merge. Shareholders of
each company will own 50 percent of the new Autus Genetics, which will focus on
an experimental gene therapy for heart disease, a technology being developed by
Vascular Genetics and licensed from Rockville-based Human Genome Sciences. Human
Genome, which owns a 27 percent stake in Vascular Genetics, will own 15 percent
of the new company and will be entitled to a 10 percent royalty on sales of any
product based on the gene treatment.

   Lloyd's of London investors voted to shake up the world's oldest insurance
market by transforming Lloyd's into a franchise network, adopting a system of
annual accounting and stopping new investors from accepting unlimited liability
when they underwrite policies. Lloyd's lost $ 11 billion from 1997 through 2001,
including $ 3.07 billion from the destruction of the World Trade Center -- its
biggest single-event loss ever.

   Argentine President Eduardo Duhalde violated the constitution in January by
converting U.S. dollar bank deposits into pesos, an appeals court ruled. The
decision is a victory for bank clients who aim to get the Supreme Court to
reverse the currency conversion.

   Compiled from reports by the Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Dow Jones News
Service and Washington Post staff writers

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2002


                             1171 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 13, 2002 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: Green, glowing mice may spell end of baldness

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Mice whose fur glows green may be the first step to using gene therapy to
treat hair loss, baldness and perhaps even to permanently change hair color,
researchers say.

   They put jellyfish genes into the hair follicles of the mice, which grew fur
that glowed fluorescent green under the right light.

   "The hair now is glowing green because green fluorescent protein is in the
hair shaft," Robert Hoffman of San Diego-based AntiCancer Inc., whose company
led the study, said in a telephone interview.

   "We saw lots of green fluorescent hair."

   Writing in this week's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, Hoffman and colleagues said their experiment involved skin taken from
a mouse, treated, then grafted to another mouse. They need to try it now
directly on live mice.

    "It's got a way to go before the market," said Hoffman, who worked with
scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Japan's Kitasato
University School of Medicine.

   But, he added, "We have a good system now to get genes into hair follicles."

   Green fluorescent protein often is used by scientists testing genetic
engineering techniques. It is a single gene that makes jellyfish glow green in
the dark, is harmless to other animals and is easy to look for.

   Hoffman said that if one new gene functions in the hair follicle, others
should.

   His idea is to treat the hair loss that is caused by cancer chemotherapy.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             1172 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 10, 2002 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-1

LENGTH: 977 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY TAKES UP CAUSE OF BATTEN DISEASE

BYLINE: DEBORAH WEISBERG

BODY:

   Up until two years ago, Zach Balog, now 6, was a robust child never bothered
by so much as an ear infection.

    "He was slightly behind in his speech," said his father Steve Balog, 36, of
Cranberry. "But he was off the charts in height and weight, so his not being
able to string words together was no cause for alarm."

    Then the seizures started, and unexpected trips and falls. A month after he
was put on anti-seizure medication, Zach had trouble walking alone. As his
balance and coordination deteriorated, so did his ability to speak and to see.
He was shuttled from one doctor to another, each of whom ordered more tests. The
mystery only deepened until a neuro-ophthalmologist found the decisive clue: a
bulls-eye shaped dot on the retina of both eyes -- an indication of retinal
deterioration.

    Zach had late infantile Batten disease, a rare and fatal genetic disorder
whose victims -- just 500 worldwide -- can expect to live about 10 years.

    "It was horrible," said his mother Susan, 36, a former pharmaceutical
company representative, of the diagnosis. "You think, cancer or more common
things. But this was a real shock."

    Batten is one of 40 of what are called lysosomal storage disorders. In these
disorders, including the more common Hunter's disease or Tay-Sachs syndrome, the
enzymes that break down fats, proteins and sugars in cells are lacking, which
gradually haltS brain development. Both Steve and Susan, high school sweethearts
who grew up in Butler and dated through college, carry the Batten gene -- a
remarkably rare coincidence. This gave Zach a 1 in 4 chance of developing the
disease.

    His younger brother Josh, now 4, is a carrier but tested negative for the
disease.

    While there is no treatment or cure for Zach, the Balogs have reason to
hope.

    In researching Batten on the Internet, they got to know Greenwood, Ind., dry
cleaner Phil Milto, who has two sons with the disease. He is raising money for
research into treatments.

    Milto a year ago established the Nathan's Battle Foundation, named for his
eldest son, who's 8, and hopes researchers at the Cornell University Institute
of Genetic Medicine will extend their gene therapy investigations to Batten
disease.

    There, ground-breaking research is under way into what's described as "using
genes as drugs" to treat cystic fibrosis, the hereditary disease of the
respiratory tract, as well as other diseases.

    But Cornell needs money to begin the Batten research, as much as $2.5
million to $3 million to manufacture and test the gene therapy, Milto said.

    "We have an agreement to receive funding from the Nathan's Battle
Foundation. It's essentially a gift to us," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, chairman of
the Department of Genetic Medicine at Weill Cornell Medical School. "It's not
appropriate to talk about details around money."

    The Balogs and two other families affected by Batten, one in California and
the other in the United Kingdom, have joined his cause. The Balogs have raised
about $120,000 and hope a Sept. 14 golf outing at Pittsburgh North Golf Club
will generate their greatest contribution yet.

    The foundation has so far raised $1.7 million.

    Dr. John Barranger, medical director of the Molecular Medicine Institute at
the University of Pittsburgh, also is researching the gene transfer approach to
Batten disease.

    Pitt is developing different vectors, or modified viruses, that would
transfer the beneficial genes into the nervous system.

    "That would correct the biochemical defect," Barranger said. "Gene therapy
would add another gene, not fix the 'bad' cell. Genes are being cloned, and what
we have been developing is the vectors that would work well and could be made in
large quantities."

    He cautioned that all work in this area is in the early clinical stage, with
development of any effective treatment years away.

    "Families have hope. People need hope. At the same time, they don't need
false hope," he said. "It's not right to raise the expectations of families with
afflicted children."

    At Cornell, large-animal trials to demonstrate therapy safety could begin in
a few months, Crystal said. "We've developed the drug -- essentially a modified
virus in which we place the gene. The virus is like a Trojan horse. That's
already developed. That's not the issue. We have to make sure we can deliver it
to the brain of large animals."

    Once safety is demonstrated and many regulatory obstacles have been cleared,
then human clinical trials can begin, which is the only way to know if the
therapy will treat Batten disease, Crystal said.

    There's no guarantee that Zach or Milto's children would be selected for
future clinical trials.

    "I realize my children may not benefit from this," Milto said. "But others
may. What drives me is when I go home every night and look at my kids."

    The Balogs also are driven by hope.

    "You have to be," said Susan. Her son receives weekly therapy and continues
to grow. He now weighs 50 pounds. He is given anti-seizure medications and a
high-fat, or ketogenic, diet sometimes prescribed for people with epilepsy,
through a feeding tube. He cannot walk or talk, can see only differences in
light and dark, and has lost most of his motor skills.

    He has good days and bad, she said. "We do the things most families do; we
just do them in a different way. "

    "It's amazing when you see other families out doing things, how much they
take for granted," Steve Balog said.

    "You know, we used to think we had it all -- a great marriage, a good house
and two kids. Now getting Zach well is all that matters."


    MORE INFO

    * For details about the golf outing, which includes a $1 million cash
hole-in-one prize, call 724-452-4330 or e-mail the Balogs at
sbalog@stargate.net.

    * For information about Batten Disease, visit www.nathansbattle.com.


NOTES:
Deborah Weisberg is a free-lance writer who covers health issues

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Matt Freed/Post-Gazette: Susan Balog with Joshua, 4 and Steve
Balog with Zachery, who's 6. Both parents are carriers of the gene for Batten
disease, but only Zachery has developed it.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2002


                             1173 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 10, 2002 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: WU JOINS IN GENE THERAPY PROJECT THAT CURES DOGS OF RARE DISEASE;
 IN HUMANS, THE SYNDROME CAUSES STUNTED GROWTH, MENTAL RETARDATION

BYLINE: Tina Hesman Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Scientists from Washington University and the University of Pennsylvania have
used gene therapy in dogs to cure a rare genetic disease that affects multiple
body organs.

   The researchers, led by Katherine Parker Ponder at Washington University and
Mark E. Haskins of the University of Pennsylvania, used gene therapy to treat
seven dogs with a disorder known as MPS VII. In humans, the disease is called
Sly syndrome - named for Dr. William Sly, a doctor at St. Louis University who
first diagnosed the disease in 1973.

   Other researchers have used gene therapy in dogs to target diseases that
affect a single body function, such as vision or blood clotting, but the
17-month study published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences is the first to report successful treatment for a disease that affects
many different organs, Haskins said.

   Sly syndrome is a disease caused by a lack of the enzyme beta-glucuronidase.
Without the enzyme, the body can not break down certain sugar molecules, causing
the sugars to build up in storage compartments, called lysosomes, within cells.
Overstuffing the storage compartments damages cells and leads to defects in
almost every organ system in the body, especially the bones, eyes, heart valves
and liver. People with the disease have stunted growth, mental retardation and
trouble moving. They usually die in childhood. The disease affects about one in
27,000 babies born in the United States.

   Although rare, the disease is a good model for treating other storage
diseases, such as Tay-Sachs disease, Sly said.

   Ponder and other colleagues first used gene therapy to treat mice with the
MPS VII disease. The researchers then turned to the dogs to see if such
therapies might be useful to treat people.

   "We were interested in a large animal model because it's getting to the point
where anybody can cure a mouse," Ponder said. But researchers have rarely been
able to use the rodent cures to treat larger animals or people, she said.

   Ponder and her co-workers replaced genes in a retrovirus with a healthy copy
of the gene for the beta-glucuronidase enzyme.

   The scientists then injected newborn puppies affected with the MPS VII
disease with the engineered retrovirus. The scientists later found liver cells
in the dogs producing the beta-glucuronidase enzyme, proof that the gene therapy
had worked. The liver cells made enough of the enzyme to correct the disease
throughout the body.

   The puppies gained weight almost normally and were able to walk and run. The
dogs didn't develop the serious heart and eye problems normally found in dogs
with the disease.

   The technique could be used to cure many other lysosomal storage diseases,
which affect about one of every 7,000 babies born, Sly said. It also may be
useful in developing gene therapy for other enzyme deficiencies.

   The therapy could be ready for human use in five to 10 years, Ponder
predicted.

NOTES:
Reporter Tina Hesman: E-mail: thesman@post-dispatch.com Phone: 314-340-8325

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2002


                             1174 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                           September 9, 2002, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; WORK & MONEY; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1573 words

HEADLINE: Reasons to hope for growth

BYLINE: By Laurent Belsie Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

HIGHLIGHT:
Small investors willing (and able) to think long term can find solace in
history's cycles. How to approach the post-boom era.

BODY:

   Editor's note:

   After a whipsaw summer - consider nearly 40 one-day swings of 200 points or
more on the Dow - welcome to the bad old September slide.

   This back-to-business month is notoriously downbeat for the stock market. For
September 2002, add war worries over Iraq and more confidence-rocking ripples
from corporate scandals - and stand back. What's next?

   Economists keep working to reconcile offsetting indicators - a rise in gross
domestic product brings cheers. An unemployment rise brings us back to earth.
Wait! Unemployment is down.

   And investors can be forgiven for rethinking the idea of tying their
financial futures too closely to the performance of firms that - as became clear
in the '90s - aren't always what they appear.

   What to do? Look for context. Today's lead story looks past Wall Street's
wildness to gauge the New Economy's real legacy as investors adjust to a
post-boom era. Follow-up stories will look at its long-term implications for
workers and consumers.

   - By Clayton Collins

   Rooting for the New Economy these days is like yelling in an empty stadium:
The players have all gone home. The fans have vowed never to watch again. Even
the season-ticket holders are cashing in their seats for pennies on the dollar.

   So why cheer amid such deafening silence?

   Because something is transforming America's economy. And it looks
increasingly like one of those periods when new technology permanently bolsters
living standards.

   Of course, investors have heard all this before - from brokers peddling stock
that's now nearly worthless. Oddly, that's a positive sign. Dramatic
technological change has often spawned investment booms and busts. But each
time, they've heralded the beginning - not the end - of an important leap
forward.

   That's why, more than ever, it's crucial for investors - particularly those
just starting out - to think long term. Those who glimpse the shape and pace of
things to come will be far better placed to profit than the dotcom-chasers of
yesteryear.

   "The crash is not the end of the technology revolution; it's really the
beginning of its glory days," says W. Brian Arthur, economist at Santa Fe
Institute in Santa Fe, N.M. "After the crash, the technology stops being
glamorous. It loses its glitz, its cachet. And we settle into a period of hard
work."

   And that is precisely the era we're entering, he argues: sober,
growth-oriented, and quietly setting the stage for new industries not yet
conceived.

   Unconvinced? Take a stroll down memory lane.

   At the start of the Industrial Revolution, Britons began to get excited about
using canals to ship bulk goods like coal. They poured in money with increasing
abandon and, in 1793, the canal-building boom crashed.

   In 1845, they piled in again, this time with railroads. Companies floated new
plans for railway lines, sometimes a dozen or more a week, and eager investors
temporarily ignored the growing overcapacity.

   Then the bottom fell out, and by 1847, hundreds of companies had closed and
railroad stocks had lost 85 percent of their value.

   That's eerily similar to the recent telecom crash, where companies installed
too many fiber-optic telephone lines for too few customers.

   An Internet joke now making the rounds points out that people who bought $
1,000 worth of beer a year ago and returned the empty cans for a 10-cent deposit
would still have more money left ($ 214) than those who plunged $ 1,000 into
Nortel stock (now worth about $ 165) or that of WorldCom ($ 9.23).

   The point, however, is what happens after the crash. Historically, Mr. Arthur
points out, canal and railroad companies continued to extend their networks and,
slowly, traffic increased.

   By 1910, Britain sported nearly 10 times the trackage that had stoked the
investment frenzy 65 years earlier.

   Now, fast-forward to today and answer three questions:

   Do you know anyone using e-mail less frequently than two years ago?

   Have any of your friends turned in a cell- phone because it's a dead-end
technology?

   Have you unplugged your computer because, after all, the digital revolution
is over?

   Most people will probably answer no. The crash of telecom and dotcom stocks
didn't reveal a flaw in the technology. It simply overestimated - probably by a
decade or two - the speed with which society would adopt it widely. And it
probably underestimated the full impact such technology will have on society.

   "To think that this revolution is about dotcom companies is to stand on a
whale and fish for minnows," says Paul Saffo, director of Institute for the
Future in Menlo Park, Calif. "It's not just about making new things. It's about
creating new tools that allow us to make new things."

   For example: Many of the genetic therapies now being developed stem directly
from the mapping of the human genome, which could not have been accomplished
without computers. And it's not limited to new industries.

   "The information revolution has been affecting manufacturing, trucking,
financial services, and all the things that people were doing before," says
Alice Rivlin, former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve and now professor at
New School University in New York City. "It's a very profound change in how
economic activities are carried out and organized. And it doesn't have a lot to
do with buying things over the Internet."

   A productivity boom

   While economists and others disagree about how revolutionary this period will
ultimately turn out to be, they have nevertheless formed a rough consensus
around two points.

   First, productivity looks to be growing faster today, even during the
economic slump, than in the 1970s and '80s. Second, information technology is
playing some role in accelerating that growth.

   For instance, from 1973 to 1995, US nonfarm workers got only a little more
efficient each year - an unspectacular average of 1.4 percent. But since then,
their productivity growth has jumped to nearly 2.4 percent a year, points out
Martin Baily, senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics in
Washington. Why?

   Certainly the boom of the late '90s played an important role - and that part
of the growth equation has since disappeared. The surprise is that productivity
continues to grow despite the slump.

   Last year's 1.1 percent might look pretty shabby, but it's far better than
the 0.6 percent decline averaged during the previous four recessions, Mr. Baily
points out. When the economy revives, he expects the growth to snap back to a
sustainable 2 to 2.5 percent per year.

   Economic impact of high-tech

   Not everyone believes in the New Economy. "The new technologies do improve
our standard of life, of course, but I don't see any reason to think that they
give us a structural improvement in the rate of productivity growth over the
period ahead," says James K. Galbraith, chair of government and business
relations at the University of Texas in Austin. "The optimist in me says we'll
have stagnation. The pessimist in me says it will loop into another recession."

   Still, many skeptics seem to be warming to the idea of a tech-enhanced, more
productive period that lies ahead. Its economic impact alone could be huge.

   If the United States' economy grows half a percentage point faster than it
did in the period 1975-95, it would allow workers' wages to rise faster without
triggering inflation, says Dean Baker, co- director of the Center for Economic
and Policy Research, a think tank in Washington.

   And future financial claims on society - the extra burden from increased
Social Security spending, for example - would be eased or erased by a sustained
growth spurt, he points out.

   Adjusting expectations

   What investors can learn from all this boils down to two things: patience and
diversification. For starters, let go of those fanciful dreams of a '90s-style
sharp rebound in the stock market. All those 20 to 40 percent annual investment
gains really were part of an unsustainable bubble, economists say.

   "We're looking at a very weak economy going forward," Mr. Baker says. "This
is a cyclical phenomenon, but it could be a very long-lasting cyclical
phenomenon."

   Second, watch old-line companies - not just those in glitzy new industries -
to see the innovative ways in which they implement technology. "Look for the
companies that can reinvent the whole nature of their business," says Mr. Saffo
of the Institute for the Future. "That's where the short-term opportunities
are."

   Long term, prepare for long, slow, consistent growth fostered by new
industries we haven't even dreamed up yet.

   History suggests there's a 40- to 50-year lag between an invention and its
widespread use, says Arthur of the Santa Fe Institute.

   Railroads were operating in the 1830s but didn't reach their golden age until
the 1870s and '80s.

   The electric motor, commercially available in the early 1880s, became common
in the 1920s.

   If history is any guide, it will take a similar period for business and
society to fully adapt to today's collection of information technologies - the
Internet (invented 1969), microprocessors (1971), and cheap lasers (the '80s).

   "Nobody knows what the business organization of the future will look like,"
Arthur says. "And it's going to take two or three decades of experimentation
until that will work itself out. But this revolution will be as big as the
Industrial Revolution - and may even be bigger."

   (c) Copyright 2002. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: September 08, 2002


                             1175 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     September 8, 2002 Sunday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1490 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firm ailing despite state's millions;
 Top management leaves Osiris Therapeutics;
 New CFO hired, CEO in wings;
 Hope lingers amid lawsuits and uncertainty

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Osiris Therapeutics Inc., a company the state has backed with millions of
dollars after luring it from Cleveland to be "part of the foundation" of
Maryland's biotechnology industry, has lost virtually its entire top management
team and all but a single company director.
The departures - which include Osiris Chief Executive Officer Annemarie B.
Moseley and her interim replacement - have added even more uncertainty to an
already difficult future for the Baltimore company, which develops therapeutic
treatments for people, a business in which the risk of failure is inherently
high.

   The company's co-founder and biggest investor are at odds, with one suing
another and asserting that Osiris is "financially crippled."

   The mess is a far cry from what the state had in mind eight years ago when
officials announced during a triumphant news conference that Osiris would move
to Baltimore.

   The company then seemed a prime example of the kind of investment Maryland
wanted to make with its new venture-capital program: a potentially high-growth
company with a sexy new technology that promised to revolutionize the treatment
of certain injuries.

   Osiris planned products derived from stem cells that could grow cartilage,
help cancer patients recover more quickly after bone marrow transplants and
regenerate heart muscle damaged by heart attacks.

   Then-CEO James S. Burns predicted that the company's 20 jobs would expand to
"several hundred within a three-year period." Mark L. Wasserman, then the
state's secretary of economic and employment development, heralded Osiris as
"another building block, another part of the foundation" of a life sciences
industry in Maryland, The Sun reported at the time.

   But after more than $5.1 million in state backing in the form of investment,
grants, loans and guarantees, Osiris has about 70 employees and no products on
the market. It has scuttled plans for a public stock offering at least twice.
Some employees are unclear who's in charge.

   Still, the state isn't giving up on Osiris. "I'm not ready to put up a white
flag by any stretch of the imagination," said Tom Bodnar, director of the
state's Investment Financing Group, a venture-capital arm that invests taxpayer
money in high-tech and biotech companies. Developing a biotechnology product, he
noted, often takes "years and years and years."

   Robert C. Brennan, the state's assistant secretary for financing programs,
acknowledged that "Osiris is one of the cogs in this whole strategy" of
attracting and keeping private biotechnology companies in Maryland. But he said
the state doesn't take active roles in the management and direction of companies
in which it invests.

   "In terms of public policy, it's not our role," he said.

   The state invested $500,000 in Osiris in 1994 in exchange for stock. It has
made or backed loans to the company totaling about $3.6 million, made more than
$525,000 in grants for work force training and improvements such as the creation
of labs with sinks; and has pledged $500,000 as a rent guarantee to Osiris'
landlord.

   This year's rash of resignations and dismissals occurred as Swiss venture
capitalist Peter Friedli tightened his control of the company.

   Moseley was fired in January. Her replacement, interim CEO Alfred Seidel,
left in July after his contract expired.

   Osiris' chief operating officer and top research executive, Alan K. Smith,
Chief Financial Officer Alan A. Musso, Chairman Max E. Link and Directors Jack
L. Bowman and Richard G. Power are among the others who have left this year.
Power said he attended one official board meeting before resigning.

   The company has hired a new CFO, Donald W. Fallon, a former finance executive
at Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. It is expected to announce this month that its
next CEO will be William H. Pursley, who resigned Friday as senior vice
president of commercial operations for Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a
Cambridge, Mass., developer of gene therapies. Osiris has just two executives
considered senior enough to be listed on the company's Web site: Fallon and Dr.
Kerry Atkinson, its medical affairs vice president.

   Burns, an Osiris co-founder and its CEO until pushed out in 1999 by Friedli
and the board, sued Friedli this year. The suit, now in U.S. District Court in
Baltimore, claims that Friedli obtained a "stranglehold" on Osiris by extracting
extraordinary terms from the company in exchange for providing money to it in
1995. The terms gave Friedli first claim on handling any Osiris loans or equity
issues, the suit says.

   Since then, Burns alleges, "Friedli insisted that he alone could finance
Osiris," and at terms unfavorable to the company and many shareholders.

   Friedli, whose previous investments have included Myriad Genetics Inc. of
Salt Lake City, which is now publicly traded, declined in a telephone interview
from his home office in Zurich, Switzerland, to discuss Osiris or Burns'
allegations in depth. But he said the allegations are untrue. "It's absolute
nonsense," he said of the lawsuit. "They have to prove it."

   Friedli estimated that he and others who invested through his group,
Zurich-based Friedli Corporate Finance, have put nearly $50 million into the
company since its inception in 1993.

   "My primary goal is to make the company successful," said Friedli, who
estimates that he and his investors own about two-thirds of the company.

   "I'm not just there and do stupid things."

   Moseley, the former CEO, said she was forced out during a January board
meeting at the company's Fells Point headquarters. She said she had just
presented a range of financing options while directors listened in a first-floor
conference room with a view of a harbor marina. When the board took a break,
Link, then the company's chairman, called her aside and said, "It's time to cut
the umbilical cord." She was out of a job.

   Moseley said she headed for the parking lot, only to find out later that Link
had then dismissed her husband, patents and business development Vice President
Ken Moseley, with the same words. She said neither Friedli nor Link ever gave a
reason for the dismissals.

   Friedli said from Zurich, "I have fired the people who tried to do harm to
the company and were not very smart."

   He declined to say whether the dismissals were related to the board's
knowledge of Burns' impending lawsuit, which also names Link, Osiris and its
holding company, MSC Regenos, as defendants.

   Annemarie Moseley had signaled her displeasure with some of Friedli's actions
when she resigned in December from the boards of Osiris and MSC Regenos.

   The Swiss-based holding company was created before a possible overseas public
offering. The offering was scuttled when the markets there soured. Moseley said
in an interview that she resigned her board seats because "I didn't agree with
the nature of things going on at that point, particularly the financing."

   The company often seemed to be operating on the brink of running out of
funds, though Friedli always managed to come through with more money. Moseley
said the financial uncertainty weighed on her. "It's difficult to start new
clinical development when you don't know if you're going to make payroll," she
said.

   Power, a former Osiris director who was once a Johnson & Johnson executive,
said Link sent him a note asking him to resign after he had attended his only
official board meeting in March.

   "A new financing was coming up, and he (Friedli) decided to bring in his own
complete new board with his own financing," Power said of Friedli. "It's kind of
a strange situation. I've sat on many boards and was just starting to get
acquainted with Osiris."

   Bowman, another former Johnson & Johnson executive, who had been a director
since 1997, didn't return calls. Neither did Link, who was once CEO of Sandoz
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and had been Osiris' chairman since 1994.

   Friedli said he and Link are still good friends and declined to talk about
the board resignations. He said the company will announce a new management team,
directors and financing when it is ready, saying: "It will come together when it
comes together."

   Employees were told several weeks ago that the company was negotiating with a
prospective new CEO, said an Osiris scientist who asked not be identified for
fear of retribution. Asked who is running the company in the meantime, the
scientist said, "It would be the executive staff and the board."

   Asked to identify anyone who fit that description, the employee said,
"There's an executive committee." But the employee was unable to identify anyone
on it.

   "My day-to-day stuff hasn't changed dramatically," the employee said. "My
boss is still my boss. His boss has just changed a couple of times."

   Another scientist said much the same thing. But, commenting on management,
the employee said, "The upstairs people, I have no idea what's wrong with those
people. I have no clue."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Osiris co-founder James S. Burns was chief executive
officer until pushed out in 1999.; 2. Annamarie Moseley was fired as CEO in
January, and her interim replacement departed in July after his contract
expired.; 1. SUN FILE : 1997; 2. SUN FILE : 2000

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2002


                             1176 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 7, 2002, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Material from Bloomberg News was used in this report.;
FDA AIMS TO SPEED BIOTECH DRUG OK'S

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration yesterday said it would change the way it
evaluates drugs developed by biotechnology firms in an effort to speed approval
times and unify its evaluation methods.

   The move appears to be an effort by the Bush administration to appease
critics, within the biotechnology industry and elsewhere, who contend drug
approval times have grown and the agency's actions can be unpredictable.

      But planned changes don't address one fundamental problem at the FDA,
which is the lack of leadership: The agency has operated without a commissioner
since early last year, and the White House hasn't even nominated a candidate
since Congress rejected several early choices.

   Specifically, the agency said it would consolidate reviews of new
pharmaceuticals in its Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Previously, some
biologically derived drugs, such as those produced by some biotech firms, were
reviewed by the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research.

   Treatments such as vaccines, gene therapies, cellular therapies, or products
made from blood or tissue would continue to be evaluated by the Center for
Biologics.

   The change means that drugs will be evaluated according to how they are used,
rather than how they are developed.

   "FDA's drug and biological product reviews have long been the gold standard
for the world," said Dr. Lester M. Crawford, deputy commissioner, in a
statement.

   "By carefully combining part of our present biologics review operation
responsibilities with our drug review operation, FDA will be optimally
positioned to uphold that gold standard by continuing to review novel
pharmaceutical products promptly and rigorously in an accountable and consistent
manner."

   Overall, the time it has taken the FDA to approve new biologics has dropped
from 47.7 months in 1991 to 21.5 months last year, according to a study by the
General Accounting Office. But the office noted that time to approve biologics
varied greatly from year to year, possibly because a small number of such drugs
are approved each year.

   Industry officials applauded the move.

   "Although the details and their full implications have yet to be determined,
we are pleased with the Bush administration's efforts to bring lifesaving drugs
to patients faster alongside greater consistency in the drug development and
review process," said Carl B. Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, a trade group.

   "BIO and its members will do everything we can to facilitate this transition
toward streamlined development and review of biologics."

   Walter Moore, a lobbyist for Genentech Inc., a large biotech firm in South
San Francisco, Calif., said, "Anything that can get clarity and consistency in
clinical trials for patients is a good thing, and that appears to be their
objective." Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2002


                             1177 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 7, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Shifts Biotech Drugs Into Main Oversight Unit

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration announced a significant reorganization
yesterday intended to speed the review of drugs made by biotechnology.

        The agency said that it would shift oversight of biotechnology drugs
from its biologics division, which regulates products made from living
organisms, to its main drug division, which oversees more traditional drugs made
using chemistry.

    The move appears to be a response to criticism from the biotechnology
industry that the biologics division takes longer to approve drugs than the drug
division. It also appears to be a response to criticism of the biologics
division by a Congressional committee that has been investigating insider
trading and other aspects of the controversy surrounding ImClone Systems, whose
cancer drug was not even accepted for review by the biologics division.

   While agreeing that ImClone's application should have been turned down, the
House Energy and Commerce Committee said in a letter to the F.D.A. in June that
"there appears to be a different and better approach to the expedited review of
cancer drugs" in the drug division than in the biologics division.

   Murray A. Lumpkin, senior associate commissioner of the F.D.A., said the
agency decided to consolidate oversight of chemical and biological drugs to
improve efficiency and consistency.

   "Products that are basically studied the same, evaluated the same and used
the same ought to be under one management umbrella," he said.

   The biologics division, known formally as the Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, will retain jurisdiction over blood products, vaccines, tissue
transplants and gene therapy. Biological drugs, like the protein EPO for anemia,
have until now fallen into this category because they are made in genetically
modified animal cells.

   The complexities of such products derived from living things was thought to
require separate expertise. The biologics division was once part of the National
Institutes of Health, and many of its employees are still based on the N.I.H.
campus and do research on their own. This, critics say, has made the division
less efficient in reviewing drugs than the drug division, which concentrates
strictly on drug evaluation.

   "There are dramatic differences in the management of the center for drugs and
the center for biologics," said Ira Loss, a health care analyst at Washington
Analysis. The expertise needed to determine, say, whether blood transfusions
might spread West Nile virus is different, he said, from that needed to evaluate
clinical trials of a cancer drug.

   Details of the transfer have yet to be worked out. It is expected that many
people from the biologics division will shift to the drug division. Still, the
F.D.A. said that rules governing biological drugs would remain largely the same.
Biotechnology drugs will still not be subject to generic competition in the same
way chemical drugs are.

   Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, the
industry trade group, called the reorganization a "welcome development." He said
it took the biologics unit several months longer to review drugs than the drug
division and that the biologic review times had been rising in the last few
years.

   But Patrick Mooney, a biotechnology analyst at Thomas Weisel Partners, said
the reorganization would have no effect on approval times. He said the longer
approval times for biotechnology drugs resulted from their greater complexity
and novelty, factors that will not change.

   Peter Lurie, deputy director of the health research group at Public Citizen,
the consumer group, was cautious about the reorganization, saying, "If things
get sped up inordinately, there is potential for mistakes."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2002


                             1178 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 7, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: FDA to switch biotech reviews to drug division

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER | Reuters contributed to this report.

BODY:
 The Food and Drug Administration announced yesterday it will shift
responsibility for reviewing many new biotechnology products from its biologics
division to its drug division, a move that could speed approval of new
therapies.

   The FDA's drug unit, known as the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, or
CDER, has historically handled the review of chemical-based drugs, and is
perceived by some in the drug industry to be faster and more efficient than its
counterpart, the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, or CBER, which
handles products derived from living organisms.

   In making the decision, acting FDA commissioner Lester Crawford said the
agency will be "optimally positioned . . . to review novel pharmaceutical
products promptly and rigorously in an accountable and consistent manner."

   Industry observers say the biologics division has lagged behind the drug
division in approval times, in part because the unit is smaller and has had
responsibility for many new and complex technologies, such as gene therapy.

   CBER will retain responsibility for vaccines, blood and tissue products, and
gene therapies, but other biotech products that had dealings with it -- such as
monoclonal antibodies -- will now be under CDER's roof.

   The FDA has established a committee to develop by January a plan to implement
the switch.

   Robert Abbott, chief executive for Selective Genetics, a San Diego biotech
that is developing a gene therapy for tissue repair, said the move is positive
because it will allow CBER to focus its expertise and speed reviews.

   "For the last five years, the FDA has been among the most proactive parts of
the government for reinventing themselves and trying to do a better job," Abbott
said.  "I think this is a pretty decent move."

   Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, also
said the move was welcome.

   "Although the details and their full implications have yet to be determined,
we are pleased with the Bush administration's efforts to bring life-saving drugs
to patients faster alongside greater consistency in the drug development and
review process," he said.

   Some analysts suggested the timing of the change may also have had to do with
the recent insider trading scandal surrounding the biotech ImClone Systems.

   Congress is probing how information about the FDA's imminent rejection of the
company's most promising drug, Erbitux, was leaked and whether FDA mismanagement
of the situation contributed.

   "The ImClone hearings may have served as the catalyst for some of this," said
Nancy Braddish Myers of Lehman Brothers, who noted that during congressional
hearings, "people were comparing" the two FDA units.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2002


                             1179 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 7, 2002, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Shift in biotech review process;

FDA seeks to streamline approval

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey

BODY:
Hoping to streamline the approval of biotechnology drugs, the Food and Drug
Administration will transfer responsibility for their review to one of its
long-established units that currently evaluates only conventional
pharmaceuticals.

    The move was hailed by the biotech industry, which has argued that the
existing review process is too cumbersome and takes too long. Critics say a
speedier process could be dangerous to patients, and some question whether the
reorganization will quicken the approval of biotech drugs.

    The FDA reorganization will shift the approval process for biologics --
drugs produced from living sources like microorganisms -- out of a specialized
office that had been criticized by biotechnology groups for issuing decisions
more slowly than the conventional drug unit.

    FDA Deputy Commissioner Lester Crawford said that by consolidating review of
all new pharmaceuticals in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, the FDA
will review all experimental drugs "promptly and rigorously in an accountable
and consistent manner."

    The unit that now reviews biologics, the Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, will retain jurisdiction over vaccines, blood safety, gene therapy and
tissue transplantation.

    Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, said
the established drug review unit is not only better at meeting timetables than
the biologics section, but also issues clearer guidelines for the scope of
clinical trials. A time line for the reorganization will be developed by
January.

    "Although the details and their full implications have yet to be determined,
we are pleased with the Bush administration's efforts to bring life-saving drugs
to patients faster alongside greater consistency in the drug development and
review process," Feldbaum said.

    The drug industry watchdog group Public Citizen, however, warned that the
conventional pharmaceuticals unit could be subject to political pressure to
speed up approvals of novel, high-tech drugs that by their nature should be
subjected to diligent safety scrutiny.

    "These are, after all, complex and new molecules," said Public Citizen
spokesman Peter Lurie. "It's not surprising that it would take a lot of effort
to review them."

    One analyst is betting that the transfer of




    biologics to another unit will have no impact on the speed of their review.

    Patrick Mooney, a biotech analyst for Thomas Weisel Partners in San
Francisco, said the FDA's conventional drug unit has faster average review times
only because many of the drugs it reviews are familiar "me-too" versions of the
approved, chemically synthesized small molecules that end up as the pills or
tablets most people are used to taking.

    In fact, Mooney said, review times for biologics might end up taking longer
because the traditional pharmaceutical review unit will tread carefully with
high-tech drugs produced by genetically engineered bacteria or tissue cultures.

    Walter Moore, vice president of governmental affairs for Genentech Inc. of
South San Francisco, acknowledged that the complexity of protein-based
biotechnology drugs may add to their review time no matter who evaluates them.
But he said the FDA is on the right track with the drug unit consolidation.

    "If it achieves clarity and consistency, it's a good thing for our
patients," Moore said.

   Copyright 2002 The San Francisco Chronicle

   E-mail Bernadette Tansey at btansey@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, The biotech industry has argued that the review process for
biotech drugs is too cumbersome. / Paul Sakuma/Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2002


                             1180 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           September 7, 2002 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 392 words

HEADLINE: FDA Seeks To Hasten Review of Biotech Drugs

BYLINE: Marc Kaufman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Some new drugs developed through biotechnology will be approved in the future
by the Food and Drug Administration's drug evaluation center rather than its
biologics center, the agency announced yesterday.

   Many biotechnology companies have recommended the shift, saying the agency's
drug evaluation center is better staffed and can review the applications more
swiftly.

   FDA officials said the move makes sense because the testing, evaluation and
use of the pharmaceuticals is similar, whether the drugs are created through
traditional chemical means or through newer biotechnology.

   While the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research will lose its review
authority over the drugs created through biotechnology, it will maintain control
over vaccines, blood safety, gene therapy and tissue transplantation.

   In recent years, the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research has gained in
industry respect because of its relative speed in reviewing applications. It was
the first center at the FDA to be given additional staff and funds through the
user fees that drug companies have paid since 1994 when they apply for approval
to sell their products. The biologics center will not begin receiving user-fee
funds until next year.

   Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, said his
group welcomed the change, which he said reflected concerns that were raised
when the user-fee legislation was reauthorized over the summer.

    "The industry has been impressed with [the drug center's] close attention to
review time clocks," he said, adding that the biologics center did not have as
good a record.

   Feldbaum said BIO also believed that CDER had developed straightforward and
consistent rules about clinical trials for new drugs that the biologics center
had not always followed.

   The question of how quickly a drug is reviewed by the agency is of prime
importance to drug companies, which cannot begin to recoup their costs of drug
development until they can begin to sell their products.

    The FDA said yesterday that details of the shift will be worked out by
January by a group chaired by Murray M. Lumpkin, a senior associate
commissioner. An FDA official said the group would decide questions such as
which classes of drugs would move to the drug center, how resources might be
changed and whether employees would be transferred.

CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 2002

CORRECTION:

   A Sept. 7 article incorrectly reported that the Food and Drug
Administration's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research has not received
funds through a pharmaceutical industry user fee program. The center began to
receive user fee funds in 1992.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2002


                             1181 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       September 6, 2002, Friday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy study targets heart ; S.A. man gettingexperimental
cardiac treatment

BYLINE: Nicole Foy


BODY: A San Antonio man with severe coronary artery disease became the first
local volunteer in a highly experimental gene therapy study Thursday in the
hopes it will someday help patients grow new blood vessels to their hearts.

    The idea, known as angiogenesis, is to provide alternate paths for
oxygen-rich blood to flow in and around narrowed or blocked coronary arteries.



    University of Texas Health Science Center physicians injected new genes that
manufacture fibroblast growth factor (FGF) directly into the heart of the first
local patient enrolled in the national research study.

    So far, the treatment has shown promise in just a few small-scale human
trials. The ongoing study at about 100 U.S. medical centers will include 450
patients and help determine whether angiogenesis will prove a legitimate new
treatment for heart disease, said Dr. Miguel Zabalgoitia, professor of medicine
at the health science center.

    "This is totally, totally experimental," acknowledged Zabalgoitia, who is
helping lead the study at the Audie Murphy VA Hospital. "We don't really know
the long-term effects of gene therapy. That's why we need studies like this one
looking for objective evidence of improvement."

    The FGF genes are transported into the heart muscle by a modified version of
a common cold virus. The treatment is administered through a catheter inserted
near the groin and guided up an artery toward the heart.

    Some in the medical community have become wary of using weakened viruses as
packages for gene therapy after at least one patient died a few years ago from a
fatal allergic reaction to a virus during an experimental treatment.

    But Dr. Nilesh Goswami, an interventional cardiology fellow aiding in the
San Antonio study, stressed that the jury is still out on whether growth
hormones and angiogenesis will prove useful in cardiac care.

    So far, the experimental treatment is reserved for patients who have failed
conventional therapies. The 58-year-old San Antonio veteran injected with the
drug during an hourlong procedure Thursday fits in that category, his wife said.



    Within the last year, the man, who asked that his name not be used, has
undergone an angioplasty and heart bypass surgery. Despite the interventions and
medications, he suffered from light-headedness and chest pain attacks -
sometimes up to 10 times a day, his wife said.

    A recent angiogram showed he suffered from five severe blockages in his
coronary arteries, Zabalgoitia said.

    Despite the risks of the experimental gene therapy drug, the man and his
family decided enrolling in the trial was his best hope.

    Patients will undergo a treadmill test six weeks after the catheterization
procedure to determine whether the treatment has reduced chest pain and boosted
the heart's ability to tolerate exercise, said Heather Moore, a VA hospital
nurse and a study coordinator.

    So far, the treadmill test, coupled with a questionnaire on quality-of-life
measures, is the best indicator of the drug's effectiveness, Zabalgoitia said.
That's because even the most sophisticated medical technology has not been able
to pick up images of the tiny new blood vessels, he added.

    "There are many unknowns," he noted.

    nfoy@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: Photo: Kin Man Hui/ Express-News Staff ; Graphic: Felipe Soto/
Express-News Staff : Photo: Physicians Nilesh Goswami (left), Robert Chilton and
Michael Lujan peer at monitors during a new procedure called angiogenesis. The
procedure was performed Thursday at Audie Murphy VA Hospital. ; Graphic: Gene
therapy for the heart

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2002


                             1182 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   September 5, 2002 Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg.A3

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: WILD BOAR KILLED AFTER ATTACK ON BOY IN RESIDENTIAL AREA

DATELINE: CONSTANTA, ROMANIA (AP)

BODY:

   Police killed a wild boar that charged through a residential neighborhood in
this Black Sea port city and gored a 7-year-old boy, police said Wednesday.

    It was one of five wild boars that spooked tourists and residents along
Romania's Black Sea coast in recent days. The animals have begun straying into
residential areas in search of food since their habitat was overrun by
construction, officials said.

    "People were sitting out in the streets on Tuesday evening when the boar
appeared," said Marian Voicu, a police officer in the town 150 miles east of
Bucharest. "It began to chase people and tore the boy's upper lip with its
tusks."

    Police shot to death the 175-pound male boar two hours later. The boy was
treated in a hospital and released.

    Wednesday, tourists and waiters at a restaurant next to the beach spotted
two wild boars in the Black Sea. Monday, a wild boar wandered into the lobby of
a hotel at the resort of Mamaia, alarming guests. Another boar was shot Monday
after it attacked scientists at the Maritime Research Institute, 150 miles east
of Bucharest.


    Two rare panda cubs die
 from skin infections



    VERONA, Italy (AP) -- Two rare red pandas died from skin infections at an
Italian zoo after their mother licked off antibiotic cream helping them heal,
officials said Wednesday.

    Kunming and Xian were born in mid-July and soon developed skin ailments.
Their mother licked the sores, removing antibiotic cream applied by
veterinarians, the Parco Natura Viva zoo said Wednesday.

    The cubs were already weak because their aging mother could not breast-feed
them, zoo officials said.

    The zoo, in the northeastern town of Bussolengo, breeds red pandas under a
European program to repopulate the animal's native Himalayan forests in southern
China. Only a few thousand red pandas exist.


    Gene therapy frees boy
 from life in plastic bubble



    AMSTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) -- The remnants of lunch were on Wilco Conradi's
rosy cheeks when the 2-year-old grabbed a large ice cream and ran back to the
table.

    "Let's see if this tastes OK," he said, climbing onto his mother's lap and
drawing a giggle.

    This summertime outing at the zoo once was unthinkable for the Dutch boy,
who lived his first months in a germ-proof plastic enclosure after being born
with severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. The plastic enclosure protected
Wilco from infections that would have killed him.

    But the blond, blue-eyed boy underwent a new gene therapy technique that
apparently cured his disease and allowed him to leave his plastic bubble. He
needs no medication or special treatment and eats a regular diet.

    "He can go to school, go on vacation and live like any other child," said
his father, Theo Conradi. "Just look at him!"

    Wilco is among the first four boys to undergo the new treatment -- all with
successful results -- for the inherited disease. The disorder, which is carried
by women but afflicts only boys, has plagued Wilco's family for generations.


    Man claims voice told him
 to attack kindergartners



    SEOUL, South Korea (AP) -- A man who said he heard a voice telling him to
kill people if he wanted to save his life attacked kindergarten children with
knives in a church cafeteria Wednesday, wounding 10 of them.

    One child was in a critical condition with a stab wound in the head, said
police Lt. Kim Sa Yeon.

    Two others were in serious condition with stab wounds. The children's ages
ranged from 4 to 7.

    The 53-year-old man, who police said had a record of mental illness,
attacked the children as they gathered for lunch at Neungdong Church in eastern
Seoul.

    He picked up two kitchen knives from the table and began attacking the
children, witnesses told police.

    Police identified the man only by his last name, Hwang.


    Days may be numbered
 for Britain's royal train



    LONDON (AP) -- British monarchs have traveled by royal train to visit their
subjects since Queen Victoria's rule. But in the belt-tightening of the 21st
century, the train's days may be numbered.

    A parliamentary committee suggested Wednesday that the royal train, which
costs taxpayers about $78 per mile, is an expensive and underused indulgence
that should be scrapped.

    "The (royal) household might well come to the conclusion that it has had its
day," said Edward Leigh, chairman of the public accounts committee, as he
released a report on royal travel expenses.

    "In the modern world, there are easier commercial options. It is much easier
. . . to just jump into a helicopter and get there in half an hour."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2002


                             1183 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  September 05, 2002, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: New world for Dutch bubble boy;
Gene therapy frees tot from germ-proof pen

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: ANTHONY DEUTSCH

BODY:

   AMSTERDAM, Netherlands - The remnants of lunch were on Wilco Conradi's rosy
cheeks when the 2-year-old grabbed a large ice cream and ran back to the table.

   This summertime outing at the zoo once was unthinkable for the Dutch boy, who
lived his first months in a germ-proof plastic enclosure after being born with
severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. The plastic enclosure protected Wilco
from infections that would have killed him.

   But the blond, blue-eyed boy underwent a new gene therapy technique that
apparently cured his disease and allowed him to leave his plastic bubble. He
needs no medication or special treatment and eats a regular diet.

   "He can go to school, go on vacation, and live like any other child," said
his father, Theo Conradi. "Just look at him!"

   Wilco is among the first four boys to undergo the new treatment - all with
successful results - for the inherited disease that occurs in about one of every
75,000 births. The disorder, which is carried by women but afflicts only boys,
has plagued Wilco's family for generations, killing one of his uncles and two
cousins.

   The illness renders the immune system ineffective against microbes ordinarily
harmless to people with normal resistance. The best-known victim was David,
Houston's famous "bubble boy," who lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until
his death at age 12 in 1984.

   Wilco was a baby when he received the experimental treatment at the Hopital
Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris. After receiving a single injection of
genetically modified stem cells, Wilco now has a normal immune system.

   In April, the experimental procedure passed its first major test when Wilco
got sick.

   "He had chicken pox and recovered on his own," said Dr. Nico Wulffraat, an
immunologist at the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in Utrecht. "Normally, that
would have been lethal."

   The day Wilco was born, his father took a blood sample to Wulffraat, fearing
the boy had inherited the disease first discovered in the family 45 years
earlier. The diagnosis was confirmed hours later and the next day Wilco was
admitted to the hospital.

   Wulffraat then introduced the family to Paris immunologist Dr. Alain Fischer.

   The four boys treated in France lacked an essential protein due to a genetic
mutation. As a result, they could not produce two types of infection-fighting
immune cells and a third type did not work, leaving their bodies vulnerable to
infection.

   To reverse that gene defect, doctors drew bone marrow from the boys. They
culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with a harmless virus that
contained a gene that makes the missing protein.

   After the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each boy's cells
were injected into his bloodstream to give them healthy immune systems.

   Wilco visits the hospital four times a year, twice in Paris and twice in the
Netherlands. He does not remember anything about his groundbreaking treatment or
about his infancy in isolation.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Wilco Conradi

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2002


                             1184 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   September 5, 2002 Thursday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. A02

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy rescues boy from life in a plastic bubble

BYLINE: Anthony Deutsch Associated Press

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM

BODY:

   The remnants of lunch were on Wilco Conradi's rosy cheeks when the 2-year-old
grabbed a large ice cream and ran back to the table.

   "Let's see if this tastes OK," he said, climbing onto his mother's lap and
drawing a giggle.

   This summertime outing at the zoo once would have been unthinkable for the
Dutch boy, who lived his first months in a germ-proof plastic enclosure after
being born with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). The plastic enclosure
protected Wilco from infections that would have killed him.

   But the blond, blue-eyed boy underwent a new gene-therapy technique that
apparently cured his disease and allowed him to leave his plastic bubble. Now,
he needs no medication or special treatment and eats a regular diet.

   "He can go to school, go on vacation, and live like any other child," said
his father, Theo Conradi. "Just look at him!"

   Wilco was peering disapprovingly at a boy sleeping in a stroller, apparently
worn out by the heat.

   Wilco is among four boys successfully treated for the inherited disease,
which occurs in about one of every 75,000 births. The disorder, which is carried
by women but afflicts only boys, has plagued Wilco's family for generations,
killing one of his uncles and two cousins.

   The illness renders the immune system ineffective against microbes ordinarily
harmless to people with normal resistance. The best-known victim was David,
Houston's famous "bubble boy," who lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until
his death in 1984 at age 12.

   Many afflicted babies are saved by bone-marrow transplants but for the rest
of their lives must take monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin,
antibodies culled from donated blood.

   Wilco was a baby when he received the experimental treatment at the
Necker-Enfants Malades hospital in Paris. After receiving a single injection of
genetically modified stem cells, he now has a normal immune system.

   In April, the experimental procedure passed its first major test when Wilco
got sick.

   "He had chicken pox and recovered on his own," said Nico Wulffraat, an
immunologist at the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in Utrecht. "Normally, that
would have been lethal."

   The boy has no signs of complications - such as fever or infection - that
could indicate problems, Wulffraat said.

   "Everything looks right, but we are closely following his case," Wulffraat
said. "Several other children have now received the same treatment."

   Similar gene therapy might be used to fight other inherited disorders,
Wulffraat said, "but these children will have to be followed for a long time" to
know the long-term results.

   Wilco visits a hospital four times a year, twice in Paris and twice in the
Netherlands. He does not remember anything about his groundbreaking treatment or
his infancy in isolation.

   At the Artis zoo in downtown Amsterdam, Wilco scampered off with his
12-year-old sister, Petra, to play on the slide as his parents explained how the
treatment had lifted what seemed like a family curse. Their second child, Wilma,
died of a brain tumor a year before Wilco was born.

   "It feels like we have been given a second chance," said Wilco's mother,
Roelien. "But it is still difficult to treat him like a normal child."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2002


                             1185 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 5, 2002 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY ALLOWS BOY TO LEAVE HIS BUBBLE

BYLINE: ANTHONY DEUTSCH, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands

BODY:

   The remnants of lunch were on Wilco Conradi's rosy cheeks when the 2-year-old
grabbed a large ice cream and ran back to the table. "Let's see if this tastes
OK," he said, climbing onto his mother's lap and drawing a giggle.

    This summertime outing at the zoo once was unthinkable for the Dutch boy,
who lived his first months in a germ-proof plastic enclosure after being born
with severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. The plastic enclosure protected
Wilco from infections that would have killed him.

    But the boy underwent a new gene therapy technique that apparently cured his
disease and allowed him to leave his plastic bubble. He needs no medication or
special treatment and eats a regular diet.

    Wilco is among the first four boys to undergo the new treatment, all with
successful results, for the inherited disease that occurs in about 1 of 75,000
births. The disorder, carried by women but afflicting only boys, has plagued
Wilco's family for generations.

    The illness renders the immune system ineffective against microbes
ordinarily harmless to people with normal resistance. The best-known victim was
David, Houston's famous "bubble boy," who lived in a germ-proof plastic
enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

    Many afflicted babies are saved by bone marrow transplants, but for the rest
of their lives take monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies
culled from donated blood. Wilco was a baby when he received a single injection
of genetically modified stem cells at a Paris hospital.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2002


                             1186 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 5, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-16

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: New treatment cures immune-deficient boy; Gene therapy gives child
normal life

BYLINE: Anthony Deutsch; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 AMSTERDAM, Netherlands -- The remnants of lunch were on Wilco Conradi's rosy
cheeks when the 2-year-old grabbed a large ice cream and ran back to the table.

   "Let's see if this tastes OK," he said, climbing onto his mother's lap.

   This summertime outing at the zoo once was unthinkable for the Dutch boy, who
lived his first months in a germ-proof plastic enclosure after being born with
severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. The plastic enclosure protected Wilco
from infections that would have killed him.

   But the boy underwent a new gene therapy technique that apparently cured his
disease and allowed him to leave his plastic bubble.  He needs no medication or
special treatment and eats a regular diet.

   "He can go to school, go on vacation, and live like any other child," said
his father, Theo Conradi.  "Just look at him!"

   Wilco is among the first four boys to undergo the new treatment -- all with
successful results -- for the inherited disease that occurs in about one of
every 75,000 births.  The disorder, which is carried by women but afflicts only
boys, has plagued Wilco's family for generations, killing one of his uncles and
two cousins.

   The illness renders the immune system ineffective against microbes ordinarily
harmless to people with normal resistance.  The best-known victim was David,
Houston's famous "bubble boy," who lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until
his death at age 12 in 1984.

   Many afflicted babies are saved by bone marrow transplants, but for the rest
of their lives take monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies
culled from donated blood.

   Wilco was a baby when he received the experimental treatment at the Hospital
Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris.  After receiving a single injection of
genetically modified stem cells, Wilco now has a normal immune system.

   In April, the experimental procedure passed its first major test when Wilco
got sick.

   "He had chicken pox and recovered on his own," said Dr. Nico Wulffraat, an
immunologist at the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in Utrecht.  "Normally, that
would have been lethal."


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Associated Press; Wilco Conradi, who recently visited the
Amsterdam zoo, was isolated in a "bubble" until experimental gene therapy
apparently cured his immune system.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2002


                             1187 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 5, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: THERAPY FREES BOY FROM BUBBLE

BYLINE: Anthony Deutsch The Associated Press

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

BODY:

   * This is Wilco Conradi. He was born two years ago with severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID, which renders the immune system ineffective against
microbes ordinarily harmless to others. A simple illness can become
life-threatening to those with SCID. The disease is inherited. It killed one of
Wilco's uncles and two of his cousins.

   But a new gene therapy technique apparently has cured his disease. After a
single injection of genetically modified stem cells, Wilco gained a normal
immune system. He left the plastic bubble that had kept him safe from germs. He
needs no medication or special treatment and eats a regular diet.

   The remnants of lunch were on Wilco Conradi's rosy cheeks when the 2-year-old
grabbed a large ice cream and ran back to the table.

   "Let's see if this tastes OK," he said, climbing onto his mother's lap and
drawing a giggle.

   This summertime outing at the zoo once was unthinkable for the Dutch boy, who
lived his first months in a germ-proof plastic enclosure after being born with
severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. The plastic enclosure protected Wilco
from infections that would have killed him.

   But the blond, blue-eyed boy underwent a new gene therapy technique that
apparently cured his disease and allowed him to leave his plastic bubble. He
needs no medication or special treatment and eats a regular diet.

   "He can go to school, go on vacation and live like any other child," said his
father, Theo Conradi. "Just look at him!"

   Wilco was peering disapprovingly at a boy sleeping in a stroller, apparently
worn out by the heat.

   "Everything looks right"

   Wilco is among the first four boys to undergo the new treatment - all with
successful results - for the inherited disease that occurs in about one of every
75,000 births. The disorder is carried by women but afflicts only boys. It has
plagued Wilco's family for generations, killing one of his uncles and two
cousins.

   The illness renders the immune system ineffective against microbes ordinarily
harmless to people with normal resistance. The best-known victim was David,
Houston's famous "bubble boy," who lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until
his death at age 12 in 1984.

   Many afflicted babies are saved by bone marrow transplants but for the rest
of their lives take monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies
culled from donated blood.

   Wilco was a baby when he received the experimental treatment at the Hospital
Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris. After receiving a single injection of
genetically modified stem cells, Wilco now has a normal immune system.

   In April, the experimental procedure passed its first major test when Wilco
got sick.

   "He had chickenpox and recovered on his own," said Dr. Nico Wulffraat, an
immunologist at the Wilhelmina Children's Hospital in Utrecht. "Normally, that
would have been lethal."

   The boy has no signs of complications - such as fever or infection - that
could indicate problems, Wulffraat said.

   "Everything looks right, but we are closely following his case," Wulffraat
said. "Several other children have now received the same treatment."

   Similar gene therapy might be used to fight other inherited disorders,
Wulffraat said, "but these children will have to be followed for a long time" to
know the long-term results.

   Diagnosed at birth

   The day Wilco was born, his father took a blood sample to Wulffraat, fearing
the boy had inherited the disease first discovered in his family 45 years
earlier. The diagnosis was confirmed hours later, and the next day Wilco was
admitted to the hospital.

   Wulffraat then introduced the family to Paris immunologist Dr. Alain Fischer.

   The four boys treated in France lacked an essential protein due to a genetic
mutation. As a result, they could not produce two types of infection-fighting
immune cells, and a third type did not work, leaving their bodies vulnerable to
infection.

   To reverse that gene defect, doctors drew bone marrow from the boys. They
culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with a harmless virus that
contained a gene that makes the missing protein.

   After the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each boy's cells
were injected into his bloodstream to give them healthy immune systems.

   "A second chance"

   Wilco visits the hospital four times a year, twice in Paris and twice in the
Netherlands. He does not remember anything about his groundbreaking treatment or
about his infancy in isolation.

   At the Artis zoo in downtown Amsterdam, Wilco scampered off with his
12-year-old sister, Petra, to play on the slide as his parents explained how the
treatment lifted what seemed like a family curse. Their second child, Wilma,
died of a brain tumor a year before Wilco was born.

   "It feels like we have been given a second chance," said Wilco's mother,
Roelien. "But it is still difficult to treat him like a normal child."

NOTES:
WORLD FOCUS

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photos; (1) Wilco Conradi was a baby when
he received the experimental treatment in Paris. In April, the procedure passed
its first major test when Wilco got chickenpox and recovered on his own.; (2)
Wilco Conradi, 2, visits the aquarium at the Artis zoo in Amsterdam,
Netherlands, last month with his parents, Theo and Roelien Conradi. For his
mother and father, the outing at the zoo was once unimaginable. But now "he can
go to school, go on vacation and live like any other child," Theo Conradi said.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2002


                             1188 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    September 3, 2002 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.F-1 COVER STORY

LENGTH: 2186 words

HEADLINE: DANCING WITH NED;
 RECURRENT OVARIAN CANCER IS A LIFE-OR-DEATH TANGO

BYLINE: BETSY KLINE, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Every cancer survivor covets a long, slow dance with NED.

    NED is medical shorthand for No Existing Disease and it's the sweetest music
a cancer patient can hear.

    Dancing with NED is the feeling of renewed vigor after months of
chemotherapy-induced nausea and fatigue. It's the feel of the wind in a new
growth of hair and a spring in feet that were once numb.

    But for survivors of advanced ovarian cancer, the most lethal of the
gynecological cancers, the dance is a game of musical chairs. Remissions end too
quickly; recurrence is a way of life -- and death.

    The statistics are grim.

    The American Cancer Society estimates 23,300 new cases of ovarian cancer
will be diagnosed this year; about 13,900 women will die. Only 25 percent of
cases are diagnosed before the cancer has spread outside the ovaries; these
women have a 95 percent chance of surviving five years. Most cases are not
detected until stages 3 and 4, when the disease has spread; only 50 percent of
these women will live beyond five years and 70 percent will face multiple
recurrences.

    Fighting recurrent ovarian cancer presents both the patient and her doctor
with difficult choices. Long-term chemotherapy can prolong life by months or
even years, but the quality of that life is compromised by multiple surgeries,
sickness, weakness and possible organ failure. When do patient and doctor break
from established protocols and test different drugs? When does a woman hang up
her dancing shoes?

    These are the stories of women who have chosen to fight and the doctors and
researchers who are striving to give them better weapons to win the battle.


    A will to survive

    Carolyn Gardner loved her life as a second-grade teacher at Liberty School
in Shadyside, where she lives. In June 1998, Gardner, then 49, was diagnosed
with stage 3a ovarian cancer. After surgery to remove tumors followed by
chemotherapy, she was in remission by January 1999.

    "I spent all summer planning my classroom," Gardner recalls wistfully. But
the chemo had taken its toll. "I only lasted three weeks. I went home and cried
all night and by Saturday I was dry-eyed and knew I had to quit." That was
September 1999.

    She channeled her energies into fighting the disease on the nonmedical
front. She became active in the local chapter of the National Ovarian Cancer
Coalition, one of whose missions is to educate the public about the disease. She
is now its community outreach director.

    Then last summer, almost three years to the day after her initial diagnosis,
she learned that the beast was back. Gardner underwent more chemo. She lost her
hair a second time. By February it looked as though she was in remission again.
But it lasted only four months.

    "I found myself becoming bitter towards people who've enjoyed good health
because this has been such as a struggle. In June I was envious of people still
in remission. I was thinking of planning my funeral," Gardner says.

    Instead, she got busy talking to other oncologists for second and third
opinions and decided on treatment using different drugs. She joined a Bible
study group and maintained an active social life.

    "We [survivors] can't be consumed by ovarian cancer. We attend too many
funerals. We have to do other things and be with other people."

    Karen Bowers, 48, of Ross, also takes a proactive approach.

    Diagnosed in June 1998 with stage 3c ovarian cancer, she is now fighting her
third recurrence.

    "I don't even think in terms of cure anymore. I just want a long remission,"
Bowers says matter-of-factly. She admits she gets impatient with doctors who
favor doses upon doses of chemo drugs. She's had them all. The president of the
local NOCC chapter wants to see more aggressive surgeries and "out-of-the-box"
therapies focused on excising tumors and blasting away the microscopic remnants
that sneak back as full-blown tumors.

    Meanwhile, she rides a nightmare roller coaster. Her current treatment
involves a drug called Doxil, which takes months to kick in. In the interim, she
worries about her cancer spreading. It's scary. "It's not like me to break down
in tears at the drop of a hat, but that's what it's like now," the former
chemical industry sales rep says. Antidepressants help. "I measure my life in
milligrams now," she says with an explosive laugh.

    "It's my impression that the diagnosis of recurrence is in some ways more
frightening" than the original diagnosis, says Judy Knapp, an oncological social
worker at Magee-Womens Hospital. "It means the disease hasn't gone away and
stayed away. These women know the implications of going back into treatments" --
the loss of hair or fingernails, rashes, persistent nausea, lack of energy and
libido are all blows to one's body image.

    Knapp has worked with ovarian cancer patients for 22 years, and she's seen
women walk away to die on their own terms, and she's seen women fight.

    The typical fighter, she says, is "a woman who has a strong ability to
adjust to life's changes and lots of family and social support. A woman who has
a deep spirituality or a strong set of religious beliefs. A woman who has roles
in life to fulfill, such as mother, sister, employee or ovarian cancer advocate.
It's about trying to reclaim parts of your life from the cancer experience. A
sense of humor helps -- it gives you perspective."

    Knapp shares the women's frustration. "For those of us in the health
industry, the fact that ovarian cancer can be treated as a chronic disease is a
huge step, but it's squat for the individual dealing with it."


    Facts and frustration

    Women with advanced ovarian cancer have an average life expectancy of three
to four years, compared to one to two years a decade ago.

    Dr. Jan C. Seski, director of gynecological oncology at Allegheny General
Hospital, attributes the gain to improved patient care and better chemotherapy
drugs. Women who are treated from the start by specialists in gynecological
cancers also tend to survive longer,.

    But the reality, says Dr. Holly Gallion, director of the Center of
Excellence for Gynecological Cancers at Magee-Womens, is that better drugs and
procedures usually buy a few years at most.

    "The face of ovarian cancer has changed so much since I started in 1983,"
she says, citing the development of new chemotherapy and antinausea drugs. While
women enjoy a better quality of life during treatment, Gallion says, most still
face a fatal outcome.

    Not only does long-term chemotherapy erode a woman's health, but the disease
becomes more resistant to treatment with each recurrence, she says. About 80
percent respond to first-time treatments; that drops to 30 to 40 percent the
second time; 15 percent in the third go-round. Remissions become shorter and
more elusive.

    So while doctors talk about treating ovarian cancer as a chronic disease --
keeping it under surveillance and controlling it with continuous treatment much
like asthma or diabetes -- survivors are not as enthused.

    Gardner feels that the "chronic" label gives women "a false sense of
security. It is only chronic as long as the chemo works."


    Research and clinical trials

    The thrust of most ovarian cancer research today is two-pronged: better
screening to catch the disease early and more effective and less debilitating
treatments for recurrent disease.

    Unlike cervical cancer, which can be detected early by a routine Pap smear,
ovarian cancer does not have a reliable early detection test. The reason so many
cases of ovarian cancer are caught late lies in the vagueness of the symptoms --
pelvic pain and/or abdominal swelling, bloating and indigestion, pelvic
pressure, persistent fatigue -- which often don't show up until the disease has
progressed beyond the early stages. Hence its nickname: the "whispering" cancer.

    But there is happy news on the horizon. A new early detection blood test
using spectrometry has shown 94 percent accuracy in early trials vs. less than
10 percent for the cancer antigen (CA125) test now used in conjunction with
ultrasound (for a total 20 percent accuracy).

    Researchers around the world are testing new chemo cocktails and techniques.
The major stumbling block is toxicity. Just how much can a body ravaged by
cancer, surgery and harsh drugs take?

    Cyndee DePastino, 44, of Monroeville gave a clinical trial a shot, with
mixed results.

    First diagnosed with stage 3c ovarian cancer in April 2000, DePastino
underwent nine rounds of chemo and achieved clinical remission that September.
But in December 2001, her doctor found five new tumors and her life slipped back
into crisis mode.

    Despite severe allergic reactions to standard chemotherapy, she enrolled in
a clinical trial for a new drug combination. It was rough, but after two
treatments, her tumors shrank dramatically. But the next two treatments did
nothing except exacerbate her side effects. Sick and miserable, she dropped out
of the trial.

    "I'm really conflicted about it," she says. She has some hard decisions to
make about further treatment vs. quality of life. "I'm a realist," she says. "I
have an appointment with my lawyer. I have plans to go to a funeral home ..."

    She cheers up at the thought of her only grandchild, Andrew, born July 21.
"I want to live. ... I want to enjoy that grandbaby."


    Research and hope

    Chemotherapy is not the only route to remission.

    Gallion points to Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy as holding some
promise. Conventional radiation delivers large doses of radiation to localized
abdominal tumors, but has been very limited in combating ovarian cancer, which
tends to be more difficult to pinpoint. IMRT is much more precise.

    Dr. David Bartlett, director of surgical oncology at the University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, is using hyperthermic chemo perfusion for patients
with few options left. The high-risk procedure combines surgery to remove tumors
and high doses of chemotherapy directly to the affected area while heating the
abdominal cavity. The combination of heat and chemo delivers a knockout punch to
residual cancer cells.

    "I tell patients that the surgery itself is a tough one, but people who have
been through chemo know what it's like," Bartlett says.

    Alice Fox was 46 and symptom-free when a routine checkup detected her stage
3 cancer in 1995. The Hunker, Westmoreland County, wife and grandmother had been
in almost continuous treatment since then. "You name it, I was on it," she says
today. Some of the drugs worked for a while and then quit.

    In December, she was told she had one more shot and that his name was Dr.
Bartlett. "I was scared. I was told that if I chose not to have this procedure I
had a year, maybe a year and a half to live. It was a tough decision."

    She had the surgery Jan. 16. It lasted 12 hours and recovery was slow. Eight
months later, Fox says, "I feel great. I have done more physical work in this
past summer than in the past seven years."

    She knows she's not out of the woods, but she's optimistic. "If this
procedure doesn't work for me, I know there's something else out there."

    That something else could be gene therapy, therapeutic vaccines or
antiangiogenic agents that cut off the blood supply to tumors. All are still in
the research phase.

    In a phase 2 clinical trial involving ovarian cancer patients at the Western
Pennsylvania Cancer Institute, Dr. Gregorio Delgado, chairman of the Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology at West Penn Hospital, and Dr. John Lister,
director of bone marrow transplantation, are investigating a controversial
procedure combining bone marrow stem cell "rescue" and nearly lethal doses of
chemo. Healthy stem cells are harvested and then transplanted back into the body
to restore bone marrow destroyed by the chemo.

    Delgado says that so far the response rate is good and the toxicity has been
tolerated. Skeptics of the procedure point to the low quality of life during the
treatment.

    The fact that new therapies for ovarian cancer are being studied and applied
is reason for optimism.

    "Everybody talks about breast cancer; nobody wants to talk about ovarian
cancer because it's so lethal," observes Carolyn Gardner.

    But that is changing. Slowly.

    "Ovarian cancer has never had much of an advocacy group, until now," says
Magee's Gallion. As survivors stay alive longer, "they're becoming more
militant," she says.

    All because they don't want the music to stop. They're all hoping for a
long, slow dance with NED.


    Walk for the Whisper

    * WHEN: Sept. 15. On-site registration begins at 8 a.m.; walk begins at 10
a.m.

    * WHAT: A 5-mile/1-mile walk to raise awareness, promote education and
support research of ovarian cancer, sponsored by the Pittsburgh chapter of the
National Ovarian Cancer Coalition. Rain or shine.

    * WHERE: Boat house at North Park.

    * REGISTRATION: $20 day of walk; $10 for children 12 and under. Look for the
red balloon tent. Parking: Follow the signs in North Park or free shuttle
service from the former Builders Square parking lot at McIntyre Square or Trader
Horn (near Showcase Cinemas North).


NOTES:
Betsy Kline is a two-year survivor of advanced ovarian cancer. She can be
reached at bkline@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1408.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING: By Daniel Marsula/Post-Gazette:
 PHOTO: Robin Rombach/Post-Gazette: While undergoing treatment, ovarian cancer
survivor Carolyn Gardner of Shadyside is keeping busy helping to organize the
Walk for the Whisper set for Sept. 15.
 PHOTO: Martha Rial/Post-Gazette: Dr. Holly Gallion, left, talks with
chemotherapy patient Carole Scaife of Mundy's Corner at the Women's Cancer
Center at Magee-Womens Hospital. Scaife was diagnosed with with ovarian cancer
this spring.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2002


                             1189 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    September 2, 2002, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1179 words

HEADLINE: TRIALS CONTINUE IN DIFFERENT FORM PATIENT MOVES PAST CANCER TREATMENTS

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Hope.

   The word is tattooed on Adriana Jenkins's wrist, in black ink and flowing
cursive script. Her battle against a deadly cancer once proliferating in her
breast inspired it.

      It is small enough to be obscured by her watch band. No garish tattoos for
Jenkins: There remains a career and marriage and social life to consider. Still,
she stares at it most every day.

   "This is my life now," she said, lounging at a Brookline cafe in the late
morning on a recent weekday. "I am a cancer patient."

   In April, the Globe chronicled 32-year-old Adriana Jenkins's journey through
a clinical trial for an experimental cancer therapy. The therapy appeared to
work: Her massive tumor disappeared. However, she developed a mild heart problem
as a side effect, prompting doctors to pull her from the trial seven months into
the scheduled 15-month experiment.

   In the four months since the Globe stories appeared, Jenkins has finished
chemotherapy and completed radiation treatment. Some hair has grown back. The
heart problems vanished. Her cancer has not returned.

   As a test subject, Jenkins exemplified the risks and promise of clinical
trials, a central piece in the mission of Boston's world-leading medical
community. Today, her role in the experiment over, she faces a new struggle: the
transition from a medical test subject facing death to a cancer survivor
reconstructing life. "In my mind, if I make it two more years, that'll be a big
hurdle for me," she said.

   The cancer is gone, but it is not forgotten. Her doctors say a 60 percent
chance remains that it will return within four years. Early death remains a
possibility; doctors aren't likely to ever pronounce her "cured."

   For now, Jenkins is well. A thick, kinky wave of mostly gray hair recently
sprouted on her once-bald head. She dyes it jet black. Loose clothing and
special undergarments mask the fact that a scar exists in place of her right
breast. "She's doing well. She has now completed all of the chemo. She's
recovering strength, growing hair," said Dr. Jennifer Ligibel, her doctor at the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. "She's in the rebuilding phase."

   During the trial, Jenkins's heart began beating irregularly. Doctors also
found that her heart's pumping strength slightly less ened. Both problems
disappeared once she stopped taking Adriamycin, a harsh chemotherapy drug.
Jenkins has resumed taking Herceptin, the so-called "smart drug" that was the
trial's focus. Researchers designed the virtually side-effect-free drug to
target specific cancers, avoiding the indiscriminate cellular destruction that
makes many cancer therapies harrowing. She has had no recent heart problems,
despite restarting Herceptin. Her doctors remain puzzled over the precise cause
of the earlier problems.

   On July 12, she completed her intensive treatment at Dana-Farber with the
last of 33 exhausting blasts of radiation therapy. She also recently started a
five-year course of tamoxifen, a drug that blocks certain cancer cells from
feeding off female hormones.

   "We hope [her cancer] is gone forever, but we watch carefully," said Ligibel.
"The longer period of time that has passed, the more likely this will never come
back."

   On July 10, Jenkins marked one year since her cancer diagnosis. She went out
for dinner with her husband, David Halligan. They plan to celebrate one year of
marriage on Sept. 15.

   He has been a pillar in her life, one that she increasingly leans on. He
found new work with manageable hours in part to spend more time with her. And he
never once complained about marrying a woman facing death and lacking a breast
and hair and, on many days, energy. Jenkins worked throughout her trial in the
public relations department at Millennium Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge. But this
summer, a deep weariness finally set in. She left work, taking paid medical
leave. She began resting her tired, scarred, chemotherapy-battered body.

   She sleeps now. A lot. She has taken up painting, favoring color-filled
abstract work.

   "It's been great just to relax, take a break, go at a pace my body is
comfortable with," she said.

   A simple headache still prompts fear. A brain tumor, perhaps? But, during the
tranquillity of the summer, a transformation occurred. "I crossed some line
where I'm not obsessed with it all the time," she said. "It was exhausting to
constantly be contemplating my demise."

   After the Globe series appeared in April, Jenkins received an outpouring of
support and concern, from friends, colleagues, other cancer patients, and even
strangers. In the tears and hugs, she saw energy waiting to be harnessed. And so
she fashioned a new role for herself: activist.

   She has organized an art auction to benefit breast cancer research at the
Tufts-New England Medical Center. The Boston Harbor Hotel donated a ballroom.
Christie's auction house will run the event. Already, more than 60 artists,
mostly local, have donated work, including amateur painter Senator Edward M.
Kennedy. Channel 5 news anchor Natalie Jacobson will be the master of
ceremonies. The effort - Jenkins dubbed it "Art for Hope" - has already received
$31,000 in corporate donations, including one from San Francisco-based Genentech
Inc., the maker of Herceptin. Her goal for the Oct. 3 event is $100,000.

   On a recent morning, she surveyed the ballroom, with its sweeping views of
the Boston waterfront. Where should the food table be, she asked, walking around
the room, pointing left and right, tailed by several public relations people.
Where should the jazz band sit? What about coat check? And reception?

   Four of Jenkins's paintings, completed this summer, will be auctioned. One is
of a pink tree, using the color adopted by breast cancer activists. Another
portrays a child's silhouette.

   "This is fun," she said, laughing. "Maybe I'll do it every year."

   Clinical trials have taken a battering in recent years, after a 1999 gene
therapy trial in Pennsylvania ended with a teenager's death. A recent Time
magazine issue with a story on clinical trials depicted on its cover a
frightened patient in an animal cage. But Adriana Jenkins holds another opinion:
"The clinical trial saved my life."

   "Art for Hope" is her expression of gratitude to the research community. But
after the auction has ended and the jazz band has sounded its last note, Jenkins
will return home with her husband to continue life as a cancer patient. It is a
precarious life, but she has come to see it as a deeply enriched one. And, with
each passing day, it molds Jenkins's identity anew.

   "I think I have slowly learned to mesh my old life with this new one with
some success, and hopefully as time goes on, I will recapture more and more of
my old life," she said.

   "But this life has some benefits as well. People reach out to you in all
sorts of wonderful ways. I have learned to appreciate people and things in a
completely new way."

   For information on "Art for Hope," call the Tufts-New England Medical
Center's development office at 617-636-7656. Raja Mishra can be reached at
rmishra@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, A tattoo on her left wrist signifies the hope that breast cancer
survivor Adriana Jenkins is bringing to her fund-raising project. / GLOBE STAFF
PHOTO / SUZANNE KREITER

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2002


                             1190 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    SEPTEMBER 2, 2002, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1095 words

HEADLINE: Long-stalled appointment at FDA is crucial to biotech

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
Most people recall how Dan Quayle stumbled over the word "potato," but lately
I've become worried President Bush may not know how to spell FDA.

    FDA is the acronym for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the
9,000-person federal agency whose actions affect millions of Americans daily.

    The FDA approves new drugs and medical devices. It ensures the safety of
three-quarters of the U.S. food supply. It regulates genetically engineered
crops and animals, and plays a key role in bolstering defenses against
bioterrorism.

    Yet for 19 months, this critical agency has been without a leader because
Bush has not found a nominee acceptable to the Democratic-controlled Senate,
which must approve any appointment.

    Politics certainly plays a role. Bush had initially wanted to give the FDA
job to Michael Astrue, the 44-year-old general counsel of the Boston-area
biotech firm Transkaryotic Therapies.

    But Sen. Ted Kennedy (D-Mass.) signaled he wouldn't accept a nominee so
close to industry -- not even one from his home state. Given Kennedy's role as
chairman of the Senate health committee, Bush never bothered to make the
appointment and risk rejection.

    Since that reversal, other rumored choices have also been shot down, either
by Kennedy or by Bush insiders. In the aftermath of Sept. 11 and the fallout
from financial scandals, finding an FDA commissioner has not been on anyone's
front burner.

    But having a strong FDA commissioner is essential to the biotech industry,
which has been increasingly vocal about getting the politicos to settle on a
pick.

    Biotech's interest has to do with obscure but important changes Congress
recently made in the formula under which drug and biotech firms pay fees to
support the FDA's review of drugs.

    Led by Lou Lange of Palo Alto's CV Therapeutics and Hollings Renton of
Richmond's Onyx Pharmaceuticals, biotech lobbyists have pushed the FDA to boost
its monitoring of new drugs after they are approved.

    Biotech leaders hope stronger scrutiny of new drugs would make the FDA more
comfortable about approving experimental therapies without forcing companies to
run enormous clinical trials.

    In recent years, the FDA has been asking for larger studies, for the good
reason that the more volunteers in a drug trial, the greater the likelihood it
will turn up any harmful side effects.

    But biotech leaders argue that there are costs, not only in dollars but in
needless deaths, from policies that demand excessive safety checks before
approving new medicines.

    It will take a strong FDA leader to strike the proper balance between the
bureaucratic tendency toward excessive caution and the recklessness that might
tempt profit-driven drug developers.

    So if President Bush takes a break from fretting about Iraq, perhaps someone
in the White House could remind him about this headless agency with the
easy-to-spell name.

    -- Stem cell state: The California Legislature may not have passed a budget,
but on Friday, it took a symbolic stand in favor of embryonic stem cell research
and therapeutic cloning when the Senate approved SB253.

    The bill, authored by Sen. Deborah Ortiz (D-Sacramento), has already passed
the Assembly, said Ortiz spokeswoman Ana Matosanto.

    "It's on its way to the governor, and we think he'll sign it," she said.

    Ortiz first proposed the bill at a public hearing held at Stanford
University in March. At the time, it appeared that the U.S. Senate was about to
pass a federal bill that would have restricted both therapeutic and reproductive
cloning.

    Scientists appealed to Ortiz to put California on record as supporting
therapeutic cloning, a technique that they said was essential to fully explore
stem cell therapy.

    But Congress has since given up its effort to regulate cloning, leaving
Ortiz's bill something of a symbolic orphan.

    -- Whither goeth NIH? Biotech has benefited in recent years from a 15
percent annual growth in spending by the National Institutes of Health, the
agency that funds basic research at universities.

    In 2003, the NIH budget will reach approximately $27 billion, capping a
five-year growth spurt that has roughly doubled the amount that Uncle Sam has
poured into medical discovery.

    Many NIH-funded discoveries are eventually licensed to private firms,
creating the raw material for drug development. The Human Genome Project, which
fueled the biotech boom of 2000, is one example of an NIH project with a Wall
Street payoff.

    But the five-year budget-boosting program has all but run its course, and
the question investors should ask going forward is, how will NIH fare in future
budgets?

    I ran this past Harold Varmus, the former NIH director, who engineered the
doubling of the agency's budget.

    "If NIH is going to maintain a vital pace, there will have to be the
funding," said Varmus, a former UCSF professor who is now president of the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.

    "We can't go back to steady state or inflation-plus budgets," he said,
predicting that science supporters would gear up to seek 10 percent annual
increases for the next several years.

    -- Make book on it: The leading biotech stock index sank again last week,
after rising steadily since it hit a 52-week low on July 10. The American Stock
Exchange biotech index closed at 346 on Friday, down about 9 percent from the
previous week's close.

    But last week's retreat still leaves this basket of biotech stocks 24
percent above its July 10 nadir of 280.

    All this up and down must confuse investors, who wonder whether the biotech
sector has found its bottom and when it might begin a reliable climb.

    Among many consequences, the market malaise has put a crimp in the
publishing plans of Jim McCamant, editor at large with the Medical Technology
Stock Letter in Berkeley.

    McCamant recently finished boiling down two decades of stock-picking
experience into a 195-page book titled "Biotech Investing." Unfortunately, the
book debuted during the slump.

    "We didn't get much of an initial reception," McCamant told me ruefully.

    That's too bad. "Biotech Investing" is a good, quick read, a primer on
trends in medical development and an introduction to the science and the jargon
of this complex field.

    And although this is a tough time to trumpet biotech investing, it might be
wise to bone up on your basics during the lull, because biotech will rise again.

    Of that McCamant is sure, although he has enough experience to know that
it's only possible to predict a bottom in retrospect.

   Copyright 2002 The San Francisco Chronicle


GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), Bush / Varmus

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2002


                             1191 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            September 1, 2002 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Part 4; Sports Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1571 words

HEADLINE: High Performance;
Thirty years after Munich, IOC battle against doping is far from over

BYLINE: ALAN ABRAHAMSON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The night before the men's 400-meter freestyle race at the 1972 Munich
Olympics, Rick DeMont, a 16-year-old from the Bay Area, woke up wheezing. He'd
been taking allergy medications since he was 4, and that night he took an
anti-asthma pill, called Marax, so he could breathe.

   The next morning, before the race, he took another Marax. It contains
ephedrine, a stimulant. Ephedrine, then and now, was on the International
Olympic Committee's banned list.

   But DeMont didn't believe there was any reason for concern. Before the 1972
Games, he had filled out a standard medical form listing medications he was
taking, which, he presumed, meant that the authorities had been dutifully
notified. He was at the Games, swimming, competing, so everything had to be OK,
right? No one had told him otherwise.

   That night, DeMont raced, and won, by one-hundredth of a second over
Australia's Bradford Cooper. A few days later, however, after easily swimming a
qualifying heat in the 1,500 meters--a race in which he was the world-record
holder--DeMont was told he had flunked doping control. Bewildered and angry, he
watched the 1,500 final from the stands. In short order, he was also stripped of
his gold medal in the 400; it was awarded to Cooper.

   Thirty years later, DeMont is still bewildered and occasionally angry. At the
1972 Munich Games, he unwittingly emerged as the first high-profile casualty of
the IOC's campaign to slow--if not stop--athletes' use of performance-enhancing
substances, a cat-and-mouse affair that until the last couple of years has been
most noteworthy for inconsistency in effort and result.

   For 30 years, DeMont, now a painter and an assistant swim coach at the
University of Arizona, has had his reputation stained by the events in Munich.
An Australian newspaper story published two years ago, during the Sydney Games,
labeled him the No. 2 Olympic "drug cheat" of all time--behind only Ben Johnson,
the Canadian sprinter who won the men's 100-meter dash in Seoul in 1988 but was
later found to have been using steroids.

   In DeMont's case, the fault in Munich was not his but that of U.S. team
physicians, who didn't look at DeMont's medical form before the Games and relay
the information to IOC medical authorities. Testifying during a congressional
inquiry three years after the Munich Games, Douglas Roby, a U.S. IOC member,
said he believed DeMont would have had his gold if the team doctor had simply
"assumed responsibility for the oversight."

   The DeMont case stands today as a reminder of the complex political and
pharmacological issues that still--after 30 years--trouble the Olympic movement
as the IOC tries to rein in athletes' use of drugs and other
performance-enhancing substances. And, as the IOC confronts a new generation of
cheaters willing to embrace a host of methods for enhancing
performance--revolutionary chemical substances, perhaps even the manipulation of
human genes--the DeMont case resonates as an illustration of the value of
caution and precision in applying policies and politics.

   That the fight against doping is the IOC's oft-proclaimed priority is without
question.

   "The IOC, I can say this, under my presidency, will be a witch hunter in
doping," Jacques Rogge, a Belgian physician elected IOC president last year,
said recently. "Zero tolerance. Pushing relentlessly to test, and to catch the
cheats. And we support WADA wholeheartedly."

   WADA, the World Anti-Doping Agency, created in the wake of the doping scandal
in the 1998 Tour de France, has made what even skeptical experts consider
significant progress in advancing the fight against doping. Perhaps most
important, WADA represents not just sports officials but governments worldwide.
It coordinates out-of-competition testing and monitors IOC testing at the Games.

   In the United States, the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency was constituted to take
responsibility for drug testing away from the U.S. Olympic Committee. It took
over that responsibility after the Sydney Games.

   The IOC and WADA have pursued with vigor the illicit use of the synthetic
hormone erythropoietin, or EPO--which boosts red blood cell production, thus
enabling athletes to train longer and harder--and earlier this year surprised
competitors at the Salt Lake Games with a test for darbepoetin, an EPO
variation.

   "I will acknowledge that some progress has been made," said Charles Yesalis,
a Penn State professor and authority on the history of doping in Olympic sports.
"I'm using words like 'perhaps' and 'maybe' because they," meaning the IOC and
officials at Olympic sport federations, "don't deserve better.

   "There's this awful history of them sticking their heads in the sand.... I'm
going to have to see them perform for four or five years before I grab my
pompoms and start leading the cheers."

   In recent months, a new threat has emerged--the idea that athletes could
manipulate their bodies or enhance their performance by use of genes. That is,
an athlete could inject a gene into his or her body and suddenly become stronger
or faster.

   In March, WADA sponsored a Long Island, N.Y., conference that, for the first
time, brought together sports officials and leading genetic-research scientists.
Among them: Dr. H. Lee Sweeney, a University of Pennsylvania researcher whose
experiments with genetically modified mice and rats show the double-edged nature
of such research.

   Sweeney's research, funded by the National Institutes for Health and the
Muscular Dystrophy Assn., involves injecting a synthetic gene coded for a factor
called IGF-1, which plays a critical role in muscle growth and repair, directly
into the animals' muscles, via a harmless virus. One injection is sufficient for
the life of the animal.

   Rats injected with the gene got 15% stronger. Those injected with the gene
who then undertook a rat version of weightlifting got 30% stronger. Recovery
from injury was complete and rapid. Injected rats who were allowed to grow old
did not lose muscle strength as they aged.

   The possibilities for beneficial therapy for dystrophy sufferers--as well as
aging-related muscle problems--are great. So, too, however, is the lure for
cheaters.

   Sweeney said, "I've gotten contacted by lots of athletes, even one coach,"
whom he declined to name, "who wanted me to treat his whole football team, which
I thought was pretty amusing."

   Without a muscle biopsy, detecting genetic manipulation done in Sweeney's lab
is currently impossible. It seems farfetched to imagine the IOC ordering muscle
biopsies on 10,000 athletes who compete at the Summer Games--particularly given
the cultural and religious objections now to tests that sometimes involve the
simple drawing of blood.

   Sweeney said it's simply a "matter of time" before athlete use of gene
therapy surfaces at the Olympics. In an opinion held by other experts as well,
he said, "I think the next Olympics," in Athens in 2004, "is too soon. I don't
think they could get it together by the next Olympics. But the one after that,"
in 2008 in Beijing, "if some nation moves to the forefront in some strength or
speed activity, I might be a little suspicious."

   Rogge said the issues involved with genetic manipulation are "fascinating"
but said, "I'm not pessimistic." He said, "Classic doping with drugs will still
be the major danger for years to come.... Because it's easy to get. It's cheap.
It's not sophisticated. Everyone can get access to anabolic steroids. Everyone
can get access to EPO. You don't need to be a rocket scientist."

   Last year, the IOC, announcing one of several surveys conducted at the 2000
Sydney Games, said athletes had admitted taking an average of six to seven types
of medication each. Products the athletes admitted taking included anti-asthma
products, multivitamins and painkillers.

   One athlete, IOC medical chief Patrick Schamasch said, took 29 types of
medication.

   Dr. Gary Wadler, a New York physician, professor and author who in recent
years has served as advisor to the White House Office of National Drug Control
Policy, said, "We're a lot smarter in 2002 than we were in 1972." Nonetheless,
he added, "We're still working our way through the same issues--issues relating
to strict liability, which is the keystone in the Olympic movement, issues of
therapeutic exemption and issues involving the disorder that comes up the most
frequently in the Olympic movement, and that's asthma."

   The incidence of alleged asthma sufferers in the Olympic population has
startled experts.

   Last year, the IOC announced the results of a study finding that 7% of the
athletes at the Sydney Games had declared they were asthmatic; the incidence in
the general population runs to about 1%, the IOC said. Because many asthma
inhalers deliver a combination of medicines that can include stimulants, IOC
officials were suspicious.

   Prince Alexandre de Merode, longtime head of the IOC medical commission,
described the 7% rate as "very bizarre." He said, "It looks like the Games for
the sick."

   A couple of weeks ago, Dick Pound, a senior Canadian member of the IOC who
now heads WADA, wryly told reporters at the Commonwealth Games in Manchester,
England, "What the survey found was pockets of extremely brave athletes who have
apparently overcome asthma. Canada, Australia, Britain and Germany were the
countries mentioned. That is where they have an inordinately high number of
athletes who appear to suffer from this condition but bravely put it behind
them."

GRAPHIC:  Rick DeMont, stripped of 1972 gold medal, was unwitting symbol in the
Olympics' difficult, politically charged war on drug cheats. PHOTOGRAPHER: AL
BELLO / Getty Images
 (Bulldog)Rick DeMont's disqualification for taking allergy medication at Munich
Games is reminder of need for caution in anti-doping policies. PHOTOGRAPHER:
Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2002


                             1192 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     August 30, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 NAMES & GAMES/GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 788 words

BODY:

   Sorry, but it's just impossible.

    The Angry Young Man cannot leave the newspaper. Not now. I've spent too much
time developing my explanation for the guy, and while I'm damn tired of
delivering it in its various forms, I'm just too close to getting it right, to
communicating it to Angry Old Men in fewer than 700 words, that I can't believe
he's outta here as of today.

    Rossi, we hardly knew ye. Or barely knew ye. Or Hardley Barely, who won the
Oscar and one of those inexplicable Page 2 comparisons against, I believe,
former Bucco shortstop Sammy Khalifa.

    So that's it? Now it's former Post-Gazette hipster wiseass Rob Rossi, is it?
Not a bad media label (it beats botched home castration victim Rob Rossi), but
come on. We get this news right on top of the demise of the annual Blue-Gray
Game? That's just cruel. Just bleeping cruel. And don't get me started about
Post-Gazette editors dropping this shell right into the middle of the Wild
Things postseason. Savages.

    (And while we're at it, can you believe the annual Blue-Gray Game couldn't
get a title sponsor? Isn't American Musket lookin' for a suitable vehicle?)

    The whole mess makes me hark back (linguistic engineers continue the
research needed to one day allow us to hark forward) to my first conversations
about the Angry Young Man, and to reflect upon how far they've come. Don't say
nobody warned ya.

    Early exchanges went typically like this:

    Perplexed reader: "What's with that Rob Rossi?"

    Kindly sage columnist: "What's with him?"

    PR: "Yeah, I mean, what the hellzee tawking abaht?"

    KSC: "Talkin' 'bout freedom."

    PR: "Freedom?"

    KSC: "That's right Free-he-he-dom. He will fight for the right to live his
writer's life on Page 2 in any way he so chooses."

    This solved nothing, of course, but only brought both of us unneeded
additional contempt. But as someone who is himself apt to be misunderstood (I
know, you're stunned), I could empathize with the Angry Young Man. Thus I was
compelled, one might even say obligated, to explain and support his mission,
even if his mission was merely an opaque attempt to get laid.

    PR: "What's Rob Rossi trying to do?"

    KSC: "Trying to give part of the sports section a little different spin."

    PR: "How?"

    KSC: "Well, for example, he and his buddies go out and, you know, rap with
the Miss Pretties."

    PR: "What?"

    KSC: "Chat with some honeys."

    PR: "What?"

    KSC: "Make time with some dames; am I getting any closer?!"

    PR: "What are you tawkin' abaht?"

    KSC: "I don't KNOW what I'm talking about!"

    PR: "Ya mean girlies?"

    KSC: "Yes, Myron, yes!"

    Seems to me that when the Angry Young Man started the Page 2 project of edgy
interviews, irreverent comparisons and impassioned rants, there were just two
ads for strip clubs in the section. Now there are six, seven on a good day.
Coincidence? I think not. And if people didn't get him, it wasn't from his lack
of candor. I mean really, Rob, do I need to know that you're pretty much always
going home alone?

    And yet questions persisted. Frustrations grew.

    PR: "Ya know the prawm with that Rob Rossi?"

    KSC: "There's a prawm, I mean, a problem?"

    PR: "I mean, I think I see what he's tryin' to do. But it doesn't make
sense."

    KSC: "Oh and everything else in the paper makes perfect sense? Does it make
sense that we spent most of the summer with daily health and status updates
regarding the availability of Armando Rios like we were waiting for Roy Hobbs?
Have you read my column lately. Isn't that nonsensical more often than not?"

    PR: "You have a column?"

    In a final desperate lunge at understanding the Angry Young Man, I concluded
the mystery must lie within the nature of the emotion itself, somewhere near the
essence of anger. Or something.

    Wading into a film library, I watched "Angry Harvest," set poignantly in the
German occupation of Poland. I watched "Angry Joe Bass," set poignantly in
Native American culture during a long argument with the government over fishing
rights (how could I make that up?). I watched "The Angry Red Planet," set
poignantly on Mars and, in fact, so bad it was good.

    Finally I watched "Twelve Angry Men", in which Henry Fonda stalls a jury
from railroading a young suspect, and that's where I found it. The answer to the
whole Rob Rossi issue.

    PR: "That Rob Rossi, I don't get it!"

    KSC: "Have you ever heard of Henry Fonda?"

    PR: "Sure."

    KSC: "Then you're not supposed to get it! You're too damn old to get it. If
you got it or I got it, it wouldn't be any good. Just like opera."

    PR: "Oprah?"

    KSC: "No, opera."

    PR: "Oh, where it ain't over 'til the fat lady sings."

    KSC: "Right, and today there's a big fat Miss Pretty singin' like it hurts."


NOTES:
R.I.P. ANGRY YOUNG MAN SEPT. 10, 2001 - AUG. 30, 2002

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Ted Crow/Post-Gazette:

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2002


                             1193 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   August 28, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
BIOTECH 20 AUG. 20-27

BYLINE: JEFFREY KRASNER AND GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   A second straight profitable quarter boosts Harvard Bioscience; problems in
South Africa and analyst downgrades send Biopure tumbling.

   1 1    Serono SA SRA $9,514 $14.82 2.0%

      2 2    Biogen BGEN $5,249 $35.34 -3.8%

   3 3    Genzyme Corp. GENZ $4,744 $22.14 -4.8%

   4 4    Millennium Pharmaceuticals MLNM $3,669 $12.90 -5.4%

   5 5    Charles River Laboratories International CRL $1,723 $38.50 1.3%

   6 6    Vertex Pharmaceuticals VRTX $1,614 $21.23 -3.6%

   7 7    Transkaryotic Therapies TKTX $1,265 $36.35 -4.4%

   8 8    Alkermes ALKS $558 $8.62 -5.5%

   9 9    Sepracor SEPR $529 $6.29 6.3%

   10 10    Exact Sciences Corp. EXAS $222 $11.65 1.1%

   11 11    Cubist Pharmaceuticals CBST $202 $7.06 -1.7%

   12 13    Praecis Pharmaceuticals PRCS $173 $3.35 1.5%

   13 14    Immunogen IMGN $131 $3.27 7.6%

   14 17    Harvard Bioscience HBIO $128 $4.80 16.8%

   15 15    Arqule ARQL $127 $6.00 4.9%

   16 16    Genzyme Biosurgery GZBX $109 $2.76 -2.8%

   17 18    Ariad Pharmaceuticals ARIA $106 $3.25 8.4%

   18 12    Biopure Corp. BPUR $97 $3.32 -44.7%

   19 19    Indevus Pharmaceuticals IDEV $81 $1.73 8.1%

   20 20    Repligen Corp. RGEN $69 $2.59 -4.0%

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2002


                             1194 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 27, 2002, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20 health

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Cell study disputes 'bone to brain' changeover ;
Baylor team says occurrence uncommon, therapy for nervous system's ills unlikely

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Refuting previous research that adult bone marrow stem cells can transform
themselves into brain cells, Baylor College of Medicine researchers are
reporting that the phenomenon is an uncommon occurrence and unlikely to lead to
therapy in the foreseeable future.

   In an unusual publication of "negative" data in Friday's issue of the journal
Science, the Baylor team described its futile efforts to persuade stem cells to
produce neural cells, those found in the brain and nervous system.

   The previous suggestion that they could be transformed was hailed as holding
promise for treating brain disorders such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's
diseases.

   "Our data suggest that the 'bone to brain' (transformation) may not be a
general phenomenon but may depend on the experimental system in which the
hypothesis is tested," said Dr. David Shine, an associate professor in Baylor's
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy and the lead author of the paper.

   "Any therapeutic promise is not on the horizon."

   The contradictory findings are part of ongoing research into the therapeutic
potential of adult stem cells - historically viewed as limited but suddenly seen
as promising, as scientists have reported greater flexibility than thought.

   If the promise is realized, adult stem cells would provide a noncontroversial
alternative to embryonic stem cells, which are considered medicine's next
frontier despite ethical concerns because the embryo has to be killed to obtain
the cells.

   Stem cells are the body's building blocks. In embryonic form, they are
capable of becoming any sort of tissue the body needs. In adult form, they are
best known for replenishing cells in a particular organ that wears out. In the
past few years the cells have been found to be capable of turning into other
tissue, such as muscle or bone.

   In one of the biggest discoveries, reported in Science in December 2000, two
teams of researchers, using different methods and different strains of mice,
showed that converting bone marrow cells into brain neurons may be part of a
previously unknown healing action the body uses to replace failed brain cells.

   The attempts by Shine's team to coax highly purified and unpurified bone
marrow stem cells to transform in normal mice and in those with brain injuries,
produced no evidence of brain cells derived from the original source.

   The only cells related to the original source were a few similar to
blooding-forming cells located near blood vessels in the brain.

   "This calls into question the notion a patient's bone marrow cells could be
converted to brain cells to treat diseases of the nervous system," said Shine.


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2002


                             1195 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 26, 2002, Monday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 535 words

HEADLINE: 4,000 orthopedic surgeons open world meet in San Diego

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In Ankara, the Turkish capital, doctors like Yasar Musdal are seeing many more
disturbing cases of children born with severe dislocation of the hip, blamed on
a genetic disorder.

   In Bitola, Macedonia, surgeons like Gorgi Zofirovski are struggling with a
new wave of bone cancer, which they attribute to the aftermath of the 1986
Chernobyl nuclear accident several thousand miles upwind.  Some teen-agers born
around that time are starting to get sick at much higher than normal rates.

   And in Nairobi emergency rooms, physicians struggle with what emergency
specialist Prakash Heda euphemistically called "road trauma," the enormous
number of broken or severed bones that result from vehicles being driven too
fast and/or in poor condition or with too many passengers, too much cargo and
without licensed drivers.

   There, a crash that would do only modest damage to a vehicle in the United
States is more likely to involve a pedestrian, who is likely to be seriously
hurt.  What's worse, the injury may not get treated for hours or even days.

   To share information about all these problems and more, 4,000 orthopedic
surgeons from 105 countries -- about half from developing nations -- arrived
here this weekend for the 22nd World Congress of the International Society of
Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology.

   This largest international meeting of its type is held every three years to
present information on infection control, training and education, the latest
surgical tools and materials to doctors in countries where money is always an
obstacle.

   "We're reaching out to provide education to orthopedic surgeons from places
like Africa and Indonesia, where trauma cases involve people who get run over by
cars in the middle of nowhere and the biggest problem is the risk of infection,"
said Dr. Robert Pedowitz, a co-chairman of the conference's scientific committee
and who runs a sports medicine program at UC San Diego.

   "One of our main areas is preventing unnecessary death through trauma,
primarily car accidents," said Dr. Chad Smith, the society's president.  Several
speakers will discuss the possibility of using the Internet to guide doctors not
specially trained in certain difficult procedures.

   The sponsoring organization is working to develop training disks and video
tapes that can be used in poorer countries to help doctors save lives, he said.

   The meeting also features sessions on the latest research potentials, such as
the use of stem cells to regenerate brain, spinal cord and heart muscle tissue
-- an accomplishment previously considered impossible, said James Triffitt, a
stem cell specialist from the University of Oxford, England.

   A few discussions will focus on the possibilities for gene therapy, the use
of certain targeted sequences of DNA, to either stop the destruction of
cartilage and bone or perhaps even provoke its growth.

   And a great deal of emphasis will be placed on the use of improving imaging
techniques, such as magnetic resonance and other machines that allow doctors to
see the damage as they are trying to undo it.

   The meeting at the San Diego Convention Center runs through Friday.

   Cheryl Clark: (619) 542-4573; cheryl.clark@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2002


                             1196 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 26, 2002 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: 4,000 orthopedic surgeons open world meet in San Diego

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In Ankara, the Turkish capital, doctors like Yasar Musdal are seeing many
more disturbing cases of children born with severe dislocation of the hip,
blamed on a genetic disorder. In Bitola, Macedonia, surgeons like Gorgi
Zofirovski are struggling with a new wave of bone cancer, which they attribute
to the aftermath of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident several thousand miles
upwind.

   Some teen-agers born around that time are starting to get sick at much higher
than normal rates. And in Nairobi emergency rooms, physicians struggle with what
emergency specialist Prakash Heda euphemistically called "road trauma," the
enormous number of broken or severed bones that result from vehicles being
driven too fast and/or in poor condition or with too many passengers, too much
cargo and without licensed drivers. There, a crash that would do only modest
damage to a vehicle in the United States is more likely to involve a pedestrian,
who is likely to be seriously hurt.

   What's worse, the injury may not get treated for hours or even days. To share
information about all these problems and more, 4,000 orthopedic surgeons from
105 countries -- about half from developing nations -- arrived here this weekend
for the 22nd World Congress of the International Society of Orthopaedic Surgery
and Traumatology. This largest international meeting of its type is held every
three years to present information on infection control, training and education,
the latest surgical tools and materials to doctors in countries where money is
always an obstacle. "We're reaching out to provide education to orthopedic
surgeons from places like Africa and Indonesia, where trauma cases involve
people who get run over by cars in the middle of nowhere and the biggest problem
is the risk of infection," said Dr. Robert Pedowitz, a co-chairman of the
conference's scientific committee and who runs a sports medicine program at UC
San Diego. "One of our main areas is preventing unnecessary death through
trauma, primarily car accidents," said Dr. Chad Smith, the society's president.
Several speakers will discuss the possibility of using the Internet to guide
doctors not specially trained in certain difficult procedures. The sponsoring
organization is working to develop training disks and video tapes that can be
used in poorer countries to help doctors save lives, he said. The meeting also
features sessions on the latest research potentials, such as the use of stem
cells to regenerate brain, spinal cord and heart muscle tissue -- an
accomplishment previously considered impossible, said James Triffitt, a stem
cell specialist from the University of Oxford, England. A few discussions will
focus on the possibilities for gene therapy, the use of certain targeted
sequences of DNA, to either stop the destruction of cartilage and bone or
perhaps even provoke its growth. And a great deal of emphasis will be placed on
the use of improving imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance and other
machines that allow doctors to see the damage as they are trying to undo it. The
meeting at the San Diego Convention Center runs through Friday. Cheryl Clark:
(619) 542-4573; cheryl.clark@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1197 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                  August 25, 2002, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: Pg. 9 DAILY NEWS SPECIAL REPORT

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: BIZMAN HOOKS UP PATIENTS WITH OVERSEAS OPERATIONS

BYLINE: BY BRIAN KATES DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
Need a heart? Who you gonna call?

   Jim Cohan. He says he'll get you an overseas transplant for a mere $240,000.

   How about a kidney? Or a lung? Or a liver? They're yours for $125,000,
installation included. Or so Cohan says.

   A self-described "international organ transplant coordinator," Cohan says he
bypasses years-long American waiting lists by hooking up patients with doctors
in countries where organs are plentiful.

   He demands $10,000 upfront, and he warns that the procedure is not covered by
insurance. "This must be taken into account before contacting us," his ads say.

   Transplant experts call the Los Angeles-based Cohan a con man who preys on
the fears and the pocketbooks of the desperately sick. He has been investigated
by the FBI and the California attorney general's office. His activities landed
him in an Italian jail for five months.

   But he is undaunted. Now, he says, he is setting up a "nonprofit, pro bono
organ transplant clinic" with the esteemed international group Doctors Without
Borders.

   Problem is, Doctors Without Borders knew nothing about the alleged
relationship until it popped up on Cohan's Web site. The group filed a
cease-and-desist order last month, said spokesman Kevin Phelan, but the
information is still posted on the Internet and Cohan does not disavow it.

   Cohan is vague about his operation. He told the Daily News he has
relationships with "30 to 40 doctors" in "Singapore, China, South Africa, the
Philippines, Brazil, Peru" - places where people must opt out if they don't want
their organs harvested when they die.

   The policy, called "presumed consent," is illegal in the United States. But,
Cohan insists, "6,000 a year would not die in this country if we had presumed
consent."

   Many legitimate experts agree. But none condone Cohan's practices.

   "Cohan is notorious," said Nancy Scheper-Hughes, director of Organs Watch, a
nonprofit watchdog group. "He is part con man and part zealot."

   According to Dr. Kim Solez of the Nephron Information Center, which provides
information to kidney transplant patients, Cohan obtained the group's membership
list and bombarded members with postcards and E-mail solicitations.

   The New York Organ Donor Network, the California Medical Association and the
Association of Organ Procurement Organizations have filed complaints about
Cohan. In 1998, he was arrested in Italy for allegedly trying to broker a kidney
transplant. While he was behind bars, FBI agents raided his office in Los
Angeles.

   None of the charges stuck, but Cohan remains a shadowy figure.

   He is not a physician, and he concedes he does not personally know most of
the transplant doctors he says are affiliated with him.

   "It's about telephone relationships," he said. "I really don't know them
until I've worked with them a few times. I just put them in contact with
perspective recipients."

   In the past 10 years, Cohan says, he has arranged some 350 transplants, most
by U.S-trained doctors. Although he says that, "I've never had a problem," he
can't provide the names of any of his success stories.

   Cohan says he gets "only a few thousand dollars" from the transactions and
that he earns his living primarily as a nutritionist. He boasts a degree from
Donsbach University School of Nutrition. The nonaccredited school was founded by
Kurt Donsbach, a health huckster with a long rap sheet.

   But Cohan thinks big. "I have begun working on gene therapy, and I will
coordinate human cloning when it becomes available," he told The News.


GRAPHIC: Jim Cohan refers to himself as an international transplant coordinator
and says that for the right price he can provide an organ transplant.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2002


                             1198 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 23, 2002, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: Adult-stem-cell research shows some limits

BYLINE: Elizabeth Weise

BODY:
Despite earlier research that adult stem cells from bone marrow could
successfully change into brain cells, research out today suggests the change
isn't as easy as once believed. That could put a damper on hopes that adult
cells might take the place of those from embryos in research to cure brain
diseases and spinal cord injuries.

   The research, reported in the journal Science, is the latest entry in the
politically charged debate over stem cells. The cells are found both in embryos
and grown animals, and are coveted for their ability to change, or
differentiate, into any kind of tissue in the body.


   Scientists are studying stem cells as possible therapies to regenerate
diseased tissues in patients with Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and
spinal cord paralysis. However, some say research on human embryonic stem cells,
which are harvested by destroying embryos, is immoral.

   Those who say they believe human embryonic stem cells hold the most promise
are pitted against those who say adult stem cells are just as useful and
harvesting them doesn't involve the destruction of embryos.

   A team at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston described its futile efforts
to get adult stem cells from mouse bone marrow to produce neural cells, which
are found in the brain and nervous system.

   "It may work only under certain experimental conditions," says H. David
Shine, of the Center for Cell and Gene Therapy at Baylor and senior author of
the study.

   Over the past three years, several researchers were able to coax mouse bone
marrow cells to differentiate into neural cells, but the Baylor team was unable
to replicate those findings.

   The team used radiation to wipe out the bone marrow of mice and then
implanted genetically marked bone marrow cells from other mice to see whether
the cells would differentiate into neural cells, but none appeared.

   "More research needs to be done because it would be a great resource" to
learn the conditions under which the differentiation takes place," Shine says.
"We're still betting it's possible."

   The study was funded by The Institute of Rehabilitation and Research in
Houston, which provides rehabilitation services for the paralyzed.

   Helen Blau, professor of genetic pharmacology at Stanford University in
California, says there's evidence the genetic marker used by the Baylor group
doesn't function as well in brain tissue. She says her group, which published
one of the first papers to show adult stem cells becoming brain cells, tried
using that marker for a year before switching to another, which worked better.

   Blau notes that research in all types of stem cells has become complicated by
the politics of research on embryonic stem cells.

   She emphasizes that research should continue on both adult and embryonic stem
cells. "For certain diseases, one type of cell might be more applicable than the
other."

   As is often the case with new science, the limits of what is possible are
still being worked out in the realm of adult stem cells. Whether or not adult
stem cells are as flexible as some scientists believe them to be is a matter of
much debate in research circles, with vociferous arguments taking place in
conference corridors and graduate seminars around the world.

   Although papers published in the past three years have shown that adult bone
marrow cells can become brain cells and that brain cells can become blood cells,
other researchers, including Derek van der Kooy of the University of Toronto,
have been unable to replicate those findings.

   He says that although such studies may "throw cold water" on a number of
individual examples of the apparent plasticity of these cells, "the mass of (the
studies) can't all be done poorly -- some of them have to be correct."

   Walter Low, a neuroscience professor at the University of Minnesota, says,
"We need to find out the full potential of both of these types of cells and
where they are the same and where they differ. People are getting the impression
that these adult cells can do everything an embryonic cell can do. They need to
have a more balanced view."

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2002


                             1199 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 22, 2002, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 1154 words

HEADLINE: Disease destroyed Mark Gladstein's kidneys, but he soon found out that
help was just a step away.;
New lease on life

BYLINE: FLORI MEEKS, Houston Chronicle correspondent

BODY:

   TO look at Mark and Robin Gladstein, one would never know the couple
underwent major surgery four weeks ago.

   The Greenwood Forest residents are relishing the ordinary. For them, the
details of day-to-day life are sweeter than ever.

   On July 19, Mark got a shot at normalcy in his life because Robin agreed to
give up hers for a while. After half a lifetime of low kidney function resulting
from Polycystic Kidney Disease, 44-year-old Mark's renal system is doing its
job.

   He has three kidneys now, and 43-year-old Robin has one.

   "I suspect I'll be back to a normal life in a very short time," Mark said.

   With much of their recovery behind them, the Gladsteins have been thinking
about how others can benefit from their experience.

   They want to raise awareness of kidney disease and to help people see the
dramatic impact a transplant from a living donor can make.

   "It takes a very special person to be a donor, but with kidneys, it's not
life-threatening," Mark said. "It's really happening more and more."

   The nonprofit PKD Foundation estimates that more than 600,000 Americans
suffer from PKD, and 12.5 million people worldwide have the genetic,
life-threatening disease.

   PKD affects more people than Cystic Fibrosis, Muscular Dystrophy, hemophilia,
Down Syndrome and Sickle-Cell anemia combined, the foundation says.

   When someone has PKD, cysts form on the kidneys. The cysts grow and multiply,
causing the mass of the kidneys to increase. Eventually, the kidneys shut down.

   In Mark's case, PKD has been a reality in his family for generations. His
grandmother died of kidney failure at 55. His father went on dialysis at 41, and
he died 10 years later.

   Mark has Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease, the more common of
PKD's two forms. ADPKD manifests itself in the adult years.

   Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease, which is much less common,
affects newborns, infants and children.

   Because those with PKD have a 50 percent chance of passing the disease on to
their children, Mark was tested in the fourth grade.

   Since then, he has known it was a matter of time before the disease took
grip.

   Mark experienced his first signs of trouble in his early 20s when he started
to pass blood, the result of cysts that had burst. He also developed
hypertension.

   Over the years, Mark's kidney function gradually deteriorated. The disease
started progressing more rapidly about five years ago.

   It was during that time when Robin found a support group affiliated with the
PKD Foundation.

   The group helps participants find specialists, surgeons, researchers and
information about PKD. It also provides a base of support accessible 24 hours a
day through e-mail.

   The family's need for support increased tenfold about four months ago during
a visit to Mark's doctor.

   Mark knew his kidney function was decreasing, but he didn't think he had
reached a crisis point yet. The doctor had other news for him.

   "He said, 'You need to figure out which type of dialysis you're interested
in,' " Mark said.

   Reality hit with a thud.

   "At 43 years of age, I would have been tied to a machine three times a day,
every day," Mark said.

   The only other option, the doctor said, was to find a kidney donor.

   "Robin stood up and said, 'If I can be a donor, I'm in,' " Mark said.

   Because Mark's blood type is AB positive, which is the universal blood type,
matching with Robin wasn't a problem. Mark's doctor agreed to start a series of
medical tests to see if Robin could donate safely.

   The procedure hit a roadblock when doctors discovered a small benign cyst on
Robin's right kidney. The doctors postponed surgery two months until they were
convinced it was not malignant.

   There was talk of postponing the operation further until Mark's nephrologist,
Dr. Whitson Etheridge, stepped in on Mark's behalf.

   Mark, meanwhile, remained in stable condition during the five-week wait.

   St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Dr. Stephen Katz made a four-inch incision
below Robin's naval and removed her left kidney.

   Up to recently, the procedure would have called for a 10-inch incision and
months of recovery time.

   Now, increasing numbers of surgeons are using a camera probe known as a
laparoscope to illuminate and view the area they are working on.

   The procedure allows for a much smaller incision and a considerably shorter
recovery time.

   Robin remains limited in some activities, but her recovery took less than
three weeks.

   Mark's surgeon, Dr. Charles Van Buren, placed Robin's kidney in Mark's body,
and almost immediately after the transplant, Mark's new kidney began to
function.

   "I don't remember much about Friday afternoon, but I remember that," Robin
said.

   In about six days, Mark's body resumed normal kidney function.

   Robin certainly would not describe her first few days after the surgery as
easy ones. But if she had to do it all over, she said she would.

   "I am convinced that 99 percent of people in the same situation would
probably do the same thing," she said.

   Robin went home four days after the operation, and Mark left one day after
that.

   Robin has worried that a time might come when one of the couple's three
children will need a kidney.

   Each faces the same 50 percent chance of having the disease that their father
did. The family has opted not to test them.

   But if one of the children does have the disease, it will not show itself
until the adult years.

   Robin is taking comfort in the fact that PKD gene therapy research is under
way now.

   "These guys may not have to worry about it," she said.

   Mark is optimistic his children won't have the disease.

   "Hopefully, they'll break the chain," he said.

   Meanwhile, the last few weeks have been a time for drawing closer to family
and friends.

   The Gladstein's children - Mallory, Michael and Kirby - have been doing as
much as they can to help their parents.

   The girls were at camp during the week of the surgery, but Michael spent much
of that time with his parents at the hospital.

   Michael has been asked if it was scary to have both parents on the operating
table at the same time.

   "I thought it was," he said. "I just was walking back and forth, waiting."

   The Gladsteins have received additional support from friends, neighbors and
Mark's co-workers at Merrill Lynch.

   They've given the family rides to the hospital; showered them with cards,
flowers and attention; and chipped in to provide catered meals.

   "I can't get over the support we've gotten," Mark said.

   These days, Mark is maintaining a part-time work schedule. He can drive and
has returned to the golf course.

   "The hardest thing to deal with is the drugs," he said. "The medications you
take are pretty hard on you, but it beats going on dialysis."

   Mark has been told he can expect his third kidney to function for 15 to 20
years.

   "I'm going to do everything I can to take good care of it," he said.

   Mark celebrated his 44th birthday on Sunday.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Greenwood Forest residents Robin and Mark Gladstein read
get-well cards from friends. (color); Janice Smith photo

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2002


                             1200 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     August 16, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 738 words

BODY:

   This will sound like borderline psychotic, perhaps over-the-line psychotic,
but I am hearing voices. Voices of people trying to stress me out about Tiger
Woods.

    "Tiger Woods will tee off in 15 minutes," the guy on the car radio said
yesterday at 8:20 a.m.

    What should I do, pull over?

    Or is it safe, do you think, to operate a vehicle within 15 minutes of a
major Tiger event such as teeing off at the PGA Championship in Frostbite Falls
or whatever Minnesota outpost they're playing it at this week?

    Tiger Woods, should you somehow have been able to avoid this knowledge, is
trying to become only the second or third guy to win three of the four major
championships in two years, two of the four major championships three or four
years in a row, one of the major championships four or five years in a row, and
four of the major championships no years in a row. Or something.

    That's drama, I'm told.

    "Tiger Woods is set to tee off 13 minutes from now," the guy on the car
radio said yesterday at 8:22 a.m.

    So there it was. We'd crashed through the 15-minute barrier. It was
instantly more difficult to operate the Buick in a safe manner. And there was
only a vague sense of comfort in the knowledge that had I been caught driving
erratically on Ohio River Boulevard at that moment, I'd just explain to the
investigating officer that Eldrick Woods was within minutes of whacking a golf
ball somewhere in Minnesota. We'd both just try to calm down, and he'd tell me
to have a good day.

    "Tiger Woods has hit one shot, his tee shot, and the PGA Championship has
been interrupted by lightning," the guy on the car radio said yesterday at about
8:36 a.m.

    Oh, the heartache. By now I was curled into the fetal position in the front
seat somewhere in Kilbuck, mumbling about how hard it is to be Tiger.

    It's not bad enough he's dodging lightning bolts just 30 seconds into his
bid for a seventh major championship in past 2.37 years, but now people want him
to overturn the no-women rule at Augusta National Golf Club. Do these people
know what kind of concentration it takes to recover from a brush with mortality
like shooting an 81 in the third round of the British Open?

    Hardly. What'll they want next, Tiger to weigh in on Palestinian
self-determination?

    "Tiger Woods has sought refuge in the clubhouse ..."

    Oh stop it!

    It's not like he's going to be doing any thinking in there. He's as prepared
as can be. Nothing can prevent him from winning a ninth major championship in
the past six years, least of all the whining of, uh, roughly half the human
race.

    Does somebody think Tiger Woods, patiently awaiting the one millionth Tiger
on the Prowl newspaper headline to hit sometime this weekend, would make a
mental note to inform the appropriate authorities that he won't be playing in
The Masters again until women are admitted to the club?

    Do they think he's going to cost himself a 10th major championship in 6.29
years even if he realizes that Tiger Woods hasn't had the historical impact of
Rose Mary Woods?

    "Tiger Woods might have to wait a couple of hours ..."

    A couple of hours! I can't go through this again. All a couple of hours is
going to do is screw up the poor guy's karma. It's not enough time to change the
world or at least that part of Georgia. Tiger Woods and Michael Jordan are
golden entities forged in the synergistic marketing principles taught at the
University of Nike. They will venture not a shred of social commentary, thank
you. Advertisers find it that stuff discomforting.

    Jordan, his own father shot dead and left at the side of the road, couldn't
even bring himself to comment on the gun issue. And they expect Woods to get
women into Augusta?

    "I'm just one voice," Tiger says on his Web site. Yes. Just one more voice
that is stressing me out about Tiger Woods. A voice that then allowed that he'd
like to see women members at Augusta. It was better than "there's nothing you
can do about it," which is what he said when he first found his voice on the
issue.

    Tiger Woods, were he so inclined, could do something about it. If a previous
generation of minority athletes had thought the same thing, that there was
nothing they could do in the face of blatant discrimination, there would be no
golf phenomenon by the name of Tiger Woods.

    I heard that in a Nike commercial starring, I believe, Tiger Woods. Maybe I
was just psychotic then too.

NOTES:
Gene Collier can be reached at gcollier@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2002
